Story_ID: 558357
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Charles Francis Whitten, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, W-H-I-T-T-E-N [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten].
Speaker 1: All right and do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Oh, Crip, and Chick.
Speaker 1: Crip?
Speaker 2: I had, I had an injury when I, when I was a kid and they used to call me Crip, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I get Chick frequently--
Speaker 1: Now what, what's the other one, Chick, C--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's Charles, Chuck.
Speaker 1: Oh, Chuck, okay, Chuck, okay.
Speaker 2: Chuck.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Two, two, twenty-two [February 2, 1922], Groundhog [Groundhog Day].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation.
Speaker 2: A physician.
Speaker 1: Okay and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: March 7--March 8, 2007.
Speaker 1: All right and, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in, in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1300 Lafayette East [Street] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 558358
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone we interview.  And the first one is--it's kind of, they're kind of a warm up.  So the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Paella.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Nassau [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do the best you can.
Story_ID: 558359
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Tobias Whitten] side of the family.  But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Emma, E-M-M-A, Clarinda, C-L-A-R-I-N-D-A, Carr, C-A-R-R [Emma Carr Whitten].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She's born in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what's the date of her birth, do you have an idea at all?
Speaker 2: I know the date of her birth was May 7th but the year is--I'm a little balky now.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you, can you take a guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, '85 [1885], simultaneous.
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-five [1885]?
Speaker 2: No, I'm a say 1900, no, that's not right, '85 [1885].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what can you tell us about her side of the family and--?
Speaker 2: Well she was the fourth daughter of an ex-slave, Hugh Carr.  Who had a farm in Charlottesville, Virginia.  He started off, he was an ex-slave became skillful farmer and he eventually owned the farm.  And had a reputation for being a leader and a expert farmer consultant.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was he the, is, is he the furthest back you can go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Hugh Carr?
Speaker 2: Hugh Carr.
Speaker 1: And there's a, now we were looking at some literature about, state, I guess a state historical site in, in, in Charlottesville, where they, they have there's a plaque and some other information about Hugh Carr, right?
Speaker 2: A what?
Speaker 1: There's some information about Hugh Carr in a brochure that I was looking through in the other room, before we started the interview.  About, there's a site that has some information about you know about where he lived or, or what he did?
Speaker 2: Well my, my grandfather at one time owned about two hundred acres, and when he died he left the farm to his six daughters.  The oldest daughter lived there, was a school teacher, she lived there.  And when she died, her daughter sold the farm to the Nature Conservancy.  They felt it was so typical of the landscape and the farm area that for in perpetuity that land is now known as Ivy Creek Foundation [Charlottesville, Virginia].  And my grandfather's initial plot, initial ownership is the center of that site.  So they have and education building now there.  And you had a brochure that is shows what his relationship was there.  So that's a, that's a very important part of the history there.  Ivy Creek Foundation in perpetuity, a nature trail, educational building and the center of it we'll say my grandfather's farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a oil portrait that I had made of him that's in the, in the education building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558360
Speaker 1: You were telling me in the other room, that, that it is believed that his father was a Mr. Woodlock I believe?
Speaker 2: No, Wingfiel- Wingfield [R.W. Wingfield].
Speaker 1: Wingfield, okay all right.  And he was the original owner of that land, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So are there any stories that are passed down through the family about, about that relationship or about you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, oh okay.
Speaker 2: We know nothing about those relationships.  I think my, my (background noise) mother's oldest sister and her, and her daughter--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, you were talking about the relationship between the, Mr. Whit- it was it Whitfield [sic.] or, or?
Speaker 1: We didn't, we didn't know anything about that.  I think my oldest, I'm pretty reasonably sure that my mother's older sister who lived in the farm the years it was a principal school, so I think she knew more than we, than she ever told us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: During those days, it was, they really didn't talk about that.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Right, okay are there any stories from the Civil War period--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --that are passed down in the family?
Speaker 1: No, none that I'm aware of.
Speaker 2: Okay, but there--you do have a document that your grandfather [Hugh Carr] signed during the Reconstruction period, right for?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) It was just after emancipation he was hired to run a farm that we think was see his father's farm and he had a detailed eight page handwritten agreement, contract in detail of how he was to run the farm, and he was paid a hundred dollars a year, for that year.  Sounds like he had about six or seven employees and specifically how they were to be managed.
Speaker 2: Right, even down to what sort of disposition he was supposed to have when he managed.
Speaker 1: He's supposed to have a type of--a firm, but (laughter) sympathetic disposition, but to be firm.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And they were to be on time every day.  Not to have extended lunch hours (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so but he eventually acquired the land and this--
Speaker 1: Yes, he, he acquired the land so eventually he had about two hundred acres.
Speaker 2: So, so you think that's an indication to--of a relationship that he eventually was allowed to acquire that land?
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't think there was--
Speaker 2: In an era when it was not?
Speaker 1: I don't think there was any problem with acquiring lands the only question of money.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the only question of money.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We have documents where he purchased, how many acreage he purchased, how much the (unclear)--sometimes he was selling.  He sold some land also in time.  I don't there was any problem around that at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 558361
Speaker 1: Any other stories about the ancestors on that side?  I mean, what, what else do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Well, I just in terms of my grandfather [Hugh Carr] I don't know any more.  He, he was damned determined that they should get an education.  And the Carr--there were six girls Carrs had a reputation of being in school every day.  And there's one little story that I learned from one of my his, one of my cousins later on, my wife's--my mother's cousin.  That when he went to visit his brother in law, he was concerned that had six or seven kids and they weren't going to school.  And my Uncle Cain [ph.], that was his name, said, "Well I, I, I can't feed these kids, talking about to going to school."  And my grandfather saying, says, "Well I don't care whether they eat or not; they're gonna go to school."  So eventually my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] and her four sisters finished Petersburg normal [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute], which--at that time; is now Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia].  He was damned determined to get an education.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's--now you indicated earlier before we started the interview that your grandfather could not write?
Speaker 2: Read or write.
Speaker 1: Read or write?  And he signed the document that we were just discussing with an X right?
Speaker 2: An X, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a mark.  So he was determined that his children would have an education?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother went to, had a chance to go to Petersburg normal school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, normal school is like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Normal industrial institute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And which is now Virginia State University.
Speaker 1: Did she get a teaching degree?
Speaker 2: Teaching, yeah, two years, teaching, they all got degrees in teaching, education.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have stories of growing up in that you know region and what it was like?
Speaker 2: My, my mother died when I was in life--late forties, and what I remember most specifically I never heard her say anything about her father (laughter), when we were growing up.  I, I don't understand that now.  I don't have any stories that to tell about her growing up, with her father.  Her mother [Texas Carr] died when she was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk about--
Speaker 2: No, her mother died when she was seven or eight.  And she was raised by her father and her older sister.  But I never, never heard anything about her, her father and I've regretted that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she, did she talk at all about growing up or going to school?
Speaker 2: No, very, very little other than that you know grew up on the farm.  And they, they had a very comfortable life there in terms of food because he was a well recognized--.  He, he built a home there a very attractive home.  So they grew up, they grew up very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so she finished Petersburg industrial, well, well normal school before she married your father right or did--was that true, okay?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) She--it was customary for college students from the South to come to Wilmington [Delaware] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], to work during the summer.  And she came--Wilmington was one of the stops for where they worked, so she worked with a white family during the summer.  And that's when she met my father [Tobias Whitten], so eventually they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: He was in Wilmington, he lived in Wilmington.
Story_ID: 558362
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Tobias, T-O-B-I-A-S, Emanuel, E-M-A-N-U-E-L, Whitten, W-H-I-T-T-E-N [Tobias Whitten].
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a, is there a story behind the name of Tobias?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Are they related to the Tobiases in South Carolina or?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I wondered.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know, he died in 1930 and he was forty-four years old (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never thought in terms of his birthdate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's about '87 [1887] isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear), let's see, yeah, ni- let's see, well--yeah, eighteen eighty--1886, yeah, 1886, yeah.  So he was a year--
Speaker 2: That means that, no that means my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] was probably '89 [1889], or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was older?
Speaker 2: She was younger, she was younger.
Speaker 1: Okay, right okay, (unclear) born about 1886 then.  And, and where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: In Wilmington, Delaware, okay.  Now what, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far--
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Nothing?
Speaker 2: Nothing, I tried to trace 'em, but I've been unable to do so.  They were from Virginia, Meadows of Goose Creek and I went to The Meadows of Goose Creek (laughter).  There's a Goose Creek that runs along three or four counties up to almost up to Washington [D.C.].  And I went to count, three or four counties houses looking for Whittens and several along the way: "Meadows--we never heard of any Meadows of Goose Creek," (laughter).  But that, that was a (unclear), but there's a Goose Creek.  So I went to county records and so forth and I could find some birthdates and so forth but nothing, nothing to trace (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No stories, and--
Speaker 2: No story, nothing to trace back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I actually could not find where he was born.  But I do know it was in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do know it was Meadows of Goose Creek (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right now that's where your father was actually born, or, or okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Where he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about how he ended up moving to Wilmington?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well he, he moved to Wilmington because his, his father [Tobias Whitten]--mother [Fanny Price Whitten] and father mo- he was born in Wilmington.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his mother and father were, were born in Meadows of Goose Creek.
Speaker 2: Yes, from, from Virginia, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of 'em, my I think my mother's--my father's father I think was Meadows of Goose Creek, I can't remember where, we can't find out where my mother's--father's mother was born, but in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So are there any--did you know your grandfather on that side?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Story_ID: 558363
Speaker 1: Did your father [Tobias Whitten] have any--now he died you said he died in 1930.  And then, so you were still just a young--
Speaker 2: He was forty-four.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was forty-four then and you were--1930 you were what eight, or?
Speaker 2: Hm?  Age what?
Speaker 1: How old were you then, how old were you then about eight years old, I guess?
Speaker 2: I was eight.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so did you, I guess you couldn't have known him very well, I suppose at age eight?
Speaker 2: I, I was eight year old, I have a few things I remember; not very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so do you remember hearing any stories at all from your father about growing up or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a teacher, high school teacher, civics, history and phys- history and civics.
Speaker 1: Now do you know where he went to school?
Speaker 2: He did graduate, did work at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Now we got a teaching certificate I not specifically, wasn't a bachelor's degree but it was qualified him to teach in the high school in Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He and his, his brother and sister.
Speaker 1: You know the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: High school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Howard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Howard High [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware].
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, you say your parents met over the summer when your mother [Emma Carr Whitten] was working you know for some white people in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, working as domestic.
Speaker 1: In Wilmington?
Speaker 2: Cook in Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was considered like lucrative summer work to--
Speaker 2: Yes, for summer work yes, the college students used to come--well, Wilmington and Chester [Pennsylvania], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your father was he doing the same thing working for them on--in some capacity?
Speaker 2: I have no idea what he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he had something with the schools during the summer or not, I don't know.
Story_ID: 558364
Speaker 1: When you look at your--the personalities of your parents, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Emma Carr Whitten] or your father [Tobias Whitten]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think probably more my mother because I knew her, I didn't know my father, certainly my mother.  She was a very civic minded person, goal driven.  There were four of us she was left with four kids and I was the oldest.  And so she--and wasn't qualified to teach in the Wilmington system because at that time your had to have finished a white school (laughter).  The fact that she had a certificate from two years of normal training school from Virginia [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] didn't qualify her to teach in, in Wilmington, she had to have had it from a northern school.  So that she--she worked taught at the reformatory school in Wilmington.  And she's also a seamstress and she taught night school.  She was, she was just driven to help be sure that we made it, the four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I also had my father's sister who was unmarried, who was a school teacher in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And she was a very major--helped us, great deal of support for us down through the years.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Alice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alice Ann Whitten [Alice Whitten], my father's sister.  So she was a big part of our family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so she taught in the school system, what was her personality like?
Speaker 2: Oh she was driven to, to excel she tried to instill that into the kids that she taught in Philadelphia.  She taught in the Philadelphia school system and she taught for one year in Tuskegee [Alabama], the Booker--at the time.  I never did find out why she didn't go back.  What--she taught there one year and then went into the Philadelphia system.
Story_ID: 558365
Speaker 1: Your household growing up consisted of you and your mother [Emma Carr Whitten] and how many siblings, did, did you--
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: That's all.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My aunt [Alice Whitten] didn't live with us.
Speaker 1: Okay, can do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Early childhood memories?
Speaker 1: No the earliest.
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: An earliest, an earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think my earliest childhood memory was to--walking to school behind my father [Tobias Whitten], it was a very windy day.  And I can remember going up the hill, he was going to the high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware] to teach.  I was going to elementary school [No. 5 School, Wilmington, Delaware].  And I can remember him sort of shielding me I walking behind him, protecting me from the wind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 1: Sounds like a good one for you know for--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: --a poetic one in some ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Father shielding you from the wind.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 558366
Speaker 1: Can you describe for us the neighborhood you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Wilmington, Delaware was a--segregated, we had--we lived on the east side.  There was a west side. There was two bridges.  And there were a collection of black families in each of those areas.  We lived on the east side.  And it's a, it's a story, it's something I would like to put together, I haven't done it, I reflect on it from time to time.  I really think that we had the most unique one block in terms of a multicultural--multicultural that's probably a good term--citizenry in that one block.  We had a physician, we had a dentist, we had two teachers, we had caterers, we had a--domestics.  I, I can go house by house and see a totally unique block, one block in the city.  And incidentally and certainly not of any note at that time, do you know the Cliff Brown [Clifford Brown], do you know that name, a trumpeter?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: Next door neighbor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cliff Brown was a next door neighbor, his family.  But we had that spread in terms of families in that one block.  And I don't think there's any block--I would there's doubt any block in the United States that had such a distribution, collection of families, all walks of life.
Story_ID: 558367
Speaker 1: Yeah, Clifford Brown is considered one of the great all time jazz trumpet players (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, all time there's no question.
Speaker 1: He died young too, he died young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's (unclear), all accident.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Driving one night, someone's driving them to one of their gigs and icy highway and off--
Speaker 1: And there's a now I don't know if you know about there's a, there's a trumpet player that plays with Art Blakey, plays exactly like Clifford Brown.
Speaker 2: Never heard of him.
Speaker 1: And he's a--
Speaker 2: Plays like, like--
Speaker 1: He plays like him, he's, he's a Russian trumpet player, he's from Russia.  White man from Russia and he plays exactly like Clifford Brown.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: And he studied Clifford Brown records, that's what I asked.
Speaker 2: I have to, I have to check that out, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: He used to play with a record all the time so he plays, he's--
Speaker 2: I have to check that out, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his phrasing is just like Clifford Brown.
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: That's what I've been told over and over again and read.
Speaker 2: We, we sort of followed Cliff, you know there's an autobiography [sic. 'Clifford Brown: The Life and Art of the Legendary Jazz Trumpeter,' Nick Catalano]?  The block that we lived in now is a Clifford Brown Way [sic. Clifford Brown Walk, Wilmington, Delaware].  We--I've been there and they every year, they have a big celebration of Cliff Brown.  I never heard that story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Russian--you, it shouldn't take too much to find him, but it's--
Speaker 2: Oh I'll find that right away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he played, he used to play with Art Blakey unless he still is playing with Blakey I don't, I think Blakey, is Blakey still alive?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Blakey (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, yeah he was playing with Art Blakey.  He used to wear overalls all the time this guy did, he, he was sounding just like the--
Speaker 2: I can't see him playing Art Blakey and sounding like Cliff Brown, those are two different (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well that's what they used to say, I don't know, you know I don't know as much about Clifford Brown, but that's--
Speaker 2: It's so--two----they were different.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's now Clifford Brown Drive huh?  Your street that you--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--the block that we lived, two blocks that we were in is the Clifford Brown Way, yeah.  And every, every summer they have a celebration and all of them been there at some point.  Particularly starting early years the drummer, what's the drummer he used to play with the, he played the--with outstanding drummer of all time?
Speaker 1: Max Roach or?
Speaker 2: Max Roach, yeah, they were there, they recorded quite a few.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were--
Speaker 2: You see Cliff Brown, his father [Joe Brown] had a cornet, and used to come out in the backyard and blow the cornet, he, he had no music talent whatsoever, so Cliff sort of got picked out on that.  And then Clifford was a technician and my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] said she used to get so, we lived right next door to each other, listen to him just blowing notes, blowing notes, blowing notes.  And she said, "Cliff, if you ever make any money, you owe me some," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well he would play a lot of scales and--
Speaker 2: Scales that's right, technical, no--very little melody, he was such a perfectionist around technique.
Story_ID: 558368
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sound and smells--well we lived in a clean neighborhood.  And we (laughter) we had--the weather the Wilmington [Delaware] was we had seasons we had distinct seasons you know where--four seasons.  So, you have the snow in the winter, and good sunshine in the summer and rain storms and so forth, so nothing unique.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's well a pretty quick summation (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think of anything unique about our neighborhood from that standpoint.
Story_ID: 558369
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: I liked to roller skate, and we used have, we used to make skateboards, old skates and you know anything about that (laughter)?  We'd take an orange crate and a little and we made, made our own scooters.  I used to like to run, 'cause we got interested in Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival] when I was a kid.  My, my father [Tobias Whitten] was a great interest in the sports and used to take us to the Penn Relays.  And we started going to the Penn when I was probably five or six.  And up until two years ago I'd only missed a couple.  I been to over seventy Penn Relays, coming down so.  I used to enjoy running but then I had an accident, I fell on the ice and had a slipped epiphysis of my hip.  And that just ended anything I could do athletic.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a--now how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: Twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve and you were, you were running on ice and that's how it happened or?
Speaker 2: I was walking to school--I know specifically where it was--down to high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware] and I fell on the ice.  I could, I still see the icy patch where I fell.  And it--so, so I was a body--I was in a half body cast for about six weeks, had weights and so forth they put in the (unclear).  And then a couple years later I was playing sandlot football, I shouldn't have been doing and did the same thing on the other side.  So I had to go through the same thing.  So I've, I've totally distorted the hips as a result of it.
Speaker 1: So did, did it impair how you walked and how you?
Speaker 2: Initially no, it's only recent years, more recent years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went through you know life basically with normal gait and--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: You were telling us earlier that, that one of your nicknames was Crip.  That your nickname--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was because of that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) because of--
Speaker 2: At one time, after my first time, one of my legs was shorter that the other.  So I had to have--had to heal, so they used to--and I had a little limp, so they called me Crip, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Then when, when the other side when you had the other side, were they evened up or?
Speaker 2: That even, evened it up (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you have to go a long period of time before you could walk again, I mean or walk right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was in bed for, for body--first they put a lot of adhesive tape and some weights in the hospital to pull it down.  And then in a body cast for six weeks.  Total cast from ankles to umbilicus, in bed.
Story_ID: 558370
Speaker 1: How would you describe your personality when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I, I--my personality basically was one of (pause), I was a--very pleasant, easy to get along with, I wasn't challenging.  I was the oldest in the family and I think I sort of almost adopted the fatherly role with my brothers and sisters.  And sometimes I had the nickname the Golden Boy in the family, and that sort of thing.  So that was basically where I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't challenging, I was an excellent student.  And I never created any problems in school.  I was considered to be a good boy (laughter), and destined to do well.
Story_ID: 558371
Speaker 1: Now did you have to work when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I had started selling papers very early, yeah.  I worked for papers and I worked in the coal yard for a time.  But I started selling papers very early, Afro-American, Baltimore [Afro-American Newspapers], and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and Philadelphia Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now those are all the black papers right?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Afro, the Baltimore Afro-American, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did, did--well--
Speaker 2: And the Liberty magazine, I sold those, five cents and people used make me come back.  Go to collect it, day to collect it, I had to go back a second time to get the five cents (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were delivering papers when time were--times were pretty bad right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Depression [Great Depression], yeah.
Speaker 2: It was during the Depression, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so some people didn't have that five cents.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no they didn't have the five cents, but they got the paper so they had to pay me (laughter).  Sometimes you, you know very well--you knock on the door you know they're home, they don't answer the door (laughter).  It was quite an experience.  Sometimes my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] had to give me the money to pay for the papers, until I got the money from selling them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you were--since you were a good student, did you read a lot of those papers that you delivered, did you?
Speaker 2: I used to read the papers yeah, I used to yeah, I read a few.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite of those papers?
Speaker 2: No, I used to enjoy the Afro--the Baltimore Afro-American, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Pittsburgh Courier was a good paper too, between the two.
Story_ID: 558372
Speaker 1: You said you were a good student in school.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I, I think my favorite subject was--it would tend to be math, uh-huh, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any black history instruction in school in those days?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Any black history instruction, did they talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: We, we didn't do it, you know despite the fact it was an all-black school [No. 5 School, Wilmington, Delaware] with all black teachers we didn't do very much with that (laughter).  I, I, I frequently reflect on that because what's been touted as being what made a big difference in black schools and white school and so forth.  We had all black teachers and we had--they were role models and so forth but we had very little black history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very little.
Speaker 1: But in terms of the teachers being role models was there any particular teacher that was a mentor to you or a role model for you?
Speaker 2: Not particularly no, we had, we had some teachers we respected, we had a couple of teachers weren't worth it, weren't worth a (unclear) (laughter).  But we, we all got to know our teachers, there were, there were teachers where you know you, you--they were very strict.  And the others you could get along with, get away with and so forth.  You get to know all your teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher at all?
Speaker 2: I, I don't, I don't think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was music a big part of--
Speaker 2: I never, I never had any feeling that I was particularly well taught (laughter).  I never had any feel of that, I went to school every day and did the homework and got good grades and you moved on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I mean did you feel, did you have a sense from what you were reading or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or the media that, that there was--you could have been learning more in school than you were?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't think so.  We were the four of us [Whitten and his siblings] knew that we were going to go college, was never any discussion about that.  Where we might, how it was going to be paid, that was an issue, but higher education was just a given, there's no, no discussion about that.  That just was--it's like going to the primary school, going to college was like going to primary school; it's something you do.
Story_ID: 558373
Speaker 1: Was religion a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: A what?
Speaker 1: Religion--a church?
Speaker 2: No, we, my mother [Emma Carr Whitten], was a, was a faithful Baptist church (unclear), we had to go to Sunday school we didn't have to go to church.  We went to church from time to time, but we went to Sunday school every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We weren't required to go to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went from time to time.
Speaker 1: Now was, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist [Shiloh Baptist Church, Wilmington, Delaware], Shiloh Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I think there's one in every city.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: I think there's one in every city.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sure (laughter) at least.  There's a Shiloh and there's a Second Baptist in every city too.
Story_ID: 558374
Speaker 1: When you were in grade school [No. 5 School, Wilmington, Delaware] did you have an idea what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: I've always wanted to be a--after the cowboy and Indians [Native American] stage, at one time I wanted to be a cowboy, after that I wanted to be a physician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, and before you ask me, did I have any role models?  I said no, I just wanted to be a doctor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you know some doctors?
Speaker 2: No.  We had, had a, a doctor, but I had--I would never consider him to be role model or anything.  I wasn't trying to emulate him.
Speaker 1: Did the media do any- I mean the movies or the radio do anything to attract you to being a physician?
Speaker 2: No, no we had a--before my father [Tobias Whitten] died we had a radio one of those where you had to--you had to bring the battery in, that's well before your time (laughter).  And it was very low, biggest show that we had was Uncle Wip at night, seven o'clock.
Speaker 1: Uncle Wip (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before--Uncle Wip that's before you went to bed.  But I don't remember much around news or anything in those early days with the radio.  Radio was more, I can remember the first radio you almost had to use the earphones to hear it that my father had.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't very loud, huh?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It didn't, it didn't--
Speaker 2: It wasn't that loud.
Speaker 1: It wasn't very loud.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember Joe Louis fights on the radio?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, those are celebrations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were real celebrations.  When they the whole neighborhood erupted when he knocked somebody out (laughter).  Suddenly all the doors fly open and everybody's out there, out in the street yelling and screaming and quite a celebration.
Story_ID: 558375
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of friends in those days growing up?
Speaker 2: We had neighborhood friends, kids we grew up with, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about--did you go to middle school or junior high school or did you go right to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to elementary and then junior high and senior high were the same school, Howard High [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware].
Speaker 1: All right--oh in, all in the same school?
Speaker 2: No the--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --junior high, senior high was in the same school, same buildings.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Twenty--No. 5 [No. 5 School, Wilmington, Delaware].
Speaker 1: Okay, so then you went on to Howard High School in eighth grade or?
Speaker 2: Eighth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No that's seventh--seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelve, yeah, three years junior high, three years senior high.  So elementary school was the first six grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is Howard High School named for O. Howard [Oliver Otis Howard] the same Howard that Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is named for or another Howard, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know, our Howard was named for a white person in--had a history in Wil- the Delaware area, I don't know about Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, so did you have black teachers at--was Howard an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, what--did--were you involved in school activities when you were in junior high school and high school?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any (laughter) activities I guess we didn't have a band then.  We didn't get a band until a couple of years after I finished, so there were no activities after school, other than sports.  Sports was only--I couldn't, I couldn't participate in any sports.  But that was the only activities we had.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you run for student gov- council or anything, or student body president or?
Speaker 2: No, we--our student body wasn't organized.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have a--any favorite teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As I said, with teachers you got to know those who you thought did a pretty good job and those who didn't.  Those who were a little lax and those who were pretty firm and you went with the flow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558376
Speaker 1: So you never got involved with Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a Boy Scout.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right okay did you--okay so were a Boy Scout did you get a chance to go to camp and all that?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't go to camp, the--they had national jamboree.  And I remember that the--you had to have a physical beforehand and the doctor who examined me, who had lived in our home when he finished Howard High--Howard med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] for about a year said I had a heart murmur and I was disqualified.  Here I'm eighty-five years old I still had a heart murmur, so I couldn't--my brother [HistoryMaker Benjamin Whitten] went to the camp I didn't, he didn't, he didn't qualify me to go to camp because of my heart murmur (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well those were the days you said this physician was living with your family.  Those, those were the days when people had a lot of roomers and so forth, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because of the, the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So were there always someone living there, someone else living in your household, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, no my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] used to rent she with the segregated system in Delaware there was no high school other than in Wilmington [Delaware] in the whole state, for blacks.  So for the high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware] the kids would be paid to come--they were subsidized to come to Wilmington.  And then they had to find a place to live.  So sometimes we had girls living in our home that were being paid by the state, while they went to high school.
Story_ID: 558377
Speaker 1: When you graduated did you graduate with honors or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was, I was fourth in my class [at Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware].
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get a chance, to read a--to read anything at graduation?
Speaker 2: No, I got a prize, a hundred dollar prize (laughter).  I got two prizes, a hundred dollars and one for five dollars (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you choose a college?
Speaker 2: Convenience and expense.  I commuted, I went every day to University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so I commuted on the train.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's not a easy school to get into, University of Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't if it was any problem, I was--I had a good high school record so, didn't have any problem getting in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And but it was a commute it was about fifteen minute walk from my home to the Wilmington train station, and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] it was about a fifteen minute walk to the train station to the University of Pennsylvania campus.  So I did that every day for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your major at?
Speaker 2: Zoology.
Speaker 1: Zoology, were there many black students there?
Speaker 2: We had on the campus, we had thirteen black students when I was there, University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Could students--could black students stay on campus?
Speaker 2: They could but we didn't, there's no one stayed on, no one had any money to stay on Penn campus, they were all Philadelphia students, they were all Philadelphia residents.
Speaker 1: And how?
Speaker 2: And then I'm from Wilmington [Delaware], I was the only one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so sir how, how were you treated you know as a black student on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was no, I don't--there was no issue around treatment you just went to class you know it's commuter school, University of Pennsylvania really basic- commuter school.  All they had--that's not entirely true because they certainly had dormitories there.  But we didn't have any relationship--I guess the kids who when to Philadelphia high school might have had some white friends who were--school--who were at school at the same time, but we, I didn't, I was Wilmington; I didn't have any colleagues.
Story_ID: 558378
Speaker 1: I was asking you about treatment at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and--
Speaker 2: There was no, I only had two, maybe two or three racial incidents at Penn.  And one, it really strikes--stands out was a--in a class we were taking an examination and one of the kids raised his hand to get a--answer a question about the exam.  And the instructor said, "Do you see more than two niggers in the woodpile?"  And it happened to be two of us in the class (laughter).  That was just a racial expression for him, because I used to walk back there, back from class with him, from time to time and had no meaning other than the fact that that's a southern expression: niggers in the woodpile.  And it just came out, but the white kids (gesture), that sort of expression.  That's about the only thing that I sort of remember strikingly, but there were no racial incidents or anything I went to class, had the only three or four white kids that I had any friendship with we happened to be taking the class, the same time.  But there was no, no interaction what so ever otherwise.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't involved in campus activities or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no involvement in campus activity.
Speaker 1: You, you didn't, did you expect to be involved in anything like that when you were?
Speaker 2: No, did have any need to be, and then I was commuting from Wilmington [Delaware], I had to get home, you know, get the train, get home.
Speaker 1: So did you ever think about what it would have been like if you had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or some other school, you know where you could have stayed on campus or?
Speaker 2: Well I was very happy that I went to professional school where I had a campus life, somewhat a campus life, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville Tennessee], not really campus, but still, as opposed to commuting.  I was very--a couple of Wilmingtonians commuted to Penn med school [University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], also.  But they, so they never get any campus life, and I, I was happy I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, plus I wasn't accepted to Penn med school either, so that's another reason I didn't go (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, so was it, was Penn easy for you or was it?
Speaker 1: Undergrad?  I, I wasn't a great grad- undergraduate student.  I had a tremendous disadvantage I found out later, I never had an examination--I never saw an examination that anyone ever took at Penn.  You know all the kids I was going to school with who were in class living in the frat [fraternity] houses, living in the dormitories, they had old exams.  I never saw an exam (laughter) the whole four years.  And I reflect back on that, gee I could have been far better student if I'd seen some of those exams, prepared for it, I'd been preparing on my own.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you didn't, so you were--
Speaker 1: That was a disadvantage.
Speaker 2: --working without benefit of a study group or anything.
Speaker 1: There was no study groups, no, but just without the study group, if I just been able to see some old exams, have some idea where they're coming from.  I was all--left on my own.
Story_ID: 558379
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation you, you applied for Penn medical school [University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And didn't, didn't make it, huh?
Speaker 2: I didn't make it, my grades weren't that good that competitive with--but even more importantly they were admitting one black student into University of Pennsylvania med school in every four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had the old quota system?
Speaker 2: It was--the quota was full.
Speaker 1: It was--did they--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --did they openly acknowledge that or?
Speaker 2: No, no, they didn't openly acknowledge you just look around and see one, one student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then three or four years later another, but never more than one, it was never more than one black student in Penn med school over ten or twelve maybe more years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that--
Speaker 2: That I was aware of.
Speaker 1: So that meant, admitting one every four years or so, right?
Speaker 2: About that yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you could never have two in there at the same time, right so?
Speaker 2: I never, never aware of two, if there--might, might have been a senior and a freshman at the same time, but basically we just recognized about one of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you applied to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] right?
Speaker 2: Applied to Meharry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was accepted, I wasn't accepted at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], I was accepted at Meharry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Meharry is in Nashville [Tennessee], close by Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Meharry is in Nashville, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Close, close to Fisk University.
Speaker 2: Across the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  Now you said that was a little bit better right?
Speaker 2: It what?
Speaker 1: That was a little bit better, in terms of socially than Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes.  Oh yeah well I lived in the frat house, Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], Omega, and I lived at the frat house.  We didn't have a dormitory, Fisk, Fisk had dormitories, Meharry didn't have dormitories, so who lived in private homes and each of the fraternities had a house.  So I lived in Omega house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did, well how, how was Fisk in terms, terms of, the terms of the course of study, the teachers--
Speaker 2: How as what?
Speaker 1: What was Fisk like for you?
Speaker 2: What was?
Speaker 1: I mean Meharry I'm sorry, Meharry, what was Meharry (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was Meharry?  Oh, I didn't have any problem, I studied hard, I was a good student.  I didn't have any problems with--academic problems, I didn't have any problems with med school curriculum none at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of your, professors and what were they like?
Speaker 2: Well we had all kinds (laughter), we had some who--we had a couple we had a lot of jokes about in terms of accent there were a couple of, who were Caribbean and one from Panama.  And we had couple of alcoholics and you know we had a little of everything in--among our faculty.  Which make some teacher and somewhere just poor, fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty much the mix.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Was the faculty at Meharry all, all black?
Speaker 2: The faculty all black other than the--some visiting part time from Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee], in the senior--during the clinical years.  But the un- the basic science years they were all black, not all African Americans, but some were Caribbean and so forth from--Panamanian.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers there at Meharry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a couple who I, I thought very highly of, yeah.  Dr. Quinland [William S. Quinland] was a--he's from Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago] he was a pathologist, and I had a great deal of respect for him.  There's a Dr. Crump [E. Perry Crump] who's a pediatrician and anatomist, who I had respect for him also.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your, well, did--were you a part of any clubs or?
Speaker 2: Do what?
Speaker 1: Were you a part of any clubs, organizations, associations at, at Meharry?
Speaker 2: Yes, Omega Psi Phi.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right.  Okay, did you--were you an officer of Omega Psi Phi, while you were there?
Speaker 2: Let's see was I?  No, no I wasn't basileus, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, well were who were some of your classmate, would we know any other them now or did--
Speaker 2: Well my classmates are now twelve or thirteen living.  And in--here in Detroit [Michigan] we have three, two at least two favorite classmates really outstanding, I got a surgeon and a pediatrician, two surgeons and a pediatrician, yeah, we were classmates.  But out of my sixty-five who finished there are thirteen of us are living, I finished in 1945.
Story_ID: 558380
Speaker 1: Where did you do your residency?
Speaker 2: I did a one year internship at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center] in New York [New York].  At that time a year's residency--a year's internship was, was pretty typic- characteristic of how you started.  We were very few of us were doing residencies at that time, specialties we were finishing and going out and practice.
Speaker 1: So, so you basically--
Speaker 2: I had some, I had some interest in doing a specialty, but I had a, I had a need to get out and help my brother [HistoryMaker Benjamin Whitten] and sister go college.  So I--once I finished I finished I need to get out and make some money so to help them to make it.  So during residency was just out of the question when I finished, so I did one year internship and then went into practice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went in as a general practitioner basically.
Speaker 2: I went in--Lackawanna, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of hospital?  Did you--oh you just went into general practice.
Speaker 2: General practice.
Speaker 1: Just as a general physician?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had an office.
Speaker 1: At your office okay, okay. So you opened up in Lackawanna, New York?  That's a big railroad town?
Speaker 2: You what?
Speaker 1: A big railroad town?
Speaker 2: No, no steel.
Speaker 1: Steel town, okay?
Speaker 2: Steel town, Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, well we always hear it as a railroad stop, to me a lot of no, not really.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) It's Bethlehem Steel.
Story_ID: 558381
Speaker 1: So we were talking about residency before and pick up that topic again for us?
Speaker 2: Well if I, if I--later--well let me put it this way if--there was no questions about my doing a residency when I finished Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  'Cause I needed to get out and make some money.  When I decided after about five years I wanted to do a residency I could do a specialty then that be--was big a problem of where I might do it.  Because if--at that time Meharry could arrange some residencies but you had to go back and teach at a relatively low salary.  So, so it wasn't totally opened--when I finished it wasn't totally open for residencies.  Couple of my classmates that wanted to do residencies couldn't do it where they wished to.  And if you did you had to come back--Meharry had to arrange it for you and that would be a part of coming back.  So that was big, big point.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Maybe you can get that in.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--yeah, so, now why did you choose to go, or how did you choose to go to Lackawanna, New York to practice?
Speaker 1: I had a very good friend who lived in the frat house, Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] who was from Lackawanna, and I was looking for a small town near a big city.  Lackawanna was just ideal for me, Buffalo [New York], big city, Lackawanna, small town, that's what I was looking for.  So Lackawanna didn't have a black physician there and that's what I that's the reason I went there.
Speaker 2: Okay so how was business in Lackawanna?
Speaker 1: How was what?
Speaker 2: How was your practice in Lackawanna, I mean was it--
Speaker 1: How was it?
Speaker 2: How was it in Lackawanna as far as practice, do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, well I had a excellent general practice, I was needed and I was--it worked well.  Big problem with practicing in Buffalo in that area was the weather.  The wintertime with the snow, we had blizzards (laughter).  (Unclear) problem, but just--you didn't have--I didn't have hospital privileges when I started there.  So if I had a patient that needed to be hospitalized I had to send him to a white physician there.  But the--in terms of general practice I delivered babies in the home.  I didn't deliver babies in the hospital, delivered babies in the home.  Surgery I could go in and be a second assistant in surgery, my patients, not taking care of them, but just simply my patient.  And that's when they had spit fees so I got part of the fee being a surgeon.  Even though I had no, no training in surgery, as a being in the field, surgical field.  If, if one of my patients were operated on in the hospital the one of the sort of things they did.  I didn't take care of my patients, but I got a fee for being a second assistant.  So I wasn't, I never delivered a baby there, in the five or six years, all of the deliveries I did were in a home.
Speaker 2: Okay, was that--
Speaker 1: So I was a real general practice, night calls and home calls.
Speaker 2: Now were babies delivered with anesthesia in those days or how did they--?
Speaker 1: Very little.
Speaker 2: Very little?
Speaker 1: Very little, very little.  Natural childbirth, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, well, how long were you in Lackawanna?
Speaker 1: About five years or five and half years.  Then I just and I decided I wanted to a specialty.  And I decided that it was during the Korean War that I wanted to get the, I didn't want to be in the, in the course of a residency and pulled out to go in this [U.S.] Army, so I volunteered.  So, I spent two years in the service then came back to do a pediatric residency.
Story_ID: 558382
Speaker 1: Where did you do the pediatric residency?
Speaker 2: At Children's Hospital, Buffalo [The Children's Hospital of Buffalo, Buffalo, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things had opened up a little then.  And so I could apply and be accepted, probably wouldn't have been accepted five or six years earlier on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be about 1952, I guess is that are we right?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Would the residency be about 1952?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, before then (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay 'cause we have it on the sheet as--
Speaker 2: You got it there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well I don't know if it's right or not, It says in '51 [1951] you were in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Spent two years--
Speaker 2: Okay then it was '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: So yeah, '52 [1952] or '53 [1953] I guess, one or the other, I gue- yeah.  So you studied pediatrics at University of Buffalo, I mean at--
Speaker 2: Buffalo Children's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Buffalo Children's Hospital, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and--
Speaker 2: Well before that I spent a year, eight months at graduate school University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Med school, graduate medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] 'cause I had been out five or six years and I thought I needed to get back get some basic, back to the basics again before I started a pediatric residency.  So I volunteered on my own, I, I went to Penn graduate school of medicine, which was a little unusual for anyone to do that, before I did the residency.
Story_ID: 558383
Speaker 1: Now that same year in '53 [1953] you were--got, you got married, right?
Speaker 2: I think you got that right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you meet--
Speaker 2: I got that right didn't I (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So, so how did you meet your wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten] and who was she?
Speaker 2: My wife came to Buffalo [New York] as a--a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] convention and she came and we had a blind date, someone arranged a date.  And I was captured immediately from the blind date.  She was the most beautiful woman I had ever seen at that time, okay.  So subsequently we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, now--
Speaker 2: Now I know she wants more details than that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Most people are not on the spot like this (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well once I was in Buffalo and she was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] so that we had a long distance letter writing courtship, and then I was overseas.  I volunteered, went overseas and we had planned to get married--Korea--and then I got shifted to--I was in Japan and I got shifted to Korea so that didn't happen.  But I got married as soon as I left the [U.S. military] service in '53 [1953] we, we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and so--
Speaker 2: So our courtship was primarily by letters.
Story_ID: 558384
Speaker 1: Well in 1955 you moved to Detroit [Michigan], is that true?
Speaker 2: I came to Detroit to do a, a resi- a fellowship in pediatric hematology, blood disease in children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I decided I wanted to do a specialty in pediatrics.  And I looked around in--at Buffalo Children Hospital [The Children's Hospital of Buffalo, Buffalo, New York] and had thought in terms of--I was interested in the heart, cardiovascular surgery--residency.  And they had arranged a fellowship for me with the, at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] where the outstanding--Helen Taussig [Helen B. Taussig] was the outstanding pediatric cardiologist at the time.  But then I looked around there were four pediatric cardiologists at Buffalo Children's, and I would be the fifth.  I looked around in hematology and there was a part-time hematologist, I decided to be a hematologist.  So, I came to Buffalo--I mean to Detroit to train under one of the world's outstanding pediatric hematologists.  And--
Speaker 1: Now who was that, who was?
Speaker 2: Wolf Zuelzer [Wolf W. Zuelzer] was his name.  And after being with him six months [at the Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan], I came on my own, he didn't have any money, but accepted me for fellowship for six months.  At the end of the--around the fifth month he wanted me to stay on for the entire year, and then he would pay me a fellowship beginning six months.  But he wanted me to honor my free, last free month.  Originally I planned to spend six months at no salary.  So he said, "That's--when you finish that, then I'll start paying."  And this was a wealthy department (laughter), wealthy department that's the way they handled me.
Speaker 1: That doesn't sound--seem fair, but.  Okay, so, you're in Detroit, and you I gue- well you've been in Detroit ever since I guess I suppose right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, never left.
Story_ID: 558385
Speaker 1: When did you become chief of pediatrics you know?
Speaker 2: Well when I finished the residency with a fellowship they wanted--they had a opening as the chief of pediatrics at the city hospital [Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] and I took that position.  Part-time instructor at the univ- at the med school [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan], and chief of pediatrics to the city hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay this, this still in 1955?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Now what had had you--at this point I know you become like an expert on sickle cell anemia, but at this point in your life had you ever heard of sickle cell?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I heard of it--
Speaker 1: Did you know what it was?
Speaker 2: --but we hadn't spent any time with until my fellowship, my fellowship because that was but one of the blood diseases that we dealt with at Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan].  And that's the time I got interested in sickle cell disease.  Because I didn't feel that the patients there, or the children there were getting sort of total approach to their problem that they deserved.  And I, I felt something needed to be done about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The hemophiliacs, the thalassemias, which were sort of white--more white problems, they were getting total care.  And I didn't think they were getting the total care that the, that the children with sickle cell disease should.  So eventually I established a clinic at Children's Hospital for sickle cell, full-time clinic.
Speaker 1: So, how long did it take to convince people to establish it?
Speaker 2: A couple of years to move, to move that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I moved the children with sickle cell disease out of the regular hematology clinic into a specialty sickle cell--full-time sickle cell clinic where I put a together ether a team of physicians, a--two nurse practitioners, a social worker.  I wanted to have a total, a total program.  I'm particularly interested in having nurse practitioners so there'd be some continuity in care.  In most clinics you had residents taking care in rotation, residents rotate.  So that you didn't have the clinic- the continuity of care, so that was something totally unique I put together.
Speaker 1: Okay, why was the continuity so important?
Speaker 2: Well you like to have children and the parents be able to relate to someone on the, on an ongoing basis.  So they get to know you, you know what their problems are, you get some confidence in them.  Otherwise you have a resident coming through, three month there.  And next time next time you go it's another resident, so you had no--I use the term continuity care.  Someone who knows, knows--gets to know you, know your problem you get to know them have some confidence in them and so forth, exceedingly important in medical care.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so some of us are committed to being of help.  Otherwise, other than just being there being trained, residents are basically just--they're being trained, they have no commitment to the individuals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558386
Speaker 1: What is sickle cell disease and--
Speaker 2: The what is?
Speaker 1: Why is it so important for black people?
Speaker 2: Why is it so important?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well one of the most repor- I think if we didn't have a--one of the features of sickle cell disease that we have, it would not have a very important disease.  And that feature is it's a lifetime of unpredictable pain episodes that might occur at any time.  And if we didn't have that as a factor it would just be another disease.  There is no other disease where you have a lifetime of unpredictable pain episodes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what causes these unpredictable pain episodes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The blocking of blood vessels with sickle cells.
Speaker 1: And what causes the cells to sickle?
Speaker 2: It's a mutation that occurs.  There's a substance in red blood cells called hemoglobin that carries oxygen.  And it's different--we have a sickle hemoglobin, we have normal hemoglobin.  Sickle hemoglobin when it gives off oxygen that carry the tissues (unclear) internal realignment of a sickle cell, of the molecules in the red blood cells, and distorts the shape of cells into that of a sickle.  And a sickle cell is very rigid and very fragile.  And the normal red blood cells are round, very pliable, very soft, pass through blood vessels very easily.  Sickle cells plug blood vessels very easily; they behave like logs in a riverbed, and that's a major problem.
Story_ID: 558387
Speaker 1: Well in '59 [1959] you become an assistant professor of pediatrics, right?  And then in--where?  At the hospital or?
Speaker 2: Wayne medical school [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: At Wayne medical school okay all right.  And then in 1960 you were one of the founders of the American medical education--I'm sorry, the African Medical Education Fund?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that something I was deeply involved, but that's not a very important--if we're going to talk about my life.  That's trying to get more black physicians in Africa; it's a very small piece of what we're doing because there are few students that--we had very little money to support them.  And few very of them ever when back to Africa.  That's not something I spent a lot a great deal of time reflecting on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a tremendous need for black physicians in Africa.  We had a few, few of them would come to train here you like to give them support and we have very few dollars.  And we like for them to go back and very few of them went back, we had very little support them.  So that piece of my life I see a--have a fair amount--it's not very--not something I'd want to spend a great of time talking about.  The need is there but it's not a very important part of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, it didn't really turn out the way you organized (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's just, I've given you the problems: very few, very little money and they don't go back.
Story_ID: 558388
Speaker 1: You went to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] with Dr. Charles Wright [Charles H. Wright], right?
Speaker 2: He was a, I think he was, Charlie was a senior when I was a freshman or somewhere along the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were acquainted with him in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we got to know--
Speaker 1: You all became--
Speaker 2: We got to know each other very well as colleagues here in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Black physicians, we all knew each other in Detroit very well.
Speaker 1: Well how were things for black physicians in Detroit when you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well when we came here, they were very, very--you--privileges in white hospitals didn't exist.  I was the first physician to have a, the privilege in a white hospital in Detroit, director and the director of a service in Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan].  Because--the reason I was because the residents from Harper Hospital [Harper University Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] in pediatrics spent some time on my service at Receiving Hospital [Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, Michigan], therefore they put me on the staff.  So I was one of the--I was the first to be on the staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Detroit doesn't have a black hospital as such like, like--
Speaker 2: A black now, but we've had hos- black hospitals, we have a rich heritage of black hospitals in Detroit, a rich heritage.
Speaker 1: Well give us a little overview of those, I know in Chicago [Illinois] you've got Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County] and you know other--Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: We--we've had at least six or seven here they were small hospitals--there were some weren't that small either.  But they were, they were developed because if you're a black physician you couldn't treat a patient, your black patient, in a white--in the hospital.  So they developed black hospitals.  That's the history of them.  So we had some outstanding black hospitals in Detroit, a rich his- history.
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the ones when you started?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: When you got here what were some of those black hospitals?
Speaker 2: Well there's the Laurence Dunbar [Dunbar Hospital, Detroit Michigan], there was a Millen--no, not Millender.  I have to reflect on that, the names.  They'll come back to me in a moment.
Speaker 1: All right, but there was more than one?  There, there were more than one?
Speaker 2: At least a half dozen.
Speaker 1: At least a half dozen, okay, all right that's what I'm trying to find (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 2: Northcross was another hospital [Mercy General Hospital and Clinic, Detroit, Michigan], about a forty, fifty bed hospital.  Burton Mercy [Burton Mercy Hospital, Detroit, Michigan], Burton Mercy was another larger hospital, names are coming back to me now.
Story_ID: 558389
Speaker 1: What were some of the obstacles to what you were doing at Detroit Receiving Hospital [Detroit, Michigan]?  What were--did everything work smooth, or were there any obstacle to what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any major problems with running a pediatric service at, at Children's Ho- at Receiving Hospital.  The only--I got in difficulty because we had a team of cardiovascular surgeons who were trying to develop a cardiovascular program, hurgi- surgical program, and they had brought in a child who had a septal defect one other walls of the heart and died.  And I didn't think they were qualified to ca- to perform cardiovascular surgery at Children--at Receiving Hospital at that time.  They didn't have the experience.  And I decided that they would no longer have access to any of my children for surgery.  The chairman of the department took me to the board, for the position I took.  And I stood on my ground and said that for that reason that I would no longer have a child that's in the pediatric service that they would be referred to them.  And it, it held up.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was this?
Speaker 2: It was around '58 [1958] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was during the time I was chief of pediatrics at Receiving.
Story_ID: 558390
Speaker 1: Was it a long time before there was another black doctor in one of the white hospitals in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we have--let's see, there's a Dr. Waldo Cain, one of my classmates, Dr. Charlie Wright [Charles H. Wright] and three others.  I mounted a real campaign.  They eventually opened up, began opening up the hospitals here.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any organizations you formed to open up the hospital with?
Speaker 2: No, there were the Detroit Medical Society, which is black physicians, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't organized specifically around that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that was just one of their (unclear)?
Speaker 2: One of their missions, yeah.
Speaker 1: One of their missions.  Okay, okay, good.  Now as a, as a black doctor in the city like Detroit, or in any city for the most part, doctors are called upon to perform do a number of social functions?
Speaker 2: To do what?
Speaker 1: I said doc- black doctors--doctors period in most cities or anywhere they are are usually seen as civic--
Speaker 2: Civic leaders?  Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Leaders, right, and people go to you for things that have nothing to do with medicine.  Now did you find yourself overwhelmed with things to do?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I think I had a niche that I was performing and I was not the most outgoing person in terms of things.  But I, I was making a contribution in areas that I made a contribution in without being called upon necessarily.  I had some areas that I was focusing on, as you will talk about med school soon that I was focusing on.
Speaker 1: Okay all right well--
Speaker 2: I didn't say--I didn't feel I was overwhelmed--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with the demands.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what were some of the organizations you became a part of in those days?
Speaker 2: I, I was not a big organization person, I--it's more what I organized myself (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A sickle cell program and--which I spent a lot of time with.
Story_ID: 558391
Speaker 1: Tell us about the organization of the sickle cell program?
Speaker 2: Well I--in '71 [1971], I--based on my experience during the residency and the feeling that we weren't getting the services that individuals needed.  Individuals weren't getting the benefit of what we knew in sickle cell research that I, I started a organization here in Detroit [Michigan], 1971, sickle cell disease, sickle program in 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was primarily to give individuals opportunity to find out whether or not they had sickle cell gene could have children with sickle cell disease.  And then to give them some education, information so they could make some decisions.  Prior to this, children who were born with sickle cell disease who had parents who had potential for having sickle cell disease and they weren't aware of it.  So they had no knowledge of it whatsoever.  So the first time that they found out that they had a child, or could have a child with sickle cell disease was after the child was born.  And yet with knew who to, to detect the carrier state.  Most of my sickle cell life has been devoted around trying to be sure, that what we knew about sickle cell disease was of benefit to the community--the research was benefit that--our patient population got the benefit of it.  That's been my lifetime mission with sickle cell.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I've not been a great bench researcher.  I did some research, bench research of sickle cell disease but primarily developing organizations, developing educational materials, developing training programs that's where I've been.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--
Speaker 2: I've been an advocate.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it your organization that was lar- was your organization responsible for the great wave of public information that started coming out in the early '70s [1970s] about sickle cell--
Speaker 2: We, we were a big, big part of it, big part of it.  I--a Dorothy Boswell and I founded a National Association for Sickle Cell Diseases [Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, Inc.].  The two of us, put together a--and a group of individuals--for thirteen programs and developed the organized a national association in 1971, that gave us an opportunity to have a national thrust.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I served as president for about twenty years and as leader in terms of the first--this is the first genetic disease where there's been national screening.  And we've been at the forefront dealing with some of the issues related to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know in--
Speaker 2: See I--we had a problem with this early on because one of the groups the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were totally opposed to our sickle cell program because they considered it to be genocidal.  What we were trying to do, when we trying to in- to education people about sickle cell disease and what they might do around birth and so forth that what you're really trying to do is reduce the black pop- you don't want any black babies born.  So that, that was their thrust.  One of the ways I dealt with that, one of the leaders of the Black Panther movement was here in Detroit.  And I spent time with him and eventually brought him on our board of directors.  So that he could see what we were what we were attempting to do was not genocidal; it was of benefit to the black population.
Speaker 1: Well who was this (background noise)?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Kenny Horton [ph.].
Story_ID: 558392
Speaker 1: (Background noise) As you probably already know the--the idea of a genetic disease is something that causes a lot of discussion and conspiracy theory talk in the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I know I first read, or heard about sickle cell anemia from the Tony--'Tony Brown's Journal,' a television show, or 'Black Journal'--it might have been 'Black Journal' then.  But Tony Brown was the host and he discussed the disease and--were you on the show, ever on his show?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know he had a doctor on and they discussed the ramifications of sickle cell anemia, and who it affects.  There's always been some confusion that it was just a black disease (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, we know better than that, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us better, tell us who, who it affects?
Speaker 2: Well we know that it--let's say it occurs in other racial groups but not nearly at the extent in which it does in the African--primarily because it's it originated primarily in African cultures where malaria is a problem.  And so happens that having sickle cell trait is a beneficial, if you have sickle cell trait your child is less likely to die from malaria.  And that's the reason the association is there.  But it's--if you're Scandinavian it's not likely for you to have malaria.  And so happens that sickle cell gene if it occurred there as a mutation it didn't last.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so conversely, if a Scandinavian was in Africa and was bitten by a malarial mosquito he would probably have a harder time trying to survive right?
Speaker 2: Yes, well not only that if you're, if you're black and didn't have sickle cell trait, same.
Story_ID: 558393
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about some of the struggles I guess to even do what your national organization [National Association for Sickle Cell Diseases; Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, Inc.] was set up to do.  Now you, you established a number of spin off organizations from the national, right (unclear)?  I think initially you said thirteen were formed?
Speaker 2: Well thirteen, they weren't all sickle cell organizations either these were in the organizations who had some interest in sickle cell who, who came.  They weren't all sickle cell, but we're up now to about, I think we're up to around sixty, sixty-five member organizations throughout the country, in our sickle cell--.  I served as president for nineteen years, twenty years and in its earlier development of the organization, dealing with a lot issues around getting acceptance, dealing with the--trying to get adequate funding for programs and so forth.  Trying to get our member organizations in a position where they could provide meaningful services, develop training programs for individuals to conduct sickle cell programs.  To, to be a banquet speaker and were helping to raise funds throughout the country, those sorts of things that I've, that I've done.  But a lot of it was, is developing grant request.  For example, I want kids to go to summer camp where they can learn to be independent from parents for a week, one grant.  I wanted it to be handled appropriately in the schools and have a educational program for how parents and teachers can work together, I got grants--money for that.  So fair amount of grant money that I raised for our national association to carry out my basic mission of seeing that the benefits--that the black population got the benefit of what we knew about sickle cell disease, ongoing.
Story_ID: 558394
Speaker 1: Now you said you had a--at a certain juncture the March of Dimes [March of Dimes Foundation]?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: At a certain juncture, the March of Dimes and perhaps some other organizations, mainstream organizations had decided that they would be the--
Speaker 2: Just the March of Dimes, no one else.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right, so March of Dime- how did--tell us that story how did--the March of Dimes stepped in and wanted to be the vehicle for sickle cell education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) March of Dimes says that we will, what their plan was to have a sickle cell component in every of their branches throughout the country.  And that's what I was concerned about.  It would be under white leadership with a direction and the monies would be flowing.  If we have sickle cell programs in the black community we'd have the black perspective on what need to be done around this disease and that approach, and also we'd have the income, coming into--we'd have some we could create jobs for individuals to be running programs, to be counselors and so forth in these programs.  We would have printers for printing paper, printing materials for paper, who are black printers and so forth.  So I had saw it as being a way of enriching and benefit the black community at large.  Everything that we do in the sickle cell field, in my judgment, ought to some way be beneficial to the black community.  And this is one of the ways you do it, by having black leadership, there's nothing that we do in the sickle cell field that if we can't we should try to find a black person or black corporation or whatever to do it.  That doesn't mean we don't need a corporate support, we do we need the money, but the in terms of direction and leadership ought to come for the black community we want to benefit from it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said--we were discussing off camera that that you went to Washington, D.C. to appeal to the Congressional Black Caucus around this issue.
Speaker 2: That was only a part of--a piece of this.  The basic getting the March of Dimes out, three of us did that with the leadership of the March of Dimes, with a meeting with them; that's--that wasn't Black Caucus.  We had the Black Caucus dealing with some of issues around this, but this specific thing we did three of us did this with the leadership of March of Dimes.
Speaker 1: It was you and--
Speaker 2: We've had later--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: --my wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten] as appropriate in saying that we bring the Black Caucus in when there was some problems of threaten some funding that we needed to have, then we, we, we finally called on the Black Caucus.  But I stepped in immediately when I found out about this.  And once--what's ironic about this, the leadership of the National Medical Association was black had agreed with the March of Dimes, they had accepted this when I found that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, so did you meet with the leadership of the National Medical Association?
Speaker 2: No I just ignored them and when straight to the, went straight to the March of Dimes and convinced them, that's the source.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well who went with you?
Speaker 2: Dorothy Boswell, the person I ment- who had been a volunteer in the sickle cell field and a person in New York who had been in the sickle cell movement, just the three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and--
Speaker 2: And that was our entire thrust that this is a black disease we have capable black leadership, we're constantly leader- the black community being demeaned and criticized because they're not moving up to, to deal with their own problems, here we have an opportunity to do so and we, we don't want you to usurp us in this and but we need some support also.  So I say we left with a check for eight thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Sorry, eighty thousand dollars, right?
Speaker 2: At that time--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were successful in, in persuading them to back off of that, yeah.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They pulled out completely.
Story_ID: 558395
Speaker 1: What was your interaction with Congressional Black Caucus in terms of the sickle cell program (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was later over some funding issues where we needed, needed some, some help.  And Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] was very, very helpful with that.  But it's a question of--one of the things that was happening was that since sickle cell had been so successful as in getting some, some congressional support that the other genetic diseases wanted to have the same.  So they wanted to have a law, we have a law now, a sickle cell--called Control Act [National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act of 1972] that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] put in place.  And they wanted to have something similar to this and that's what we were considered about, this (unclear) of funding if everybody had it had a act in the, in the picture that's where the Congressional Black Caucus was very helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what was--what did the--what were the previsions of the sickle cell act?
Speaker 2: Well basically now it says that [U.S.] Congress is mandated to have ten comprehensive sickle cell centers, didn't say how much funding.  But they mandated to have ten comprehensive sickle cell--that's unique, a mandate of Congress.  So we've come a long way with, with the congressional--the governmental regulation of the sickle cell problem, what needs to be done about it.
Speaker 1: So are these--
Speaker 2: That's one of the big, the big advances.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are--there are ten centers now?
Speaker 2: Ten, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: There were--we had fifteen.  I, I was program director for one of the centers [Sickle Cell Detection and Information Center] at Wayne State [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan] for nineteen years.  And we started with, with fifteen and then they went down to ten.  And at the last--when I was still active--the last application was after I was active we no longer had a solid research program.  We weren't competitive for nineteen years we were, so we di- weren't funded from that time on.  But for nineteen years and during the course that time we had of $17 million to come in for the comprehensive sickle cell centers.  And we were very proud national- locally that Wayne State University, that was the largest research funds, that ever come to a university in any one, for any one program, for the whole university, was my sickle cell program.
Speaker 1: That is something.
Story_ID: 558396
Speaker 1: Where do things stand now at Wayne State [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan] and around the country?  How--what's--
Speaker 2: For what?
Speaker 1: Well for sickle cell research and education?  I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh we, we have, we have a little program not, not much going on there now.  We have, in terms of research it's a--the--most of the research independent individual investigators, or the ten comprehensive centers and we're not one of the ten comprehensive centers now.  But that's federal those are federal, NIH [National Institutes of Health] funds, not university funds.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And competitive, highly competitive.
Speaker 1: Is--have there been major advancement--advancements in the treatment of sickle cell disease and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah oh we we've come a long way in the sickle cell field, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what are some of those advancements, since you know, got involved in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that we recognize that--I guess the biggest advance is the fact children are prone to develop infections that could be overwhelming can cause the death beginning as early as three months, because they don't have a great immunity to infections and with penicillin prophylaxis, giving them penicillin every day for five years--first year of their life can significantly alter that.  That's probably the most important advance we've had in the whole field.  And we have a state--all, virtually all the states now require individuals to be tested for sickle cell disease as new- newborn.  That permits us to identify them and get them started on penicillin before they--they're at risk of having infections, or death.  That's probably the most important advancement we have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558397
Speaker 1: Sickle cell disease is still a significant health problem in the country (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Would you say--what percentage of the black population is affected by it?
Speaker 2: We have 8 percent of the black population are carriers of sickle cell gene and about one in five or six hundred are born with sickle cell disease.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how does that compare to the rest of the population?
Speaker 2: Well this is within the black population and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's within the black pop-
Speaker 2: And, and that, that frequency within the black population is the largest for any genetic disease.
Story_ID: 558398
Speaker 1: You were director of the center [Sickle Cell Detection and Information Center] for nineteen years and then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was dire- yes I directed the center for nineteen years, I was president of the, of the sickle cell association of America [National Association for Sickle Cell Diseases; Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, Inc.] for nineteen years, the leader there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you also have a academic career at Wayne State [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the meantime?  You began to teach, you were teaching at Wayne State back in the early '60s [1960s] right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And then, so tell us about your career at, at Wayne State, your teaching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the thing that--the only thing significant I've done at Wayne is that I became concerned about the fact that we have very few black physicians.  And that we needed to increase the number.  And to do so it didn't seem likely that, that we had enough qualified applicants of individuals who qualify, not just applicants, but qualified applicants.  And I developed a pra- program at Wayne based on the premise that there were individuals who have the native ability, basic intelligence, so forth to become successful physicians.  But they--when they applied to medical school their academic credentials did not suggest that they will be successful.  And hence they were denied admission.  But I believe that they had the potential and the reason that they didn't have the necessary academic credentials is that that they had been disadvantaged, educationally disadvantaged, emotionally disadvantaged, physiologically disadvantaged, economically disadvantaged.  Many had to work through the four years of school and hence didn't have the grades that--.  And if these individuals were given the opportunity for another year's program they could be successful in medical school.  I convinced the medical school administration of this, and we started off with five black students.  Eventually ten then fourteen; we had to increase it because we couldn't have a program exclusively for blacks.  And as of last year we're over two hundred black doctors now, who graduate from med- Wayne med school who had originally been denied admission to the medical school and about sixty others--racial groups.  And it's based upon the premise that they had the ability but had been disadvantaged and hence had not been (unclear).  This was an outstanding--it's a unique program that I started in 1961.
Story_ID: 558399
Speaker 1: And in relationship to that, a few years ago the school established a--tried to develop a scholar- an endowment fund in my name for the post baccalaureate program, to continue to support it.  They started off with a goal of five hundred thousand when they reached that goal they didn't decided to go for a million.  And now the value of the [HistoryMaker] Charles Whitten endowment fund is about $1.3 million, to help support the post baccalaureate program.  The program is unique--other schools have duplicated to some extent but few to the extent that have all the provisions.  One of the things, this was a program totally supported by the school, students had no fees.  We, we also gave them a modest living stipend hopefully wouldn't, so they wouldn't have to work.  And they if they maintained a B average they were automatically admitted to medical school, so it wasn't a question of being better prepared, being back in the field.  So those three features to the programs were--what's been unique, but only partially being duplicated by other medical schools.  First that the--totally supported with a stipend, guaranteed admission if they are successful.  Those two features are, are essential in my post baccalaureate program that I was pioneer of and originator of.  A few schools have had post baccalaureate programs, but none have had all three of the primary characteristics.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well who are some of the, the people who successfully finished the program and, and who?
Speaker 1: We've had at least seven or eight full time Wayne State University [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan] faculty members who have came--came through the program.  Our assistant dean for admissions now for the medical school is a Wayne graduate--is a post baccalaureate graduate.  Director of the outpatient service programs for the medical school for the internal medical is a post baccalaureate graduate; we have quite a few.  We have been pleased with the number of, of our graduates who have support the program we've had one whose--who provided, who has contributed over thirty-five thousand dollars to the program.  I happen to be the largest contributor to the program, fifty thousand dollars that's my, I wanted to be the leader in saying not only did I walk, I talked; not only did I talk, I walked, okay.  So I provided fifty thousand dollars for the endowment fund.  Even though I don't particular- I don't personally benefit from it.  But I, that's my leadership what I intended to do as a leader in, in believing in the value of the program.
Speaker 2: Okay, does, does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But this is a program that's got national recognition.  And with some of the newspaper articles you'll see, where I was a Michigan--Michigainer of the Year [sic. Michiganian of the Year] a few years ago because of the post baccalaureate program, you have a photograph of that in there.
Story_ID: 558400
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990] you became distinguished professor of pediatrics at Wayne State [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  I think before that you were the dean of curricular affairs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  For nineteen years I was the, I ran the educational program for the School of Medicine, associate dean.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, okay you were the dean of special programs and--let's see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was after, after I resigned, decided it was time for someone else to take over the educational programs after nineteen years.  They still wanted me to stay on, and I didn't want the title of associate dean for minority affairs, so we, we used the title, special programs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you retired in 2004, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You can call it retirement (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not--
Speaker 2: I work very hard.
Speaker 1: Do you, okay?
Speaker 2: Not being paid (laughter).  Yeah I retired in '04 [2004], yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, have, have you--I imagine, it's probably true--
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: I just imagine that you've been called upon to visit a number of countries on behalf of, I mean to, to, to educate about sickle cell disease, is this, is this true?
Speaker 2: Oh we've--I've been to England and Caribbean, a couple of countries.  Nothing's been going on otherwise, Ghana, but nothing otherwise, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is the level of education about sickle cell disease very high in Africa and the Caribbean?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's, it's very difficult to mount.  You've got so many problems in (laughter)--.  Sickle cell is just one of many, many, many, many problems.  Very difficult to get the sort of thrust for sickle cell in in African countries, extremely difficult, for good reasons.  Got AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] to deal with for example.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's yeah that a pandemic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, that puts some priorities on things.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You've got malnutrition to deal with, malaria to deal with; you've got so many problems in many of the African countries, starvation, malnutrition, so, it's difficult to get any real thrust around sickle cell disease.  They're doing a good job in Ghana, trying to get things moving, in, in a segment of the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know there's a, there's a pretty well organized Ghana Medical Association that--
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: Ghana Medical Association here in this country that sends money to Ghana for various (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they've been helpful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 558401
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any particular thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of your hopes and concerns in general for the black community in the United States and for Detroit [Michigan] in specific?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that we need to find ways to equali- to have more equal opportunities for everyone.  What we have not, we've not talked about the program that I started.  I, I became--I'm saying this very modestly, very modestly--I'm an expert on childhood on preschool reading.  I'm well, well, well versed on what we can do, what the problems are and why children are unable to read effectively as they move along.  The reading is a major, major problem to such extent I got involved in this program--.  See I've gone from being educator of medical students to try to be an educator of preschool kids (laughter).  But I facetiously sometimes say the problems the same.  You've got resistant learners (laughter) and you got poor memories on both sides.  You teach medical students something you hope that they'll remember it two years later.  You teach a preschooler something you hope that they'll still remember it three or four months later.  So I started a program in which I tri- developed a program to teach--help parents to teach their children some of the skills they need prior to kindergarten so they'll be ready for the kindergarten curriculum, and hence eventually do well there, and eventually be good first, second grade readers.  The data clearly shows high percentage of children are not effective readers.  If they don't become effective readers around three, third grade, they're not likely to ever become effective readers.  So you need to start very early.  So the program I started was to provide parents with some--a program in which they have structured activities to teach their children some factors--features that are important in terms of learning to read.  They were to spend fifteen minutes a day, six days a week, for six months and I would pay them sixty dollars a month to do it.  That was a program that I put in place one year with some Head Start, it went very well.  I wanted to expand that to what I've--many of the Head Start mothers in the program--small program, twenty or so.  But these were mothers who--some them had already begun and more, more--less likely to be failures than some of the others.  I wanted to reach out to those mothers who were most likely to have children who are entering kindergarten not able to take advantage of the kindergarten curriculum.  Who are they?  The single parents, low income, single parents, low income, those are the ones who are most likely to have children who are going to fail.
Story_ID: 558402
Speaker 1: I couldn't get enough parents in a cohesive group to continue that program, and I was going to raise the stipend to ninety dollars.  We--this was from money that my wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten] and I have in a foundation, small foundation--to give them twenty dollar--ninety dollars a month to carry out the lesson plans.  I couldn't get enough who I had any confidence that they would con- follow out the program because I couldn't get them started even (laughter) to carry out the things you get--to register, to come on time, to register and so forth, and so forth and so forth, so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you're saying the breakdown is in parent- parental commitment?
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: The breakdown in the program is the parental commitment to--
Speaker 1: Parental commitment to do it--
Speaker 2: --get involved in it.
Speaker 1: --commitment to do, and a commit- the parental confidence, generate the confidence that they will do it (laughter).  Now, why I have two insights as to why that's difficult to get parents to do.  One of them is that basically most parents, many parents believe that it's the responsibility of the school to teach their kids; it's not their responsibility.  That's a major problem.  But there's one parent, one young lady who gave me what I think is a more essential insight as to why.  She said in effect, "Dr. Whitten [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten], the program requires me to do a certain thing every day basically the same time, I can't structure my life that way," in effect that's what she said, "I can't discipline myself the way--I've got to be doing it whenever I can do it."  Which means that they're not likely to do it some days. That was to me was the biggest insight to why--they're so involved in their other problems that they have that they can't structure, discipline themselves to do it every--.  If you don't do it regularly every day, you're not going to do it.  And that's what I think we have to deal with, we have to get some way, and I don't think anybody know the answer yet of how we get some of these parents to do it.  To motivate, to be--feel differently about school and to be, to put the time in.  And they, they don't have the backgrounds, they, many of these parents can't be good parents because they weren't parented well themselves.
Speaker 2: Yeah so we've got sort of a vicious cycle?
Speaker 1: Yeah were in a vicious cycle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There's no easy and no one has any real ans- .  We, we speak of successful schools and (unclear) but when we look at the percentages, percentages are very poor.  And no matter how many experts--around reading there are over a hundred thousand publications on reading in literature.  And no one really has all the answers when you get down to the, (unclear) the problem.
Story_ID: 558403
Speaker 1: In terms of the pre- I guess the preparatory for literacy program with the parents, how did you get in involved with in, in that kind of activity in the first place?  Was there something that happened that--?
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I guess it occurred in t- in two ways and I'm, I'm hesitating now because I don't want to reveal any names, but there was a multimillionaire who I was trying to convince he ought to be doing more (laughter).  And somehow during the course of that discussion I, I raised a question about reading as a one way, and I frankly don't know totally how I hit upon reading.  Or it was just by reading the statistics every, every--frequently in the papers those days were saying what percentage of kids were failing the examination and so forth.  I think it primarily came from reading the statistics and the discussion I had with this person that I became interested in that what, what can you do about this?
Speaker 1: Okay. What can you do about the fact that we have so--such high percentage of poor readers in the black community?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's just a fundamental problem--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and that affects everything else that comes after it?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Such a major factor in the ultimate success.
Story_ID: 558404
Speaker 1: Now the post baccalaureate program in the year we're focusing on their scientific background, their personal adjustment.  Particularly their personal--'cause on some, they've had some problems some of them overall in their scientific background, and their, their, their skills, academic skills; those are three.  As a result of the post baccalaureate program, Wayne [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan] became the second medical school, leading medical school in the country other than Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and in number of black graduates.  And the third of those black graduates were coming through the post baccalaureate program; that's the point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We became the leader in black--producing black physicians and a third of those had come through our post baccalaureate program.  Without that we would not be a leader.
Speaker 2: Okay all right so it's a direct relationship between--
Speaker 1: Yes, direct relationship.
Speaker 2: --that post baccalaureate program--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and that kind of success.
Story_ID: 558405
Speaker 1: We thought during a break too it might be useful to talk about you know what, what happens at the clinic step by step when a parent brings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it's, it's--one of one of my intents to do in the sickle cell program, give individuals an opportunity to learn about sickle cell and what their potential is for having a child with sickle cell, and how they might address that out of the context of self-determination.  No societal goals we're not trying to reduce the incidence of sickle cell disease; we're trying to enhance self-determination.  What's best for you, your family to decide?  Recognizing that if both parents harry--have a carrier there's a one in four chance in each pregnancy to have a child with sickle cell disease.  So are you going to take that chance or not?  Recognizing that you could have ten children and not one of them have, you could have ten children and all of them could have, you have no control over that.  Or you're go- do you want to take that risk or not, and what are your options?  If you decided that you don't want to take any risk basically you can't have any children 'cause you have no control over it.  If you decide you never want to have a boy you'd have to stop having children because you can't have any control over that.  So we go through all of that, and--but the basic thing is what do you think is in your best interest of how you handle this.  And not what the society.  Our counselors are never permitted to give any opinions about what they would do.  I would never give my opinion.  "Dr. Whitten [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten], what would you do?"  That's not your issue what I would do; I'm a different person from you, you have to decide what's best for you and your life.  And it might be quite different for me.  And this--I'm not a model for you for that, you have to decide.  Here's what we know about the disease, here's what we--here's what your options are, here's the way you have to go about thinking about it.  So I have a rather detailed instructional program for that with, with graphics to help them illustrate it, we don't use any scientific terms.  And we try to, to educate them, inform them, so they come away with an understanding of what's, what's, what's they're faced with.  Recognizing this is not a onetime decision it something you have to think about spend some time with and decided what you--how you want to go about it.  We have with the programs of this sort others have developed some programs, no one has been able to present, develop a, a model for deciding or investigating what parents do with the information.  Do they, do they eventually use it, or what extent do they use it?  Do they decide to forget it, ignore it, or they decide to take a chance and so forth?  There's so many aspects to that to get into private issues.  And whether or not people are gonna tell you the truth or not.  When they decide to have a child, did they use the information or not, and no one has been able to develop a program to decide where we stand with that.  We think they need the information.  How they use it, we don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay so it would be useful I suppose to have somebody actually study what people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would be good if we had a study, but no one can design that.  To, to address all of the issues that everyone presents.  "No, you can't ask that, no, you can't ask that," (laughter).  "No, they're not going to give you an answer to that, an accurate answer to that."  (Laughter) So you're not--you're going to have a flawed study from the very beginning.
Story_ID: 558406
Speaker 1: We discussed the number--there were quite a few black hospitals in Detroit [Michigan] and we've talked about the fact that there were black hospitals in other major cities in the United States, like St. Louis [Missouri] and Chicago [Illinois] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], other places.  As someone who came along as a pioneer when, when ho- the some of the major white hospitals were being integrated, and you were one of the first to integrate one of them [Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] do you have any reflections on how that integration affected black hospitals?
Speaker 2: Well let's, let's back up.  We had black hospitals because hospitals weren't integrated.  No one would ever go into develop a hospital other than an entrepreneur just feeling that they can make money on a hospital.  You wouldn't establish a hospital for black persons if there was a free admission to white hospitals.  There'd be no moti- no motivation of that so the whole motivation throughout the country for hospitals is because there wasn't access.  Doctors weren't able to treat their patients in the white.  So once that opened up there's almost--you can almost reason why, why exist, why continue black hospitals at the cost, they're costly.  And if you're, if you're primarily have black patients in white--in the black hospitals you've got a, you've got a major economic problem, in terms of how you support the hospital.  And we've had black hospitals who failed because they can't--even before integration because they didn't have enough money.  So this, I don't look upon the, the closure of black hospitals as being a sign of failure.  I think it's because there's no need for black hospitals when you have open hospitals, far better financed hospitals, far better care.  The smaller black hospitals, we had a small black hospital now I had a major health problem, I wouldn't want to go to a small black hospital.  I want to go to the Wayne University hospital (laughter) where all the specialists are.  So there's no, so all the white--all the black hospitals have fallen.  You know Chicago, Baltimore [Maryland], all of them, St. Louis, for good reasons, they, they were part of the past; they're part of our history.  But there was no need for them to continue once everything really opens up.  And it's a benefit to society, benefit to black physicians, black physicians ought to be able to get on the staff of all the hospitals.  Black patients ought to be able get admitted to any hospital, so you know everyone gets the benefit of all the services that are available.  You can't duplicate the services in small hospitals.  You can't do it (laughter), no way, so that's the reason they failed.  And I don't consider it so much a failure as they've outlived their usefulness.  And that's true of Mercy [Mercy-Douglass Hospital] in Philadelphia it's true of the (Unclear) in Chicago and all the hospitals here.  So I look at it a little differently than, you know, as though there's been a takeover.
Story_ID: 558407
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, when you look back on everything you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh I think my--I, I, I feel best about the post baccalaureate program [at Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  I've, I've, I've opened up career opportunities for over two hundred black physicians, more than six hundred for other racial groups to become physicians.  And second to that is what I've attempted to do in the sickle cell field those are those two, but the post bac--.  (Speaking off camera) Would you say the post bac is a?  (Laughter) I got endorsement, that's, that's been my pride and joy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558408
Speaker 1: We always ask about family too at this junc- juncture--
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: We always ask about family too at this juncture--I know your--family?
Speaker 2: What about it?
Speaker 1: Yeah we always ask about family in terms of you know who compromises you family--comprises your family today?  I mean do you have any children or do you have?
Speaker 2: Yeah we have two--
Speaker 1: We know your--
Speaker 2: Two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a oldest daughter [Lisa Whitten] who's a tenured professor in psychology she has a Ph.D. in clinical psych, and she's in this associate professor in the SUNY System [State University of New York System] in New York.  I have a second daughter [Wanda Whitten-Shurney] who's a clinical instructor, she's a pediatrician who runs our sickle cell program at Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan], at--here in Michigan [Detroit, Michigan], and she's on the faculty at Wayne med school [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  So we have two. I have two grandchildren who--one is seventeen year old girl [Simone Whitten-Shurney], and a fourteen year old boy [Cameron Whitten-Shurney] who's the children of my daughter here in, in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay and you've been married for what fifty-two years, is that it?
Speaker 2: Married fifty-two years.  You have a lot of--they've got a lot of--a lot written of you already (laughter).  They already have it, (unclear) and all that they already got it.  Yeah, fifty-two years I've had a, a great, I've had a very, very, very fortunate fifty-two years with my wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten].  She's, she's put up with a lot and I owe a whole lot to her.  She has, she has felt that it's very important that our marriage be successful.  And she's, she's a student of marriage (laughter).  So she's poured a lot into it that probably wouldn't have been there if it left to me alone.  But we've, we've had a very good relationship and I'm very, very grateful to her for the, the life that I've had.  My life would have been totally different without her, no question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm very, very grateful to her.  But it's partly because she's been a student of marriage, she really said the marriage has to work and here's where you make it work.  And here's the way you go about it and she's the same with our daughters, she feels there's always some way to make things work.  And that's what she's been--instilled in them.
Story_ID: 558409
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--no, I, I, I have that interest in what we--what I did in Haiti, that we hadn't talked about.  We had a--
Speaker 1: Okay you, you had an interesting story about that trip to Haiti that you discussed before we started so, so tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well there's a, a blood specialist in Haiti who wrote a letter to many of us in the sickle cell field here in the states wanting some help.  And after a few months I called him to see what kind of response he had gotten, he said only one of--one response was from a physician in the Bronx [New York] in one of the programs in the Bronx who offered to help.  And I said, "Well what help do you want?"  He said, "Well I'd like to do what you do, you screen newborns I don't have equipment to do that for sickle cell disease."  So I said fine, my wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten] and I bought the equipment, about ten thousand dollars, and we delivered personally to him.  To so he could set up a screening program for sickle cell disease in Port-au-Prince [Haiti].  While I was there I got deeply impressed with the type of person he was, his social concerns.  He wanted to develop a clinic in the area which he was born in Haiti where there was no running water and no schools, no nearby medical facilities and he already had the plans drawn up for a building.  He had some land there that his father had left him.  And he had the plans, but no money for the construction, so we gave him twenty-five thousand dollars to--for, for construction materials.  It was going to be a community project where the community people would help build the little clinic there.  And he would help find people to staff it.  So that we--that's what--that's now Clinique Whitten is what that has been called.  And while it was under construction or development, we made a visit there and it's up in the mountains.  And I couldn't walk up the mountains, they have mules to take up, I couldn't straddle a mule, so I showed you the photograph where--how they carried me up to see it.  My wife went up on a mule and the story I told you about earlier with the problems with going there.  The fact that on the way, when I was being carried, we had a torrential rain storm when we were going over smooth rocks.  But coming back when we looked over the side my wife was around one curve, she was on a mule I was on the other side, and I yelled over the to her, "What the hell we doing up here?"  (Laughter) You remember, so that's, that's, that's that story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just sounds like a dangerous--
Speaker 2: Yeah so that's the Haiti I--that I was sort of reaching out.  My wife and I have felt that there was such a thing as enough.  And we have a little money that we set aside to do good, to feel that there's a limit to what individuals ought to spend on their own.  And so we, we set aside a few dollars, do good money for others.  And that's, that's something we're, we're very proud of, we have a little foundation.
Story_ID: 558410
Speaker 1: Is there anything else before I ask last my last question?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no, go right ahead.
Speaker 1: It's all right if it is, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as an individual who has attempted to help others.  Based upon a very, very, very deeply felt conviction.  I've been highly privileged, I came through an educational background with educated parents [Emma Carr Whitten and Tobias Whitten] who had a, a vision and a need, a commitment around education.  We were relatively poor, but never, never impoverished.  I've been very privileged, I've had things that happened to me that are not something that I designed.  And I have a deep conviction that many of us are beneficiaries of circumstances and of which they had no control and no input, and others are victimized by them.  I've been fortunate enough to be beneficiary and I've tried to help individuals who I felt had been victimized.  As a way of, of relating to this and that's, that's what I've been trying to do, that's the post baccalaureate program [at Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  Disadvantage vic- people with no reason they're born to families where there was no educational motivation.  Sometimes they've--in the family where the parents want them to work don't want 'em to go to college and so forth and so forth.  So that's, that's, that's where with what I, what I feel.  I don't--what was your question (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It was how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well that's why I'd like to be remembered, someone who felt that based upon the advantages that he had, that he would like to have others have some of the benefits from--advantages of which they had no control someone stepped in--might not even be recognition.  I would tell anyone who's been successful that if you carefully look at your career don't tell me that you were a self-made person and all the things you overcome.  I can point out to you if you're honest some things that you had no control over that made a difference in your life.  If it not had--if that had not had occurred you wouldn't be--might not be where you are now, despite all of your good efforts and so forth.
Story_ID: 558411
Speaker 1: I don't know why he put that one up--I don't even know the--that's with a baby.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That doesn't really have any significance.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: My sister and two brothers.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What are their names?
Speaker 1: Sister's Ann [Alicia A. Adams], brother is Ben [HistoryMaker Benjamin Whitten], brother is Toby [Tobias Whitten].  And my brother Ben you've already done a HistoryMaker on him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh that's (laughter), that's one of my first cars.
Speaker 2: That's you in about what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't remember what year that was.
Speaker 2: But it's in the '50s [1950s] it looks like?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my, me and my brother Ben.  I said my brother Ben you've already interviewed him as a HistoryMaker, he's an outstanding educator in Baltimore, Maryland.  He's the one sitting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Are you ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready, sir.
Speaker 2: That's my wife [Eloise Culmer Whitten] and my two daughters, Lisa's [Lisa Whitten] the top, Wanda [Wanda Whitten-Shurney] is the second.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thirty-five years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay sir.
Speaker 1: That's a very handsome Charles F. Whitten [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Yes indeed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Eighty, eighty-four years ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir.
Speaker 2: Medical student in Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] sitting outside of the Omega house, that's where I lived, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity house.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay sir ready.
Speaker 2: That's Lou Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] who was a United States surgeon general at one time, [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, outstanding personality, and the young lady is a young lady who had sickle cell disease who is a physician who can through my post baccalaureate program.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: My grandfather Hugh Carr as a--that's a brochure that deals with his legacy, as a national--Ivy Creek Foundation in Charlottesville, Virginia on the outskirts at his property that he owned was the nucleus of which is a national conservatory now.  In perpetuity Ivy Creek Foundation is a nature trail of education building.  And in it is a portrait of him that I had made as one of the original owners of the land.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and that's the portrait?
Speaker 2: That's--I, I--are you saying when you're ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, ready.
Speaker 2: That's Hugh Carr, an ex-slave, my grandfather, my mother's father.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and we're ready.
Speaker 2: Those are Hugh Carr's daughters and the one at the top is my mother, and you can see they're pretty well dressed my, my grandfather took care of them very well.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Emma Carr Whitten, my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh you're not ready.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now I'm ready.
Speaker 2: This is a commencement at Wayne State University School of Medicine [Detroit, Michigan] where I got an award as the outstanding faculty member, or outstanding--yeah, faculty member.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay I'm ready.
Speaker 2: This is being carried up the hill in Haiti.  This is the only way that I could get--they had to carry me up.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That was very nice of them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 2: This is--you see the doctor with me is the physician I was trying to help, but that's his clinic in Port-au-Prince [Haiti], that's not the clinic that I'm talking about, you'll see that later.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir.
Speaker 2: I got an award for the post baccalaureate program with the national society of a--oh, just a moment.  The award is from the American medical college society--American association--American--of medical colleges [Association of American Medical Colleges], I got an award for the post baccalaureate program.  This is the president.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right I'm ready.
Speaker 2: And this is--we're presenting a poster child--sickle cell national poster child to President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.].  And I was president of the Sickle Cell Disease of Association of America [National Association for Sickle Cell Diseases; Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, Inc.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay all right I'm ready.
Speaker 2: We're in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and the occasion is presentation of the poster child to President Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Poster child, Xernona Clayton and President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's my clinic [Clinique Whitten] in Petit Goave--Petit Goave, Haiti, it's about twenty miles out of, twenty-five miles out of Port-au-Prince.  Here they're waiting to go into the clinic.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 2: I directed a general clinical research center at the Children's Hospital [sic.] of Wayne State University [Sickle Cell Detection and Information Center].  And here's the announcement of the award National Institute [National Institutes of Health] award, it's a comprehensive sickle cell cen- comprehensive research center, not sickle cell, comprehensive research center that I directed.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: No, that's the same as, that's for the com- comprehensive research center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my father, Tobias Emanuel Whitten [Tobias Whitten].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: I don't know who that dude is (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh that's my favorite picture, that's why that's here (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay we're ready, for you.
Speaker 2: Oh this is Asclepius in front of the (unclear) med school building at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan].  And this was a part of calendar from the Hartford calendar [The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.], Hartford insurance company calendar one year.
