Story_ID: 631657
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My full name is Billy, B-I-L-L-Y, Leo, L-E-O, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S [HistoryMaker Billy Williams].
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 15, 1938, in a little town out of Mobile, Alabama, Whistler, W-H-I-S-T-L-E-R, Whistler, Alabama [Prichard, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is near Mobile, near the gulf [Gulf of Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's about two and a half miles from Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it right on the gulf, too?
Speaker 2: It's inland, you know Mobile is right on the water.  Of course it's a little inland, a little ways inland.  So it's not that far, about two and a half miles.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation at this time is you know, I'm like the consultant for the Chicago Cubs.  I used to be assistant to the general manager, who was Andy MacPhail, of the Chicago Cubs, and when he retired I moved in a different area because I wanted to do a few things for myself, like playing golf and enjoying life a little bit more.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're also like a Hall of Fame outfielder.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was inducted in the Baseball Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] in 1987 along with Catfish Hunter and a guy who played in the Negro Leagues by the name of Ray Dandridge.  I've heard a lot of talk about Ray, and of course they say he was a good third baseman, and it was a joy to go in with him because I know the struggle and stuff that they had many years ago.  But he got his due when he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1987.
Speaker 1: Okay all right now and so what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the first--January, and the 16th, and 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, January 16th, 2007.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because that's easy to remember.  Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday was yesterday.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Well we're at The HistoryMakers office at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 631658
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that they always ask me to ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is beans, probably.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind?
Speaker 2: They have pinto beans, red beans.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, my favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year of course is spring, beautiful, yeah I like the four seasons and I choose the spring.
Speaker 1: That seems to be the Cubs' [Chicago Cubs] favorite time of year, the spring 'cause it--you don't know what's gonna happen.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah well, especially in Chicago [Illinois].  I moved to Chicago in 1966, and of course when you get through the winter, you look forward to the spring.  It's always baseball season, and of course the branches start blooming and it's just a nice time of year.  Not too hot.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination of course is Hawaii.  I've visited Hawaii a couple of times, and I really enjoyed over there.  You know it's a nice place to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  And it started many, many years ago with a principal of my school, when I went to grade school.  It's good, better, best, never let it rest until the good is better and the better is best.
Story_ID: 631659
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Frank Williams] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And just tell me what you know about them.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Jessie Mary Williams, J-E-S-S-I-E, M-A-R-Y, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S [Jessie Moseley Williams].
Speaker 1: And what is her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Moseley, M-O-S-E-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right, now what do you know about--I'm sorry.  Can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 10th, and the year I'm not too sure.  The year I'm not too sure.  Yeah because you know a lot of records, and I think it was 1910, yeah that's what it was 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay and what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace her side?
Speaker 2: Well she was from a family of twelve, and she had I think--right now the only aunt that's living, lady by the name of Olivette [Olivette Moseley Lewis] who lived in Joliet [Illinois] for a long time.  But she was from a family of twelve and all her siblings have died, including her.  And the only aunt is living now, as I said, is Olivette Lewis.  But you know, we were all raised up in the same area, in Whistler, Alabama [Prichard, Alabama] so I got to know the family real well.  The brothers and sisters because, you know, the brothers lived right beside the father and this is where we would go on Saturday nights and we'd talk, you know, about the family and we'll eat fish and drink coffee and just sit around and talk.  The family was always, they was always--my grandfather was always concerned about the family because I remember he was a great churchgoer.  You know, he sang in the choir and every Sunday he would go to church.  I never did see him in an open collar shirt.  If I could always remember he always had a tie on because that's the way he was.
Speaker 1: Now that's--a lot of people I guess in years past, wore a suit and tie.
Speaker 2: They did, they did.
Speaker 1: Whatever kind of job they had, they'd wear a suit and tie.
Speaker 2: Yeah because he was always that kind of individual.  And when you look at baseball games, you see people with hats.  Used to come to baseball games and a lot of people had ties on to come to baseball games.  I think that you know the tie has relaxed a little bit now.  I know when you go to California you don't want to wear a tie, Arizona, you don't want to wear a tie.  A lot of because it's hot, you know.  But most of the time down south, most of the time down south, when a person that you know, tried to instill in his family how to act, how to do things, and I think he did this because look at me.  I could wear a tie, I could do this, I could do that, I want you guys to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, setting an example.
Speaker 2: Setting an example, yeah.
Speaker 1: Of aspiring to raise--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  That's how I saw my grandfather on my mother's side, my mother's side.  And as I say, he was the kind of guy that he was a family person, you know.  He had his job where he worked at the steel mill and he would come home in the evening, he had his sons to work there.  And he would always spend time with the family, you know we would go on Saturday we'd go shopping down to A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], and seemed like he'd take one or two grandkids down there just to go down there, just to take them away.  And if I'm remembering my mother's mother, she was always sickly.  She--as I walk in the front door, as I walk in the front door of the house, she would be sitting to the left.  And there was a big radio there, and she had a chair.  And she was always be listening to the old programs, like 'Stella Dallas' and all those kinds of programs.  But seems to me every other week, I think she was a diabetic.  Because every other week seemed like my grandfather used to take her to the doctor.  And if I'm remembering, she never did--I never did see her enjoy herself.  You know seems to me she was always sick.  And that's why a lot of the sisters and brothers and the grandkids--well you spend a lot of time at your grandparents' house.  But seems to me my mother would be over there all the time.  And with her being over there, we were there, you know, just to spend time with her.  But I, I could remember her well.  She was sitting in her chair all the time, most of the time.  And if I could picture her right now, you know if I could bring her up, that's where she would be sitting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In her chair listening to that 'Stella Dallas.'
Story_ID: 631660
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Jessie Moseley Williams] or your grandparents have any stories about the history of the family?  Like what, you know, any stories that go way back, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd sit around and talk but it's like family stuff, you know.  I had one uncle that--he was a kind of loner.  You know I didn't, I really didn't know that he was a child of my grandfather because every now and then, you know, he would come around.  We could be, we could be out, you know, maybe in the back barbecuing or doing something, but I imagine he came there maybe once out of ten times.  He was kind of that way.  He was all over the place, you know.  And but he was, you know, he came and when he did come, he had fun with the family, you know.  But insofar as a lot of stuff has been told, you know about the family.  I can't recall a lot of it.  I know they grew up in that area and the family was well respected because my grandfather knew a lot of people in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama].  Whistler was a small town anyway.  And a lot of people knew him.  You know he had been around there a long time.  He passed away at maybe ninety-something years old.
Speaker 1: Okay so as far as you know the history of that side of the family is right there in Whistler for as far back as--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes it is.
Speaker 1: Was there any stories about your great-grandparents or--
Speaker 2: The story about my great-grandparents is--I'm not sure.  I didn't get into that detail with them.  I didn't--she didn't talk too much.  If she did, you know I've forgotten a lot of stuff about what happened then on my mother's side, on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 631661
Speaker 1: On my father's side, okay, my grandfather was raised on a farm up in north Alabama.
Speaker 2: Now let's get your father's full name and spell it.
Speaker 1: Okay, my father's full name is Frank, F-R-A-N-K, Levert, L-E-V-E-R-T Williams [Frank Williams].  And he was from a family of three siblings, three boys.  He settled in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama] and the other two brothers settled in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Now what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Let me see, May 12th I think, 1902.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So his brothers settled in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes two of his brothers settled in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Where were they from originally?
Speaker 1: They were from Alabama.  They were from Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay, but not from Whistler.
Speaker 1: No, not from Whistler.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They lived different places.  There was a place we called Dauphin Island [Alabama] or Mon Louis Island [Alabama], and I seem to think my grandfather grew up down there.
Speaker 2: Was that really an island?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Off the coast?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it--a lot of--if you bring up--they had a, they had a community called the Faustinas [Alabama], okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, how do you spell?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  You're gonna have to look this up.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But it was at Faustinas, and I think, I think my grandfather was raised up down there in that area.  And I talked to my father, and he was raised up in a little place up in north Alabama, and he raised the kids down at Faustinas.  He was raised in Alabama on a farm.  I think he was, he was--he had a white father.  And you couldn't tell him whether or not he was black or white.  And the thing we used to do with a--you know I got a kick out of it when we used to go fishing.  You know he would take us fishing all the time.  And when we would come back fishing, we would go in a restaurant, okay.  We'd go up to the restaurant and he'd ask, what did we want to eat, you know.  And you'd see a lot of whites going in, and he walked right through the front door.  And he, you know got whatever we wanted and he came out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is your father.
Speaker 1: This is my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Your grandfather, all right, okay.  So your grandfather could pass.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I guess what they called it at the time.  I think he was you know he was, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you think he was white.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had so many features you know.
Speaker 2: But he wasn't--he was white but now was that--'cause you know I know in the North, you know a lot of the memory what went on in the South and what happened gets distorted.  And we don't know how we got the different colors we are.
Speaker 1: No we don't.
Speaker 2: And but, in the South, I mean was it common that a white man would actually take care of his black children?
Speaker 1: He did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, took care of him up until he got a chance to leave the household.  Just before my father died, he gave me a name of a little city that he was raised up in in north Alabama.  A little town called Buffet [ph.] I think it was.  He spelled it out and I wrote it in the encyclopedia.  And I made a lot of calls; you know I looked for the Buffets up there and try to--just go back and try to find some of the history of him.  And that's where it stopped at because I couldn't find anybody that knew.  And I didn't see anything in the telephone book.
Speaker 2: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: His name was Louis, L-O-U-I-S.
Speaker 2: Louis what?
Speaker 1: Williams [Louis Williams], yeah, yeah, he was a Williams of course.  Yeah and his, his, his wife, I saw some pictures of his wife, my father had some.  And she was like six; she was like about six feet.  She was tall, black, dark skinned woman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't remember her name or nothing.  I know he told me, but I forgot all of that.  But this is why you keep history, you know?  I sit around and tell my grandsons now, you know different things about, you know the father, the grandfather, the grandmother, the great-grands.  And you know they'll have it in their mind.
Story_ID: 631662
Speaker 1: Now what is the Faustinas [Alabama] community?  Is that just a place to live or does it have any special significance?
Speaker 2: It's just a place where I guess a lot of--they were in between, they were in between white and black, seemed like.  Because we used to go on a Tuesday, we would go to the Mon Louis Island [Alabama].  Seems like it was every Tuesday, the church has a picnic that goes to Mon Louis Island.  And we would go down there swimming and this community, you know, it was just there, you know.  Everybody you saw down there probably was fair skinned, you know, yeah.  That's called Faustinas (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's similar to--there's a community in northern New Jersey called the Jackson Whites [Ramapo Mountain People], they call them.
Speaker 2: Jackson Whites?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they look like they all have a similar look.  But they--people don't know who they are 'cause all of them look alike.
Speaker 2: Yeah as I say, it's a community been there for a long time and seems like every Tuesday the churches have picnics.  They get together on Tuesday and they'd have they big picnic that they go, they take the kids down there, they swim and they just enjoy you know.  They have a dance floor where the kids can come in and dance.  And they serve hot dogs, peanuts and all that kind of stuff.  And they would always go.  A lot of people took their lunch, you know down there to have a picnic, but they always, Faustinas always had the other stuff for them, you know.
Speaker 1: So would you actually call the people that lived there the Faustinas?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think that was their name; that was their name, yeah, yeah.  And I don't know how the name got to be, where they come from, yeah.  But that's what they were called, Faustinas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's important information.  I'd never heard of this before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So we're getting more than baseball here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So now did your--what church did you all attend?  You mentioned it a couple of times.
Speaker 2: Yeah our church--I attended Pilgrim Rest A.M.E. [Pilgrim Rest A.M.E. Zion Church, Prichard, Alabama], African Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: And that's in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: That's in Whistler, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where grandfather, father [Frank Williams], mother [Jessie Moseley Williams], aunts, uncles, everybody was a member.  And you go there now and you could see a family of the Williams, the Moseley, the Spencers [ph.], and that's on my father's side, you know, relatives of the Spencers.  And they all seem like everybody there related to each other.  And this is what I was telling you, Mobile [Alabama] is a little small town and, you know, everybody knew each other, you know.  Maybe somebody got out of whack now and then you know (laughter).  But that was one of those things that a lot of people didn't talk about, you know.  When somebody interacted, you know had kids from--out of wedlock with somebody else.  I think this was squashed in small towns like that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 631663
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Jessie Moseley Williams and Frank Williams]--did they have a chance to go to school and everything, or were they, how far did they get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my mother--you know when you're from a family of twelve, you know which my mother was from, the grandfather, my grandfather was probably glad she was getting married, and she got married at a early age, fifteen years old.  Which is common for a lot of people that grew up in the early 1900s to go to get married, soon as they find a husband, they're gone.  And--but she got married at a young age and I don't think she finished high school.  I don't think my father finished high school.  They went to school for a while and of course the female got married soon and then the male has to go out and get a job and work.  You know, they help the family out.  And that's what my parents did.  You know because I got three brothers and a sister, you know, from a family of five.  You know he had to get out and work.  And he did.  You know he gave us, not a good living but a decent living.  And we all survived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm not sure.  I'm not sure how they met.
Speaker 1: You said your father came to Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: My father came to Whistler at--I guess when he was like seventeen or eighteen years old.  And I imagine some of the functions that they had, either at the church [Pilgrim Rest A.M.E. Zion Church, Prichard, Alabama], you know they did something or went somewhere and they met each other.
Speaker 1: It was a very small town.
Speaker 2: Small town, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know, I can't recall.  They didn't tell me how they met.  They were just together a long time, forty; I think about forty-six years they were married.
Story_ID: 631664
Speaker 1: Did they have any stories about growing up in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama], or about living in Whistler and what it was like?  What was the--I know it was the South, you know Alabama in the 1930s.  I know it was segregated, but did they talk about any of the racial tensions down there?
Speaker 2: I think the racial tensions was outside the rim of where we lived.  We were confined to I think three streets.  You know, and this is where we did all our stuff.  You know, it's a place called Baptist Town [Whistler, Alabama] when, you know they called it Baptist Town because they had two or three Baptist churches in this area.
Speaker 1: Black community?
Speaker 2: Black community.  This is where we first lived there, Baptist Town they called it.  And then I remember my father [Frank Williams] was working and he neglected to pay this one individual and we were put out of the house.  And we moved in an old shanty, you know, shack, until he built a place for us.  That was in Methodist Town [Whistler, Alabama], that's where all the Methodist churches were.  So you had Baptist Town, Methodist Town, and that was the end of where all the, you know that was the community.  Because all the blacks lived there.  All the blacks lived in this community except there was two black families that live on 9th Street.  This street was 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th and 6th and 7th Street.  That was all black.  And on the 9th, on 9th Street there was two families on 9th Street.  And there was one lady that used to teach.  A lady by the name of Miss Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R, used to teach at the school, the grade school where I went to.  She was the only person lived on 3rd Street.  The only black person living on 3rd Street.  And that's where the community was, you know.  There was the racial tension I think, you know as I said, there was some.  Quite naturally there's gonna be some, but it wasn't alarming amount.  You know there was a time that you know, you fought, you did this.  Next thing, you know you doing something together, you know.  Yeah, so it wasn't a big racial tension (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the community--
Speaker 2: A lot of people, community, you know a lot of people know each other.  You know I--me and my brother Franklin [Franklin Williams], we used to work on the corner for these people by the name of Gaston [ph.].  You know we would work there every Saturday and we were making fifty cents an hour.  You know, and a lot of people knew her and knew our family.  And then the area there, it was such small town that as I said, a lot of people knew each other.  My mother [Jessie Moseley Williams], she was a--she worked in the homes of a lot of whites.  And a lot of people knew us through that, you know.  A lady by the name of Miss George [ph.] she used to work for.  And she used to go all around, and she used to take me as a young kid.  I'm like, you know before I go to grade school.  I'm like three, four, five years old.  You know I would move around with her because she go in the homes and she would iron, she would wash, and that's where I used to get a lot of clothes from to wear to school, you know.  I have the knees out and pants leg out but you know I had a lot of hand-me-downs I wore as a young kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got a chance to see both sides of the community, travel around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, yeah I did, saw a lot of it you know, saw a lot of it.  Not only with my mother, you know but with my [paternal] grandfather [Louis Williams] too.  You know, taking around, seeing people, meeting people.  You know going with him, you know, I'm safe, yeah.
Story_ID: 631665
Speaker 1: We were speaking off camera about Mobile [Alabama] being a port city and Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama] being so close to it and you were saying your father [Frank Williams] often worked in Mobile on the docks.
Speaker 2: It was Murray Stevedoring [Murray Stevedoring, Co., Mobile, Alabama], that's the company he worked for, and the banana boats, they would come in like two, three, four, five o'clock in the morning.  And whatever time they came into the city, they would call him to come down to help unload.  And he was one of the--my grandfather was there.  He was one of the foremen at first, and this is what I remember, I'm going back because he told me he was a foreman.  They gave him the job as a foreman not knowing he was a black guy, okay.  And he told them, don't call me daddy down here, okay.  Because he wanted to get over, that's a way of getting over at that time.  But when the boats would come in, they would call him, my father and like, as I said like two, three, four o'clock in the morning and they would unload the boat.  And at the end, you know everybody probably would get a bunch of bananas and he had this one hanger where at home you know he had that hanger.  He'd come home and he'd hook that bunch of bananas up there and a lot of times we ate bananas, that was it.  That was our meal for the day, you know, we ate the bananas.  And what they got paid.  I remember as though this was yesterday, when he comes in we'd be sitting on the porch.  It's a school day.  You know, and we have to--five minutes to seven I think we had to catch the bus, which was about two miles.  We had to walk there and catch the bus, you know.  And I remember we all sitting and waiting on him to come, and he drove this A Model Ford [Ford Model A].  He had this A Model Ford that he used to drive.  And we would look up and here he come.  And when he pulled in the yard, you know, he'd flip us silver dollars because that's what they paid with.  They paid with silver dollars.  I wish I could have saved some of them silver dollars now.  But he would come just in time seemed like, where he could flip us a silver dollar and we're off to school.  And he'll go home and probably sleep all day.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 631666
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: You know, just growing up in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama].  I did everything a young kid did.  The thing that I most remember that whatever was in season of sports we played.  Whether or not it was baseball, football, basketball.  We played that sport when it was in season.  And in the summertime, in the summertime during the baseball season, we'll start off in the morning playing baseball.  And then we'll take off about eleven, twelve o'clock to go up to this one place called Eight Mile Creek.  And that's where we would swim.  You know we'd go in the water, it was ice cold water.  We would swim.  We would stop by the supermarket and we would get us a watermelon and put it behind the roots and stumps where it would stay there and get cold.  And we'll sit around, we'll swim, lay in the sand on the site, and you know then we'll bust the watermelon open and we'll eat it.  And maybe we'll go back in and get the sand off our bodies and then we'll get dressed and then we'll go back to this place where we used to play baseball, and we'll start up again.  We'll play until dinnertime, you know 5:30, six o'clock and we'll all separate, go our separate ways, go home.  And that next day, you know, we'll probably start over again.  Because jobs, you know nobody hardly worked because there was no jobs.
Story_ID: 631667
Speaker 1: Well, when you were a little kid, I mean can you remember, I guess, the first time you played baseball?
Speaker 2: No.  No I think it just happened.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: It's just something that happened so much.
Speaker 2: Just something that happened so much because I had, with my three brothers, my three older brothers.  I'm the youngest of the family and there was always baseball.  My father [Frank Williams] used to play.  You know he'd tell us that, you know, he played with Satchel Paige.  You know, the guy by the name of Mr. Robinson, just passed away.  Bill Robinson [William Robinson], who played with the Chicago American Giants, and they grew up together.  They were like you know, 12, 13, 14 years old, running around in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama], and then later on, they played baseball together.  Matter of fact it was so enjoyable when I came up to the big league in 1961, or 1959, he was living here.  And I got the number, and I called him and you know, after going to the ballpark.  I didn't get a chance to play that much.  But you know after I get an at-bat and maybe strike out or pop up, it was always good to go to his house and get the comfort that was there.  Because his mother, his wife would cook a big meal on Sunday or Monday or Tuesday, and then I would go over there and eat because at that time you didn't make that much money.  And he always invited me over because he had two sons.  And we would talk and chit chat and he always told me, he said, "Keep your head up.  One day you gonna be a good ballplayer, you know."  But it was always to have that comfort zone when I came up to the big league.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he played Negro League ball with your father.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.  He was playing in the Negro League back in, you know, the '20s [1920s] yeah.  He played right here with the Chicago American Giants.  I think this is why he settled, right here in Chicago [Illinois].  And he just died at ninety-five years old, a couple of years ago.  Bill Robinson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  William Robinson was his name, yeah.
Story_ID: 631668
Speaker 1: Did your father [Frank Williams] play Negro League ball, or did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well semi-pro, he played semi-pro ball.  That was when you know, the guys used to play in the area, Double Duty [HistoryMaker Ted "Double Duty" Radcliffe] is from Mobile [Alabama], Satchel Paige is from Mobile, and all those guys that played semi-pro ball and they used to play it against each other.  And maybe some of the guys went off to play in the Negro League, they got signed by the Monarchs [Kansas City Monarchs], the Homestead Grays or something like that.
Speaker 1: Those are some interesting people from Mobile, Satchel Paige and Double Duty.
Speaker 2: Double Duty Radcliffe, he's from down there and I could give you a host of guys in the, you know, last few years that played, you know including Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] and myself, Willie McCovey, Tommie Agee, Cleon Jones, Amos Otis, Milt [Milt Bolling] and Frank Bolling.  All those guys come from Mobile.  It's some good hitting water down there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: That's the claim to fame, you know a lot of guys come from Mobile to play baseball, and we still keep in contact with each other.  You know we used to go out maybe three weeks before spring training and we'll have a little hitting section, everybody take about two or three rounds and maybe twenty swings.  At the end of that, we'd go sit up in the stands and just talk baseball.  And of course Henry Aaron was the first guy to go off to play professional ball.  You know, we would sit up in the--he had the floor, you know.  He would tell us about the Major League [Major League Baseball] and what it's like and all this kind of stuff.  But it was enjoyable, you know. You learn a lot growing up.  Because when I first saw him play, when I first saw Henry Aaron play, Henry's about five years older than I am.  And he used to play baseball with my brother [Franklin Williams].  They was on the same team, the Mobile Black Bears.  And Henry played second base, and my brother was a left-handed pitcher.  And Henry was a cross-hander, I guess you've heard this.  He was a cross-handed hitter.
Speaker 1: So he actually had his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when he played, when he played second base for the Mobile Black Bears and the guy owned the ball club by the name of Ed Tucker, and Tucker was a guy that if anybody played baseball he wanted to see them play, you know.  He wanted to, wanted to give them an opportunity to play.  But Aaron played second base and he was a cross-handed hitter.  And the next thing he got--he went with, the Indianapolis Clowns signed him.  And when he went with the Indianapolis Clowns, the Indianapolis Clowns was a team like the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], you know they'd go out and play and enjoy themselves, you know.  They would good ball players of course.
Speaker 1: The barnstorming--
Speaker 2: Barnstorming, entertaining type team.  And when Aaron went with the Indianapolis Clowns, they already had a second baseman, a lady by the name of Toni Stone, she played second base.  And Aaron went to the outfield.
Speaker 1: So they had a lady playing second base.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Toni Stone.
Speaker 2: Yeah there could have been a couple ladies playing.  I know that she lived in San Francisco [California] and she was the second baseman for the ball club.  The Indianapolis Clowns.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've seen pictures of the Clowns play.  You know when I was coming along, they really didn't get that much publicity, but I do remember seeing a picture in Jet of them using an oversized baseball glove, all the tricks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they did all the funny stuff.  The things they do on a baseball field now, you know when you go to a minor league field.  You know they spin the bat and all that kind of stuff.  I don't know whether they did that, but they were an entertaining bunch of guys.  You know they, they could play.  They had the phantom ball trick where they take infield without a ball.  You know like they throwing it around.  You know, they did all that.  They did all that.
Speaker 1: I know there's another club too.  I don't know if you saw them play, but the Zulu Cannibal Giants, that was the wildest thing I'd ever--
Speaker 2: I don't remember them.
Speaker 1: Yeah there's a picture of them.  They used to play in grass skirts.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean it's like a--
Speaker 2: Zulu Cannibal Giants?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Zulu Cannibal Giants.  There was some pictures of them in these old books.  But I was--that's the strangest thing I ever heard of.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I haven't heard of them.
Story_ID: 631669
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], Aaron was--he was a cross-handed hitter, played second base.  Matter of fact there was a lot of good ballplayers, you know, playing on the team [Mobile Black Bears], but they didn't want to leave home.
Speaker 2: Was it legal to play cross?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Any way you can, you know.
Speaker 2: So it's not illegal.
Speaker 1: No.  No this is, this is how we did it.  And you know in the semi-pro.  But once he signed to play professional baseball, they have their own ways and rules of doing things, you know, so he had to straighten it up.
Speaker 2: He was known for having strong wrists.
Speaker 1: Strong wrists, yeah.
Speaker 2: And able to just snap that ball.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was, he wasn't a big guy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know you see guys now, 230, 240.  No, he wasn't a big guy.
Speaker 2: He wasn't on steroids.
Speaker 1: No.  He was about 175 pounds, yeah, yeah.  But he was a--he came to the big league, he came to the big league.  He could run, he could hit, he could throw the ball, did everything great.  But a lot of people saw him because he was so relaxed in doing it.  People had a tendency to say he was lazy, this and that, you know.  But he got it done, you know because he was just so relaxed.  And I remember a little saying that when he came up to the plate and he had the brand around a different way.  It's certain ways you have the brand.
Speaker 2: On the bat?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it could have been you know, anybody.  I think it was Yogi Berra that said he got the brand, you know, you should have the brand a certain way.
Speaker 2: Yeah some say it should be facing up towards the sky, it should be facing back.
Speaker 1: Right, you always want to see the brand.
Speaker 2: Somebody say never hit on the brand side cause it will--
Speaker 1: No.  And Yogi said, "You know you got the brand in the wrong place."  And I think the saying is Aaron said, "I didn't come up here to read, I came up to hit."  Yeah, and another line drive go off his bat.  But he was just a great ballplayer.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's good information.  He wasn't big and that's an important point, 175 pounds.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's all-time home run leader in Major League Baseball until today, as we speak.
Speaker 1: He was, as you mentioned he had the quick wrist.  Okay his wrist was quick, plus he had great timing, timing on the baseball.  Everything was hit right here.  And a lot of people say he hit off his front foot.  The ball was gone at the time, you know.  You see him, he's up there, you know.  He hit against your front foot, but not, not off your front foot.  And Aaron weighed 175.  I couldn't make 170 pounds.  A hundred and seventy-three is high as I could go in playing baseball.  I signed, you saw the scouting report, 165 pounds I signed.  So I picked up another, what seven, eight pounds and that was it.
Story_ID: 631670
Speaker 1: Let's go back to growing up and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well the smell certainly was the Southern Craft Paper Mill.  We could tell--it was located out by the high school, Mobile County Training School [Prichard, Alabama], I went to.  And we could always tell when the wind blowing from the north, when it's about to get cold.  It would blow the paper mill scent all over Mobile [Alabama] and Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama].  And you smelt, you know I guess it's the pulp, wood burning.  And that was one of the smells, the sights of you know, the roses, the magnolias, the azaleas grow anywhere.  You know, and that was a good scent too.  I guess that fought the paper mill scent.  And the sights of course, was the flowers and stuff.  But the sights of the bay, the waters, you know, those kind of things.  It was nice.  It was nice, you know.  The growing up there, carefree.  You could live off the land.  You know, they had persimmons, bananas, oranges, apples, cherries, mulberries, grapes.  You know, you could live off the land down south because the temperature didn't get that cold.  You could always have some kind of food to eat.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) always the garden.  My father [Frank Williams] had a garden, you know.  We--the tomatoes, you know cucumbers, all that stuff because when we were living in Baptist Town [Whistler, Alabama], when we were living in Baptist Town, he had a garden right beside the house.  I was like two, I was like about 150 yards from walking in the door of the school [Whistler Elementary School; Prichard Preparatory School, Whistler, Alabama].  So I was close to the school.  And right on the side where we lived at, you know, there was a big garden, he had a big garden.  I don't eat duck today, I don't eat duck.  My mother [Jessie Moseley Williams] raised ducks, and seems to me between the chicken and the duck, we had--I still like chicken.  But the duck, I won't eat a duck now.  You know because that was one of the foods we ate at a young age a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she raised them, she had a pen where she could put them up.  She had a water trough where they'd go.  They was all over the place.  And with the ducks, you know the garden and everything, we ate a lot of fresh food, ate a lot of fresh food.  And plus the fact the two families, the two families that lived on 9th Street if you recall, by the name of Franklins, it was two brothers, had homes right beside each other.  And he used to work for Raleigh Fruit Company [ph.], and he'd bring in a lot of apples, oranges and stuff like that.  And we'd go and he'd say, "Get as many as you want," you know.  So it's a small community, everybody, you know, looked out after each other.  The lady that brought me in this world by the name of Ms. Carrie Turner, she was a midwife and we used to go up to her house a lot.  And she would bring in pears, apples.  That's where we play all marbles up there, her house.  She had a lot of, you know, front yard and we could get out there.  That's where the guys would congregate to shoot marbles, you know.
Speaker 1: That was a big deal in those days, shooting marbles.  Make a ring and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Make a ring and, you know you could--we used to cheat a little bit.  We'd go up to the mechanic shop and we'd get steels, you know.  You could get steels and you could just boom like that.  Yeah, you could knock marbles all over the place.  But it's got to be legal, you know you got to agree on it at first, you know.  We played tops, you know playing tops we always would buy these tops with the little metal tip on it, you know.  And we had a game that you know if we flip or something and you lose, you got to throw your top in there.  And you get about five or six guys try to throw their top on top of the other top to split it open.  And sometime you get good at that, you know.  Yeah if you do it enough times.  Shooting marbles, stuff like that, playing jacks.  All those games, you know they were interesting because it kept us busy.
Story_ID: 631671
Speaker 1: You said you went to the Mobile County Training School [Prichard, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Mobile County Training School, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that where you started school?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Is that where you started school?
Speaker 2: That was my high school.
Speaker 1: High school, okay.
Speaker 2: That was my high school.  But--
Speaker 1: What about grade school?
Speaker 2: When I went to grade school, right now it's Martha Thomas [Martha Thomas Elementary School], but when I went there it was Whistler Elementary School [Prichard Preparatory School, Whistler, Alabama].  And you could go from the first grade to the seventh grade.  And after then you go to Mobile County Training School, and you pick it up out there in the eighth grade.  There was a thing happened I guess about three years ago.  My brother [Franklin Williams] and I went to Mobile, we go fishing every year.  So we were just riding around and we went up to Whistler School.  And we were setting there talking to the young instructors, you know like the principal and stuff like that.  And we were looking at different things, and we start pointing out different things saying, "This was the school, I remember going to this school."  You know, going to school, there was a little, there was always little holes in there under the school in the ground.  And we would wet the stick, put it down in there and we'll roll it round, there are little bugs down in there.  And we said, "Dude, dude, you better come out with your house on your fire."  And we pull him out, you know.  And it was a thing how many we could get, you know, you win the contest, you know.  But it was under the school.  The school was built up and they had--
Speaker 1: Like a--
Speaker 2: Yeah and we used to get under the school and you know, they had all the wood burning stoves and stuff in there.  And when they came in and did the septic system and everything.  You know when they were digging it out.  They were digging it out and they must have hit a water vein down there.  And we swam, we used to go down there and swim.  You know, we didn't have to go to Eight Mile Creek.  And we started telling this lady that, and she said, "Hold a second, hold a second.  Let me get a pen and paper," you know.  And she knew we knew a lot about the school.  We lived right next door, you know as I said about 150 feet from the school.  So we started telling a lot of history about the school and she was writing, she was writing down.  But the one good, better, best, never let it rest until the good is better and the better is best.  I got that from the principal.  Because every Wednesday--her name was Lilly A. Dixon.  Every Wednesday, you know I think Wednesday she'd have assembly.  And at the end of the assembly, she would say, "All right, everybody going back to class now," they'd rang a bell where they all leave.  And this is the last thing shed say to the classes.  Go back to class and good, better, best, never let it rest, until the good is better and the better is best.  I put it in my Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] speech.  A lot of people got a kick out of it.  But she was gonna come to the Hall of Fame ceremony but she passed away.  She used to come to Atlanta [Georgia] when the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] used to go to Atlanta because of Henry [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] being from Mobile [Alabama] and when I go in.  Of course Tommie Agee and Cleon Jones was with the Mets [New York Mets].  And every time they went there, they would bring up three or four buses from Mobile.  A lot of people wanted to come up.  And I remember the last time I went there, you know, she was coming up and she passed away.  She didn't get a chance to come up because she was, she was a great inspiration to a lot of people, a lot of people that grew up knowing her.
Speaker 1: Okay so she was really an important person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah she was important to a lot of people who grew up in that area environment, yeah.
Story_ID: 631672
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in grade school? Did you?
Speaker 2: Physical education (laughter).  No, we had shop, you know.  Learn how to build things.  I always liked to build things.  I was, like I used to help my father [Frank Williams] and grandfather with carpentry.  You know we used to go different places, and they would take me with them, and this is how you do that, this is how you do that.  So when the school got shop, you know that was one of my favorite things to do.  Science was good because, you know, you brought a lot of snakes and all that stuff, frogs and you know, you cut them open, see what they're made out of, you know.  Science is good.  But I didn't enjoy it more than shop, though, because a lot of times we build a lot of stuff and then the instructor will let us go out and play softball.  We would play softball in the bowl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were in grade school [Whistler Elementary School; Prichard Preparatory School, Whistler, Alabama], did you have a sense that you were a better ballplayer than the other guys?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  No I didn't.  No, I was just out there doing my thing.  I had no inkling that this might happen.  You know, I would just go out and play and really, really enjoy it.  Because you know, my game, I loved football.  Football, I loved that, you know, I played my last year in high school [Mobile County Training School, Prichard, Alabama] simply because my brother [Franklin Williams] was playing and he didn't want me to play while he was there.  So he finished school in 1955 and signed with the Pirates [Pittsburgh Pirates].  And then as I stayed in school, I played my last year.  Played football my last year and I was drafted you know, Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], I got a letter from Grambling.  They wanted me to come down there but as you see, I was weighing 165 pounds, I wasn't, I wasn't big enough.  I said, "I better do something else."  So I was playing semi-pro baseball and this one guy Ivy Griffin came by and asked me, you know, he saw something good and asked me, did I want to play professional baseball.  So he signed me to a contract.  But insofar as looking at myself saying I was a better ballplayer than anybody else, you know, I couldn't see it.  I couldn't see it at the time, you know.
Speaker 1: You was saying a lot of good ballplayers came from that area.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of competition?  I mean, a lot of good ballplayers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's one of the things we did a lot.  Play baseball.  There was about three or four teams and a lot of guys played the game of baseball.  They enjoyed it.  It was something to relax themselves, and you know, it's a strange thing.  When you, when you think about things and when you look back and you know, the people who inspired you many, many years ago.  When I--when we used to play baseball in this one field, you know, and there was a house in right field.  There was a house in right field.  And a lot of guys, lot of guys would hit it and break the window, you know, break a window.  You see this one guy by the name of Simon Brown; that was his name.  And you could see him fixing this window the next day.  Fixing this window the next day.  And I think he said, somebody went over there and talked to him, he said, "One of you guys gonna make it to the Major League [Major League Baseball].  Just keep on doing what you doing."  And you know, you always remember stuff like that.  I didn't know it was gonna be me, of course.  He say one of--you know, whether or not he made a prediction, you know, it came true.  One of you guys--he never did say anything about people hitting the ball over there breaking his window.  He just said, "One of you guys is gonna play in the Major League one day."  And it happens.
Story_ID: 631673
Speaker 1: --We were talking about people from Mobile [Alabama] off camera and you had--and we mentioned Bishop Howze [HistoryMaker Bishop Joseph Howze] who is a retired Catholic bishop.
Speaker 2: First of all he was down, he was down in North Carolina because Jose Martinez [ph.] used to play baseball.  He was with the Kansas City baseball team, and he used to go to church when he was in North Carolina, South Carolina, whichever it was.  But another story was when I was living on Constance [Avenue].  The first year I moved to Chicago [Illinois] was 1966 and we got to know the area real good and plus the people that lived, you know, on this street.  It was a nice area.  And we got to know people by the name of Claudette [Claudette McCollum (ph.)] and Vernon McCollum [ph.] used to live right down the street.  And the story goes that Claudette was talking to Bishop Howze who married when they was in Carolina, someplace out there.  And through their conversation on the telephone, Bishop Howze told Claudette, said, "You know Chicago, I been there a couple of times.  I got a niece, a cousin that is living in Chicago, and her husband plays with the Chicago Cubs."  And we looked out the door and Claudette is running down the street hollering and yelling, and she came down there and told us who she just talked to.  And she was telling the story about he married Vernon and her a long time ago.  And we became real good friends.  And the bishop has been in Chicago several times.  He married I think two or three of my daughters.  Every time one gets married, we'll call him and he'll come up.  Matter of fact when he was made bishop in Jackson, Mississippi, he called me to ask me to come down because they have a ceremony, something in the ceremony, a handshake of peace.  So he wanted me to come down and be down there for that.  And I tell you the people in Jackson, Mississippi, they treated me real nice.  'Cause it's an all day ceremony, but he wanted me to come down to do that.  Shirley [Shirley Williams] and I flew down along with Claudette and Vernon, we flew down and we stayed there like three or four days.  But the bishop is retired now.  He's in Biloxi, Mississippi and we got, you know we got a 2006 Christmas card from him.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him about three years ago at the Ohr Museum [Ohr-O'Keefe Museum of Art] down in Biloxi.
Speaker 2: When the pope came here about, I guess about seven or eight years ago, he was with him down in New Orleans [Louisiana] when Pope John or Pope Paul [Saint Pope John Paul II] came and he spent some time over here and he was with him when he went to New Orleans.
Story_ID: 631674
Speaker 1: Back in high school, okay so you went to the Mobile County Training School [Prichard, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so you'd have to take a bus to--would you take a bus down to--
Speaker 2: We used to have to take a bus.  As I mentioned we were like about a mile and a half, two miles we had to walk to get the bus.  It was like five minutes to seven every morning.  And we'll take this bus and we would pass by Vigor [Vigor High School, Prichard, Alabama] which was a white school, we couldn't, we couldn't go to school at Vigor so we had to go to Mobile County Training School and it was like three or four miles.  And we'll come, you know, right by the paper mill [Southern Craft Paper Mill] and then the bus will let us out because there was a big gully and it used to rain and be wet and everything down there.  So the bus didn't take us all the way to school.  We had to get off the bus and walk another 150, 200 yards to get to school.  'Cause the bus didn't let us out there.  And then we had to do the same thing in the evening.  You know we had to walk, pick up the bus and the bus, you know, let us out.  But it was a quarter to seven every morning we had to catch the bus.  We had to be there.  And if we didn't catch the bus, we either ride our bicycle or we walked to school and got there late.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played football in high school.
Speaker 2: My last year.
Speaker 1: Your last year.
Speaker 2: My last year.
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: I played defensive end, and strangely enough, you know I mentioned softball, we used to play softball a lot during the shop class, the guy would be doing something and he would let us out to go in the bowl, we had a thing that we called a bowl.  We'd go down there and play softball.  That's what we played.  We didn't have a baseball team in high school.  I used to play Monday, Wednesday and Friday, I played in a rec league.  I got a team together and we played in the rec league, the city recreation league.  But insofar as playing baseball in high school, we didn't have one.  There was a time they did have a baseball team, but the funding wasn't there and they didn't have it when I went to high school.
Speaker 1: So this is the downside of--of course segregation was not great.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In terms of--
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have money for the teams.
Speaker 2: No you really didn't.  Football was the big thing.  They always kept a football team but baseball, they never did have a--they had a baseball team but when I went to school out there, it wasn't in existence.  So I had to find ways to play.  I loved the game, you know, I wanted to play.
Speaker 1: Was there any teachers or coaches or mentors in high school that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  The guy, the guy that used to have the football team by the name of Charles Rhodes [Charles T. Rhodes], and it's ironic, both them named, their name was Rhodes.  They had a Charles Rhodes and a Virgil Rhodes.  And they were good, they were good people.  They not only emphasized the sports, but they emphasized being a good human being.
Speaker 1: And they were both coaches?
Speaker 2: Both coaches, yeah.  Charles Rhodes was the real coach and Coach Virgil was the assistant.  And it seems to me they had been together for many years because they knew each other's habits and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: And they weren't related?
Speaker 2: No.  No they weren't related at all.  Matter of fact, Virgil, Virgil used to stay in Whistler [Whistler, Alabama; Prichard, Alabama] you know, right, right where I lived at.  He's from Whistler.  And until the day he died, okay, until the day he died, they have, they have Billy Williams Lane [sic.], okay.  And it covers two blocks, two blocks.  And he was trying to get the city council to extend that.  There was a street out there we called Indian Street [ph.], you know.  And he wanted them to rename that to make it a little feasible, you know, make it a little more--
Speaker 1: Little bit longer.
Speaker 2: Yeah a little bit longer.  And I think he--every time I went home, you know back in Mobile [Alabama], I would see him.  And he told me what he was trying to do.  Matter of fact, I got some letters at home somewhere where he wrote them and sent me a copy of it.  But they were good people.  They were, they were concerned about you know, you as a player.  But they were more concerned about you as an individual because they did a lot of stuff to help you along the way, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, did you have a favorite course in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, shop.  You remember?
Speaker 1: So you primarily, you were an athlete.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was an athlete.  I, you know I didn't kind of go for too many classes.  I wanted to play sports, you know, which is not a good thing.  But I didn't know I was gonna make it to the big league.  I didn't know I was gone play big league baseball and have a career in baseball.  But insofar as going to class, you know as I say, science was a good one.  We had a young guy there and we always did stuff with different animals and stuff like that, dissect animals, stuff like that.
Story_ID: 631675
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you like music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: You weren't really a big music fan?
Speaker 2: I wasn't a big music fan, no.  Insofar as playing, I like to listen.  But insofar as playing, no I can't, I can't play no music, no.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite music to listen to?
Speaker 2: At that time, you know you had the Jackie Wilson and God rest his soul, Jim Brown, James Brown, you know.  And we used to go and see Ray Charles for like fifty, sixty cents at a place by the name of Club Harlem [Harlem Duke Social Club, Prichard, Alabama].  A lot of people used to come to Mobile [Alabama].  This one guy I was telling you about, named Ed Tucker, he had a club.  And he would get these individuals to come down.  You know most of the guys that owned baseball teams, they had clubs where they had clubs or restaurants, clubs and restaurants.
Speaker 1: So Ed Tucker, he owned the Mobile--
Speaker 2: Mobile Black Bears.
Speaker 1: Black Bears, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And he had a club too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he would--he had, Tucker, and they had Club Harlem.  There was two clubs, you know right across the street from each other.  And you know, the big entertainers would come down there and perform.  And as I say, you know Ray Charles, I saw Stevie Wonder when he was real young.  They had a place that they were building up, you know, they're building some townhouses and stuff like and they bought in Stevie Wonder to appear out there one evening.  I saw him as a young kid.
Speaker 1: Yeah cause he didn't really come into prime until about '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you were young playing with the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] then by the time he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Stevie Wonder, yeah, 'Fingertips' came out, I think it is, he was playing the harmonica (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  There was a place called Hillsdale Heights [Mobile, Alabama] they was building.  And that's where he came to perform at.
Story_ID: 631676
Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [Mobile County Training School, Prichard, Alabama], what did you envision yourself playing--you were trying to get a contract with a Major League [Major League Baseball] team?  Or did--how did it happen?  How did it--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Not knowing whether or not I was gonna get a contract, I begin to start playing semi-pro baseball in my senior class.  You couldn't get paid 'cause you was still going to school, but the guys would slip us a, you know five or six under the table.  And we would play with this Mobile Black Bears and we would go to, we would go to Moss Point [Mississippi], Biloxi [Mississippi], you know, all through Mississippi playing.  And Tommie Aaron was on the same team, Henry Aaron's [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] brother.  And we would play, we would play and I remember, I remember one Sunday we had a game in Mitchell Field [Whistler, Alabama], that's the field we used to play.  And the policemen, they always had a guard at the ballpark.  And the policeman came up and said there was a scout here from the Chicago Cubs.  And you know you hear the--yeah, yeah, yeah.  You know, Tom Aaron's brother was on the ball club, Henry Aaron's brother.  So when the guy told us that, I thought nothing about it, you know.  I went out and played my game.  So I think that particular day maybe a double, a home run, I don't know what I did, but I must have did something good because the next Saturday we were playing--matter of fact we were playing at Mitchell Field that Saturday.  The next Saturday we're playing in Gulfport [Mississippi], so the scout's there along with Henry's brother Tommie Aaron and myself.  And I say, "Well he's looking at Tommie Aaron to play baseball."  So the next Sunday we go to Moss Point somewhere.  So Aaron's not there and the scout's still there.  So now I'm beginning to think he's come to see me now.  You know, we were the two best guys on the ball club.  So after getting through playing, in this little small town, Whistler [Alabama], Ivy Griffin drove up one Saturday or Saturday evening and he went up to the corner store and asked, "Say, where does the lad [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams live at?  You know the young kid."  And I'm almost a graduate then, you know.  It's about a week or so.  All of my friends were going in the [U.S. military] service, you know, doing different things.  And I said, what am I gonna do?  You know.  Go in the service too.  So he asked this one guy, said, "Where does the lad Billy Williams live at?"  And the guy, they were reluctant to tell him, what do you want with him?  You know.
Speaker 1: Right, people had to protect themselves down there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Said, "What do you want with him," you know?  Well he said, "I'm a scout," after, you know talking to him a long time, he said, "I'm a scout for the Chicago Cubs."  And the guy said yeah.  Then he told him where I lived at.  So I guess about fifteen minutes later, you know, this knock on the door.  I go to the door, you know, white man coming up there about 8:30, 9:00 in the evening, you ask what the hell is going on, you know.  So my father [Frank Williams] goes, answers the door you know, and he said, "I want to talk to you about your son playing professional baseball."  I knew what it was, because my brother [Franklin Williams] had signed '55 [1955], this was in 1956.  And my brother was always talking about, get a big bonus when you sign.  You know I think at the time it was like four thousand dollars or something like that, you know, you could get for signing a minor league contract.  So my brother would call all the time.  And this guy knocked on the door and talking to my father and you know, asking, could your son, does your son want to play baseball?  And I'm listening.  He said, "Does he want to play semi-pro baseball?"  And I'm listening.  And I was hoping my father says yeah, because this is what I wanted to do, you know.  And he said we're going to sign him to a minor league contract because I think he can play.  Matter of fact, on this scout, on this report in 1956, he had highest classification he could go is ML, Major League, this is when I first signed the contract.  He must have saw something a lot of people didn't see, you know, because he was the only guy that we talked to.  So my father said, "Yeah, you know, he wanted to play, and this is what he wanted to do.  He'd been a big fan of baseball--."  "So you know we're going to sign him to a contract, we sign him to a contract, take care of him, you know."
Story_ID: 631677
Speaker 1: We signed the contract.  I think I got $1,500, my father [Frank Williams] got a cigar.  And two days after then I was on my way to a little city in Oklahoma, Ponca City, Oklahoma where I first started.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: P-O-N-C-A, C-I-T-Y, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was in the Sooner State League, Sooner State.
Speaker 2: And that was the--what was the nickname of the team?
Speaker 1: Ponca City Cubs.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's Class A.
Speaker 1: Class D.
Speaker 2: D.
Speaker 1: No you start in A now.  That was in, that was in '56 [1956], that was in Class D.  Yeah and so I rode, I rode the bus for two and a half days and when I got to the bus station, a guy by the name of, his last name was White [ph.], Mr. White picked me up, and he took me to this private home.  And this is one of the first times I'm away from home, you know.  So he took me to this home where Sammy Drake, Lou Brock, not Lou Brock, Lou Johnson, a guy that lives here by the name of Horace "Chick" Greenwood, and a guy who passed in '66 [1966], Gilmore [James Gilmore].  They were all living at this private home.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a black home.
Speaker 1: Black home, yeah, yeah.  Because I couldn't go to the hotel.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the rest of the white players lived in a hotel?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.  But we had to--we couldn't stay at the hotel, we went to the private home.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It must have been a big home, I guess, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was, it was.
Speaker 2: Like a boarding house or--
Speaker 1: It was only two people there, two elderly people, and they had like an upstairs.  They had rooms in the back, and when I went there, you know, they put me up in the front room there.  I don't know where they went, but I had the, I had the front room.  That's where they wanted me to stay, so okay.  They picked me I guess through Buck O'Neil and the Cubs [Chicago Cubs], they had it all figured out when I went up there.
Speaker 2: So Buck O'Neil was part of the Cubs organization?
Speaker 1: Yeah, at that time.  He was in the minor league, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  All right so at that time, was it--did the Cubs have any--I'm sure they had some black players by '56 [1956] didn't they?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  They had Baker [Gene Baker] and Banks [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks].  Baker and Banks was one of the first--they were a double play combination.  When Banks signed in 1953 with the Cubs, he came from the Kansas City Monarchs, and of course Gene Baker, they had a double play combination.  I was, I signed in 1956, course I was in the minor league at the time.
Speaker 2: So Gene Baker and Ernie Banks were there.
Speaker 1: They're the first--they had, they had, they had Baker and Banks.  Then they got Solly Drake that came with the Cubs, and I think Sam Jones came with the Cubs for a little bit.
Speaker 2: Sam Jones.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Not related to the basketball--
Speaker 1: No, no, this was a pitcher from Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah matter of fact, we used to live at the Edgewater Beach Hotel, used to be on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And the clubs used to be out there, I was living on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And Sam Jones, he liked you know, to have a drink every now and then.  So he would go to Jack Power [ph.]; that was a place on the South Side by the name of Jack Power.  A lot of the players used to go in there and have a drink or two.  And Sam sat up there and had two or three or four or five.  And he would call about two or three in the morning, and I was just a young kid.  You know, didn't care about driving.  He would call me up and I'd take him home.  I'd take him back over on the South Side, I mean on Edgewater Beach, yeah.  Sad Sam Jones, yeah.  He pitched a no-hitter for the Cubs, yeah.  He later passed away.
Speaker 2: Sad Sam Jones.  Why did they call him Sad Sam Jones?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure (laughter).
Speaker 2: Just was alliterative--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They, they call him toothpick too, and I think that's where Dusty [Dusty Baker] got that toothpick from.  You know every time you saw him pitch, he had a toothpick in his mouth, yeah.  And it's funny how things come, and it's a true saying--what goes around comes around you know.  People do it, and all of a sudden here it is again, yeah.  But Sam used to have a toothpick in his mouth all the time.  Had a curveball that makes a hitter sit down.  Yeah, he'd throw that thing, and you could hear like that shhh, and hitters, I've seen hitters sit on their butt, you know, because the curveball was so good, and he'd be laughing out there, yeah.  He was some kind of pitcher, yeah.  Yeah, but that was the guys that came through.
Story_ID: 631678
Speaker 1: Did they bring you up as a--when you let me see the scouting report on you, they were thinking about trying to make you a third baseman.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I signed as a third baseman/outfielder.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I went to Ponca City [Oklahoma] and we had, we had Don Beaver who was the manager and right away they put me in the outfield.  I don't think I played any games at third base.  I went to the outfield and they hit me some fly balls and you know I, that was an adventure right there.  When I first started.  You know couldn't, couldn't get under the ball right, you know.  But I worked at it, and I just stuck solely to playing the outfield.  And the funny thing about the first year, okay, when I signed in 1956 at the time you was making two dollars and a quarter a day meal money.  And because I didn't get a very big bonus, they didn't have much invested in me you know.  They had time to see whether or not I could be a good ballplayer.  So the first year, the first year I went to Ponca City, all I did was pinch hit, you know.  When the team'd [Ponca City Cubs] go on the road, they would give me two dollars and a quarter meal money and they would go on the road and leave me in Ponca City.  And I met this one friend, I just talked to him the other day, he's in Oklahoma now.  A guy by the name of Bobby Walton.  It was good to meet him because we did a lot of things together.  We went to a lot of places in Oklahoma.  I saw a lot of Oklahoma that particular year because I wasn't traveling with the team, and every time the team would go, they'd stay six, seven days, and then they come back.  I had me a schedule when they were coming back in town.  I would probably get there a day before and he would come out and throw me batting practice and I would hit, I would hit.  I'd be ready when the team got back in town because Don Beaver will ask, you know, "Williams [HistoryMaker Billy Williams] go up to the plate and hit for somebody," the pitcher.  And I think I had five straight hits.  So I did that the whole year.  But the next year I went back up and I start, you know, I started in the outfield.  I went, I went up in June right after high school [Mobile County Training School, Prichard, Alabama].  And the following year, 1957, I got a chance to play.  But not many times I got a chance to play in '56 [1956].
Story_ID: 631679
Speaker 1: How did you develop your swing?  Now you have been--you are the person that people talk about when they talk about the perfect baseball swing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They talk about [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams having the sweetest swing in baseball, and they still say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you develop that swing and--
Speaker 2: Well I think one of the most important things, I was gifted when they talk about the quickness of the bat you know.  The quickness of the bat allowed me to wait to see the last instant of what the ball's gonna do.  Because a lot of people, a lot of players have asked me, said, you knew what was coming, didn't you?  I said, "No I didn't know what was coming."  I just waited, I waited a little longer than the average guy.  I had the confidence to wait because I was gifted where I could get the bat here to the ball.  And by doing this, it made me relax up at the plate because I had the confidence was there.  And I knew, because I wasn't a big guy.  I had to work on the timing all the time.  I had good timing.  And by going in the basement, you know setting up the TV, set--not the TV but we had a 16 millimeter video camera.  I used to go in the basement and watch what I did when I, you know hit the ball, what I didn't do.  And I developed a good swing through this, along with, you know, a guy by the name of Rogers Hornsby you know who played.
Speaker 1: Now he's a Cub [Chicago Cubs] legend from way back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was one of the greatest hitters in the--in baseball.  And I used to have sessions with him.  He would come down to the batting cage, we would talk about hitting, talk about this, talk about that, you know.  But I was just--I think in a way I was gifted with a quickness.  And once I knew I had the quickness, it allowed me to wait longer than the average guy.  And I could see the ball.  I didn't--I guess at an early age I thought about just hitting the ball.  You know not trying to pull, not trying to hit it because when I first started playing every day, 1957, I hit nineteen home runs as a skinny kid.  This was just unheard of.  You know a kid coming into professional ball hitting nineteen home runs in the minor league.  But everything was to the left side of the diamond.  I might pull a ball every now and then, but it wasn't down the line.  It was like right center field.  But everything else was hit to left field.  And over the years I've seen hitters do that and they become good hitters.
Story_ID: 631680
Speaker 1: --We were talking about Class D ball, you were in '57 [1957] and how you developed your swing.  You said Rogers Hornsby was influential.
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know Rogers at that time, at that time.  I think as a young kid, you don't know what you doing.  You're just swinging the bat.  You know, but when I reached AA baseball was two years later.
Speaker 1: So this was like 1959.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959] yeah I was at San Antonio [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's where Rogers was.
Speaker 2: That's where, that's where I first met Rogers Hornsby.
Speaker 1: Prior to getting to Rogers Hornsby, how was your--you said you hit nineteen home runs in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, every, everything was, everything was good.  I say because of the quickness, you know.  I always I guess worked at it because I wanted to--I wanted to have a good swing.  I wanted to do real good.  So maybe a little extra work from time to time I put into it.
Story_ID: 631681
Speaker 1: Is there any story from the minor leagues we need to tell before we get you to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I have a great story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it happened in 1957, I got a chance to play.  And that night--we planned, we were playing the Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] farm team, we were playing the Ardmore Cardinals, okay.  And in the ninth inning the game was tied and I was the only black person on the team [Ponca City Cubs], and I went the whole year just being the only black person on the ball club.  In the ninth inning I got a base hit to win the baseball game.  Beat the Cardinals at baseball game.  They went away from the park pissed off, okay.  They go to the hotel, and the one guy that runs the elevator--when three or four teammates got on the elevator, they got in an argument with the guy running the elevator.  So they beat the guy up pretty good.  You know they kicked him, they did all kinds of stuff with him, yeah.  So at the end the guy said, "I'm gonna get you guys," okay?  And we playing in--next night we were playing in Ponca City [Oklahoma] and I'm playing left field.  So I saw this guy, you know all that used to come to games was whites and Osage Indians, that's a big Osage Indian [Native American] country.  And I'm sitting--he sits in the stand for about, I guess about five minutes.  And I'm watching him from left field.  And then he ventured, you know the dugouts were right on the field, little low dugouts, you're sitting in there, you could--minor league D baseball.  So the guy, the fence was right here and the dugout was right here.  So the guy walks up to the dugout and he asked, "Say, where was Corey Smith?"  He asked, "Where is Corey Smith?"  That's one of the guys that beat him up, okay.  So Corey Smith looks around and sees him.  And their dugout on the first base line, our dugout is on the third base line.  Corey Smith looks up and sees him and takes off and starts running.  This guy pulls out a .38 right at the baseball field, pow, pow, pow.  Empty it.  You could see it hitting the ground, you could see the dust flying.  And the, the manager jumped up, the manager got shot in the side.  And he never did hit Corey Smith.  But they came and got him, they arrested him, okay.  They came out to left field, got me and took me in the clubhouse because they thought somebody would bother me.  They took me in the clubhouse, sat me around in the clubhouse and they arrested this individual.  They called the game.
Speaker 1: Now this was a white guy, the elevator guy was a white guy?
Speaker 2: No, he was a black guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  See this changes the whole--
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a black guy, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: And he was shooting at a white guy, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He was shooting at the, he was shooting at Corey Smith, the guy that beat him up, yeah.  So they called the game about the second inning, you know.  And this friend of mine, Bobby Walton, and they had a little team town or something that we used to go to and we went over there right after then.  And somebody told his daughter that they arrested your father.  And she went down to the police station and he got out.  You know he was there about three or four days and he got out.  Because he had bruises, lumps where they had beat him up on the elevator.  And it's a strange thing.  I guess about fifteen or twenty years ago, I went back to Ponca City, Oklahoma and I said, "You remember when I played here in 1957?  There was a guy came out to the ballpark and he started shooting."  So one of the guys in the area said, "Come here, I'll take you where he is."  So I went over there and I could see this guy nailing nails, you know, and he was working on a church and he had become a preacher.  And he turned around and I told him who I were and I just wanted to meet you and everything.  And he said, "You know, you were the cause of that."  And I say, "How was that?"  He said, "They were mad because you got that base hit to beat them a ballgame."
Story_ID: 631682
Speaker 1: But the funny thing though, I left Ponca City [Oklahoma] and I went to Midland, Texas.  We had a ball club down in Midland, Texas.  And I got a call from Ponca City, Oklahoma.  And when I got this call, the guy said, "You [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams?"  I said, "Yes I am."  And he said that, he said, "Did you mention what happened back in '57 [1957] or the paper mentioned it in 1957."  I said, "I mentioned it because I was just talking about the experience that I had in 1957."  And they said, "Thank you," and hung up.  If I had said the paper mentioned it first, I think they would have sued the paper.  But I was just telling the experience I had when I played down there.  And you know for a kid, you know coming out of, you know, Alabama, first year away from home, second year away from home.  And to see this happen at a ballpark scared me to death.  Our second baseman, you know, trying to hide behind second base.  Our center fielder had jumped over the fence and guys was scattering.  The people in the stand was scattering.  You could see, you know when he's shooting you could see the, the bullets hitting the ground and the dust flying up.  And it was a bizarre thing that night, you know.
Speaker 2: That is scary.  That was quite a story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's the experience I--that was one of the experiences I had there.
Speaker 2: Well that's the danger of having a black man win the game.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The other black people in town will catch it.
Speaker 1: You know the whole year, I was the only black person the club.  Of course the Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] didn't have any.  That was a franchise [Ardmore Cardinals] of the Cardinals.  They didn't have any black guys on the ball club.  Matter of fact, there was about three or four black guys, you know, in that league [Sooner State League] down there, Ponca City.
Speaker 2: That's some, that's some story.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's, it was something.
Speaker 2: Now where is Ponca City in relationship to--
Speaker 1: It's right next to, not too far from Guthrie, Oklahoma.  Yeah, you familiar with that?
Speaker 2: I've heard of Guthrie.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's where Fergie [Ferguson Jenkins] used to live.  It's about forty miles, we was--I think it was right on the borderline of Arkansas, you know.  It wasn't too far from Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Like eastern Oklahoma (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, yeah because we used to go up to Ark City, Arkansas City [Kansas], I used to go up there and it wasn't that far.  It was like thirty-five, forty miles.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we used to take off and drive up there.
Story_ID: 631683
Speaker 1: Tell us about being called up to the Cubs [Chicago Cubs].
Speaker 2: Well, you know the strangest thing about that?  When we talk--when I mention my brother [Franklin Williams], talk about him.  Going back, when the Major League [Major League Baseball] club used to go around and play, you know, a barnstorm they call it.  And they came to Mobile [Alabama] and my brother and I was the two best ballplayers in that area.  They would get us to play on the team, you know.  They'd come down and play.  I faced Joe Black when I was like fifteen years old, sixteen years old.  I didn't strike out, I hit the ball, hit it to left field.  And I said "Man, these Major League guys throw hard, man."  They're throwing the ball about a hundred miles an hour it seemed like.  But we used to live at--when I first got called up, they all housed us at the Sheridan Plaza [Sheridan Plaza Apartments] here on Sheridan Road in Chicago [Illinois].  When I was playing, went and playing in San Antonio [Texas], okay.  I'm in San Antonio, we're playing Victoria [Texas].  And there was a friend of mine who was on the police force down in Houston, Texas by the name of J.C. Hartman.  And we were playing together, we was at San Antonio, we playing Victoria.  And I just got tired of playing baseball, I got tired.  I wanted to, I wanted to just get away from it, you know.  Because of all the--I had to depend on somebody to bring me food to the automobile, the bus, we drive around in a bus.  And--
Speaker 1: This was--
Speaker 2: It was travel, you know the--
Speaker 1: So the whole thing about being the only black player on the team, and second class (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well at that time there was two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So everybody else could get served and you couldn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we were the first, we were first ones to be picked up and the last one that be put to bed.  And we had to outperform the other guys, you know.  We had to find our places to eat.  On traveling on the road, we couldn't go sit in a restaurant.  If you gonna go in the restaurant, you had to go around to the back and sit by the stove, I had that experience.  You know I ate because I was hungry.  But I called my brother and he said, "We're coming back from Victoria," and I just got fed up with it, you know.  And he said, he said, "How you doing?"  I said, "I'm doing fine, man."  I said, "But I'm gonna get away from this game, you know."  So I told J.C. that night, we was, we was at the--there was a place called Manhattan Hotel [ph.], we lived there, down in San Antonio, Texas.  And I told Jay, I said Jay, I said, "When I get back to the hotel, I want you to carry me to the train station because I'm going home.  I don't want to play no more."  So he said, "What are you talking about?"  I said, "I'm going to Mobile.  I don't want, I don't want to be here, okay."  So he said, "No, I'm not gonna take you over there."  I said, "Well if you don't take me, I'm gonna call a cab anyway.  I'm leaving."  So we had our old Champion Studebaker [Studebaker Champion] down there, and I say, "Here's the keys, you can have the whole thing.  I'm gone."  So he says, "You serious aren't you?"  I said, "Yes I am."  So he took me to the train station and he said, "We'll see you later."  I said, "Okay, you got it pal."  So I went home, you know, on that train.  I rode, I rode and then got into Mobile, my brother picked me up.  You know I go to the house.  It was funny because that's--you know after playing for two or three years, summertime you're off playing baseball.  So you go back to Mobile and I get home, I'm relaxed, I'm doing some stuff.  You know just enjoying it, you know for about two or three days.  And in the meantime John Holland, you know had called Buck O'Neil and said, "Go see about Billy [History Billy Williams], see what's wrong with him down there, you know."  Buck knew.  Buck came down and you know I'm sitting on the porch like this.  My father [Frank Williams] built a home, it was way back in the back, you know he had this land and he built a home way back in the back.  So I see this Fury come up, you know, Buck always used to drive this Plymouth Fury.  So I see this car coming up in the yard and I said, "Uh oh, I done messed up now (laughter)."  So he came up and he didn't say, you know, we want you to go back to play right away.  So Buck just came back and took me down to Prichard Park [Whistler, Alabama] where all my friends was playing baseball and all them made a big thing out of me playing professional baseball, you know.  So it began to get to me.  And in the next couple days, you know, I was back in San Antonio.  I stayed in San Antonio a couple of days, then I went to AAA a couple of days and then I went on to the Major League [Major League Baseball], and when I first got to the Major League, I called home and told my father.
Story_ID: 631684
Speaker 1: But in the meantime, you know, around in the area--and this is what I was saying.  Lot of people saying, "That Williams boy made it to the big league, Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Williams]."  And everybody's saying, "No it wasn't Billy, Franklin [Franklin Williams] made it to the Major League [Major League Baseball]."  Because he was a better ballplayer, you know.  I just got the right opportunity.  That's what I was saying we used to play a lot, you know.
Speaker 2: What happened to your brother?  What's the story?
Speaker 1: He's in Sacramento [California].  Yeah, he got up to AAA baseball in the Pirates' [Pittsburgh Pirates] organization.  He didn't, he didn't go all the way just because I guess the opportunities and getting the breaks.
Speaker 2: You hear that a lot, now you know I've seen it myself.  Where you know somebody's an outstanding athlete and for some reason they don't get the--
Speaker 1: Well, you got to be with a ball club looking for players, you know you got to get the opportunity.  You know it's been said that Roberto Clemente was released by the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], yeah.  We, Cubs [Chicago Cubs] had to release a lot of guys.  They come on, sign with somebody else and you know guys get second chances and they show you what they can do.  You know it's a--because a lot of times you know with all the players and a lot of times it's hit and miss.  If you're that borderline player.  But you can tell a good ballplayer.  You can tell what he's gonna do.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it seemed like--so your brother never, never got a chance to play in the Major Leagues?
Speaker 1: No he didn't, no he never did.  But he experienced everything that happened, though.  Because you know every time I go to San Francisco [California], go to the Major League, go in the clubhouse, I take him to the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] every year.  Three things we do.  You know, we go fishing and we go to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and just enjoy golf.
Speaker 2: Nobody ever caught--he was a really, you know everybody thought he was that good and nobody tried to pick him up again after that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was.  He was--he played all the outfields, played infield, hit the ball real well and he just didn't get the opportunity, the breaks you know?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They had, you know you'd be with the Pirates.  You know maybe they had three outfielders that's doing it at the time, and he was an outfielder.
Speaker 2: Well he was with the Pirates about the time that they won the World Series too I guess, the organization.
Speaker 1: It would have been, it would have been about--let me see, '55 [1955], '59 [1959], somewhere through in there.
Speaker 2: That's the year before.  They won it in '60 [1960], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When they beat the Yankees [New York Yankees] with Mazeroski [Bill Mazeroski].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Hit that ball over Yogi Berra's head.  Yogi was playing left field at the time, yeah.  Yeah, 1960, yeah.
Speaker 2: So they had a pretty good team when he was in the minor league system.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  He and Clendenon.  You remember Clendenon?
Speaker 2: Donn Clendenon, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was, he was with the Pirates too.  The time my brother played.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah he played against Juan Marichal, Cepeda [Orlando Cepeda].  That's why when we go to the Hall of Fame everybody know him, you know.  Yeah he have a ball up there, um-hm.  Yeah he's been going up there--well I was inducted in 1987, and he's been--we missed one year.  And he's been going up there every year.  He's just like a fixture up there now, he enjoys it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay now--
Story_ID: 631685
Speaker 1: You came to the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] in--
Speaker 2: I came up as a recall.  A twenty-four hour recall.  You know, you sign a big league contract and you split with a minor league contract, okay.  And at the end of the year, September 1st, then that's when they can expand the roster.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And all those guys who have Major League [Major League Baseball] contracts, not all of them of course.  Some of the guys they think they might come up and be, you know, get some experience and help you out later on.  They bring you up to the big league.  So they brought me up before then because I went to, I went to AA, I came back to AA, I went to AAA, okay, for about five days we was in Denver [Colorado].  And I hit .475 in Denver.  And the next five or six days I was in the big league.  But when I came up here, I didn't play.  I just sit on the bench, pinch hit and go to sleep (laughter), yeah.  But you know I was just, I was just watching and observing what Major Leaguers do.  You know Tony Taylor and [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks were here at the time, and I got a chance to see a lot of the city, what they do and how they did it.  You know and just experience it, being in the big league.  It was great, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so in 1960 then did you play--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960] I was at--before Houston [Houston Buffaloes] went Major League.  It was a franchise of the Chicago Cubs.  And that's where I played.  I went there right after Shirley [Shirley Williams] and I, we got married in 1960, February.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet your wife in Chicago [Illinois] or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  My wife is from Mobile County Training School [Prichard, Alabama].  She lived in Plateau [Mobile, Alabama].  The area that the school is in, is in Plateau, and that's where she's from.  And I met her in high school.  We went together for like three years in high school and we've been married forty-six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's where I met her at.
Speaker 1: Okay and she's related to Bishop Howze [HistoryMaker Bishop Joseph Howze].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And then well two days after I married, I was on my way to spring training, and that's where I played at Houston [Texas], 1960, and you know the year was good.  And Houston tried to buy my contract down there, they wanted me to come back down there and play.  But the Cubs wouldn't do it.  They had plans for me here.  So at the end of the season, on that twenty-four hour recall, I was called up to the big league.  And I got a chance to play in a couple of games at the time.  When the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] was playing in the Coliseum [Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum] out in Los Angeles [California], guy by the name of Stan Williams was pitching.  And I hit my first home run off of Stan Williams.  It seem like the ball traveled 300, 400, 500 feet, you know.  Because they had the short wall in left field.  But in right field it was far away.
Speaker 1: So the Dodgers, that was before they built Chavez Ravine [Dodger Stadium, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were playing in the Coliseum.
Speaker 2: Used to play at the Coliseum.  They made a ballpark out of--they didn't, the Dodgers just wanted to get out of Brooklyn [New York], you know.  They didn't have a ballpark out there and they got out before they could build a ballpark.  They said, well if you find a place to play, we'll play.  So the Coliseum was where they played at.  And Wally Moon, Wally Moon had about twelve home runs the first three or four weeks of the season.  Because they called it a moon shot.  It was like 240 or 230 down the left field line.  And you get a pop up inside of the ball park.
Speaker 1: So he hit down that line and he always--
Speaker 2: Yeah down in left field, yeah.  He was a left-handed hitter and always trying to shank the ball over in left field.  But that's where we played at.  Matter of fact the Giants [San Francisco Giants], when we first went out there, the Giants didn't have Candlestick Park [San Francisco, California], they had Seals Stadium [San Francisco, California].  We played there.  That was one of the last parks that you had a knot hole.  You know, the wood fences, you used to look through there.  That was one of the things baseball don't have, the knot holes.
Speaker 1: So you could look through the knot hole.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They used to have a knot hole game.  But I got called up in 1960.  Got a chance to play a little bit.  And did pretty well so they had plans for me the following year.  And it was easy because the general manager said that when I first went to spring training, he said, "We're gonna put Williams [HistoryMaker Billy Williams] in left field and leave him there.  Nobody bother him," and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a--they had a lot of confidence in you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who was on the team then with you?
Speaker 2: Well when you play, when you play AA and have the year I had in Texas, when you play AAA and have the year I think over .300, twenty-three, twenty-four homeruns.  Drove in a whole bunch of runs.  When you have those years in AA and AAA, you know your next step is the big league.  And of course they had Moose Moryn, Walt Moryn was playing left field.  And they had Lee Walls in center field.  But I came up and they just said, "Williams is gonna be our left fielder."  Because the club was in transition.  You know they were trying to get somebody to help Banks [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks] at first base, I tried to play first base in AA but I couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 631686
Speaker 1: So we were talking about your rookie year with the Cubs [Chicago Cubs].  Now you made Rookie of the Year that year, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], yeah.  In 1960 I played at Houston [Houston Buffaloes] as I mentioned.  And when I came up in 1961, John Holland, who was the general manager said, you know, "You gonna be our left fielder."  And I guess that's the thing you want to hear, you know, coming from the general manager, saying you gonna be out there for a hundred, well we played 154 games at the time.  And you know it was great because you know with Banks [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks] hitting behind me, I got a lot of fastballs, he was an established player.  And a lot of them I didn't miss because I still hold the record for home runs by a rookie, which is twenty-five.  But the year was great that year.  You know I produced.  I had a little trouble in the outfield simply because the Bears [Chicago Bears] used to play there, if you can remember.  And playing left field, they used to put sod in every year.  And that ball would come out there and be bouncing round.  And I played--
Speaker 1: It wasn't flat, yeah.
Speaker 2: No it wasn't flat.  So I think that year I made eleven errors, 1961.  Because it was all choppy out there.  But after then I worked on it, made myself a pretty decent outfielder.
Speaker 1: Eleven errors.  Nowadays guys make eleven errors in a month.
Speaker 2: Yeah but insofar as striking out and errors, we didn't want to do that.  Our pride was too great.  Matter of fact, if you did it, you wouldn't be in the big league, you know.  So you had to make yourself a good ball--there wasn't but eight teams in the National League.  Now you got thirty teams.  You know there was eight teams in the National League, eight teams in the American League.  But you only play 154 games as I mentioned.  You play probably a doubleheader on Sunday and you was off Monday, you was off Thursday.  And you go to a city and get ready to play a doubleheader.
Speaker 1: So this is really--when you come up to the Major Leagues in those days, you said eight teams in Major League Baseball, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in the National League.
Speaker 1: Sixteen teams altogether.
Speaker 2: Sixteen teams altogether.  So there was a lot of minor league clubs.  Matter of fact, we had--the Cubs had about two or three AAA clubs.  Maybe two AA clubs, and you go all the way down to D ball.  So there was a lot of players for twenty-five spots, you know, if you're a pitcher, you know.  But you had to be a good baseball player.  I think to run, hit and throw, you had to have two, two out of three.  You know, you just couldn't be a guy that come up here and hit.  You know you had, you had to catch the ball, you had to run decent, you know.  You worked on that.  Maybe not run decent, but I seen a lot of slow guys through the years when I played.  But you had to be a good ballplayer, you know, to come to the big league because you know, the players were few.  If you didn't, if you didn't go down and, and make yourself a good baseball player, you'd be in the minor league a long time.  And that's why you saw guys like Don Newcombe was in the minor league a long time.  Maury Wills was in the minor league a long time.  They stayed until that, you know those teams start to go back a little bit.  Because when you, when you didn't have the ability to play up here when you couldn't do those things, they send you to minor league and work on it.  You know, and you didn't have to have a coach at any time.  You worked on that with--you and another player.  You know, if you was swinging bad, two players got together.  You didn't have a hitting coach to go out there and help you out, yeah.  You got another player to go out there and throw you batting practice and you learned, yeah.
Story_ID: 631687
Speaker 1: You were like Rookie of the Year in 1961.  Who were the toughest pitchers that you faced?
Speaker 2: Well you could, you know have several of them.  When you talk about the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], you got Drysdale [Don Drysdale], Koufax [Sandy Koufax], Don Sutton, Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] players.  When you go to San Francisco [San Francisco Giants], you got Bolin [Bobby Bolin], you got Juan Marichal, you got Gaylord Perry.  They was on the Giants.  And then you go Elroy Face, Bob Friend, there was so many great ones, you know, on a Major League [Major League Baseball] club.  As I said, there was only eight teams in the American League and they all had good pitching, they was on four-day rotation or five-day rotation.  And that wasn't such thing as a closer, set-up guy.  You know once they started, they got forty starts a year and once they started, you know, most of the time they finished the game.  You didn't get a chance to see different pitching.  If a guy went out there, he always believed that he's gonna be out there for the close of the game.
Speaker 1: Now that's really unusual now cause today they don't let a pitcher go over a hundred pitches, usually they try to pull him out of there.  Unless he's just really beating the other team really bad.
Speaker 2: Well, they gear up towards this in the minor league.  When you're in the minor league, they prepare you to pitch in the Major League.  They prepare you by keeping you strong in the minor league.  There was a time that you had to get so many innings in in the minor league, so many at-bats in the minor league.  But I think now if you can run, throw or hit, you know, you're on a Major League roster.  But now so much focus is on pitching because pitching's been far and few between, diluted over the years.  They're trying to preserve these guys.  And that's why in the minor league if you have a young kid pitching, you try to get him to stay within about sixty, seventy pitches, you know where he could be stronger when he gets to the big league.  The arm is a delicate thing and they try to preserve that.  My thinking, they don't throw enough when they come to the big league.  They don't throw enough in the minor league.
Speaker 1: So they don't get seasoned properly.
Speaker 2: But they're all groomed to go out and pitch six innings.  I think, what do they call it--a good start, a good start is when you go seven and give up three runs.  So that's what they look at.  Drysdale, Koufax, Fergie Jenkins [Ferguson Jenkins], they would have been so unhappy with that, you know.  Because when they went out, they didn't want you to get nothing.  And that's, that's why they're Hall of Fame players.  Because they have a certain thing in they mind that they wanted to do.  Fergie and I used to have a thing in spring training.  We would put our numbers, what we plan on doing, it was like a goal, you know.  We'd put it in an envelope and stick it in the top of our locker.  And at the end of the year, you know, writers would come around and see how close did we come to it, you know.  And most of the time it was right there.
Story_ID: 631688
Speaker 1: When we were talking about when you were being scouted and you were saying--I was asking you if you had any idea, you know, how good you were and you said you knew you were one of the better players.  But did they keep statistics on you guys when you were--when Ivory, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Ivy Griffin.
Speaker 1: Griffin, he came to scout you.  Did they have stats that they could look at?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I don't think they had any numbers that they would put down, just as performance.
Speaker 1: Just what you looked like that day that they came.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  They didn't--you know they might have scouted me that day, or might have scouted me the next week.  But insofar as going to the general manager or the guy that owned the club, cause we didn't have no general manager.  Going to the owner, certainly he's not gonna keep any stats.  You know, but--
Speaker 1: So he couldn't tell how many home runs you hit.
Speaker 2: No, no.  They didn't, they didn't have that.  They didn't keep up with it.  They just followed you for three or four days and they recognize you could do different things on a baseball field.  They say, well if he develops, you know he might make a good baseball player.  All it is is taking a chance, you know.  You sign, you get a bulk of players, you know.  Like when I signed, all the guys in the minor league.  You might have had a hundred, two hundred players in spring training.  You might only get two or three, two or three of those players that play in the big league.  But it just--the numbers, you get a lot of players, so somebody pops up and is a good baseball player.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's conceivable that somebody could, a scout could show up and a player could be having a bad couple days, be in a slump and he never gets picked.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: He could be the best guy.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But if there's a lot of talk about a ballplayer, you know, you might see him more than two or three times.  And he could be in a slump, okay.  The player could be in a slump.  But that don't stop you from seeing good things a guy could do.  You know he might, he could have his troubles, but he still swings the bat good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He might hit the ball good, it might be at somebody, you know.  He might have trouble in the outfield, but the ground is bad.  You see him the next time and he's making great plays, you know.  Because the fields, they not Major League [Major League Baseball] fields, you playing in the minor league, you know in semi-pro ball.  They not manicured as they are in the big league.
Speaker 1: And as you said, when the Bears [Chicago Bears] played at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois], the Wrigley Field outfield wasn't necessarily that great.
Speaker 2: No, especially left field because that was the end zone.  They would bring in portable stands in right field and you ran from home plate to left field.  That's how the park was set up, the field was set up.  And after the first of the year, you know, because you're in Chicago [Illinois], you can't, you can't sod.  You know you could sod right after the season, but it's not gonna take 'til the weather gets warm.  You know, everything is--you can step on it and you know the sod will slide out from under you.  It'll be bumpy, you know.  But you learned to deal with it, you know, until they moved.
Story_ID: 631689
Speaker 1: So you had a great first year for a rookie, one of the better years a rookie has ever had.  You said you hit a record number of home runs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty-five home runs, still stands for the Chicago Cubs.  And the way it seems, it'll be there.  You know twenty-five home runs for a rookie coming up to the big league is unheard of.  You know you come up, you might you know, hit nine home runs here, you hit ten home runs there.  But I played on a lot of ball games, I got a chance to play.  And with the twenty-five home runs I think it was like eighty-six runs batted in.  At that year, 1961, Willie Davis was picked to be the Rookie of the Year.  And I'm coming from Houston [Houston Buffaloes] not knowing that I was gonna have the year I had in the big leagues, so I started to take off.  You know right after the season started and put some good numbers on the board.  So I became the Rookie of the Year.
Speaker 1: That's quite a ballplayer too.  Willie Davis is the brother of Tommy Davis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they weren't brothers.
Speaker 1: They weren't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I thought they were brothers.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, they're not related.  Yeah, Tommy and Willie Davis, yeah.  They wasn't brothers.  Yeah, and Tommy Davis, I still see Tommy playing a lot of golf tournaments now.  And Willie Davis, still living out in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Tommy Davis once bat .340 something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, drove in a lot of runs.  You know he drove in like 160 runs or something, fifty-something runs.  Yeah he was a good player, good hitter.  He spent one year in Chicago [Illinois], here.  When Leo Durocher had a club, he got Tommy Davis here to come off the bench to help us.
Speaker 1: Now who was the manager when you were in Chicago?
Speaker 2: When I first came to Chicago, Bob Scheffing was the manager.  And then he left, and we had Bob Kennedy was the manager, and Charlie Metro, and I went through that College of Coaches that the Cubs used to have a long time ago.  Did you hear that?
Speaker 1: No, what's the College of Coaches?
Speaker 2: Well Mr. Wrigley [Philip K. Wrigley] I think after the--I guess it was about '63 [1963] or '64 [1964], somewhere through in there, '66 [1966], Mr. Wrigley felt that we don't need a manager.  We need coaches, we need four to be in the minor league, we had four to be in the Major League [Major League Baseball].  And they would rotate these guys.  And they called it the College of Coaches.  And nobody believed that it would work but Mr. Wrigley because he signed the check, paid for it, that's what they did.  And that was a time, I think that was the time Lou Brock was here.  But you get four guys on a Major League level, and after they stay up for like three weeks, they would go to the minor leagues, and they would learn the players in the minor league while these guys run the Major League club.  So they would rotate, they would rotate.  And if you were a good--the only advantage it had, if you were a minor league player doing good, okay, and you would open that guy's eyes when they go to the minor league if he gets a chance again, he thinks you might play the big league.  Because he's seen you, that's the only advantage.  But all the other stuff, you know it was because Mr. Wrigley wanted, that's what, that's what, that's what we did.
Speaker 1: This is Phil Wrigley of Wrigley Chewing Gum [Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Wrigley Chewing Gum, yes.
Speaker 1: And they owned the team then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they owned the team.  And that was the time you had one owner ball clubs, you know, a sole owner.  Now I think that's unheard of.  You know you got a sinecure of guys, a group of guys, big corporations and stuff like that.  But when Wrigley owned the club, when Charlie Finley, you know, different guys like that, White Sox [Chicago White Sox], you only had one ownership and that was all they did.  Yeah, but he thought it would work but it didn't, we still didn't win.
Story_ID: 631690
Speaker 1: What kind of season did the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] have your rookie year?
Speaker 2: I think we finished about, I would say about five or six out of eight teams.  Yeah because we had guys, we had guys to swing the bat, you know, that was the--'61 [1961] was the year that the offense was great because that was Roger Maris hitting the sixty-one home runs and Mickey Mantle.  Everybody was swinging the bat good that year.  The pitching I guess wasn't there, and we scored a lot of runs, we scored a lot of runs but we didn't win ballgames because we were losing nine to eight or ten to nine.  You know you had Banks [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks], myself, you know, and Santo [Ron Santo] on the ball club.  Matter of fact, we didn't start really winning until '66 [1966] when Fergie [Ferguson Jenkins] came from the Cardinals [sic. Philadelphia Phillies] and you start to get Kenny Holtzman [Ken Holtzman], Fergie Jenkins, Bill Hands, you get some great pitching, and we was still having good years, so we kind of put that together so we started winning some ballgames.
Speaker 1: In '61 [1961] I think the Reds [Cincinnati Reds] went to the World Series that year, but they were destroyed by the Yankees [New York Yankees].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '61 [1961], yeah.  It could have.  Frank [Frank Robinson] and Vada [Vada Pinson] was great ball players then.  Had Gordy Coleman, a big first baseman, yeah.  Who else they had?  Bench wasn't there at the time, yeah.  They had Frank, they had--I forget who they had now, but they always had a good hitting ball club (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Leo Cardenas.
Speaker 2: Leo, yeah he was there, shortstop, yeah.
Speaker 1: So the Cubs--so but you were Rookie of the Year.  Then--so through this-- when did they start this College of Coaches?  You said mid-'60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Mid-'60s [1960s], somewhere through in there, yeah, mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: So when did Durocher [Leo Durocher] come over from--
Speaker 2: Durocher, after we had a terrible 1965 season, Mr. Wrigley [Philip K. Wrigley] wanted a guy to come in and try to change the whole concept of the club.  Leo had been out of baseball for about ten years.  He was doing announcing for CBS or NBC, and Mr. Wrigley told him he wanted him to manage the ball club.  And say you get what you, you get what you want.  You can trade players, get players in, carte blanche, you got it.  So that was the first year we trained in Long Beach, California, this was 1966, the first year Leo came with the club.  And we was in transition because Mr. Wrigley thought that Mesa, Arizona where we trained at, they were supposed to build a minor league complex, but they didn't do it.  And he snatched the club from Mesa, Arizona and we didn't have a place to train.  We trained in Long Beach, California.  I was living in Los Angeles [California] at the time, you know I--the wife [Shirley Williams] had a sister there.  So we was staying with them, I used to drive to Long Beach every morning to go down and practice.  But when Leo took the club over, he came right in and said, "I'm the manager of the ball club, I make the decisions," and that was it.  We had Fergie, Fergie came over as a relief pitcher from the Phillies.  He said, "You're going to be a starter."  Kenny Holtzman was out throwing and Leo and I were standing behind the batting cage, good fastball, good curveball.  And Leo said, "This guy could win in the big leagues right now."  That's how he knew the players, because he'd been around them.  And Kenny Holtzman had to go in the [U.S. military] service.  He was in the service, they could get players in the service, where they would have to spend two years.  So he went and every Sunday he'd come back and start a game.  I think he was 8-0, he came back and won games for us.  And we had Bill Hands, you know, the pitch.  So we--Rich Nye who lives right here in Chicago [Illinois].  So we got some pitching.  And I remember we finished like seventh, you know, in '65 [1965], something like that.  And Leo said, "This is not a sixth or seventh place ball club."  And I think that time of the expansion.  He said, "This is not a seventh place ball club," no it wasn't, we finished tenth, we finished at the bottom that year.  But from that time on, we started, you know, started to pick up.
Speaker 1: What happened that first year?  You had the ingredients but it just hadn't gelled?
Speaker 2: Hadn't gelled yet, hadn't gelled yet.  Guys were here, you know, throughout all those losing seasons.  Matter of fact, we didn't know how to win, you go out and lose a ballgame and you think about that ballgame for the next two, you know.  And then you had to get beyond that.  If you lose a ballgame, forget about that, go out because everything starts anew, you know, you go out the next day.
Story_ID: 631691
Speaker 1: You often read sportswriters write about, these guys don't know how to win.  Is that what that's about?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  And I always said, I always said and I experienced this when I went with the Oakland A's [Oakland Athletics].  I experienced it here my last couple of years.  And this is what I tell the grandkids, my grandson, he's fifteen, sixteen years old.  I say, "You got to learn how to lose before you win."  I say, "You don't accept it, but you got to learn how to lose.  You got to think about what you did in that particular game and forget about it.  Because if you think about the loss tomorrow when you're playing, you're going to lose that game.  Take the loss, go to the next game," and that's what I mean learning how to lose.  'Cause a lot of guys don't, don't do that.  They play a game and--like the guys go up to the plate, okay.  Guy goes up to the plate, he pops up.  And he feels bad about it, you know.  But he goes back up to the plate thinking about, you know, what he did last time, and he gets that same ball, he'll pop up again because he's thinking about it.  Like a player, you tell a player, say, go up there, don't swing at a high pitch.  The first thing he does is swing at a high ball right here.  You know you put it on his mind.  And this is why you got to clear your mind.  Every pitch is different, every at-bat is different.  And that's why you go up and don't, you know, try to hash out the last at-bat.  And I guess that's why good athletes are successful.  They go out and they have a bad day, they feel the next day they gonna come back and have a good day.  They don't dwell on the negative.  I think if you're not--if you're having bad times, that's what happens.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: The A's, the ball club I said, you know when I went out there, these guys would go out--course they had the confidence too because they had won '72 [1972], '73 [1973] and '74 [1974], I went there in '75 [1975].  We still won the division but Boston [Boston Red Sox] beat us three in a row.  But when they lose a game, they walk out the clubhouse just they won.  Because they forget about it.  You know, they go out and do the same dang thing they did, go out and have fun, you know.  And they come back the next day with a fresh mind.  You might look over there and a couple of guys'd be fighting in the clubhouse.  Well, they did all that stuff, you know.  It was a different, it's a different breed.
Speaker 1: Oakland A's, they come out of that Charlie Finley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they went down, they went down to, they went down to the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], they went down and played and played the Dodgers in the World Series.  And Blue Moon Odom and Rollie Fingers, they started a fight right in the clubhouse during a workout.  Yeah they used to do all--Bill North and Reggie Jackson, they was in, in Detroit [Michigan].  They had a big fight in Detroit.  Yeah, guys would come in the clubhouse, you know, it was something.  It was a maverick, I guess because the Oakland Raiders, they, you know the Oakland A's, all of them, these was mavericks.
Speaker 1: Yeah the A's did seem like a maverick kind of outfit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: White shoes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did their own thing.  The Oakland Raiders did too.  You know you had some wild, wild bunch of guys.  You know, but they won.  They won.  Because they went out and played.  They played hard.  If they'd lost, you ain't gonna lose two.  You just gonna lose that one game.  So let's go out and play tomorrow.  Play like we won the game.
Story_ID: 631692
Speaker 1: Now this is a different culture than the Chicago Cubs.  This might be a good time to talk about this.  But the--one of the most baffling things to me is how a franchise over the course of a hundred years, and this is true for the Bears [Chicago Bears] and the Cubs, and other teams too.  They have a team personality, and it doesn't seem to make sense.  Especially when the owners change, the management changes.  The only thing that stays the same is the uniform and the culture stays the same too, for some reason.  It doesn't seem to make any sense.  'Cause players come from all over the country.  You're from Alabama.  [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks is from someplace else.
Speaker 2: Texas.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know everybody comes--yeah, they all come from different places.  Ron Santo's from someplace else.  Everybody comes together and yet year after year there's this cloud over the Cubs as if it's the same bunch of guys.  But it's not, it changes all the time.  So what, what is--we've heard of the curse of the billy goat and all this.  What is the--what is it about Cubs' culture that keeps--
Speaker 2: The ballplayers themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah the ballplayers themselves.  I don't think the goat has anything to do with you losing.  Although sometimes you think it does.  But you know as I, as I was beginning to mention when that Bartman [Steve Bartman], you know, messed with that ball down there, that wasn't the play that killed us.  We had a ball hit to Gonzalez [Alex Gonzalez] at shortstop, he didn't make the double play.  We had in the next--
Speaker 1: This is the playoffs back in 2004 [sic. 2003] I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yeah and then--no that was--yeah, 2004, yeah.  And then Prior [Mark Prior] gave up a double to left center field right after that happened.  So it's the players themselves.  You know you get guys coming in and you get guys--like Dusty [Dusty Baker] when he--Dusty first came, and he changed the whole concept of the club.  Why not us?  And the guys lived with that, guys did that.  And that's when we went all the way to the playoffs, you know after the first year.  We had a good year the first year.  And that's the kind of things that guys got to keep in their mind, you know, it's not the billy goat, it's the players going out there and playing.  And if you go out there and don't have good years, you ain't gonna win.  I think the biggest thing that happened to us--I like to think we didn't lose, the Mets [New York Mets] won.  Because we won a lot of ball games that year.
Speaker 1: Talking about the '69 [1969] Cubs.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969] Cubs, yeah.  Yeah we, we had a great, fantastic year and we played good enough to win.  The Mets just played .700 baseball the last month, just overtaking us because they had good pitching.  But you know the players--I don't think they have that negative mind, you know, going through the clubhouse and talking to the guys.  It's just the players going out there playing and having great years.
Story_ID: 631693
Speaker 1: Seems to me it might be--you think the general population is superstitious.  You know a lot of people are.  You go to the average bingo game, you'll see little trinkets on the tables, people think they're gonna--but baseball players more than probably any other players in any other sport are statistically measured all the time.  What's your batting average, what's your fielding percentage, what's your on-base percentage, slugging.  They come up with a new statistic every year.
Speaker 2: Sure they do.
Speaker 1: Just to measure the performance of a ballplayer.  Are ballplayers, do they tend to be more superstitious because of all this measurement all the time, or--?
Speaker 2: I know they're superstitious.  I don't know about the measurement.  There was a time, there was a time, you know, you didn't have the batting average posted on the scoreboard.  You didn't know what you was hitting, you know, 'til you look in the paper or because a lot of guys didn't, you know, write it out and you know, add it up and figure it out.  But now after every at-bat, you can look up there and see what you're hitting.  I think this has hurt the game a little bit, you know.  The guys look up there, guys look up there certain times they have the guns on, the speed gun.  And they throw the ball and all of a sudden they look up there and see how fast the ball is traveling, you know.  And all that stuff.  Maybe they're not superstitious, it's so much--you can get too much information, you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You see the guys, he start off throwing ninety-one, now he's throwing eighty-five.  Does that encourage the batters to--now we can get it.
Speaker 2: No, that encourage the manager to get his butt out of there (laughter).  Yeah, that's what that encourages, yeah.  Because he's losing it, you know.
Speaker 1: If a guy sees himself with a low batting average on the board, does that kind of take his--I mean how, does he--do you think most of them respond I'm going to raise it up, or do they respond, oh, I'm stuck.
Speaker 2: I'm gone raise, well they look at it and say I'm stuck on .240.  I'm gone try to get to .241, you know.  And I think they look at that and they might press a little bit too hard.  You know instead of going out and playing, and then letting it take care of itself.  Tomorrow let's add it up, you know.  It's just like the whole season.  You know you go, you go, you play, you play, you play, you play.  At the end of the season, you know, you look and see what you got.  You have an idea of what you're doing, but--insofar as the exact numbers, you don't know.  You just go out there and play 154 games, 162 games.  Let's add it up at the end of the year.
Story_ID: 631694
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about some of the players on that '69 [1969] team.  Now this is one of the most celebrated Cubs [Chicago Cubs] teams of all time.
Speaker 2: It's the most celebrated team that haven't won a pennant, haven't won a World Series in all sports.  If you talk about that team, you know there's a couple of guys.  Santo [Ron Santo] and I were in AA baseball together while Ernie [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks] was in the big league.  And we came with the Cubs, Santo came up in '59 [1959], I came up in 1960.  And we went to different clubs.  We had got rid of Lou Brock at the time, you know.  We went to the Giants [San Francisco Giants] and got two players that was really, really helpful.  We got Randy Hundley and the other guy, Bill Hands became one of the starters there.  So you got two players from the Giants, and of course going over to Philadelphia [Philadelphia Phillies] and get Fergie Jenkins [Ferguson Jenkins].  We had lost Kenny Hubbs [Ken Hubbs] to a airplane accident, and Beckert [Glenn Beckert] came in from Boston [Boston Red Sox].  We signed him from Boston, along with Don Kessinger, who was in the minor league system first.  And he was only a right handed hitter, but he had moves like Marty Marion, he was a good fielder.  And Leo [Leo Durocher] posed, Leo posed the question to him saying, "Can you make yourself a switch hitter?"  And he told him, said, "If you make yourself a switch hitter, I'll bring you to the big league next year."  So determination of Kessinger in making himself a switch hitter, wanting to play in the big league, he did that.  And Santo, I was the left fielder, Jim Hickman came from the Mets [New York Mets].  But as you noticed through those years, we never did--everybody when they come up to me, and they can name the catcher, the first baseman, the second baseman, the shortstop.  That's when Ernie had moved to first base of course, the left fielder, they could name the right fielder.  But there's always a question mark until you mention what's his name, Don Young's [Donald Young] name, who played center field.  We never did have a center fielder, and that's the backbone of the ball club.  When you got a center fielder, I always thought the backbone of a ball club is the catcher, the pitcher, you got some pitching, double play combination, and center field.  When you got that, you got the backbone of a ball club.  We didn't have the backbone.  We didn't have the center fielder.  And I think that hurt us because we were playing in New York [New York] and all we wanted him to do is catch the ball.  And I think in New York he dropped the ball up there.  And the next one he tried to run through the wall.  And this kid today, he thought he lost the pennant for us.  It was a long time before he came around any of us, and that's how baseball can get you, you know.  He missed that ball in New York and we had a fantasy camp which Randy Hundley has every year.  And he was invited to the fantasy camp.  It was a long time before he came.  And for him to walk in that clubhouse in Arizona and face those guys, and it was like ten years, you know since he did that, it was tough for him.  Because he thought he had did something wrong.  It's just like the guy down in Dallas [Texas], you know, didn't put the ball down, you know for the guy to kick the field goal.  He's gonna live with that, you know, he always--in his mind he always says, you know, I let the club down, I lost it.  I lost it for them.
Speaker 1: Well Leon Durham had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leon Durham had the same incident, Bill Buckner same incident.  Yeah they--it takes them a long time to get over that.  I think what happened, you know Bill Buckner, because Boston won it, he kind of got over the hump you know.  And I think it--Durham, he's still, he missing that ball.  You can hit that ball to him a hundred times, he'll catch it 99.9 because he was a great fielder.
Story_ID: 631695
Speaker 1: So '69 [1969], you all [Chicago Cubs] won ninety-three games and you were like tearing up the league up until when the Mets [New York Mets] turned it on.
Speaker 2: Well the first day of the season, you know, it started the excitement for that whole '69 [1969] season.  We were losing the ball game and Leo [Leo Durocher] called Willie Smith up there to hit.  Willie Smith hit a home run and we won the ball game and I think we rolled off about eleven or twelve or thirteen in a row.  You know we were winning, we playing great baseball.  The excitement, you know when you go to the ballpark.  There could be ten, fifteen thousand people waiting on the outside to get in the ballpark and this is like nine o'clock in the morning.  You know we'd go out to the park and see all these people and that's the time we had to walk across the street to get to our car.  We had to sign fifteen, twenty autographs before we get in the car, you know.  But it was exciting, the whole year.  You know we were, we were winning ball games.  I mean if we had to have a shutout, Bill Hands would pitch it or Fergie [Ferguson Jenkins] would.  If we need a home run, Ernie [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks] or myself or Santo [Ron Santo] hit it.  Great plays when they--we were playing solid baseball.  We were doing everything right.  And we did everything practically right up until the last day.  You know a couple of times we made mistakes on the field.  But we still could have got through it and won.  But during August, during August I think, we were like eleven games, I think leading by eleven games.  And then you could see the thing start to tumble.  We lost a few ball games, the guys weren't catching the ball.  Couple of guys went in terrible slumps.  But as I said, we still did enough to win, but the Mets kept on winning, the Mets kept on winning.  Al Weis had about one or two home runs in his whole Major League [Major League Baseball] career.  He hit a home run off of Phil Regan to win a ball game, you know?  And in New York you see pictures of Agee [Tommie Agee] sliding into home plate, and Randy Hundley tagging him for an out, and the umpire called him safe.  Randy jumped sky high and here's Leo coming off the bench.  And we just, we just couldn't get it back.  The Mets' pitching and the players, they overtaking us.  You know the pitching.  They came on and played great.  As I say, we played good enough to win.  The Mets--we didn't lose it, the Mets just beat us.  But it was an exciting season that year.  And I think from that time--this is when the crowds started coming to Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois] because there was always five, six hundred thousand.  You know you go to the ballpark, they didn't open up the upper deck until weekends.  But once that '69 [1969] season was finished, there was 1,600,000 people came to that ballpark, and that was unheard of.  You know to Wrigley Field.  And I thought, I think from that moment on, you know it's been people coming every day.  You know it's been crowds every day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's probably the best attended ballpark in the Major Leagues, I mean people pack it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To not have won a pennant, to go through the seasons that we've had.  But there's always hope, you know, for the people.
Story_ID: 631696
Speaker 1: Just like this year.  You know you go out and you sign a big name player, Soriano [Alfonso Soriano] coming to the ball team.  You got Lou Piniella, that's gonna be exciting, he's gonna throw a couple bags, throw his hats and stuff.  And a couple more guys I think--DeRosa [Mark DeRosa] playing second base, he's a pretty ballplayer for us.  It's gonna be exciting.  The thing is, you know, just the pitching.  I don't care where you're playing at or how you play, you got to have the pitching.  If you don't have the pitching, you ain't gonna win, yeah.  'Cause they pull you through when you're not swinging the bat real well.  You know you might have somebody, a pitcher, if you're not swinging the bat real well, a pitcher knows what he got to do--go out there and throw a one or two-hitter.  And I think Zambrano [Carlos Zambrano] can do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Zambrano can--
Speaker 1: Zambrano's gonna be the leader of this pitching staff.  Really exciting, yeah he's a good pitcher.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] seem to have had bad luck with injuries with Prior [Mark Prior] and Wood [Kerry Wood] especially.
Speaker 1: Yeah they have, they have.  When those two guys going, it's like clockwork, you know.  But you can't keep them healthy.  They said both of them are throwing the ball now, looking forward to spring training.  I am, to see what kind of shape they're in and what they doing insofar as throwing, you know.  But if we could get those guys back.  I think at this point, you know what has happened over the years, you can't depend on them.  Because they've been hurt every year.  If they come, fine.  You know, you get some pitching.  And if you get these guys later on to help you win, it will be fine.  But don't depend on them.  Because they've set you back the last three or four years.
Story_ID: 631697
Speaker 1: Your best year, at least the year you won the Most Valuable Player Award, was 1972.
Speaker 2: Strangely enough, I didn't win the Most Valuable Player.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It's just like you and I think I should have won it, you know.
Speaker 1: You didn't get it that year?
Speaker 2: I finished two years behind Bench [Johnny Bench].  Nineteen seventy [1970] I finished second, 1972 I finished second.  Nineteen seventy [1970] what'd I do?  Hit forty-two home runs, drove in 139 runs, scored 130 or something.  No MVP.  Nineteen seventy-two [1972], I won the batting title, had about 38, 39, 40 home runs, drove in over a hundred runs, the wife [Shirley Williams] and I was in Hawaii.  I said, "I'm getting ready to celebrate, you know, we're going to get that award and we're going go out and have a bottle of wine, we're going to really enjoy it."  And it came down that Bench won it again, the two years I finished second behind him.  I was so disappointed.  And it hurt me that next year too.  I had to--you know the first of the year I'm going out and playing I say you know I say what can, what more can you do, you know?  So I had to get it from my mind and go out and play and have a good year.  I think I wound up hitting over .300 that particular year.  But I thought for sure out of one of those years, you know, to have me on the ball club that I was on.  I think Ernie [HistoryMaker Ernie Banks] had gone, '72 [1972] I think he was right at the edge and he wanted to leave and I was--the games we won, I had something to do with most of those games and that's, that's what you call a Most Valuable Player, you know, he's out there.  If he's not on the field, where would you have been?  You look at, you know, Bench, the Big Red Machine, they had a lot of guys around.  So that's what I was looking at.  But I didn't get it, I was really disappointed.  A lot of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I thought you did, I guess--
Speaker 2: A lot of people think that way.  You know a lot of people said, the year you won the Most Valuable Player, 1970 or '72 [1972], not too many times, not too many times you know you get a book about like this with all the stats and numbers in it about this big, okay.  And my picture was on there.  The Player of the Year.  Not too many times you get the Player of the Year and don't get the Most Valuable Player.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I was the exception.  That's why I thought, you know I was getting prepared for it, to win the Most Valuable Player.
Speaker 1: So you're Player of the Year but not the Most Valuable Player.
Speaker 2: Not the Most Valuable Player.  And most of the time when you're the Player of the Year, you get the Most Valuable Player.
Story_ID: 631698
Speaker 1: You started in sixty--'59 [1959].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Came up in '59 [1959].  Over the years I mean was it--by the time you got in, I mean there had been major black players in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] for ten, eleven years I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: At that point.  How did, how did things evolve for black players I guess from the time that you came in to the time that you stopped playing in '75 [1975] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did things evolve, I mean did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When you first come up to the big league there was a thing and most clubs did it.  You know you had two black players on a ball club.  You know most of the time they roomed together and did certain things together.  There wasn't too many black players on the bench.  Because when you come up to the big league, you know back in the '50s [1950s], you had to play.  You gonna be a player, you're not gonna sit up here and make this six thousand dollars, what they were paying.  And once you got to the big league, every year you had to have a good year.  You had to have a good year.  And there were times you know when I first came to the big league, the hotels, you know like when Houston [Texas], Houston came in the big league in '62 [1962] right?  I had played in Houston, 1960, and we were living at the hotel out by the Astrodome [Houston Astrodome; NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas].  And we could live in the hotel, but we couldn't come down in the dining room.  This was 1962.  And that made it tough, you know, but now you know guys could do anything, go anywhere.  But those were conditions that was happening at the time and that's what we went through.  But those are some of the changes you know, in baseball.
Speaker 1: So I guess there as the Civil Rights Movement progressed, things got--
Speaker 2: Sure.  You know the voting rights.  Yeah as the Civil Rights Movement, you know, being from Alabama, I didn't move to Chicago [Illinois] until '66 [1966].  And every year after the season, I would pack up my belongings and I would drive back to Mobile [Alabama].  And that was several times that, you know going through Montgomery [Alabama], going through Birmingham [Alabama], you would see National Guard on every corner.  My wife [Shirley Williams] was scared to death, you know.  And we be driving through going home.  They'd be standing on the corner, National Guard just protecting the city.  I guess when they had the thing down in Montgomery, you know, down there.  But we'd be driving back and you know it was terrible.  You had a hotel that in the black area you had to stay in.  You couldn't stop anywhere you wanted to.  So you got to make way to this hotel.  You didn't know where it was.  So it was, it was tough traveling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But all that's been changed now, thank God.
Story_ID: 631699
Speaker 1: Your last couple of years you played for the Oakland A's [Oakland Athletics].
Speaker 2: Oakland A's, yes.  And in 1975 and '76 [1976].  I remember the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] were going through a youth movement again.  And John Holland and I, we had a good rapport with each other and I went in and told him that I didn't want to go through no youth movement.  This is when you start bringing up a lot of young guys.
Speaker 1: So you know you're not gonna win that year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know you're not gonna win.  And I said, "No, I want to go with a ball club that has a chance to win."  That's the one thing I hadn't done is played in a World Series.  I've done everything else, you know.  And I said, "I'll be happy to go with a club that has a chance to win the World Series."  So the next morning I go hunting and Charlie Finley called the house and talked to the wife [Shirley Williams].  And he said he wanted to talk to Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Williams] and she said Billy's not home.  He said, "Where is he?"  "He's gone hunting.  He don't want to talk to nobody today."  And she said, "He'll call you when he gets back home."  And later on when I got home that night, Charlie called me.  Matter of fact, I called Charlie.  And we started talking, and he said, "I want you to come with the Oakland A's."  And he said, "I want you to come out there and play."  I said sure, I could play.  You know, you put me in the outfield.  Said, "I don't want you to play, I just want you to be the DH [designated hitter]."  And I wasn't, you know I wasn't--DH is good, but I did it sometime in spring training, you know.  I said okay.  So he started--I said, "The only reason I'd come out there is you give me a two year contract and it's gonna cover 1975 season, '76 [1976] season, then I'm out of baseball, I'm gone."  I've had enough.  He said, "You'll play again."  I said, "No I'm not.  I just want a two year contract to play out in Oakland, okay."  And I felt because they had won in '72 [1972], '73 [1973], and '74 [1974], they had a good chance of winning because everybody was there except Catfish Hunter.  That was the year he went to the Yankees [New York Yankees].
Speaker 1: Yankees, yeah.
Speaker 2: And you know he was saying that--started talking about Bear Bryant, which is a good friend of his, you know.  He said, "Bear's a good friend of mine, we grew up together," and all this kind of stuff.  And I said, "Charlie let's get back to Billy.  Do we have it or don't?"  You know, and he came back and said you got it.  And I signed a two year contract.  I went with the Oakland A's.  And right after I agreed to go to Oakland, Baltimore [Baltimore Orioles] called the Cubs, and the Cubs could have got a lot of ballplayers from Baltimore.  They were gonna make a trade.  They wanted me to come up there and they said, "Well we'll give you ten thousand dollars more."  That was big money then you know.  And we'll give ten thousand dollars, we'll give you that salary what they're gonna pay you and we'll give you ten thousand dollars more.  And I told them, I said, "No, I've agreed, I've agreed to go with the Oakland A's," and that's where I went.  And we got a chance to play in the playoff, you know Boston [Boston Red Sox] beat us three in a row.  So that was my closest chance to play in the World Series.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't play that much in '76 [1976] did you?
Speaker 2: No.  Chuck Tanner, Chuck Tanner--first year I went out there Alvin Dark was the manager and I was the DH.  I wound up hitting about twenty-three homeruns in the big ballpark out there.  Hit about two, I guess about .250, .260, low batting average.  And I got a chance to play, though, the DH.  The next year I was in and out of the lineup, I was in and out of the lineup.  My batting average wasn't no good, I just got disgusted.  Chuck Tanner was the manager of the ball club.  And I say I had enough.  I went home and I told Charlie, I said, "Send me my release."  So when he sent it to me, you know we got on the phone.  He said, "You'll play again."  I said, "No I won't."  I said, "I've had enough."  And Seattle [Seattle Mariners] called, he said, "Seattle wants you to come with their ball club," you know.  I said, "No, I've had enough."  And then I had some investments with Herman Franks out in Salt Lake City, Utah.  And Herman was managing the Cubs at the time.  And Herman--we sit up, I flew out to Salt Lake City, Utah to get all this straight.  And Herman and I got to talking, you know.  And Herman said, "Why don't you come back with Chicago?"  I said Herman, I say if you get me $125,000, which was nothing, you know, they'd win that money when I get back.  I said, "If you get me a contract for 125 I'll come back and play for one year."  So he said, "I don't know, let me get back to you."  So he called over here and they didn't want to do it.  They just wanted me to come to spring training as a look-see guy.  I said, "No, I don't need that, I don't need that."  I said, "I'm out of here."  So they wouldn't, they didn't want to give me 125.  And I said, "That's it, I'm out of here."  So I retired in '76 [1976], my last year.
Story_ID: 631700
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were just basically tired of playing ball at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I was tired of being a DH [designated hitter].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the DH had got me in a stage where a lot of people had said you can come with this club and be the DH, you know.  And I didn't, I didn't particularly go for that.  Matter of fact again, I had got tired of it too.
Speaker 1: Was your fielding--had your fielding suffered any in the last few years or something?  Or why did they always want to--
Speaker 2: I was thirty-eight years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was thirty-eight years old and then I guess I was one of those individuals always wanted to finish at the top.  I didn't want to stay around 'til, you know, you feel yourself going down and people forget about all the good things that you did.  And I just had enough.
Speaker 1: At one time you had the Major League [Major League Baseball] record for the most consecutive games started of any player in Major League history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Eleven hundred and seventeen games.  When I came up--and you know Larry [Larry Crowe], you go through stages when you're compiling a record like that.  As I mentioned, there was eight teams in the National League and a lot of guys that were pretty decent ballplayers, they was in the minor league.  And you had to fight to keep your job up here.  And it started when I began to play.  And I wasn't swinging the bat real well, for coming up from AAA.  I wasn't swinging the bat real well.  So I started making a lot of outs.  And the manager sat me on the bench and I guess the next twenty games, fifteen or twenty games, I'm sitting on the bench watching.  And I'm saying to myself, when I get in the lineup again, they will have to tear the uniform off.  That's the first stage.  You're trying to keep somebody from getting your job after you get in the next time.  Bob Will, you know he was a left fielder and he came up with a bad back or something and had to sit on the bench.  And I got a chance to play again.  It seemed like everything clicked.  You know after sitting on the bench watching and all of a sudden here everything began to come together.  You know, I'm swinging the bat real well, getting the hits, playing good left field.  But I wanted to secure my job.  You know I stayed on the baseball field, that's the first stage.  Second stage is you get the numbers.  You start getting the numbers and the number was 895 I think to break Stan Musial's record.  I got to that record and I wanted to see how many games I could play after then.  And I got it up to I guess about a thousand, over Musial, that's the second stage.  The third stage you, you go into it's like, you got to be on the field for your team to win.  And that carried me through the rest of the games of the 1,117.  I wanted to be on the field to help my team win because I didn't they could win unless I was out there with them.  And that's called team unity.  That's those stages you go through.  Well a lot of guys through the league, same thing Ripken [Cal Ripken, Jr.] had you know.  We talked at one of the All-Star Games.  Guys come up and say, "Why are you playing so much?  Why are you on the field, why are you on the field?"  Why I was on the field?  Because I wanted this, you know, compiling the numbers and that makes you a Hall of Famer.  You give up numbers.  A lot of people didn't understand that.  I'm out there trying to get numbers.  Not knowing I would wear this.
Story_ID: 631701
Speaker 1: So when you retired from Major League Baseball, you didn't have a sense that you were going to be a Hall of Famer at that point?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  No, when you play and compile the numbers, it's in the hands of other people.  You don't know when people vote.  You don't know whether they gone vote for you or not.  You know I start looking at the numbers that I had and they were comparable to some of the guys that been voted in the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York].  But you got to get 75 percent of the votes.  After the first year the numbers was down.  The second year, the numbers began to come up.  Third year, little better.  And then the next year I was in.  You know like about five year wait, that's ten years out of baseball I think, that I went in.  But you don't know whether or not you're going to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah if you wait, if you wait ten years, if you wait ten, fifteen years, you know if you wait twenty years.  Ten years you go to the Veterans Committee [National Baseball Hall of Fame Committee to Consider Managers, Umpires, Executives and Long-Retired Players].  Once you get the call, it's just like yesterday that you were voted in.  You know the thrill of it.  Going in the Hall of Fame knowing that you played this game and you're comparable with some of the greatest players ever put on a uniform.  It's a beautiful time.
Story_ID: 631702
Speaker 1: When you retired from Major League Baseball, now how did you get involved again in baseball?  I guess it's almost obvious to some people that they would look to--
Speaker 2: Well after seventeen, after eighteen years in the game, when I retired in '76 [1976], I just wanted to get away from ball.  Because a lot of the summers, you know I spent time on the baseball field and the four daughters that Shirley [Shirley Williams] and I had, they was teenagers, a couple of them was teenagers, couple of them were younger.
Speaker 1: Did you have to play winter ball?  Did you play--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: You never did that, okay.
Speaker 2: The one year--it's funny you mention that.  The one year that I had an opportunity to play winter ball, it was in AAA.  Right after the AAA season.  Matter of fact, before the AAA season, after playing like seventy-five, eighty ball games.  We were playing in Louisville [Kentucky] and I dove at a ball in Louisville, Kentucky, this was AAA, Houston [Houston Buffaloes].  And I broke my collar bone.  And I had the option to play winter ball that year.  But because I broke my collar bone and I was out six weeks.  When I got back, we were in the playoffs, we were playing Denver [Denver Bears] and I couldn't get my stroke back together.  Denver, Denver beat us, Phil Regan was on that Denver club.  They beat us four in a row.  And the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] told me, said, "No we don't want you to go play winter ball this year.  We just want you to rest and relax because you're gonna be our left fielder."  This was '61 [1961].  So that was the opportunity to go play, but I didn't go play and things worked out for the best, yeah.  And that was the only year.
Speaker 1: Okay, but after you retired, you were just tired of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah I just got away from the game, spent some time with the family.  Because I know that, you know after you play for so many years, that's a lot of--there's a lot of things that happen through the years and you know the wife there, and they got to forfeit a lot of things because I'm playing baseball.  A lot of responsibility.  So I got away from the game and I just spent some time with them.  I was in Walnut Creek [California] at the time and I was in the process of building a home in a little town called Loomis, California.  I went up to that area because that was all, maybe two-bedroom homes and I built a big home up there.  It was unheard of at that time because they had a lot of land.  I bought me a lake and I built a big home in the middle of it.  So I stayed out of the game for that year.  It was tough.  You know after doing something for so many years, you know, you're away from the game.  I go in and switch on the TV and look at a baseball game and I cut it off and I go out there and fish and just enjoy life.  I wanted, I wanted to get away.  And of course my brother [Franklin Williams] was in Sacramento [California].  We did a lot of stuff together, enjoyed, going to Tahoe [Tahoe City, California], Reno [Nevada], we could drive up there in an hour, hour and a half.  But after that year, you know you get the urge again.  You get the urge again to get back in because you miss it.  When you get it in your blood, you miss it.  And after that one year out of baseball, Bob Kennedy, who I played for when I was with the Cubs in '63 [1963].  He called me because I worked with his son [Terry Kennedy], you know, and he became a good hitter.  And he said, "I want you to do something for me, you know."  I said, "What's that, Bob?"  He said, "I want you to work in the minor league for two years.  You know, you'll be working in the minor league for two years.  And after the two years, you'll be a Major League hitting coach.  You'll be back in the Major League."  Now that was the guarantee he gave me.  If somebody had asked me to do it, somebody else had asked me to do it, I wouldn't have did it.  But I did it with the intentions that he told me that after two years in the minor league, you'll be in the Major League.  So I did it and I got back in the game, and of course after being in the minor league for two years, seeing some--you enjoy down there.  Because you see guys making progress, you know the young players.  And you work with them and all of a sudden you see them on a major league roster doing good.  Yeah, you feel good about that.  So I did that for two years in the minor league and of course we were living way out, and you know that's the one reason I sold the place out there and moved back to Chicago [Illinois].  Because I was always traveling and stuff at the time in the minor league, you know.  I was still living there when I was in the minor league but when I came back to Chicago, we sold the place out there and moved back to Chicago.
Story_ID: 631703
Speaker 1: I had a question earlier about like where you lived in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean in those days, and I used to live in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and I was next to a building that people say that [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks owned or used to own, you know.  But you don't really see that anymore.  Seems like nowadays that the black players that come into the Bears [Chicago Bears] or the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] or the White Sox [Chicago White Sox], they don't live in the black community anymore.
Speaker 2: Not too many times, not too many times.  You know they do of course, but as so much I guess opportunities, you know insofar as the school system and that's one of the reasons I moved out to Glen Ellyn [Illinois], I'm out to Glen Ellyn now because the District 87 [Glenbard Township High School District 87] school system is great out there and all my kids went to school out there.  There was a time that was the only place you could live.  I lived at 74th [Street] and Constance [Avenue] and I used to be a part of a building on 79th [Street] and Laflin [Street].  You know we--not lived there but I was part ownership of it.  And of course Ernie lived at 82nd [Street] and Rhodes [Avenue].  We wasn't too far from each other.  But I lived over there for six, seven years.  But you know I--my kids used to go to St. Philip Neri School [St. Philip Neri Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] and after they graduated from there.  So we decided to move out of the area.  We went to Glen Ellyn.  And it was a tough thing to do, but you know you got a family to look after, you got people to raise, you know.  So that's one of the reasons why we did it and it worked out fine.  Because I have two have finished Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia], and I have two that finished Elmhurst College in Elmhurst [Illinois] right there.  So everything has worked out good.
Story_ID: 631704
Speaker 1: Who have been some of the baseball players that made it up to the majors that you coached in the minors?
Speaker 2: Well you got Joe Girardi, Jerome Walton, Dwight Smith, Joe Carter, used to be with Toronto [Toronto Blue Jays], Damon Berryhill, you know used to be a catcher for the Cubs [Chicago Cubs], Rick Wilkins.  That was--you could go on and name a lot of them because all these guys is in the minor league.  I went, I went--Mike Harkey, Heathcliff Slocumb.  Because nineteen, let me see, it was nineteen, I guess '98 [1998] somewhere through in there, when Dallas Green was here.  Dallas asked me to go out and run the instructional league.  So I went out there to do that.  I was the manager and we had a lot of fun.  We would have won it but you know somebody else came in, they was having a big day for me in Mobile [Alabama] so I had to fly down there, go down there and by that time the season was over with when I came back, you know.  But it was enjoyable doing that.  You know, Dallas asked me to do it, I didn't know whether I wanted to do it at first.  But he kept asking me about going down there and do it, so I went down and we had a lot of fun with the guys, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At one point as you said in the beginning, you were the assistant to Andy MacPhail.
Speaker 2: Andy MacPhail, yeah.  Up until last year, yeah he'd been with the Minnesota Twins and he came over here about, I guess about five or six years ago.  And Andy and I have a good rapport because when I was working in the minor league, Andy was like the assistant farm director.  So we used to travel around in the minor league together and we value each other's opinion.  You know now he asked me about a lot of guys and I've--he's asked me some questions about a lot of guys and I've made it comfortable for a lot of people in the Chicago Cubs organization, you know by saying this guy, we keep this guy, this guy is good.  Let's keep this guy, he'll stay.
Speaker 1: Now when I looked at your own scouting evaluation and we were kind of chuckling at it.  But there are some serious, I guess some considerations when you're a scout.  You look at how the player plays, but you also look at his character too, right?
Speaker 2: Sure you do, sure you do.  It's a thing that you know when you're scouting a guy like, you like to get involved in that individual.  You know this--Ivy Griffin the scout that signed me, his wife was in the flowers, she liked the flowers and she would come out and my mother [Jessie Moseley Williams] would talk about flowers.  That's where they got all the stuff about me.  You know talking to my mother and talking about flowers and getting to know the family.  And you used to do that a lot, you know before you sign a guy.  And look at the character of a guy.  Because you sign a guy, you don't know him.  They try to get a lot of information, but not all the time they get what this guy is all about.  And pretty soon if this guy's on the Major League [Major League Baseball] roster doing all kinds of things, you know he finds himself away from the game.  Because I think this is the one thing they do now in baseball and I think football's gonna come to that.  They not gone tolerate the guys that make it bad for the sport, the organization or the league.
Speaker 1: Yeah it seems like it's a lot of it nowadays.  You know the Bears [Chicago Bears] experienced a big embarrassment with Tank Johnson just recently.  Cincinnati Bengals' Chris Henry's been in jail twice I think.  He's a great player, but he--
Speaker 2: I think every sport, you know, need to do a little more scrutiny on the players that are coming in the franchise.  Because you're seeing a lot of that happening now and you should have somebody in that organization you know to maybe have conversation with that individual while they--before they sign them and when they sign when they're here.  You know, just to have conversation with him and, and the dos and don'ts of the wheres and not to go, those kind of things.  We know the player when he get--because you talking about players twenty-one, twenty-two years old.  And they're getting a lot of--a pocketful of money, got a lot of time.  And kids gonna have fun, kids gonna have fun.  But if they know how to have the right fun, it will be great for them, you know the organization and for that individual player.  There's too many guys in sports now having a lot of problems.  You know simply because they don't have any guidance.  That's why a lot of guys, you know I've seen it through the years when a player signs a contract, twenty, twenty-one years old, they have a tendency to bring their mother with them.  Or get their family to move in that city, or buy a home and bring their family with them where they're playing at.  So that will make it a little bit more comfortable.
Story_ID: 631705
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The hopes, you know, of getting more involved in baseball, now, basketball, any sport.  I know in the past years seems like there's a lot of African Americans not signing to play professional baseball.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the numbers are going way down.
Speaker 2: Yeah the numbers are going down.  There was a time in the Ebony magazine they had a spread every year, you know, who's with what team.  And it seems to me there was six or seven African American players on every ball club.  But now I guess with the academies that they have in Puerto Rico, Dominican [Dominican Republic], you know different outside the country, this is where they're getting the players from.  And I like to see that happen here.  You know, when you get the players that go through the academy--and this is, you can find out a lot about the players too.
Speaker 1: So they have baseball academies.
Speaker 2: Sure they do.
Speaker 1: In Dominica, Puerto Rico.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dominican, and they get a kid like fourteen, fifteen years old and just bring him through the ranks of playing baseball.  And once he gets where he signed, you know he signs with a ball club.  But we had one--I think they had a big spread on it about five or six years ago, the commissioner [Bud Selig] was there in Compton, California.  They were supposed to open up this academy.  But I haven't seen or heard nothing about it, you know since it opened.  They could have one on the East Coast, the West Coast, you know have it around.  Because you've got--certainly you got players can play baseball.  But when they play, they're in the inner city and I think scouts are afraid to go in the inner city and scout these guys.  You got some guys can play.  And this is what we got--that's the hope, that's where you want to get back to.  That go in these areas and sign these guys or get these academies where they don't have to go in the area.  They can bring him to the academy.
Story_ID: 631706
Speaker 1: Are you concerned at all, I mean what are your thoughts on the steroids controversy in baseball?  These guys that hit all these home runs at the turn of the century here, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a big thing in the game of baseball.  I know that when Sammy [Sammy Sosa] and Mark McGwire was hitting these home runs, ball was going out of the ballpark and--
Speaker 1: Was jumping off the bat.
Speaker 2: We was getting people in--back in the turnstile and everybody like to see a home run.  I think it misled a lot of kids.  You can win ballgames with home runs.  Sure you can.  But there's other phases of the game you should play.  And everybody leaned towards that home run thereafter.  Because the fanfare, the notoriety they got.  But insofar as the steroids is a big thing now.  And I think the commissioner [Bud Selig] is really working on it now.  I think that signs that came up a couple of days ago because they're unclear about the whole situation when they voted for the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] the other day.  Tony Gwynn and Cal Ripken [Cal Ripken, Jr.], and here's Mark McGwire hitting seventy home runs a year.  And Andre Dawson and the players, you know, all them players above him.  I think he finished like sixth, you know down the line.  But it shows you how cloudy baseball is now.  Because the steroid, they think they're going to call this steroid era when these guys hitting all those home runs.  And this is why the commissioner's trying to clear it up.  Because you don't want that in this game of baseball.  And I think the first offense, the first offense I think is thirty days, you know, up until the last offense you're out of baseball.  And, and this is how they're cleaning it up now.  Because they don't want nothing to taint this game of baseball.  Baseball was here a long time and they've tried everything, you know.  People, cocaine and all this kind of stuff to tear it down.  But it's still going.  And the commissioner has done a great job.  You know, trying to wean out all this stuff.  Trying to get the fans, you know, to really believe that when these guys hit the home run or when these guys hit, have good years, it's because they have the ability, not because they have something in their system that tries to make them good.
Story_ID: 631707
Speaker 1: When you look back at all your years in baseball and both as a player and involved in the management of baseball, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think a lot of people have tried to change the game and the other stuff, you know.  But the game remains the same.  You still got to throw it, you still got to hit it.  I really think that the game has changed in a way that where we played it in the '60s [1960s] insofar as I didn't think it was good, but it happened.  You know guys couldn't stay in there and had three or four home runs.  You know he'll get knocked down, this happened.  Sliding into second base.  Frank Robinson couldn't play now.  Tommie Agee probably couldn't play now.  Because they went in hard and knocked a guy on his butt at second base.  Now you have to come in contact with the bag, or else they'll call you out.  And those kind of things, you know when the game was a game and you'd see all of that.  Guys knocking down people.  You know, they got to protect the players.  They pay them a lot of money and they got to protect them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But insofar as, insofar as change in the game itself.  I don't think there's too many--when Abner Doubleday said you're gonna run ninety feet, you know to first base and seemed like every time it's boom, boom, just like that.  How could he do that?  The pitcher's mound's gonna be sixty feet, six inches.  And you're gonna have some guys could read the ball and see it and hit it, some guys not.  You know, he made that measurement and that was it.  Course they had, you know through the years they've raised the mound.  Bob Gibson got them to raise the mound, you know when they had that low ERA [earned run average].  He had them raise the mound because it was low (laughter).  And you know you have several guys.  The Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] got--their mound used to be real high coming off that mound.  But the game, the game itself, you can't change it.  I think a lot of people try to change it.  You got a lot of managers come in and they try to change the play of the game.  But they can't change it.  Yeah, but it's a good game and I just--you know, say anything just to have the guys to go out there and enjoy it.
Story_ID: 631708
Speaker 1: When you look back at your legacy, I guess you have to look at the hall--you're in the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean so that's pretty much--that's your legacy in baseball, very few--you can't go any higher (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the legacy is there, you know it shows and says you have played the game well.  You've been consistent over the years, twenty or more home runs thirteen years in a row, that's good.  And when you talk about playing for consistency, playing over the 1,117 games, being out there for your team to win.  The batting title, just the Hall of Fame that's, you know, in a nutshell because you don't get to the Hall of Fame unless you have those kind of numbers.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about it when you found out?  Were you surprised or did you?
Speaker 2: Not really surprised.  Because I guess the previous year the numbers was good.  And as I say, you never know when it will happen, you just always have your doubts until it happens because you never know how people vote.  They could vote for you one year and somebody else comes on the ballot, they don't vote for you, you know.  So Jack Lang is the individual who gives you that call, and that was one of the greatest telephone calls I've gotten.  You know I think WGN [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois] was out to the house and I had a lot of friends who have, you know, been around, supported me through the years.  I had them all over to the house.  And when Jack Lang called that evening, said, "I'll give you a call between this time and that time," you know.  It was about a fifteen minute span.  And he said about, let's say about 6:45 to 7:00 or 5:45 to 6:00.  And when that clock hit 5:45, that's the longest fifteen minutes in your life, unless you get it right away.  And when I got that call, we just celebrated, you know.  I have, I have some pictures when I first got the call.  The wife [Shirley Williams] was there and the people out at the park, they were taking pictures of me receiving the call.  It's just a great thing.  You feel real good.  When you get it at that time, you say, "Well being inducted in the Hall of Fame, that's great, that's great."  You think about it.  You think about the first time you put on a pair of baseball shoes.  I went and stole my brother's [Franklin Williams] baseball shoes.  I was little, about ten, eleven years old.  So I went on the grass and started sliding, you know.  So you think about it and you think about the time that you went out there and hit and played and stuff like that.  When it really sinks in, okay it started sinking when you get off the airplane and they have the Hall of Fame van with the Hall of Fame emblem, which they did when I was inducted.  And they drive up to pick you up.  You go to the hotel.  But it really hits you when the commissioner does it.  Now he calls your name and you walk out to the podium and you see all these people.  And all of a sudden you look around and you see Ted Williams, you see Mickey Mantle, you see Willie Mays, Willie McCovey, Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] and you on the same platform as these guys.  And you say, now I'm a Hall of Famer, yeah.  So that's when it really, really, really sinks in.  And it's a great feeling, there's nothing like it.
Story_ID: 631709
Speaker 1: Who's your favorite--now I don't want to get you in trouble, but who is your favorite Cub [Chicago Cubs] player of all time?  Not counting the guys you played with.  So I will let you off the hook with [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks and Santo [Ron Santo] and Fergie Jenkins [Ferguson Jenkins] and all them, but who is your favorite Cub player of all time, other than the guys you played with?
Speaker 2: I didn't play with Gene Baker, but he was a good player.  Gene left this game and he became a manager, he was in the Pirates' [Pittsburgh Pirates] organization.  And I used to see him when I traveled around in the minor league.  He managed in C ball or B ball, which was a darned good manager.  I thought he was gonna manage in the Major League [Major League Baseball].  Because he had pretty good knowledge of the game, you know.  He was a great player.  And to endure, you know he came up to the big league at a young time, '47 [1947] what do you call him, Jackie Robinson came up in '47 [1947], he came up in '53 [1953], so that's not too many years different, him coming up to the big league.  So came right from the--Ernie came from the Monarchs [Kansas City Monarchs], I think he came from the Monarchs too, double play combination.  So I would have to say him.
Story_ID: 631710
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that you think we ought to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  You asked everything, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy in a way, but it's, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who played professional baseball.  But that was just one phase of my life that I've gone through.  I would like to be remembered as a person that did other things in life that people could be proud of.
Story_ID: 631711
Speaker 1: This is Ron Santo and I, two young pups, and this is 1959, we're playing at San Antonio, Texas with the San Antonio Missions.  This is a picture of me, my last year in the minor league.  I'm playing with the Houston Buffaloes where I finished my minor league career.  The following year, 1961, I came to the big league to play on the Chicago Cubs.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready sir.
Speaker 1: Now this picture here was taken at the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York].  On the right is Buck O'Neil, who was one of the first black coaches in the Major League [Major League Baseball], and of course in the center is my brother Franklin [Franklin Williams] who played in the Pirates' [Pittsburgh Pirates] organization.  And this was taken in the Hall of Fame where they have the plaques of the players.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay sir.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a family portrait of my family and starting from left to right, you have Wayne Hill and his wife Valarie [Valarie Williams Hill].  And next to him you have Sandra [Sandra Williams Simpson] and Kevin [Kevin Simpson], and you have my daughter Julia [Julia Williams Harris] with her husband, Herb Harris.  And you have my daughter Nina [Nina Williams] who is not married.  And as you can see in the picture, I have the six grand, down in front, left to right is Nicolette [Nicolette Simpson] and Jasmine Simpson, and you got Jeran Simpson and you got Kristin Harris [ph.].  And up at the top you got Kendall Simpson [ph.].  So that's--and on the far right at the bottom you got Wayne Hill who is sixteen years old and going to Glenbard South [Glenbard South High School, Glen Ellyn, Illinois].  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: You go ahead?  Okay this is my son-in-law Wayne Hill, the far left.  And next to him is my youngest daughter, is Sandra Simpson.  Next to her is her husband, Kevin Simpson along with Kendall, Kendall Simpson.  And next to him is Julia Harris and my daughter Nina.  And starting back on the left again, Valarie, this is my oldest child, and next to her is Jeran Simpson, and you got, you got Herb Harris and you got William Hill on the end.  And at the third row, you got Jeran Simpson, you got Kristin Harris and at the bottom starting left to right, you got Nicolette Simpson and you got Jasmine Simpson.  So this is my daughters, my four daughters and my son-in-laws and my grands.  So that's my proud family.
Speaker 2: Now here's a picture I'm pretty proud of.  Of course I'm on the left and my wife Shirley [Shirley Williams] is sitting in the middle.  And of course the late and great Mayor Washington [Harold Washington].  This is on Billy Williams Day that they had here in Chicago [Illinois].  And a little story about the mayor, you know when he was mayor of Chicago, and Mayor Wilson [Lionel Wilson] out at Oakland [California], Joe Morgan and I got both of them together so we had a good time in Oakland, California.  So you know I got to know the mayor real well, and of course when he passed away I was in Hawaii and a guy by the name of Cleve Walker called me that morning.  And I talked to Cleve and he said the mayor had passed away.  So this is a treasured picture right here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, on this picture is June the 29th, 1969 on Billy Williams Day.  And I'm on the field with my wife Shirley to the left, and of course myself, and my mother's [Jessie Moseley Williams] in the middle.  And of course on the end is Ron Santo.  Seem like we always, you know, coming up from '69 [1969], you know '59 [1959] down at San Antonio, Texas, we was always together a lot.  We're still always together a lot.  So this is a proud picture here too.  It happened in 1969 and we were riding high, we was in first place and the Cubs set aside a day for me and presented me with, showered me with a lot of gifts.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this picture here was taken in Cooperstown [New York] on the day of the induction.  I'm beginning to--as I'm in the process now of giving my speech, it was the fortieth anniversary of Jackie Robinson came in the Major League.  And you know I center around that time and of course in the background on the far right you see Campanella [Roy Campanella], you see Ted Williams, and some other guys that have been inducted in the Hall of Fame.  And this is a great picture here.  I have a lot of memories from that moment right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, tell me about this one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this picture here was taken probably about a couple of years ago.  This is my wife Shirley and this was taken for the church bulletin.  So it's a picture that we'd taken and a very nice picture and it's great.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This picture here started it all.  When I first went off to play baseball in 1956.  As you can see on the left side of the picture, there is some writing there to my wife Shirley and on the right side of the picture, "With love, Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Williams]."  So this happened in 1956 when I first went off to play ball.  I wanted to see her--wanted her to see me in a Cub uniform.
