Story_ID: 558927
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am can you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Marguerita M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-A, Le L-E, Etta E-T-T-A, Washington W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N [HistoryMaker Marguerita Le Etta Washington].
Speaker 1: And what is your place of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Kansas City, Kansas, August the 16th, 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a publisher and editor, and my former career was edu- was educator, was as a educator.
Speaker 1: Okay, and well, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date? October 5, 19--no 2007 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Omaha Star in Omaha, Nebraska, it's a newspaper.
Story_ID: 558928
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight kind of People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they're kind of a warm up, they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have some favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like--I love chili, good chili, I love red hot fried--or it doesn't matter whether they are fried or not--but wings.  I love food in general, I lik- you should have asked, what is it I don't like?  I don't like raisins, I don't like prunes.  And I don't think of anything else, I don't like.  Oh, sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't like sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's three.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I imagine there's other dried fruits you don't like too but, I'm--weren't not gonna try to research them.
Speaker 2: Well, I can't say I don't like 'em, maybe I'm don't eat 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: But it's not because I don't like 'em.  I love food.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If it's, if it's good.
Speaker 1: Now, do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If it's cooked well.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue, my second favorite color is red, but I wear all colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like summertime, I like the fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have--
Speaker 2: And the rest of 'em I just have to put with.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I, I love to travel anywhere I can go, whether it's in the country or out of the country.  I've traveled extensively in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, I really don't have a favorite saying or phrase.  Just whatever comes to my mind or whatever is appropriate for the occasion.
Story_ID: 558929
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edmund Washington] side.  But, we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Anna A-L--A-N-N-A, Le L-E, Washing- well Brown, I'm sorry Brown B-R-O-W-N [Anna Brown Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that middle name, like your middle is just L-E, not L-E-E?
Speaker 2: L-E.
Speaker 1: L-E, okay and pronounced Lee?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Brown, Brown's her maiden name, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't recall that, I don't even know if she ever told me.  The women in my family (laughter) were reluctant to talk about age.  I don't mind, but--
Speaker 1: What would you recon- the 1920s maybe or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably so.
Speaker 1: Maybe 1924, '25 [1925]?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: Something.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Bessemer, Alabama.  That's right outside of Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm familiar with that place, yeah right outside of Birmingham right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Bessemer, Alabama.
Story_ID: 558930
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's [Anna Brown Washington] side of the family?  I mean how, how far back can you trace them?  What, what do you know about ancestors can you take them all the back to slavery days?
Speaker 2: I don't think that side of the family was in slavery if so it was way back in maybe the 14th or the 15th century.  But, that side was very integrated.  And so, I recall but my grandparents [Maggie Breeding Brown and Benjamin Brown] deceased when I was born.  And there were stories that were handed down to me.  My great-grandfather, great-great, yeah great-grandfather [sic. great-great-grandfather, William Breeding] was the wealthiest person in Bessemer [Alabama] at that time.
Speaker 1: So, was, was he white?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he and my grandmother [sic. great-great-grandmother, Sopharina Breeding] had a thing going.
Speaker 1: Okay, now she was, she was black then.
Speaker 2: She, she, she, she was black and when--
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what was his name?
Speaker 2: What was his name? I don't recall, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I know the story was told to me, but I don't recall.  Anyway, when he died he left everything to my grandmother [sic.], although he had a family.  And so, what happened--
Speaker 1: He left everything to her?
Speaker 2: He left everything to her.
Speaker 1: So that made her the wealthiest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) However, wait a minute, however he had a family.  And they weren't going for that.  So what did they do, they burned the courthouse down.  But some things were salvaged and it was passed to the next generation, like property a lot of property and what have you.
Speaker 1: So, this is quite a story the, the white relatives of your great-grandfather actually burned the courthouse down in Bessemer, Alabama (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: To destroy the records?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, gee now, now what was your great-grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: I can't think of it, can't think of it.
Speaker 1: Did she have the same last name as your, was she a Brown or?
Speaker 2: She was a Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes [sic.].
Speaker 1: All right?
Speaker 2: That much I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, was possibly the, the, the rich white man's name Brown as well or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Could be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like I said my, my grandparents were gone, when I was born.  And so this was passed on to me by that generation, my mother's generation.  Okay, see ya. That's just to tell me she's leaving.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, that's quite a story.  So, now any--well continue any other stories, are there other stories, about that?
Speaker 2: About that, it was--
Speaker 1: You said they managed to get some property out of it even?
Speaker 2: They managed to get some property and other things.
Speaker 1: Now, did they have children together, your, your great-grandmother and your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did uh-huh.  I couldn't tell you the names of, of, of those people either (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now these would be your grandparent and gra- what your gra- a grandparents?
Speaker 2: These are my great- great- great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: So, and great-grandparent would be among those children as well as some great aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: I supposed so yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so which grandparent was it, you can give us their, their name right?
Speaker 2: Okay, my grandparents, let's see what was her name--darn completely it escapes me.
Speaker 1: This would be your mother's grand, you mother's mother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's mother and my aunt's mother and my uncles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would have to look at some of these pictures and scrapbooks and you know, albums--
Speaker 1: Maybe when we get towards the end that's--
Speaker 2: --and all that, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, anyways so they now this is like, well this around the turn of the century that this is going on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I su- I supposed so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Story_ID: 558931
Speaker 1: So was your mother [Anna Brown Washington] raised in Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that much I know, yes.
Speaker 1: All right and did she have a chance to finish school and?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to--what's the name of that school?  They send me communications all the time, I can't think the name of the school, guess I should.  Yeah, she did and she got her degree at Morning Star--Morning College in Iowa [sic. Morningside College, Sioux City, Iowa].
Speaker 1: Morning Star College?
Speaker 2: Morning, Morning oh shoot, I need Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks] here to tell me, she remembers names (laughter) I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she got her degree.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, so she--
Speaker 2: Then she went to gee I can't think of the name of it, went to--well anyway she went down south to what is that Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in Montgomery, Alabama, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alabama State, right?
Speaker 2: But it wasn't Alabama State, 'cause--Florida State.
Speaker 1: Florida State?
Speaker 2: Flor- yeah, a black school [HBCU].
Speaker 1: Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Florida A and M, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And she taught music there.  And that's where she met my father [Edmund Washington].
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a story about him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well let's, let's--
Speaker 2: They just met (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess there is a story about it, he told her, if you know, he told her this, you know but, lines that you guys give females you know.  If you know don't marry me, I'm gonna commit suicide, all kind of crazy stuff you know.  Yeah, so, (laughter).
Story_ID: 558932
Speaker 1: My father was an attorney.
Speaker 2: Now, what was your father's name? Let's we may as well get his name?
Speaker 1: Edmund. Capital E-M-U-N-D [sic.], Duke or just D. Edmund D. Washington [Edmund Washington].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was an attorney in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, so he was an attorney?
Speaker 1: In New York.
Speaker 2: Now, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Was he older than you mother [Anna Brown Washington]?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was older, he was older. Though how much so I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what would you think maybe how much older ten years, five years?
Speaker 1: No, he was quite a bit older with my stepmother [Loraine Washington], I don't know how much it would have been than my mother.
Speaker 2: Let's see, okay, all right.  So, so he was born and raised in New York?
Speaker 1: No, no he was born in on the Mississippi border line right outside of, of Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And think so, maybe about 1920 I guess, I don't know?
Speaker 1: You mean, you mean when he went to school?
Speaker 2: No, when he was born, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, I--
Speaker 2: If he was older than your mother, I'd say five, if he was five years older, then 1920 or something, I don't, I don't know, I don't know how old they were.
Speaker 1: I don't either (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, okay so.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Anyway.
Story_ID: 558933
Speaker 1: Now where did he [Washington's father, Edmund Washington], well what do you know about his anc- his, his people and ancestors on his side?
Speaker 2: Well, what I know is that there's a great big farm that they came from and his father was an accountant and a minister.  And his father, I have, I have a picture of him at home.  And he rode a white horse. A white horse.  And when one of those storekeepers didn't want to pay him, he rode his white horse right into the store and demanded that they give him his pay, he got it.  So, I that was my grandfather was a very--on his side--was a very stately looking man that, I said that he was an accountant and a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, what denomination was he?
Speaker 2: I don't know, Baptist or a Methodist, I don't know. I know, on my mother's side her, her husband or her father [Benjamin Brown] rather was a minister, was a bishop as a matter of fact, he was a bishop--Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know about on my father's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 558934
Speaker 1: Okay so he [Washington's father, Edmund Washington] was born in Mississippi, you don't know the name of the town but it was near Arkansas?
Speaker 2: On the Arkansas border (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right.  And did he have any stories about growing up that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) his story was there was a lot of prejudice, as you know.  And my mother [Anna Brown Washington] was not his first wife, she was his second wife.  And--but my mother didn't know that, she died not knowing it. (Laughter) That's the reason why some of this you know, I have all the little details you know.  Anyway his first wife was pregnant with their third child, from what I can understand.  Now, this was the first wife, and this white man came along and degraded her.
Speaker 1: While she was pregnant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this white man did. And so my dad wasn't gonna take that, and so he, he know, he fought him.  And in so doing the man died you know in this fight.  So, my great-grandfather, he was a very prominent man in that city got him out of town, you know.  Because, you know, what would have happened?  So, because--
Speaker 1: Now, was your great-grandfather white? In that--
Speaker 2: On that side of the family? No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, he was, he was black.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you said he had a lot of influence that's why I thought he might have been white.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a lot of influence in, even in that little town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so did my grand, grandfather and grandmother in Bessemer [Alabama], you know on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did they get him out of town? What did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess he gave him some money and put him on the nearest flight--train I guess.  But, anyway he never went back, he couldn't go--he was afraid to go back.  So, in the process they got a divorce.
Story_ID: 558935
Speaker 1: So he [Washington's father, Edmund Washington] went out, he always went to private schools all his life.  And he, he went to school he went to college and he was in California at one time.  And after he got his law degree--
Speaker 2: Now, where did he get his law degree?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see, I know he got his master's [degree] from the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. I know that. So we have to assume that his is where he got his undergraduate degree.  But, then he went to on to study many other things. History, let me see what--he got a, he had about four different degrees, yeah.  And then from there he went to New York [New York] and he became an attorney.  But, he got mixed up in the wrong case, he took the wrong client and the mafia, gave him the (laughter), chased him out of town.  So, he--
Speaker 2: Now, what--do you know, is there a story there you can tell?  That about what happened exactly?
Speaker 1: No, I don't, all I know is that he had a client and the mafia was involved and I guess I don't know if he was going to the defend or prosecute but whatever he was going to do it was the wrong person.  And they chased him out of town.  So, he ended up going back to school to get a degree in education.  And somewhere during that time is when he met my mother [Anna Brown Washington], because they ended up teaching at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Story_ID: 558936
Speaker 1: Now, about what time is it that they meet, do you, do you know, you know the year they, they got married or?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know all that, I would have to look all that up.  And all that information would be at home.  And I probably still don't have all of it.
Speaker 1: What do you--
Speaker 2: But, when my father [Edmund Washington] died a lot of stuff was left to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, are you the only child?
Speaker 2: I was brought up as the only child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a younger brother [Frederick Washington], but he--after the divorce he lived with my mother [Anna Brown Washington] and I lived with my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't stay together?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't stay together.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were married and then they, then they split?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, let's see so well did you get a chance to know your father growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yes I lived with him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, oh okay, (unclear) it's just the opposite of what I was thinking, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, you, you were with your father and your brother was with your mother.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, did you get a chance to?
Speaker 2: But, my, but my younger brother was not my father's child. He was--my mother remarried.
Speaker 1: Oh, later on?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, later on.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And she had him, but they didn't last either (laughter), so you know.
Speaker 1: So, you were you know it's, it's, it's strange that daughters are raised by their father's us- usually but.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, you were raised by your father?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did--I mean, where did he raise you?
Speaker 2: Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Kansas City, okay?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, did he teach in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did, he taught there then he ended up being a principal, after I graduated.  It was pretty close for him to--time for him to think about retiring when he became a principal.  And he did, he hadn't planned on that.  You know, he really like the classroom.
Speaker 1: Did do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Lincoln High School [Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Lincoln High School, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, couldn't forget that.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right now is there a story about why--how, how he chose Kansas City or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they got married in Lawrence, Kansas and I imagine, well from there they came to Kansas City.  And then--
Speaker 1: Okay, so they left Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they left Florida A and M, uh-huh and they got married in Lawrence, Kansas.  And they moved to K.C. and bought a house and I came along.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so this, so you're born 1948.  Now, did you get a chance to see your mother much after your, your parents--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I saw her on a regular basis.  Although there was one time when I was seven years old, that my mother and father were upset with each other and he wouldn't let me see her (laughter).  And so, you know, there you are.  But, then after that it wasn't a problem.
Story_ID: 558937
Speaker 1: Well, tell me when you think about your parents' personalities--well you know tell us what their personalities were like and tell me who you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother [Anna Brown Washington] was very articulate and never stop talking (laughter) very articulate.  My father [Edmund Washington] was quiet. When he spoke everybody listened, so I'm somewhere in between maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Depending on the situation, some situations I probably can, probably (laughter)--I'm probably like my mother, never stop talking.  Other situations I'm quiet.
Story_ID: 558938
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An early childhood memory.
Speaker 1: Earliest?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I remember this or people told me this but, they say when I was about two, I fell down the basement steps and broke my eardrum.  Now, I don't know if I remember that or if it was said so many times you know I think I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know. I do remember when I was four, going on five this I know I remember my mother [Anna Brown Washington] and father [Edmund Washington] had separated, my mother was living in the house and my dad was living at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], he had a room at the Y and he had picked me up for Easter and he brought me a big Easter basket and all that.  And he had these, this pretty little dress and all that.  Anyway, this Easter basket had a lot of chocolate in it, candy and stuff like that and I tried to eat the whole thing and I was so sick (laughter) I remember that.  I remember that like it was yesterday.  'Cause I was, he had planned to take me various places and I was so sick I was sprawled out, sprawled across the bed I couldn't move.  And yeah I remember that.  I remember right after my mother and father divorced I wanted to know, where was my mother, asking him that, where was she.  And he said, "Well she doesn't live with, live with us anymore."  And of course I found out later what that was all about.  Let's see what else do I remember? You talking about early like probably five and under?
Story_ID: 558939
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in, now you, you grew up in Kansas City [Missouri], did the neighborhood have a name, or was it--and what kind of neighborhood was it, was it a mixed neighborhood, black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was predominately black but there were some Caucasians that lived in the neighborhood.  It was considered a, an above average, for black families.  This is where your professional and skilled people lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, that's the first house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a--they--did, did that neighborhood have a name?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: I mean was it just?
Speaker 2: It didn't have a name, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well--
Speaker 2: It was just a, I guess you would call it a very good neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, no what about the second neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Second neighborhood came later and it was a larger house.  It had a lot of land.  And it was considered upscale, really upscale.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact when I would take people home boy they, they couldn't believe it.  Especially the inside, well even the outside, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now what, did that neighborhood have a name?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Unless you want to call it the Swope Park area [Kansas City, Missouri], you've heard of the zoo [Kansas City Zoo] there in K.C. okay it was headed toward the zoo, but not right next to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that people called that, that?
Speaker 2: It's in Swope Park area.
Speaker 1: Swope Park area, okay?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, I thought these neighborhoods might have a name now?
Speaker 2: No, didn't have a name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, more that Swope Park, the street had a, (laughter) you know.  The boulevard had a, had a name.
Speaker 1: What, what boulevard was it on?
Speaker 2: Swope Park Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Swope Park Boulevard?
Speaker 2: It was in between, in between there was Swope Boulevard and then there was little side area, you know, because it was res- residential.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no name.
Speaker 1: So, old were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, my, like my house, my, you know, like where I live it has a name, well maybe they didn't have names then I don't know, (laughter).  I guess they did, but that didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now can you tell me like how old were you they when you, you moved the second time?
Speaker 2: I actually was about I guess sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I graduated from high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] when I was fifteen going on sixteen. And so it was (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you basically grew up in the first house, right?
Speaker 2: The first house--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yes.
Story_ID: 558940
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, can you tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights, I was a tomboy. We played baseball and football, table tennis, you know, those kinds of things.  Sights, there was a man who had I guess he had grandfather rights, on the corner he had a stable of horses.  And we use to ride the horse, so, that was, that was fun, riding.  Let's see what are some of the experiences I had was most of the kids but not all of them were older than I.  And I enjoyed being around the older kids but sometimes they didn't enjoy being around me.  Sometimes they would lose me (laughter) 'cause I was a young kid, you know.  The kids my age, I tended to get in a fight with them all the time.
Speaker 1: Well, what would you fight about?
Speaker 2: Who knows why kids fight, (laughter) they just fight.  And I, I don't remember any particular reason.  You know, most fights that kids have, even adults, after it's over you no longer remember what you were fighting about.  You just fight, you know, he said something I didn't like. (Makes sound) You know, that kind of thing.  But, I was not the type of person was a bully, it's if you've hit me well, that's different, I would defend myself. I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, did, did your father [Edmund Washington] encourage you to defend yourself?
Speaker 2: He taught me how to box, but I had a pair of boxing gloves (laughter).  And he taught me how to box, but when I got in a fight, I fought like a girl, you know, (gesture) like that, all this holding it like that, (gesture) never ended up that way.
Speaker 1: Was Joe Louis a big influence your, on you and your neighbors in those days?
Speaker 2: I guess so, I don't, I think Malcolm X, Muhammad Ali probably had more of a influence, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I know Joe Louis now he was more like my aunt's friend, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That kind of thing.  But, Muhammad Ali, yeah.
Story_ID: 558941
Speaker 1: So, okay, sights, sounds and smells--your--
Speaker 2: Smells?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Flowers, I love flowers, I don't love to plant 'em, I remember when I was about seven years old, I was in my backyard and I was actually praying.  We had some flowers and I was actually back there praying for more flowers.  And I remember I was calling some names like peonies and snowballs and that kind of thing.  I mean I was actually and I guess my dad [Edmund Washington] must've, must have heard my prayer because he went back there and planted a whole bunch of flowers.  And that's what I grew up with, the sm- the smell of the flowers.  Then I had a swing out there too, and, you know, I love to swing and smell the flowers.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's interesting, you prayed for flowers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I was actually praying (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any particular sounds associated with growing up?
Speaker 2: Horses. You can hear the horses over in the barn, you know, anything else?  Well, the weather people trying to go up the hill.  It was a very quiet neighborhood [in Kansas City, Missouri], so there're not any particular sounds that.  And I don't recall anybody fighting or, you know, neighborhoods fighting or, or something like that, I'd don't recall that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Just, just fights as little kids, when you and your, your--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 558942
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed sports. Basketball, baseball.  Even tried to do a little football until I was in the third grade, and we were playing touch.  And I had the ball I was the, I was the--I was at school [Wendell Phillips Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri], and I was determined I was gonna make a touchdown.  And I had this ball, ran flat dab in the sch- side of the school building cut my lip (laughter) that was end of my football playing that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any favorite football players in those days?
Speaker 2: No, unless it was somebody that, some kid about my age, one of my pears you know, who was good at sports, I had some of those.  Because I guess you could say I was interested in guys by the time I started school, you know, or maybe some little boy that was really good, at something, I don't remember all that.  I do remember when I was about third grade or fourth grade I had this little boy that I called my boyfriend and when he wasn't mad at me, he called me his girlfriend.  And his folks put on these big pants on him, (laughter) I mean big pants they have now didn't have anything on him, but anyway.  This kid wore these big pants and he stayed with his grandmother up on the corner.  And he got in a fight and anyway I jumped in there to help. (Laughter) And then he walked me home.  And Dad [Edmund Washington] met us at the door and I said, "Daddy this is my boyfriend, this, this is Herbert [ph.]." I remember his name.  His pants went (makes sound), (laughter) he stepped up there in his undershorts (laughter) he was so embarrassed, he turned bright red.  This is my boyfriend. Pants just (makes sound) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wrong impression for father.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember that, you should jot that down.  That was so funny.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you like television and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Movies, radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but TV I could only watch it at a certain time.  We usually watched after dinner and we would sit down and watch TV and I had to be in bed about 8:30, 9:00 something like that, very early.  So, therefore I didn't get to watch a whole lot of TV.  After I was in middle school [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri] we would call it junior high.  Junior high and, and senior high then I could watch a little more TV because I could stay up a little later.  But, it monitored, you know, I couldn't just and I didn't have a TV in my room until I was either a junior or senior, in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Now, did you have favorite TV shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me think, what can I think of that I liked?  I can't think of any at that particular time.  But, there was, oh 'The F.B.I.' What's that Italian program and they took it off because they said it was a bad image for Italians?
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Untouchables' ['The Untouchables']?
Speaker 2: 'Untouchables,' yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked, I liked those and any love story (laughter), I liked that, you know.
Story_ID: 558943
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you read a lot when you were growing up [in Kansas City, Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes.  Education and reading is something that was really promoted in my family, you know.  It's not if you go to college, it's when you go to college.  My, my dad [Edmund Washington] started, from the time that I was born, got an annuity, you know to help pay for college, right after I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, education was emphasized quite a bit.  Books were emphasized, my dad had an extensive library.  And would pick up a book, you know, on my level buy a book on my level and bring it to me all the time.  And sometimes I was wishing that he would bring me a toy, although I had plenty of toys, but (laughter), but oh yeah books, education--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now, now where did you start--
Speaker 2: And my mother [Anna Brown Washington] too, for that matter, although I was not with her, but, you know, that was the thing.
Story_ID: 558944
Speaker 1: Now, did you spend the summers with your mother [Anna Brown Washington], or did you ever spend, you know, a large block of time with her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, actually I spent the summers with her until I was in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri].  Before then I would just visit like on Saturday or Sunday or spend the weekend, or something like that.  But, to spend a summer it was not until high- my teenage years.  And even then I wasn't the whole summer, because my dad [Edmund Washington] and I would travel across the country together, during the summer.
Speaker 1: Where are some of the places you travelled?
Speaker 2: Oh, we went to Old Faithful, you know, Wyoming throughout Wyoming, Salt Lake cities, throughout Salt Lake City [Utah], California, Montana, you know.  All the places out there, the mountains and what have you, you know, this is what we did.  As a matter fact I think I was about I don't know twelve maybe and we went to Theapolis, Wyoming [sic. Thermopolis, Wyoming] and we were hungry, and, and, and he stopped at a restaurant and this guy told him, "You have to go around the back."  My dad looked at him, as if to say, I'm not going around the back, you know.  And so, since he wouldn't go around the back then he told him he had to go across the railroad tracks to a place there.  So, my dad was getting ready to beat him down and of course I stopped that, "Come on, Dad. Come on, let's go."  But, this was just a little old town called Theapolis, I wouldn't even remember the name if that happened not happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but I'll never forget it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, did you ever take trips to the East Coast, to New York City [New York, New York] or?
Speaker 2: Not with him, not with him.  I did later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, later on, I did.
Story_ID: 558945
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school, now what, what, what grade school did you start at?
Speaker 2: Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wendell W-E-N-D-E-L [sic.], Phillips.
Speaker 1: So, Wendell Phillips Elementary School?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And that was in Kansas City, Kansas?
Speaker 2: Missouri.
Speaker 1: Yeah--Missouri rather, Kansas City, Missouri.  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.  I was one of the--these students, while we were in school, I thoroughly enjoyed it.  When we had vacations I thoroughly enjoyed that too.  When we had, during the summertime I thorough enjoyed that.  When it was time to go back to school, fine, you know, I wasn't upset I loved it.  That's where the kids were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, did you have--what were your favorite subjects and what did you like about it?
Speaker 2: I liked English, I liked history, recess (laughter).  I kind of had a problem with math, but, I was able to do overcome that years later.  So, I just loved school, school was a challenge to me I mean I enjoyed learning.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in the school that really sort of stands out in your mind (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what I think I--I know a lot of people have had, have been able to name their teachers I think I liked them all.  I can't think of a teacher I, I didn't like.  Well, wait a minute, I take that back.  There was a home economics teacher I can't say, because we had home economics then, started at sixth grade.  Course they've cut back on, on that, I think, you don't get it now until middle school.  But, anyway it seems like any home economics teacher my middle school home economics teachers, my senior high home economics teacher I didn't get along with them.  Not, because I didn't like 'em, but because they were trying to teach me domestic stuff (laughter).  And I really wasn't interested in that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you did, you did, you weren't like yearning for the day, when you'd grow up and be running the household or anything or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't want to work in anyone's home I guess?
Speaker 2: I didn't want to work in anybody's home, no that's for certain.  No, I wasn't too fond of taking a broom sweeping my own house, let alone somebody else's, (laughter) no.
Story_ID: 558946
Speaker 1: You were at Wendell Phillips Elementary School [Kansas City, Missouri], and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you go there the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so one school.
Speaker 2: Although, I was such a problem child that they wanted to kick me out and put me in another school that--which was closer to my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you do to prompt that, there's gotta be a story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was mischievous.
Speaker 1: But, there's gotta be a, a specific story around that, now what did you get--
Speaker 2: I was, I was mischievous, you know.  I was always doing something, causing something, then sitting up looking innocent but the teachers knew better (laughter) very mischievous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like I said I got in fights, I promoted devilment and stuff like that.  When I was in the sixth grade or was I in the fifth, no I was in sixth grade.  The teacher had stepped out of the room and (laughter), and I really was sitting there that time doing my work.  I didn't create any chaos while she was out, somebody else did, and teacher came back looked at me and said, "Come here," and she'd like to spank you with a yardstick, you know.  Well, that's one yardstick spanking I was not going to get, 'cause I wasn't responsible.  And so, when she threw back to hit me, I grabbed the yardstick and fanned her around the room, I didn't hit her, I didn't hit her, I wouldn't dare hit her, but fanned her around the room.  And I had the, I had the class in an uproar, 'cause here's this woman trying to get away, you know.  And then finally I put the yardstick down, "I'm going to the office," and I went.
Speaker 1: That's one way to handle it I guess.  So, is that when they tried transfer you to another school?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, speed.
Speaker 2: Okay, now we were talking about the aftermath of you fanning the teacher around the room with a yardstick and going to the office and what did they decide to do?
Speaker 1: Well, after I had everybody in an uproar and I had enough, and I knew what was going to happen.  I went to the principal, I, I put it down.  I said, "Well I'm going to the principal's office now," and I did.  And my dad [Edmund Washington] never did spank me, he didn't believe in spanking his daughter (laughter).  And if I got a spanking at school, I never told him because he didn't want his daughter touched, the untouchable.  So, I went to the principal's office and this was a principal that I really liked, the one before him, no I, I didn't like him at all.  But, this guy I really liked, you know, he called my father, and we talked about it and that was the end of it.  My dad told me, "Don't do that anymore," went on back to class the next day.
Story_ID: 558947
Speaker 1: Let's see, now, so you were in that school until you were, until--
Speaker 2: Until I went to middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior high.
Speaker 1: What, what the name of your middle school?
Speaker 2: R.T. Coles [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, okay, we were talking about R.T. Coles, is that the name of the school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's no longer in existence.
Speaker 2: It was a middle school, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or, or did they call it a junior high school or middle school?
Speaker 1: Junior high, they called a junior high, but.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a very old school, so they did away with that.  It was also a vocational, oh wait a minute a vocational school; that was a part of it.  And those who wanted to take a vocation had a choice of two schools in the city.  I don't know if they have a choice of any now, you know.  But they did at that time.  It was a junior high, it was one building and vocational things, were, were located in another area.
Speaker 2: Now, wasn't--you're an educator and you, you've got a terminal degree in education, I was wondering if you have any reflections on your own education?  And the kind of schools, black students were attending, in those, in Kansas City [Missouri] in those days.  I, I hear a lot of people say they attended a vocational school or a technical high school if they were black in the city.  Usually the indication is that black student were funneled into some kind of a vocational or technical area, rather than through a college track, what that--do you?
Speaker 1: Okay, from what I can recall, you could go to the college track or the vocational track and emphasis was do something.  It was more emphasis on the future I believe in those days, for black students.  Now, there were some that--
Speaker 2: So, you're saying that you don't think that they were pushed, black students were pushed towards a vocational or technical?
Speaker 1: No, I, I don't think so, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think it was a matter of choice and that's just like my folks told me, get something in your head because you sure don't have in your hands, which I didn't.  And so, I was college bound, you know, rather than try to learn some type of vocation.  Which I think is fine, you know, if you are so oriented or so talented, let's put it like that.  I had no talent (laughter) in the vocations, in other words I wouldn't have done well in tailoring, because that's what they had.  I wouldn't have done well in secretarial education, I wouldn't have done (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right you see my point though I was--the reason why I was asking was is because, you're here. You're somebody that's college bound yet you go into a vocational school.
Speaker 1: Well, that was just a part of it at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See, there was a after junior high, I went straight on to a college prep school, Lincoln [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] was a college prep school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, it, it was just located in the same location it had the same name.  One was a junior high, which was separate from the vocational education part.  See they had auto mechanics, they had tailoring, you name they, they had it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, I wasn't in that part, you know, I didn't have anything to do with that because I went on after middle school, or, or junior high to, to a college prep school.
Speaker 2: Now, were these integrated schools or Phillips, or Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] and--
Speaker 1: It was, yeah, it was integrated, it was after 19--let's see '55 [1955] and it--there were some Latino kids, there were a few white kids and of course they're fully integrated, well no, they're not fully integrated depends on where you live and where you want to go, in K.C. saying, you know.  But, they had a few white kids there.  They had a few Latino kids there, they had a few--maybe one or two Indian kids.
Speaker 2: Now, what about your teachers, were they, were they mostly black or?
Speaker 1: They were mostly black but there were some whites.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 558948
Speaker 1: We were talking about the, the R.T. Coles Junior High School [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri].  Now, now when you were in--did you come into contact with your aunt much?
Speaker 2: Yes, well I--
Speaker 1: Your Aunt Mildred Brown who founded the Omaha Star (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she would visit me on a regular basis and I would come and I would come up here from the time I was a baby, visiting, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you visit Omaha [Nebraska] from Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You visit your aunt?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, you're well aware of the paper, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: The paper was started in 1938.
Speaker 2: July 9.
Speaker 1: Yes, ten years before you were born and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did you have a, did you ever think about becoming a journalist or being involved with the paper?
Speaker 2: No, but my aunt wanted me to be.  And she talked to me all the time about me and being her partner after I grew up and that's not what I wanted.  I wanted to go into education and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, Mildred was the type of person that whatever she wanted, she eventually got.  And so she just left the paper to me and that was it.  But, it was not without any training.  Because I used to live with her during my college days [at Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri].  And believe me she (laughter)--I couldn't just study.  I had to work.  I had to work.  I had to work in the paper.  I had to work outside the paper every day of my life she told me about the paper exposed me to various things pertaining to the paper.  When I moved out on my own, she called me every day throughout the day as often as possible and would tell me various things.  So, I didn't go into the paper blind.  I guess actually knew that someday I probably would inherit the paper, but I, I never wanted to think about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it just happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She died, and there I was.
Story_ID: 558949
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Edmund Washington], did your father discuss current events around the house a lot?  And, did you, did you keep up with current events, when you were coming up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh, oh yes, current events as a matter of fact when I was four years old I would put the paper and lay the paper on the floor stretch out on the floor and read what I could (laughter), you know.  Oh yeah, reading was a very important thing in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Now did your father get any of the black newspapers at home?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes we got the Kansas City Call.  And when I was in elementary school, I used to read The Call see all the entertainment, this club, that club, people, this concert that concert.  And I would say, "Oh, when I grow up I'm gonna go to this bar, that club," and that kind of thing yeah, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my dad he wanted to buy the Kansas City Call, but his bid was not high enough, somebody else beat him out.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was, was that the only black paper in Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: At that particular time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Now, actually it, it, it, it, it still is, but in Kansas City, Kansas there's The Globe [The Kansas City Globe] and you know that's, those are neighboring states.
Story_ID: 558950
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?  You went to high school you, you started--
Speaker 2: Lin- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I guess in one neighborhood and then moved, or did you?
Speaker 2: Lincoln High School [Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri], yeah.
Speaker 1: Lincoln High School?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Lincoln High.  But, I actually I was out of school finally I had gone on to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] when I--
Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to talk about high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they had, they had moved, you know.
Speaker 1: --I, I don't want I, I don't want get you out, out of high school?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I guess what I'm still in high school, yeah.  But, my senior year.
Speaker 1: You were in, you were in high school moved and that's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: My senior year, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, so Lincoln High School, now, now were you involved in the, the school newspaper?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything to do with journalism at all?
Speaker 2: No. No, but my aunt [Mildred Brown] made certain that I took journalism classes, because she was preparing me for this day.
Speaker 1: Now, did so when you were in high school did you, did you for student body--student government or anything or?
Speaker 2: No, I was interested in the social clubs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So, which ones were you a member of, do, do you remember the names of them?
Speaker 2: Well, I was on the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] teams, the science club and, you know, that kind of thing.  But, I had a problem when I was in high school if my grades were not up to par what would my dad [Edmund Washington] thought I was capable of doing, I couldn't participate in anything.  I couldn't go to football games.  I couldn't go to basketball games.  I couldn't talk on the telephone.  I couldn't do anything until those grades went up.  Like I said, he didn't spank me (laughter) but he would punish me.
Speaker 1: So, did it work, did his restrictions work?
Speaker 2: It worked, yeah, they did, most of the time, they did because I was a person that liked to go, you know, I, I really.  But, in my family the people I went out with had to be, well they had meet my dad's approval.  You know I didn't bring, I couldn't go out with a guy that was a high school dropout, something like that.  Although, some of 'em were very desirable but I couldn't bring 'em home (laughter), you know.  So, that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 558951
Speaker 1: Now, was, was a bu- was music a big part of growing up, when you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: Music, oh yeah, I loved music, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any favorite musicians or artists?
Speaker 2: I tended to enjoy all of 'em.  I liked everything from the opera my senior year in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri], well I had a stepmother [Loraine Washington] by then.  When I was thirteen I got a stepmother, who I was very close to.  And she felt like I needed a little, what she call it?  Culture or something (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Finishing, I think they called it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so got me a, a season ticket to the opera and she and so we went to the opera.  We were the only two at the opera (laughter).  And I enjoyed the Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] operas because I understood it, you know, because that was required reading all the Shakespeare works.  But, a lot of the other stuff I did not enjoy because I didn't understand it.  But, music I just loved music, you know, I mean I like the blues, I liked, I liked everything.
Story_ID: 558952
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you play sports in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the girls basketball team.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay 'cause I know you said you like sports so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was also on the church's basketball team, the girls basketball team.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, I couldn't play if those grades were not up, (laughter) you know, I mean all of them.
Speaker 1: So, by the time you were a senior had your grades achieved a certain, enough of a altitude for you to get a little air?
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was one time, you know, I wasn't in the doghouse and the next time I'm in the doghouse and there was no particular, shall you say rhyme or reason as to why my grades were not up.  I just simply decided at times I didn't like it, I wasn't gonna, I wasn't gonna study (laughter).
Story_ID: 558953
Speaker 1: What was college looking like then, did you--had, had you chosen a school at that point or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I went to the school for the wrong reason, Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] I'd heard it was a partying school (laughter).  And I had been so sheltered that I wanted to go a partying school and so--
Speaker 1: So, so you, you graduated from high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] in what '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], oh okay?
Speaker 2: Because I got out earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started Lincoln in fall of '64 [1964], (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it a party school?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh and so, three months after my sophomore year, my dad made an unexpected trip to Lincoln University.  Went into my room told me, "You are going home," pack my bags.  I was standing out on the steps of resident house, saying, "Daddy please don't take me, I'll do better, I'll do better."  And then some of my friends gathered around me, "Please Mr. Washington [Edmund Washington], don't take her blah, blah, blah."  He put, he put my butt in that, (laughter) in the car and away we went, home. Kansas City [Missouri].
Story_ID: 558954
Speaker 1: I was despondent for weeks, well months really.  And I didn't go back to school until next school year.  And that was an all-girls school and that, I didn't care for that.  Although, there was an all-boys school down the street.
Speaker 2: Now, which school was this?
Speaker 1: That was called--what was the name of that school, 'cause it's changed the names?  Darn, I can't even think the name of the school, I was only a semester.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's the name of it, it was St. Teresa's [St. Teresa's College] at the time, but they changed it, to Avila [Avila University, Kansas City, Missouri], Avila that's it.  It was a Catholic school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it's--
Speaker 1: It was a Catholic school, an all-girl school.
Speaker 2: So, it's now called Avila?
Speaker 1: Avila.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, but it was St. Teresa's at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did your grades pick up there?
Speaker 1: Nope they got worse (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, what did your father [Edmund Washington] do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, I had graduated from high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] on the--I was on the honor roll off and on, off and on, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, no they did not pick up, they got worse.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened?
Speaker 1: I wasn't motivated to go to school, my thing, I, I went to, I went to that school because I felt, well, my folks felt I should go, to school.  I felt like I shouldn't go (laughter) and so therefore I didn't do well.
Speaker 2: Okay, well what happened at the end of that semester did you have to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that semester my grades were so bad that they, told me goodbye, you know.  So, and what was so bad about it, is that was a very pres- it is still is a very prestigious school.  And a lot of the school systems and corporations and all, depending on what your, what your major's in, will contact you way before you graduate from, from college.  I mean, it's, it's a given that if you graduate you will be placed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but to me that meant nothing.
Story_ID: 558955
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what did you do next after you, you kind of punched out of that one [St. Teresa's College; Avila University, Kansas City, Missouri], right, so?
Speaker 1: Well, I think I was about seventeen then. (Laughter) Let's see ran off and got married.
Speaker 2: Really, okay.
Speaker 1: And.
Speaker 2: So, how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 1: Oh, I knew him in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] he was from Columbia, Missouri, which is good almost two hundred, about two hundred miles away.  But, he was on the football team and he played our school and on weekends he would visit.  So, I knew him from high school, and he was my best friend's cousin.  So, anyway I would say, "Oh," you know, we were engaged.  And he was at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I, in my mind: I wonder what marriage is like.  I mean that's just about the way I thought then, I flaky.  And so, we ran off down in Kansas some place got married.  Then I got scared: oh, what am I gonna tell my father [Edmund Washington], blah, blah, blah, blah.  And so, nothing happened, when we got back I went to my dad I told my dad, "I want an annulment."  And of course he had, he didn't want one but, he had no choice since I didn't want to be married (laughter).  Things that kids do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, anyway that summer I just had a ball, doing--the marriage was annulled.  And so, I went back to being engaged.  Wait until we graduated from college. The way that worked out, didn't make it.  And first of all, was too young, too immature and wasn't marrying for the right reasons, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that summer I just had myself a ball.
Story_ID: 558956
Speaker 1: So, what was your next school? Was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in Sept- wait a minute so in Sept-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No it was the end of August.  I thought I was going on a two week vacation and I thought I was coming here for a two week vacation and my folks had got, gotten together and decided hey, I needed to change my environment.  And that's what happened. I ended with my [maternal] aunt [Mildred Brown].  And things, my next school was UNO, the University of Nebraska at Omaha [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska].  And I made a turn around and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, not at first, not at first, you know.  I still really wasn't really taking things seriously and my grades were not as high as they could be, but it was better.  But, I was not living up to my full potential.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, what was the campus like when you entered the campus it was 1968, or '9 [1969]? Sixty--?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, everything then was civil rights and free love and Vietnam (laughter) and all that, you know, that kind of thing.  But, my thing was the civil rights thing, you know.  I mean I didn't agree with the war [Vietnam War] and the free love I didn't agree with that either.  But, everything was having fun, except for the civil rights thing.  And so, I participated in some, some of that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a black student organization on campus?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  Let me tell you how we got one, they had been trying to get one on campus.  And had been rejected and so finally the black students went to the president's office sat around there, blocked the door, and that's how we got our organization.  He couldn't get out and they weren't leaving, so that's how it happened.
Speaker 1: So, you took over the administration wing or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Took over the adminstra- administration wings, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of the organization that was formed?
Speaker 2: It was, it the organization was not--different have a name, but what developed from it and this is what they wanted was a black history department, you know.  There was not or maybe there was a name, I don't know but the name was not important. It was the idea that a black history department was developed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so--
Speaker 2: That remains today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, let's see so, what was your, your major was still education?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, and sociology, yeah.  And then after that it was I ended up being certified in special education K through twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade] and minor psychology and then master's [degree] plus twelve in administration.  And then a Ph.D. in education administration- administration, no, education administration and instruction.
Story_ID: 558957
Speaker 1: What did you write your dissertation on for your, for your Ph.D. [from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: It had to, it had to do with the social structure of blacks.  I divided the social structure of, of African Americans into five categories and, and life style and that type of thing.
Speaker 1: What, what were the--
Speaker 2: The classes, the classes of, of people.
Speaker 1: What were the five classes?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll have to show you the book (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I would have to show you the book.
Speaker 1: So, so you can't just name them, right off--
Speaker 2: Right off no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right off no.  But, I know it was in five categories, classes of people. And this is probably unique in the neighborhood, I mean society. Unique to us.  It would be a little difficult to do it with the Caucasian race because there're so many crossovers, you know.  Or even with the Latinos they would have- they wouldn't fit into these by categories.
Speaker 1: And you can't tell us what they are?
Speaker 2: No, not going into it now.  I, I'll show you maybe could show you the book, you know.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, next time you come back.
Story_ID: 558958
Speaker 1: From what I understand you taught in Omaha [Nebraska] public school system for--I guess from 19--what to, from--?
Speaker 2: To, actually when I inherited the paper [Omaha Star] I tried to do both, stay with OP, I thought I was superwoman, I'm not (laughter) I found out.  And I did both the paper as well as work for Omaha Public Schools, but I found out after five years I couldn't do that.  It was, it was taking a toll on me.
Speaker 1: Okay so, oh so, oh well you worked on your, your, you worked for the public schools from '72 [1972] until 1989, I guess right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well actually it was longer than that it was five years after '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so 'til 1994, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said I worked with both.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what did you do for the public schools?
Speaker 2: I started off as a pre-school teacher because I forgot I also studied early childhood education, as well as elementary education.  And then secondary so, you know.  So, I started off pre-school teacher, then I became an elementary teacher and taught grades--primary, the primary grades.  Then I was the special education and I taught all of the grades.  And then I went to secondary education and I because a resource teacher, meaning I didn't have a classroom.  I went to the classrooms and--
Speaker 1: So, you would help the other teachers develop research materials and resources and thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, right, right.  Then I was placed in a, I'd guess you'd call it a semi-administrative position, or maybe administrative position.  Vocation, vocational education where I would go to various schools and teach study skills to kids and how to take tests and that kind of thing.  I developed--I guess you call it a vocational program where I would take kids to various corporations and businesses and what have you and some of them would get, get hired.  In fact, I understand that some of them are working at these places this very day.  And I didn't--especially kids that I worked with were behavior problems mostly or, or they had disabilities, you know LD students.  Learning disabilities, none of them were I mean they could have grown up and, and become the president.  I mean they weren't low functioning, it's just most of them had behavior problems, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: It's easy--
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: We think of some of the presidents we've had, it's easy to imagine that some of them could be president.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So that's what I did.  This particular vocational education program was federally funded and that only lasted for two years.
Story_ID: 558959
Speaker 1: Do you have a certain philosophy of education?
Speaker 2: Yep, I think everybody should be educated one way or the other.  Beyond high school, but not necessarily go to college, but you should learn some skills that will enable you to make a living, a decent living.  That's my philosophy of education and it starts from the time a child is born, you know.  I also think you should learn something every day, if you don't, you know, you probably wasted a good learning opportunity.
Speaker 1: Now do, do you have any--when you--what were--what was the most I guess rewarding aspect of working for the Omaha Public Schools?
Speaker 2: Well, had been pulling my hair out trying to teach a concept and then finally I saw the light come on with the kid because the kid had learned it.  That's, that's what's rewarding, it's also very frustrating 'cause sometimes they're not getting it, they just aren't getting it and you're searching yourself, how can you present this differently?  How can you to this kid?  And we finally figured out a way and you see the kids getting it that is instant gratification.  Also, years later when you run into former students and they tell you what you have done for them, that's very rewarding.  Because sometimes you never know that you're getting through to kids.  They have to tell you and usually that's years later.
Story_ID: 558960
Speaker 1: In 1986, your aunt [Mildred Brown] passed and--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989] okay, all right I'm sorry, 1989--
Speaker 2: November the 2nd.
Speaker 1: Okay. What happened to draw you back into the, was the, the--did you know that she was sick or did she die suddenly, or--?
Speaker 2: She died suddenly.  She just went to bed one night and didn't wake up.  And they say she had a heart attack but she didn't have any heart problems.  She had two weeks before she died had been checked out for heart problems and they couldn't find any.  But, she--that's what, that was the diagnosis, but she had a heart attack.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said earlier that you, somewhere in the back of your mind you thought that one day you might have to take over the paper, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, because she had been--
Speaker 1: --or that she wanted you too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she wanted me too.  But I didn't want to at that time.
Speaker 1: So, what happened to persuade you to take, take it over?
Speaker 2: Well, after the funeral we had a will reading and it said Marguerita Washington [HistoryMaker Marguerita Le Etta Washington] will inherit the Omaha Star and run it.  And so, I did (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you could have said I'm just gonna continue to work for the Omaha board and I'm gonna sell it to somebody else.
Speaker 2: Well, I decided to carry out my aunt's legacy.  Because at first I was a interim publisher.  And I did that because feel, well now if I want to sell it 'cause a lot of people wanted to buy it, from across the country, then that's what I'll do, but then as I got into more I decided I'm gonna stay.
Story_ID: 558961
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was your--the biggest challenge that you faced when you took over the Omaha Star?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge I suppose would be working with people.  I imagine because I've always been good with personalities, various personalities.  But, when you're in business you discover a lot a times that everybody thinks they know how to do the job better than you.  And that was the problem that I was having at first, you know, dealing with these various personalities.  But, that didn't last long, didn't last long.  I found out that's probably one of my strongest points in that I could work with folks, and those folks are no longer around so, you know.
Story_ID: 558962
Speaker 1: So was it a, was there a big staff when you took over?
Speaker 2: No it was about, well yes, it was a little big larger than it is now, yes.
Speaker 1: That's 1989, so that's like--
Speaker 2: And, and even before then it was, it was larger.  But--than it was when I when took over.  But, it's been trimmed and it's really streamlined now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now describe the paper [Omaha Star] for us, now is it a, how often does it come out?
Speaker 2: It comes out once a week, on Thursday and it's a paper that's been here [Omaha, Nebraska] since July the 9th, 1938.  It was very instrumental in the civil rights fight.  Whatever the issues are, this is what the paper caters to.  The paper goes to fifty states, not just here.  It's also read by a number of Caucasians and other races.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there a, is there a political affiliation that the paper has, is it, some papers, papers are traditionally Republican or Democratic or something or?
Speaker 2: I try to be open to both parties.  However, I tend to be a little more Democratic.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but I try to be open to both parties.
Speaker 1: All right, so a candidate for instance that runs for office, do you endorse, do they get a endorsement from you or?
Speaker 2: Very seldom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very seldom.  I, I was a Democratic and but I tend to be more an Independent.  There have been a few times that I have endorsed, the paper has endorsed a candidate but usually we don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, has there ever, ever been a time when--a time when the paper endorsed a non-Democratic candidate or, you know?
Speaker 2: We didn't endorse but we put, but there was a lot written about a particular candidate that was positive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You won't give us her name (laughter)?
Speaker 2: His name.
Speaker 1: His name or?
Speaker 2: Well his name was Hal Daub.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Although he had his quirks, I tended to kind of like him.
Story_ID: 558963
Speaker 1: What were the, what are the big community issues that the paper has covered since you've been, been here in charge?
Speaker 2: Well, economic development for one thing which is badly needed because ever since the riots in the '60s [1960s] I believe yeah, '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s] yeah '60s [1960s].  And they burned everything down, except some black businesses.  And they removed the, the rumble, or the crumble I better say crumble and all we had was vacant lots.  And many people moved out of the area.  And especially after the interstate the freeway came through here and many people had were forced to move.  What was your question again, I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about some of the issues in town [Omaha, Nebraska] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and we were talking about community economic development?
Speaker 2: Well, economic development.
Speaker 1: Economic development.
Speaker 2: Economic development that's one of the main things that we talked about.  Health issues we're strong on health issues.  Educational issues we're strong on that.  We've even gotten to the point now where we're talking about domestic issues, because there's so much spouse abuse.  So, in fact that is really out of control so, we're talking about that a lot.  All of the particular issues that are of importance to us we cover.  But, this is a paper and it always has been that is a positive paper.  Now, I realize negative news sells newspapers but they can get that in a daily paper.  Omaha Star tries to uplift people.  It tells what people are doing that are positive.  There's also emphasis on our young people and what they are doing.  And that's what the Omaha Star is all about.
Speaker 1: Now, is most of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My philosophy is that pay a lot of attention to the young people because as the old saying goes they are our future.
Story_ID: 558964
Speaker 1: Is most of the writing done in house or is it done by stringers or contributors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have, we have, we have freelance writers, we have writers on staff.  But, a lot of our writing, writers are volunteers, community people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay yeah I was reading in an article, I, I read two articles before I came and one of, one by one of your staff members, a [HistoryMaker] Phyllis Hicks, In- In My Opinion column [ph.].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I was reading another column by Ernie Chambers who's a, a state representative?
Speaker 2: He's, right, he's, he's a senator.
Speaker 1: Senator, state senator.
Speaker 2: State senator, he has a weekly column.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so about how many columnists contribute on a regular basis, 'cause the, the paper [Omaha Star] looks full of information?
Speaker 2: We have fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fourteen volunteers, Phyllis makes, she's on staff, fifteen.  Walter Brooks he, well I think he's included, yeah he is.  So, we actually have about fifteen.
Story_ID: 558965
Speaker 1: Now is the paper [Omaha Star] a member of the, the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and are you a member National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]?
Speaker 2: I'm not a member of that no, but I am a member of the publishers association.
Speaker 1: Now, now, why not the National Association of Black Jour- Journalist rather, yeah?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't have anything against it.  I'm just not a member, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm with the publisher mostly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Because our issues are the same but they're also different, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, the journalists are most general I supposed than specific issues that would affect publishers right?
Speaker 2: Well, things that publishers are interested in is how do you get more money in, the paper?  Advertising and, and, and staff problems, you know, and, and, and that kind of thing, you know.  Where as the journalists are interested in getting the news, that's their job mostly, to get, to get the news.  But our job is mostly financial.
Story_ID: 558966
Speaker 1: In that regard, where, I mean who--what--I guess what's the biggest source of ad revenue that you have for, for the paper?  I mean what, what is the biggest sources of--
Speaker 2: Advertising.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but by who the--
Speaker 2: Well, from--
Speaker 1: It, it, could be you know state government, private I mean--
Speaker 2: From that yes--
Speaker 1: I don't know but--
Speaker 2: Private, state, federal, corporations, anybody who wants to advertise who has the money.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what I'm asking is what's the biggest source for your paper?  I mean what, what's the largest source, source of income for your paper?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's probably corporations, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And businesses.
Speaker 1: People selling consumables or, or what?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes people advertising their products and or their company or whatever it is that they want to advertise as long as it's not some, something that we wouldn't want in the paper.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know for a long time a lot of the independent black papers the biggest ad advertiser was the, were the tobacco lobby, tobacco lobby?
Speaker 2: No, we were not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now here's the thing, of course they don't advertise with us period.  But, alcohol and, and tobacco they could advertise but they don't have to put, you know, mention smoking or drinking, you know, they could do it in other ways.  Which is what they do in other media (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Other media?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no they don't, they used to advertise with us but they don't any longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean with the Omaha Star.
Story_ID: 558967
Speaker 1: Now has there been any particular news story or issue that has sold the most papers? What, what can you think of what your most, most popular edition [of the Omaha Star] was and why?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing that was very popular is when we put in an article that was--and this was something for people to think about, not necessarily true, although it could be, we don't know.  Something about the black president that we, that's been debated over the years.  Whether the person was black or not.  And it's true that this person his money, I mean his name was on the money, you know.  On, on what was it?  Five dollar bill, something I don't know something like that.  But--
Speaker 1: What person was it I mean can you tell us who was it?
Speaker 2: I can't think of his name right now, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: It's somebody who was a president of the United States?
Speaker 2: President of the United States, yep.
Speaker 1: Who's, who was considered black, by people, I mean that you know, could be?
Speaker 2: Yep, and actually on the, on the Internet sometimes they show him as black person sometimes they show him as white person.  And so, it's something to think about and it's something that is debatable, you know.  And that was the whole purpose, of putting it in there.  Boy I'm telling you we sold out of papers.
Speaker 1: Was it Harding [President Warren Gamaliel Harding]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't think of his name, he was a (unclear).
Speaker 1: It should be that hard with a president of the United States (unclear) you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, president of the United States and I can't even think of this guy's name right now.  Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks] probably would remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, but that, that, that really did it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then something very, very recently that we had in the paper and that's about gang initiation.  And we were telling people not to warn people at night that their lights are out.  Because this is part of the initiation thing in some places, you know, in some cities.  And boy that really got people stirred up, you know.  Called the mayor, called--
Speaker 1: Ten years ago in Chicago [Illinois] they were doing the same thing, they, they were saying that that was something of gang initiation, if you, if somebody blinks their lights at you, you shouldn't blink 'em back because they'll shoot your car or something it's part of a gang initiation.  But--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right, right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Now, that is supposed to be back, although the police department and the mayor's office they're saying that's a myth.  Well, I don't care if it's a myth or not. The thing is you should be careful if you're out at night.  And you see these cars with no lights on.  Because that is happening and depending on where you are you might get shot, (laughter) you know.  And you don't have to be warning people to turn their lights on, that their lights are out.  I mean some of these people are using people for target practice.  So, it's worth, it's an awareness thing, you know, so when they're out at night be careful if something appears not to be what it is, just leave it and leave the scene, you know.  Rather than take a chance.
Speaker 1: Anything else? In terms of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We've had, we've had so many different articles, you know, that, that have sold, sold the paper that I couldn't go into all of 'em.  Because you have to realize that once, once a edition is, is over for that week, it's right onto the next one.  And so, you almost forget about whatever was in last week's paper.
Story_ID: 558968
Speaker 1: Now, what's the big issue for this very week that we're conducting this interview?  What's the big issue in the, in the paper that's gonna be out next week?
Speaker 2: Well we just started, you know, we just started, so therefore I wouldn't know until Monday (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what was the last--
Speaker 2: --after, after I've checked out, after I've check out everything, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what about the last week?
Speaker 2: Last week oh it was probably what happened with girls and Girls, Inc., you know, that was some programs and some places that they went that was, that would be of particular interest to the parents and to the maybe the public, you know.  Things that these girls are being taught.  I mean they also have a place in the paper [Omaha Star], every week and many of these community I mean youth agencies also have a place in the paper.  So, as for now for this week, oh no that was last week, you know.  And then another thing that was of interest to the public is that our senator who is quite a character is suing God, you know, (laughter).  But, his point is that anybody can file a lawsuit, this is, this is the point that he's trying to make.  And so, he has people all over town [Omaha, Nebraska], all over the state, who are religious and misunderstood what he was trying to do, upset with him.  And anyway he explained this in the paper, you know, he had in his column, exactly.  The purpose of this vicious lawsuit but people still upset with him, those that don't understand what it's all about.
Speaker 1: That's Senator Ernie Chambers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ernie Chambers right uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He's quite a controversial figure.
Story_ID: 558969
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Well, my concern is that this empowerment group which I belong to one is through the chamber of commerce [Greater Omaha Chamber] and the other is a community effort.  That all the plans that we have at are--at least most of them will materialize within the next twenty, twenty-five years.  But, this community will be built up again because it used to be a very prosperous area.  Plenty of businesses, happy people, jobs I mean all these things are no longer.  And so I'm hoping that they have started doing some things like building homes, you know.  A few commercial businesses have moved in, but we need more and more and more.  And there are many plans and diagrams and graphics and everything else that, that's on the drawing board for now.  And I'm hoping that everything materializes.
Story_ID: 558970
Speaker 1: How has the, the newspaper business changed since you took over in 1989?
Speaker 2: Well, it's changed in that we no longer--we still have the same racism that we had back then.  Only it's gone underground it's a lot more subtle but it's still there and we know it.  So, what the paper does is to write about individual issues, you know, that type of thing.  Instead of calling it civil rights we might call it something else like maybe just plain old racism that type of thing.  And, but we cover we cover whatever the issues are in this community.
Speaker 1: Now, is, is the Omaha Star on online now?
Speaker 2: We have a website and it's also in the process of being changed, yes we do, it's in the process of being changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know that's something that wasn't going on in 1989 and--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Now, it's, now it's a feature of almost every paper.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and we are having it completely changed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working on developing a new site?
Speaker 2: Yes, matter of fact we just got some equipment today a computer, servers and all that kind of stuff to add to it. And then we have a, we have a person that does everything free of charge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact we have a couple of people they just come down here they say they just want to help the Omaha Star so, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you find that the community you know is prone to offer its services to the paper to try to get the word out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think we are very fortunate in that a lot of the people who could write, you know, and who have concerns, will submit their articles.
Story_ID: 558971
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, would you do anything differently, if you could?
Speaker 2: And that's what I'm in the process of doing now.  I want our electronic equipment to be a one.  I want to make sure we have everything that we should have.  I want to make certain that everybody knows--not everybody.  But, everybody in the front office knows what the other one's doing.  And can have access to it, that type of thing, yeah.  Yeah, that's one thing that I'm working on that's why I'm getting the servers and all of that kind of stuff [for the Omaha Star].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People tend to be very possessive of what they do, you know.  Whatever their job is, but, as a team you, you have to know what everybody else is doing and if that person is not around somebody else could move in and do it, you know.  So, that, that's very, very important. A lot people don't want to think that way, they want to think this is my territory I don't want you on it (laughter).  So, that's something I hope to get people to overcome.
Story_ID: 558972
Speaker 1: Now what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy. My legacy is to--is for my aunt's legacy to continue.  And I, I want her to be remembered forever I want, myself to be the one who carried, carried on her goals and objectives and added to it.  We have that corner lot here is part of the Omaha Star's lot.  And so, we, we have community organizations and people and kids and from schools and what have you, hat have made that in, they're making it, they're in the process of making that into the Mildred Brown Strolling Park [Mildred Brown Memorial Strolling Park, Omaha, Nebraska].  They got plants, shrubs and they're gonna have chairs out there, benches rather, and there will be a bust of my aunt it's in the process of being made now.  And it will have lights over it and it will be a place of beauty.  They just planted the--some of the plants and okay that's one thing, that.  Then another thing we have and we just getting off the ground all the papers have been completed and done and what have and this is the continuation of what I'm doing anyway.  And that is having students come here from high schools and colleges and they come here to learn about the Omaha Star and Mildred Brown.  And as a matter of fact this room can only seat so many but you'd be surprised sometimes you see 'em on the floor and everyplace else, you know.  And so we talk about that because they have to do a project.  And so, this nonprofit deal is called the Mildred Brown Memorial Study Center [Mildred D. Brown Memorial Study Center, Omaha, Nebraska].  That's it I'm doing it anyway so just continue- continuation, it's just now it's a nonprofit organization.  I mean we have board and all of that.  And we work, you know, getting the monies to do some interior decorating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Renovations I should say.
Story_ID: 558973
Speaker 1: So I have one more question to ask, before I ask, well, before I ask my last question let me ask you if there's anything I haven't asked, or talked about that we need to discuss or shed light up- upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything right now. You've asked me everything except (laughter) what color underwear do I have on (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That was his next question (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, that wasn't the next question, but--well, I will ask my last question now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And has nothing to do with that and it's similar to legacy, but ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a good person, as one who really tried to carry on this paper [Omaha Star] and one who did well for the paper.  But, I also want it to be known that I stood on the shoulders of my aunt [Mildred Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much ma'am.
