Story_ID: 30565
Speaker 1: We're ready.  All right my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today for the History Makers Archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Luther Steward Williams, L-U-T-H-E-R, S-T-E-W-A-R-D, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 19th, 1940, Sawyerville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay and it said, we had a note here it was Wedgeworth.
Speaker 2: Wedgeworth, Wedgeworth was the original little community that was assumed by Sawyerville.  So if I were to correct myself, it's Wedgeworth.  Cause that's what existed when I, when I was born.
Speaker 1: So it was encompassed by Sawyerville.
Speaker 2: Right, just two small little communities.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and now there's, there's a story behind your name I understand.  You were named for a CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Bishop?
Speaker 2: Yes, my fraternal grandfather was a minister, a CME minister.  And he had a very close friend who was a fellow minister who advanced in the hierarchy of the church and became an elder, and then became a Bishop of the Northern District of the CME Church.  And he would visit, he and my grandfather remained friends.  My grandfather had a very large farm and he would come several times during the year.  And just as I was--the story goes as I was about to be born, he requested that I be named, if I were a male, got to remember this is 1940 and people didn't know the sex, gender of children.  If I were a male, I should be named for his full name, Luther Steward Williams.  So that's the origin of--and I met him once when I was about five and he passed shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a, the title at the university is Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.  So I have responsibility for all of the academic components of the university.
Speaker 1: Here at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 2: At Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: And by training you are a--
Speaker 2: I'm a molecular biologist.
Speaker 1: Biologist, okay, all right.  Sir what is today's date?
Speaker 2: November--(laughs), April 11, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In the Production Center, the Kellogg Center, Tuskegee University's campus.
Story_ID: 30566
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now before we go into depth, we have five lightweight questions that we always ask.  They're sort of a warm-up.  The first one is--they only require short answers.  The first one is do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Most sea foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sea foods in general.
Speaker 1: Okay, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Barbados.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no.
Story_ID: 30567
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm gone ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you please give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mattie Wallace Williams, M-A-T-T-I-E, W-A-L-L-A-C-E, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It's 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and she was born in 1915.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well what do you know about your mother's--well where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Uniontown, Alabama.  A small community just south of where we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting name, Uniontown for a place in the south.  Was it a black town, basically?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly, it was a town that had one or two historically from slavery plantations, and then a very, very large black population.  It still exists.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering if there's a story behind the name, Uniontown.  Most things named union are--have actually do with the union and the Civil War [1861-1865].
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well as I remember it, it didn't have much to do with the Union.  It was quite the opposite of it.
Speaker 1: All right now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: To my, to my mother's parents.  As a small town five miles removed from Wedgeworth, Sawyerville, it was called Akron, Alabama, A-K-R-O-N.  My mother's parents lived there and that's where my mother, my mother grew up to a young adulthood in Uniontown and then they moved to Akron, and that's where she resided when she married my father [Roosevelt Williams].  My grandparents had seven, seven children.  So my mother had two brothers and four sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Nathan, N-A-T-H-A-N, W-A-L-L-A-C-E and Ellen, E-L-L-E-N Wallace, W-A-L-L-A-C-E.
Speaker 1: Now are there any--is that as far back as you can go in your family?
Speaker 2: In that family as far back as I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandfather and your grandmother, they were from Akron.
Speaker 2: Akron, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Alabama, okay.  Did, did they share any stories about you--with you about growing up in Akron?
Speaker 2: Yes through my mother, we would--as you know I have a large number of siblings.  We would visit them.  I mean they were only five or six miles away.  Sawyerville had several, Wedgeworth had several little towns that surrounds them so when you went to town, you either went to Akron.  If you really wanted to be ambitious, you went to Tuscaloosa [Alabama] or you went west to a small place called Utah, Alabama.  So in any case, I would guess that the frequency of at least once a month, probably more often than that, my mother would often deposit us with our grandparents while she went to shop or whatever.  So I spent a lot of time with them growing up.  My grandfather Nathan, I never knew the details of it, but he had been injured in a farm accident in Uniontown, and they had disability, he was disabled.  He could manage in terms of locomotion, but he had an eye damage and he had exceedingly high blood pressure and he had a huge wound on the side of his body.  I, I have my speculations in terms of what occurred, but he was, he was a very good person but it was clear that he, his, his body wounds drove him to be extremely bitter, extremely cynical about, certainly about black/white relationships, but about the, if you will, the positive-ness of humanity in general.  So I--there are no particular stories I remember him citing except that I knew his current disposition at that time was very much influenced by what had happened to him.  Once we, we would occasionally spend the night with them.  And one, early one morning while he was getting dressed, I saw this scar and I inquired about it.  And he completely recoiled.  So obviously it's not something he wanted to discuss.  And he never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I raised it once or twice, we raised it once or twice with my grandmother.  And she says no, no, no, don't--that's the wrong subject.
Speaker 1: So were all the injuries related to the same incident?
Speaker 2: That's my conjecture.  He didn't really, he didn't really explain it, but I--they were all on the right side of his body, so it was his right eye, it was the side and his leg.  So my guess is that, you know thinking the way, the primitive way in which agriculture was done at that time, my guess is that he fell or something of that sort, or probably was dragged, or maybe it was not an accident.  Which is, which is--on reflection a more likely possibility.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay.  So what did your grandfather do for--they basically farmed and--
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather at the time, all their lives as I knew obviously they, they farmed when they were in Uniontown.  But after they moved to Akron, he worked out an arrangement where he was the overseer of a large cattle pasture that had a large number of cattle for a local white farmer, and that's what he did.  He did not farm.  His job was to make sure that other people fed these animals and so forth and so on.  So the bulk of the time he was at home.  But remember he was disabled.  And as far as I can determine after moving from Uniontown to Akron, my grandmother never worked in, any a real job.  She was at home all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But they managed financially from this disability that he was receiving, and I don't think it was termed disability at that time, old folks' pension or something of that sort.  Some kind of pension he received.  And of course the, the salary that he received for managing, overseeing this cattle farm.
Speaker 1: Had he ever served in the military or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so he would have been, what born around the turn of the century or something?
Speaker 2: Yes he was, yeah.
Story_ID: 30568
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well what, what kinds of things did your mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] talk about in terms of growing up?
Speaker 2: The harshness of life in Uniontown [Alabama], the fields.  Minimalness she talked about education, well the minimalness of education an awful lot with us, and actually used it as a positive in speaking to us about it, what was not afforded them.  It was a combination of two factors.  There was minimum provision for schools for black children when she was growing up in this rural community, and they couldn't attend school conscientiously because they were working, you know they were busy with their parents in the fields.  That was one story.  The second one--she was not the exclusive provider of this information, but there were stories regarding Night Riders, you know the white terrorists that she recalled.  In fact she had very vivid memories of incidents, not that she necessarily observed, but you know in the community people described them.  But it served to terrorize young people whether in fact you had any direct knowledge of it or not.  So--and her delight that her parents made the decision to move from Uniontown to Akron where obviously the racial hierarchy was as substantial as it was in Uniontown, but clearly you were not subjected to all of these unrelenting variables in terms of behavior that people could engage in with impunity.  You could do it in Akron but at least there, there was a semblance of a criminal justice system and so forth and so on.  So those were most of the stories.  But they were not interestingly I was very close in a way almost as close as I was to my mother, to my mother's sister.  She had an older sister, Aunt Laura, L-A-U-R-A Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  And they lived in a farmhouse between, between our house and their house was a school that I attended.  So, and of course my cousins, her children attended the same little school.  So often after school, either they came home with us to play ball or whatever, or we went home with them.  So there was a lot of interaction because my mother and Aunt Laura were almost inseparable.  They did all kinds of things together.  In the country if they decided they were going to can vegetables or whatever they prepared, they would individually prepare and then gather at one or the other person's home and did it together.  But anyway I often as a child, would hear the two of them reminiscing about some of these terrifying experiences they had.  And this--they would name a person, this person was killed, that person was chased away to Chicago [Illinois] and no one ever heard of them again, etc., etc.  So that, that was a real, that was a real dynamic in their early lives.
Speaker 1: So did she have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, just to I think the sixth grade.  And that must have been very sporadic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In other words, I don't think that was--I don't know this as a fact, but I would guess from her comments that was not six full nine year terms.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Could she read or write fairly well?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--now--
Speaker 2: She would actually when I was in elementary school, she would actually assist us with our homework.  So she was--now I don't know how much of that she learned when she was twenty versus eight, but she was very good at it.
Story_ID: 30569
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Roosevelt, like the president, R-O-O-S-E-V-E-L-T, Roosevelt Williams.  He also was born in 1915 in May.  I don't know the exact date.  His life is, early life is interesting.  His mother and father, my grandparents whose names are Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T Turner, T-U-R-N-E-R, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  The individual who was a friend of the Bishop that I made reference to earlier, and his wife, my grandmother, was Emma, E-M-M-A Long Williams W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  When they were first married, my great-grandmother who turns out to be the central force in my life, my great-grandmother--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Annie, A-N-N-I-E Long, L-O-N-G Ellis, E-L-L-I-S.  She lived--my grandparents had a--my grandfather had inherited from his father about sixty acres of land, a farm on which my great-grandfather lived when I was a child.  His name was Jonas, J-O-N-A-S Williams.  So imagine this farm, my grandparents lived there in a house they had recently built, and then the original Williams house, that's where my great-grandfather lived alone, his wife had died.  His wife was Mary, M-A-R-Y Williams.  In any case, when my father was very young, he lived with my great-grandmother, Annie Ellis rather than his parents.  Now you've got to remember this is in the country so they're not far removed from each other, but she reared him.  So when I was therefore when I was growing up, there were--in terms of forces, there was my parents and literally if you would have put it in a city context, next door to them was my great-grandmother who had reared my father.  I'll get back to my grandparents in a minute.  When I--I'm the third of nine children.  So when I was born, well when I was two, obviously don't know this, I'm repeating what I was told.  And I, I know it's accurate because she must have told me this fifty times.  She must have assigned great value to having some child live with her.  So she worked out a deal with my mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] in particular for me to live with her as my father had done earlier.  So at age two and a half, I left my parents and went to live with my great-grandmother, and that's where I spent the rest of my life.  Now you've got to remember it took me five minutes to get from her house to my parents' house where my siblings and where my parents were.  But I lived, she reared me, I lived there.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, okay so raised two generations of--
Speaker 2: That's right.  When I went to live, went to live with her, she was seventy-two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my grandparents were, as I said they were farmers, he started with this base farm of about sixty acres and over time he added to it and it's about a hundred and sixty acres.
Speaker 1: Was there a story passed down in the family about how he got sixty acres of land in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes there's a story and you could, you could impute it.  My great-grandfather's father, who was white, gave the land to his son, that son.  And he and my great-mother Mary, had four children.  My grandfather, Uncle Ed who lived in Birmingham [Alabama] that I actually connected with later in my life when I went to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], and Uncle Sip who had a farm nearby.  What had happened is that my grandfather purchased the land that had been appropriated to his three siblings, and that's how he expanded the venue.  Because what my grandfather was to divide the property among the four of them.  So his father, this unknown but very real person, despite how I feel about that, must have endowed him substantially.  Because he must--it's a huge body of land.  That's how it happened.
Speaker 1: And this is a story that is not--I'm finding out after all these interviews, it's not that unusual, you know.
Speaker 2: In the South if you think about it, black people were A, slaves, then ex-slaves, and then so-called post-slavery, which was wanton apartheid, the only option was to become a tenant farmer and own nothing, or to leave.  So if you look at a family that inter-generationally is a property owner in the south, inter-generationally.  I don't mean someone who purchased it twenty years ago.  But if it dates a hundred years, then the source of it was the only people who owned land, and they were all white.  And that's the only way it could have happened.  Because black people, even, even if black people had the resources to acquire it, the psychological gymnastics they would have to deal with with the deed structure, recorder of deeds.  If the system decided your money notwithstanding, you will not purchase the property, you couldn't do it.  Very little of it was purchased.  It was given, it was by this, this disgusting exercise.
Speaker 1: Right.  There's a story--I think a lot of people don't really realize that after all these years, it still seems mysterious to folks.  And when I interview folks, I always ask how did they get their land.  'Cause it's-it's usually bounce back in the same (unclear).  So at any rate, so okay so they had sixty acres of land.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 30570
Speaker 1: And now did--what did your dad--now where was he born?  I think I didn't get where he was born.
Speaker 2: Wedgeworth [Alabama] also.
Speaker 1: Okay, same, okay.  The place that you were raised.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that was a little bit better than where your mother was raised.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well that was an interesting--that is an interesting, well it isn't any longer because the population has declined so substantially.  But that was an interesting community because Wedgeworth is within Hale County, one of the counties in the black belt, H-A-L-E.  And the black population, I know this accurately from having read it, records--shortly after slavery was about 85 percent of the total population for obvious reasons.  But what happened is that many of those individuals acquired an economic stake, probably by the same mechanism my ancestors did, and so when I was growing up, the little area, Wedgeworth and Sawyerville [Alabama], sandwiched between two towns, Akron [Alabama] in the north, three--Utah in the west, and Greensboro [Alabama] where I went to high school, was substantially black and the majority of those people were property owners.  So it was a rather--the distance from my house to my grandparents' house, which was about seven miles, all along the way I can now mentally identify black family after black family who, who were doing the same thing they were doing.  So it was a different kind of place.  There was a county sheriff, but he was--if there's such a thing, he was benign.  Maybe an exaggeration to say it, but if the black men in particular in the community, decided that the antisocial behavior of person X merits the person being in jail, that's when this one sheriff, this lone sheriff, would come and take action.  But if he didn't have the concurrence of those people, nothing happened.  So it was a, almost a self-disciplined and managed community until you left it.  As long as you remained in it, it was great.  But if you got outside of it, then it was another world.  And to some extent, that kind of cocoon, that kind of sociological ambiance, call it a fortress, was in a way--it served us well in terms of growing up, but in a way it was a prison because people who lived at the margin of it who knew about it, whites, they were more aggressive with you.  In other words, if they knew you were from Sawyerville or Wedgeworth and you were found outside of it, then their disposition in the negative was more rigorous.
Speaker 1: Yeah I could see that.
Speaker 2: Because the assumption was that we felt--the lower end of apartheid.  We hadn't, we didn't live in the brutal end of it.  And their position was you should live in the brutal end of it.  You should not be allowed to--you understand?  You were uppity, and you were quasi-self sufficient.  It was an agricultural community where they had built this incredible economy among themselves where I was a corn farmer, a major corn farmer and you were a major whatever, tomato farmer.  And we exchanged our products and we--they almost operated as a co-op.  They--if you were going to sell a lot of like my grandfather [Robert T. Williams] had large amounts of cattle.  Interesting the cattle station where you took the cows to be sold was in Uniontown [Alabama].  So they would, they would go to person's X house, collect three cattle and someplace else and get five.  Other words, they did it as a group.  So one person on the truck transported twenty cattle owned by different people.  Now as I got older I thought about the psychology of that.  The chances of being disadvantaged were less than if you had gone alone.  Black Farmer X going to Uniontown to the stock market, whatever cattle market alone was not in the position to negotiate a reasonable price.  But these six people together represented a different--and that's what they did.  I mean and it was deliberate, it was quite deliberate.  I knew that when I was a kid because I would hear them talking about it.
Speaker 1: It would cut down on chances of going to Uniontown too.  If you-- went all at once.
Speaker 2: The transportation, but also imagine you're the gatekeeper and it's not one person as a potential seller standing before you, there's six.  And they're all emphatically saying we delivered twenty-one cattle and they were all in good shape and etc.  Not one person alone where you're sitting there with your three assistants.  So they understood enough to change the dynamic in their favor.  And then of course now they've been paid.  The real problem there is that safety was decreased if the perception was that you had money if you were black.  Now you've got to get from Uniontown back to Wedgeworth.  You do it as a group, not one person.  So it was an interesting place.  Interesting kind of survival strategies they used.
Speaker 1: Did you have any sense of when, when that strategy was I guess--
Speaker 2: Abolished?
Speaker 1: No, when it started.  I just wonder if it goes all the way back to Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: There's, there's no doubt it did because, and I say that because I--my life is, I'm seventy and I jokingly--when you asked me earlier if I have a favorite expression, it's not favorite.  But in recent years I, I find myself often using this expression and I mean it several-fold.  I'm seventy going on a hundred and fifty.  And part of what I'm referring to is that I, I grew up in both in terms of knowledge base and experiences, in both the 19th and 20th century. And what I mean by that, by growing up with a person who was when I was ten, was eighty-two, she had a few friends who would come to visit her and they were also eighty-two, and their conversation was about a world that I couldn't even fathom.  But I learned it deeply because I understood, I mean I heard it.  Fast forward, I learned life at another level from my grandparents, both sides, and then my parents [Mattie Wallace Williams and Roosevelt Williams], and then myself and my peers.  And all of that took place from about age two until about age seventeen when I left home to go to school.  And so to answer your question, this process of collaboration and thinking through productive survival strategies, almost (unclear) what I learned from my grandmother and her friends, almost all of that started after slavery, right after slavery.  Almost all of it.
Story_ID: 30571
Speaker 1: That's interesting that the history of this school [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was founded in 1881, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right after--fifteen years after Emancipation [Emancipation Proclamation, 1863].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And a lot of the principals of collective activity, part of black farmers were preached from--were taught here on the campus.
Speaker 2: My Grandmother Emma, my great-grandmother, she religiously employed the bulletins that were produced from here.  I mean long before I knew anything about Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I knew about Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver and Tuskegee.  And to me Tuskegee was in New Jersey as a child.  But it was this place that they revered in a fashion in which (unclear) does not obtain now.  But they benefitted enormously from what was occurring here.  Now one of the reasons, one asked the question in this very, very rigorous racial hierarchy, why was a place like this allowed to operate that way?  And as the--I now know this from more contemporary reading.  The guiding assumption is that the recipients, my grandparents, great-grandparents, they didn't have the wherewithal to use it optimally, so it's okay.  But they were wrong.  These people were learning two things at the farmer's conference and going home and creatively converting them into fifty.  And that's the whole notion about the self sufficiency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have to pause here for a second for a notation and then we'll start up again.  Man, I look at those murals out here, the farmers convention-
Story_ID: 30572
Speaker 1: We're rolling again.  You said your great-grandmother [Annie Ellis] was seven when the Emancipation Proclamation [1863] was signed?
Speaker 2: Right.  So she had lived at the edge of it.  And I would imagine for the subsequent ten years, the same thing.  Cause nothing happened once it was signed, in effect.  And that trajectory from--I often, well obviously she is my, my first and last hero.  And, and I don't want to fast forward but in 1968 the--I got my doctorate degree at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] through a very circuitous route, riding on trains and all kinds of things.  She finally arrived.  She's now a hundred years old and, no ninety-four, ninety-four, she died when she- she lived until, she was a hundred fourteen [114].  But anyway it was just almost impossible despite how well I knew her to imagine someone being able to mentally get their head around knowing the edge of slavery and sitting in Elliott Hall at Purdue University for commencement, where there are eight thousand people and 98 percent of them are white.  In one lifetime, you don't accommodate that span of reality, but in fact she did.  So it was multi-century if you will.
Speaker 1: Right.  So okay, now I'm--so stunning that I'm trying to figure out if I got both sides of your family, I think I did, didn't I?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Both mother and father's side.
Story_ID: 30573
Speaker 1: Now did your dad, when he grew up, did he get a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father [Roosevelt Williams] attended the same school that I attended, which was not a school.  But he, eh dropped out of school when he was in the eighth grade, something like that.  And what I mean by--it's not technically correct.  It was not, it was not a school provided by the, the county.  Our neighborhood church. Flatwood, F-L-A-T-W-O-O-D, Flatwood CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church had erected a little cabin, a school, a one room schoolhouse, no, no--figurative expression.  Literally it was one room.  On the grounds of the church, on the church's property.  And it was called Flatwoods Elementary School.  That's where my father attended school, and so did I and my siblings, elementary school.  And he attended for about--I think he said in the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So they, they went to eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Right.  No, he went through all of that elementary school and then went to the high school for a couple of years.  School went from--there was no kindergarten during that time.  School went from grades one through six.  So he completed everything he could acquire at that elementary school, then went to high school for two years, then quit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that seems to be common that those schools would only go to sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were--in fact the entire state was organized that way.  There was no formal pre-K.  So the school started at grade one and went to grade six.  And then there was no middle school structure, so everyone went to high school.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Hale, H-A-L-E County Training, T-R-A-I-N-I-N-G School.  And in every state in the, in the south, if the school had, if it, if the nomenclature of the school included the word training, you knew what it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's where I went to high school.
Speaker 1: Another one is industrial.
Speaker 2: Same thing, same thing.  Same terms.  It means not academic.  You don't go to this school to become a chemist or a biologist, and you don't go to this school to be educated, you are trained to do--
Speaker 1: Training school.
Speaker 2: That's right, this is a training school.  And the corresponding high school the white kids attended was simply called Hale County High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Without a modifier.  But anyway that's the case with my father's education.  And occupation-wise, he farmed independently and then also in collaboration with my grandfather [Robert T. Williams] who had this very, very large farm I mentioned earlier.  He also worked in timber, logging.  He had a truck.  He cut trees and those kinds of things.  And for a short period of time, he worked for--there are a lot of waterways close to the house and there was a huge dam being constructed, and they had to clear the debris and trees and so forth from these tributaries, bodies of water.
Speaker 1: Is that the big Joe Wheeler Dam?
Speaker 2: No.  It was not that one, but it was preparatory to that one, it was a feeder.  The Army Corp of Engineers was finally building dam structures to control waterways from Tennessee down to the Gulf of Mexico.  So this large swatch went through Alabama.  And for about twelve years my father, when I was high school and when I was first in college, that's what he was doing.  So he farmed, he farmed and did timber hauling.  He then went back to only farming, reduced the farm and worked for the Army Corp of Engineers as one of the sort of journeymen, unskilled workers clearing out the waterways.
Story_ID: 30574
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story that is told in the family of how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The Flatwood CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church where the school is located, is literally across the street, across the highway from the Baptist church.  My father [Roosevelt Williams], I mean my grandmother [Emma Snow Williams] and everyone, my father's family, they were Methodist.  My--Granddaddy,Nathan, etc., they were Baptist.  And my maternal grandfather [Nathan Wallace] was a deacon in the Baptist church.  And my father went there for a program and apparently he was impressed with them.  And he invited him to come and visit their house in Akron [Alabama] and meet his daughter that he identified by name.  Aunt Laura had just gotten married, and so I guess my mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] was--the way he ran his house with his daughters, you know, you didn't get married out of sequence.  You married chronologically, so my mother was next.  So he invited my father and in a short period of time thereafter they got married.  That's how they met.  In fact they were in testy moments I can remember when I was a kid, I can--and I don't mean that in a very negative way.  But when she was annoyed with him, she would lament the fact that--would allege to lament the fact that her father made a mistake.  He invited him to dinner.  And his retort was, you know, whatever.  And then it became a big joke.  So I heard them talk about it a lot.  And that's how it happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so they were married in what year?
Speaker 2: Geez, I'm sorry, I don't know that.  But I can figure it out.  They were born in 1915 and they got married when they was 20, so--
Speaker 1: About 1935.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they're both the same age.
Story_ID: 30575
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you think about your parents' talents and their gifts, their dispositions, even their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father [Roosevelt Williams] mostly, physically, except he's much larger than I am.  But physical characteristics.  When he was, I don't know, well all my life so when he was in his '30s, he was completely bald.  My facial features are very much like his as you'll see in the photographs.  There are photographs of he and my brothers and so forth.  Dispositionally not like him.  Disposition--my mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] was very bright, reserved, quiet.  I sometime thought also lonely, sad.  But I'm very reserved.  And she, she was very introspective.  If you decided to come to her as a child and have a conversation with her, whatever is bothering you, you did not get self-evident responses.  Like oh, you have a bobo, you have an injury, we'll clean it, go away, you'll be okay.  She would use it as a, as a teaching moment about how you, you know, life is imperfect.  But if you really randomly take chances, you're going to get a lot of scars.  And she was not talking about my knee that was bleeding, she was talking about life.  So disposition is very much my mother.
Speaker 1: She took advantage of those kind of moments to teach.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and especially about the hazards of the society.  Which she spent a lot of time--and I think--well one that was her disposition.  But second that was a real issue because that was, you know I was born in 1940 so I'm having this conversation with my mother, say 1948 or something.  That was a very, very dangerous time to be a young black.  A few years later, I mean I will never, ever forget this experience.  Which until my mother passed prematurely, was the most devastating experience I ever had.  I, I don't know I was doing something one day and my older brother exclaimed that they had found this black child, little boy from Chicago [Illinois], you know Emmet Till, I'm sure for several weeks I didn't sleep well.  I mean it just fully terrorized me.  Later it seemed to lose its exceptionality.  But when you're ten, eleven years of age, and you've heard these ancient stories and you've listened to your mother talk to you again and again about, you know I have to go to the store, my mother is sending me to the store.  My mother does not want me to be, to subordinate myself to the proprietor in the store.  So I don't want to say yes ma'am, no ma'am.  So how do I get through this?  What kind of gymnastic do I employ?  Well you can do it.  You can respond affirmatively without saying either one.  The question is, is two pounds of this enough?  That's the question that's put to you.  My answer is, "My mother told me to only get two pounds."  Rather than saying yes or no.  Well that, that requires effort.  That requires, it almost requires training, and it's done with uncertainty because you're not sure whether by avoiding being subservient that you're actually not raising the ante on yourself by being smart.  I didn't use the second word I wanted to use.  You understand what I mean?  Because that's the way it was reacted to.  You have read at some point in your life, Beowulf or Paradise Lost and you see the book.  Do you, do you, do you admit that you have read it when probably only one other person in the county has?  You take a pass, you don't do it.  You have to internalize it, it's private.  And then that's a, that's a plus/minus construct because at least for me, what it became, it almost became my private world.  So I had to make a distinction between paying the price for what I knew versus robustly acquiring an awful lot of knowledge.  And as long as I, I made it private, there was no price.  You follow what I'm trying to say?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 30576
Speaker 1: I've often asked scientists this question about that kind of thing.  Because often black scientists find themselves in a situation where they're, they're thinking thoughts and pondering things that other people around them are certainly not, haven't been trained to think about, or they inclination is not thinking about, or culturally not even brought to that place.  So I mean were there others around you?  Was there anyone to talk to about something like that?
Speaker 2: There were.  I have an older brother [Charles E. Williams], two years older than I am and was a Tuskegee graduate and was in ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] here and retired as a Major General, worked for Colin Powell and so forth.  He was a very precocious student, very different personality than mine.  So he and I talked about it when I was young.  I had another classmate that--I had a classmate with whom I could have a conversation.  But who I could really have the conversation with in a very different way, was my great-grandmother [Annie Ellis].  I would talk to her, and her point was she had this huge, over--I'm sure you've seen one of these monstrous, oversized family Bible, this huge thing with all these photographs in it.  And she would say how much, how much learning--she didn't use the word knowledge, I'm trying to remember what she said.  How much understanding or sense, how much sense, that was the word, how much sense do you think there is in this huge Bible?  And I said I don't know.  Well, it's there.  I, no one else can prevent you from knowing everything that's contained therein.  So do it.  And use what you learn.  So I would say should I try to do this--she'd go and find some appropriate statement in the Bible about--I remember the first such conversation I had with her.  There is--it was about feeling guilty about insisting on having a straight A, always having a straight A average.  And she says that's not your choice.  So she cited the story about the differential talents, the person with ten talents, five talents and one.  If you, if you have, if you have been so endowed, you have an obligation to multiply and multiply and multiply and multiply.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: So she was, she was the real force.  And I, and I, I--it was a--it was freeing in a way.  Early on, I must confess I became fascinated with science, which also I think helped me grow up in that place because after a period of time, I didn't live there any longer.  I mean I wanted to understand why the leaves left, the trees lost the leaves.  And people would say it's fall, and that's nonsense.  I want to understand why it happened.  I wanted to understand why I can stand in the water in a little stream and feel this incredible force and someone says well that's because the water is running down the hill or whatever.  I wanted to understand why I could see in this rather open pond, lake I could see the fish swimming patterns and whatever.  And the horses can't do that, you know and other farm animals, these can.  And their breathing patterns.  So I just, I just became fascinated with, with living systems and, and that, that became my, if you will my world, my escape mechanism.  And I was very tolerant and accommodating and cooperative with everyone else.  But every single day, even school.  School was kind of a necessary event, but not really the major issue for me going to school each day.  The major issue was when school was out and I had to walk home and I'm walking through these woods and streams and I stop for five minutes and do the examination of the stream the same way I did yesterday, or (unclear) take a small container, a can or something from home and carry it around in my pocket the whole while I'm school and then the route home, scoop up water samples and discovered that this world I live in with these few human beings and, and all of their insanity, is not the world fully.  In this ten milliliters of water, ten ccs of water, there is, there must be fifty different living things.  Well it was that.  So that's what I did from--got me through some very difficult times, including my mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] died from when I was about, maybe fifth grade, until I got out of high school.
Story_ID: 30577
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about--that your grandmother [sic, great-grandmother, Annie Ellis] shared with you how she learned how to read?  She was basically born during slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They, they--the central item was the Bible and they painstakingly, you know 80 percent of it was too complicated.  They couldn't read.  So they took the things they could read and, and just (unclear) reread them again and again.  But in the process, she didn't understand what was occurring, but I do.  She was adding to her vocabulary every time she moved a little further.  I have in my possession, among my sacred documents, I left home, which is to say I left her, when I was barely seventeen.  Turned seventeen in August, went off to college two or three weeks later, and she died when I was forty-one.  She wrote me a letter at least twice a month that entire time.  And I watched over the years her borrowing from me to improve--it was an incredible process, yeah.  So as I'm sure an awful lot of people like she, suddenly presented with the opportunity to- leaving aside what the society was doing, but to self emancipate themselves.  They just took this long path of growing as much as they could, essentially the rest of their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she also was the president, when I was very small, president of something she referred to as The Lodge, but I later discovered it was one of these burial funds that black people didn't have the benefit of insurance, that--and she maintained, she maintained all the records for that organization because when I was a junior and senior in high school, I would actually assist her in doing the assessments.
Speaker 1: Did she collect the money too for it?
Speaker 2: She did it all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was a precursor to the black insurance companies.
Speaker 2: That's what they were.  That's right, that's right.  So when person X died they had this fund to--what it was about.  I went to many of those meetings as a little boy cause it was always held on a Saturday morning at church.  So I had to--I didn't want to go but I remember having to go to and sit through those meetings.  She was the president, so I had to be there and of course, all the other people were adults.  There were no children there, that's why I didn't want to go.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: So at your great-grandmother's house, it was just, just, just you and your great-grandmother, or were there other people in your great-grandmother's home, was it--
Speaker 2: No, just two people.
Speaker 1: Just two people.
Speaker 2: Only she and I.
Story_ID: 30578
Speaker 1: All right.  Did she have other materials there to read besides the Bible?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes she had books that she had collected over the years, people had given her, a lot of which I read.  And she also very cleverly had a friend, white woman, and I think it's probably fair to describe them as friends, who probably was about sixty [years old].  And she would get books.  I would hear her telling her to get books.  And of course what that was a euphemism for, you go to the library, which I can't.  You check them out and of course very few people in Hale County [Alabama]--I'm being unkind, read books.  So you could check them out for the summer, you know, not for three days.  There was no rush to return them.  And that's what I had during the summer.  She would not tell me to read them, she would just bring them home and say see the books I have in there?  And so I'd take a look at them.  And of course I saw the library card and I knew they were not due back until August 15, and so during the summer that's what I would do.  Then she would ask me to explain the stories, explain what I read.
Speaker 1: Did you get periodicals at all too?
Speaker 2: No.  Only--church related, Sunday school bulletins and my church related things, but no periodicals.
Speaker 1: Never got a 'Tri-State Defender' or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not, not during that time.
Speaker 1: Newspapers?
Speaker 2: Not during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used to read them--actually they were in the library at the school, Hale County Training School.  But we didn't have them at home.  So for me, I was familiar with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you--
Speaker 2: And occasionally, occasionally I would, I would read the--there's a black paper called the 'Birmingham World.'  I would read it.  Actually it was more frequent than--it was more than occasional.  My uncle, my grandfather's brother, great-uncle who lived in Birmingham obviously he subscribed to the paper.  And he would bring, when he would come to visit, large collections of them.  So that paper I did read with some regularity.  Always dated, always after the events had occurred.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a radio?
Speaker 2: No.  My parents [Mattie Wallace Williams and Roosevelt Williams] did.  We didn't have a radio, we didn't have T--we had nothing.  The books and the two of us and she [great-grandmother, Annie Ellis] had a rather nicely appointed two bedroom house, because she made everything.  She sewed, she made draperies and she, she was really vested in it.  And she had these incredible photographs that I still have of these old members of her family that I--only half of whom I was able--unfortunately before she passed, I didn't learn the identity of all of them.  But one of which is her, an aunt that I actually met, Aunt Julia.  So I actually met and spent time with a person who had actually been a slave.  She had the scars, you know and the ankles and so--I mean, yeah--from the shackles, right, right.  When she was ninety or so.  Only lived for a short period of time, but she lived with Baddy (ph.), my great-grandmother whom I called Baddy.  About a year and a half.  And she was very much like my, my grandfather nature.  I'm a kid, I'm naive, I'm asking her questions.  And she couldn't talk about them.  Now later obviously, I understood, yeah but that was interesting.
Speaker 1: That seems to be a common, you know way to--that people wouldn't talk about it.
Speaker 2: It's a coping, it's a coping strategy, yeah because you obviously have to relive that trauma.  And also I'm sure she was--I'm not sure, I would assume she [Aunt Julia] might have been concerned about frightening or intimidating me.  I'm not sure.  But, but no, no radio, no TV, no, nothing.  Just the two of us.  And it was--and back to the business about science, fascinating, being, becoming fascinated by what things were and how they worked and so forth, my great-grandmother [Annie Ellis] went to bed early.  Now that was inconsequential when I was five or six [years old].  But imagine I'm sixteen, 7:00 at night she went to bed, 7:00 o'clock.  In the middle of the summer, it's like 2:00 pm, it, but she went to bed.  But she got up early in the morning, 4:00, 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  So what--the point I'm attempting to make, every night unless I went, and I often did, I would leave and go and explain to her what I was doing, go and visit my parents, you know, be with my siblings until like 9:00 [p.m.] or so, then I'll come home.  But the bulk of the time I was there.  So it really meant from seven until I went to bed, I lived alone.  There was no one.  And so what do you do with the time?  Well there are many things you can do with it, but what I did was to just try to challenge myself to understand things.
Story_ID: 30579
Speaker 1: Okay now did, when did you--so you were, you were really interested in nature.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you first I guess conceive of that as being like scientific inquiry or, or did you ever have any sense of it?
Speaker 2: All, when I was in high school.  Even before I was in high school.  This, this elementary school that I attended, Flatwoods Elementary School, I told you was six grades, I only went to school there five years because at that time, you know the system was indifferent to whatever happened.  Technically, the system wasn't even providing the school, school being provided by the black community.  So I, I had this incredible professor, Mr. Sterling Wallace, S-T-E-R-L-I-N-G, W-A-L-L-A-C-E, unrelated obviously to my family, my mother's [Mattie Wallace Williams] family, from Birmingham.  And he was a Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] graduate, and had gotten a teaching assignment in this small, this school, in this small community.  And he was exceedingly demanding.  The way the school was organized, there were only two teachers.  One person taught grades one through three, and he taught four through six.  So I was in the fourth grade the first year he came there.  And he discovered that I most of the time didn't have anything to do because of, you know where I was relative to my classmates.  So what he did without formalizing it, I remained in the fourth grade, but he gave me the fourth and fifth grade work.  And at the end of that year, he went to my great-grandmother [Annie Ellis] first, because everybody knew her role in my life, and then to my father [Roosevelt Williams].  And said to them that he would like have me not be a fifth grader, but go from fourth to sixth grade cause I had in fact done the fifth grade.  I was to talk--he and I became very close and I would talk with him about my, you know, I wanted to understand how this works, whatever.  And he gave me the first science book.  He went on to Birmingham [Alabama], remembered it from college, from when he was in college.  Even though he was an education major, he gave me this general biology textbook that he had used in college as a sophomore.  I'm in the fifth grade.  Well on record I was in the sixth grade, but I'm a fifth grader, about eleven years old.  And it was--
Speaker 1: We just need to pause here for a second.  He's got a make, you know, reel of tapes, okay.
Story_ID: 30580
Speaker 1: Mr. Wallace gave me his college biology book because from talking with me, my predominant interest had to do with living things.  So I struggled to read it and--but discovered two things.  I, I really liked the analytic part of it, the inquiry.  And the second finding was that's when I was introduced to the, the scientific method.  How do you solve a problem?  From hypothesis formation to results, and then whether the results confirm the hypothesis.  So the, the logic if you will, of scientific thinking.  So I extracted that from the book and I decided geeze, this matches perfectly, this is what I want to do.  And I also am not going to deny the fact that I also consciously thought that this was a, it was going to be an escape mechanism.  That I'm going to think and do science, I'm not going to deal with America in its expressions.  So that was the first experience.  The second one was when I was a junior in college.  I had, again a Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] graduate, and contained therein, I don't want to divert, but contained therein is a powerful story that I see missing even at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] now.  Clearly, HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] had a quasi-monopoly on their upper end of the black talent pool during that era.  So these people were just incredibly gifted.  Mr. Sanders had grown up in Birmingham [Alabama], served in the Air Force for a while, got his GI bill, came home, got married and got his undergraduate degree from Miles [College] and he was the chemistry teacher at the Hale County Training School.  And this guy instead of just having a classroom, my first such experience, he had a laboratory.  He had a storage area in the back of the classroom that was intended for storage, but he converted part of it into a laboratory.  So during the lunch period, and I think the lunch period was something only like forty minutes, he would permit me and two other students, eat your lunch in eight minutes.  We would come during the lunch period and do experiments.  And he started us with things that could be done in fifteen minutes and you saw this, you know, fantastic reaction and then it became to be more complicated.  Sometimes it would take us a month to finish them.  But it was resoundingly clear to me that--two people, Wallace and Mr. Sanders, opened the doors for me in terms of what science is, how one does science, and the excitement that comes from making a discovery.  And I think it's remarkable that both of those people were Miles College graduates, and both of them were not, they were not teaching at Kennedy High in Cleveland [Ohio] or, or even Parker High in Birmingham [Alabama], but in these little isolated communities.  And it was a godsend that they were there because they were not many--even though the teachers were talented, there were not many Mr. Sanders at Hale County Training School.  I had a math teacher who was his counterpart, Ms. Hope, just incredibly gifted and demanding.  So in high school I had good science and math teachers.  But the point I'm trying to make is that those people labored almost in a fully discounted fashion.  Because society did not expect them to do anything worthwhile with us.  They did it anyway.  They were not expected to do it, they were not compensated to do it.  Their employment was not dependent on it.  They just simply were these rare products who decided to, to if you will, the way I think of them, they were intellectual warriors, they were revolutionaries.  Because whatever, however I feel about my abilities and what may or may not have happened, I am certain the trajectory would have been different if I had not been advantaged by someone at a critical level in elementary school and a critical level in high school to show me what was possible.
Story_ID: 30581
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of your high school again?  You went to--
Speaker 2: Hale County Training School.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  That's right, that's right, you did tell me, Hale Training School.  So you went right after Flatwoods [Elementary School].
Speaker 2: To that school.
Speaker 1: So you must have entered--you were pretty young entering Hales.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated from high school when I was still sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right.  So was there--your freshman year--
Speaker 2: In college I was seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was spent here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well in high school, were you involved in--did they have any activities in high school to get involved in like they do now?  I mean at Hales County?
Speaker 2: No, no.  There were activities, I mean sports.  My older brother played, brothers both played football, and softball team.  They had a debating team, which I considered for a while but didn't do--I actually joined the debating team when I was in college.  But no, I was not involved in anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how--after four years of high school, then what did you, what was your career path?  I mean what, what were you thinking that you were going to do?  Did you think you were going to be a scientist?
Speaker 2: I was convinced I wanted to be a scientist.  The challenge was I couldn't figure out how to do it.  I didn't have any money.  So the real hurdle was how to go to college.  And so I debated, though I was not yet eighteen, I considered perhaps getting a job until I was fully eighteen and then going to the military, you know, using Mr. Sanders as an example.  You understand what I mean?  Employing the GI Bill as a mechanism.  Considered a variety of options.  But I had one quasi-window of opportunity, or an advantage.  My older brother, the one I made reference to earlier, Charles [E. Williams], at that time had completed two years here at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] as a student.  And so he, he suggested Tuskegee as an option, and I talked to Mr. Sanders and others at the high school.  So I applied and I was admitted.  But since I didn't have any money, the university at this time, the Tuskegee Institute at that time had something called the five year plan.  So you could come to school and for the first three years you took an abbreviated load and you worked also.  So basically you were earning your tuition and fees.  So that's--I came here determined to major in biology or chemistry.  And I had a job in the School of Veterinary Medicine here on campus, that's where I worked.  And I, I found it, I found it very disconcerting and, and in the following regard.  Obviously in order for the university to have this mechanism by which students could earn their tuition and fees, the students by definition had to be modestly compensated because the bulk of it was to apply to your tuition and fees.  But I--when I was in the tenth grade in high school I mentioned to you my father [Roosevelt Williams] was working for this department--Army Corp of Engineers.  And in the summer, two summers, I worked there also.  And it was challenging, but it created a kind of sense of not self-sufficiency, but it was a sense that I can be a, I can be a teenager and masquerade as an adult.  I can do both of these things.  So while I was in school that year, I thought a lot about this and I decided well I'm going to see if I can simultaneously be a student and, and have a different compensation structure.  Well I can't do it in isolated Tuskegee, Alabama.  So back to my Uncle Ed, Great-Uncle Ed who lived in Birmingham, actually lives only two blocks from Miles College, lived at that time.  So after I spent a year here, I went to Birmingham [Alabama] during the summer and I worked.  And nearing the end of the summer, I saved a buck of, well what I would do, I would work and every two weeks I would go home and I had--minus trivial expenses, I had to deposit everything I earned into my great-grandmother's [Annie Ellis] safe.  So I had a, relatively speaking I had a lot of money after the end of the summer.  Enough to pay tuition and fees for half of a year because I worked overtime and etc.  so I decided to transfer from Tuskegee to Miles College.  Now Miles resonated to me because of Mr. Sanders and Mr. Wallace, and so that's what I did.  And then I, I--very few of my credits transferred from here.  But I completed the four year program at Miles in three years, and I worked thirty, I worked thirty hours a week.  So I earned my, my keep while going to school.  So--
Story_ID: 30582
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a, that's--you really were gifted (laughs).  I mean you are gifted.  That's all I can say.  That's--to be able to work--
Speaker 2: It's discipline, it's discipline.  I mean if you think about it over a twenty-four hour timeframe, it's not, it's not, it was not that challenging.  You get up, classes start at eight.  Monday, Wednesday, Friday my classes ended at 1:00 [p.m.].  I didn't have an automobile, I'd take the bus, go downtown, I'm at work at 2:00 [p.m.].  I work until 9:00 [p.m.].  I've gotten seven hours that day, right?  On days that I had labs, 'cause I was in science, I didn't go to work, but I had three days that I made, that I worked seven days in addition to going to school, seven hours in addition to going to school, so I had twenty-one hours.  And I worked all day on Saturday and sometimes I worked on Sunday.  Well you get the--your work ends at 9:00 [p.m.].  You get the bus, you get home at 10:00 [p.m.].  And in a very organized fashion, you study from 10:00 [p.m.] until 1:00 [a.m.].  You can do it.  It just, it just takes--you have to commit to an agenda and says the following.  On the two days that I had labs, Tuesday and Thursday and school didn't end until 5:00 [p.m.], I knew I couldn't, I could not restrict studying to three hours cause tomorrow I have to go to work.  So that evening, most of it was spent studying.  Now the one thing you compromise, that I compromise, I don't know whether everyone has to do it, but you certainly don't do much else.  Your social life is nonexistent, but you know, I figured I was eighteen, nineteen, twenty and twenty-one years of age.  So if God is kind, I would have all the rest of my life after age twenty-one to have a social life.  So I wasn't going to make an art form out of the fact that I wasn't having it when I was nineteen.  It just didn't matter.
Speaker 1: But this delayed gratification, this order, was itself imposed or did--well it had to be self imposed 'cause nobody can do it unless they're, they're involved themselves.  But, but did the plan come from you, or did somebody consult with you, or did you come up with it?
Speaker 2: No, it came from me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But I had enormous support.  I had as you can imagine my great-grandmother [Annie Ellis] was the, my leading fan.  And to insensitize it, even though she had very little money, she would say if I had, I don't know, $230, she gave me $20 to make it $250.  I mean she, she--that was her way of urging me to stay the course.  My mother [Mattie Wallace Williams] was dead and had been for a long time.  But I was also driven by a host of conversations I had with her in the last year of her life, which meant you know she, she was very ill.  And she knew she was going to die.  And so didn't know it with certainty, but assumed she would.  So the conversation was something like if I'm not around, I want you to remember the following.  And among the things, the lessons at the end of the day, the world is not always necessarily enabling, it's not necessarily kind, but let the world fail you, you don't ever fail yourself.  And in order to do that, you've got to be willing to suck it up and do what's required to stay on course and your agenda.  And I also think I was aided by the fact that I have, I didn't really--I'm very internally focused.  So I, I don't, I don't reach external to myself to complete my ego.  You know what I mean?  If I'm making mostly all A's and if I'm paying my tuition and fees per my sweat, and I have a great relationship with my siblings, my younger siblings and my father [Roosevelt Williams] and my grandparents and so forth, and I have a friend.  She would prefer that I saw her more often than working 90 percent, but she's a good friend, I'm okay.  Because I know what I'm attempting to do.  I have to be an outstanding junior if I want to be a scientist.  Junior year in college is not an end result.  It's just simply one step in the process.  I don't, I don't want to make an art form out of being a, a junior.  I want to get through it very well because that's a, that's a building block to what I want to do.  And the reason I work so hard in terms of my studies, I was quite aware of the fact of my history.  I recognized obviously that most of the people with whom I had to compete did not go to Flatwoods Elementary School.  They did not attend Hale County Training School.  And for that matter, even though I didn't realize it wasn't much of an institution and quality at that time, I was at Miles [College, Fairfield, Alabama], I was not at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  I later learned that wasn't important.  But I thought it was.  Because if I, I knew enough about how science operated worldwide, and how can you not since at least up until the latter part of the twentieth, half of the twentieth century the majority of the great discoveries were made by people who were not Americans.  So I was quite aware of the fact that I was about to enter a global arena.  Well someone in Germany and Belgium and England and so forth, their life circumstances were different, as were the people who were in New York.  I got to compete with all of them.  So this had to be a very, very--I got to do this well.  So that was the idea.  And if I don't do it well, it really doesn't matter whether I, I've earned the tuition.  Cause I didn't--I wasn't dismissive about it.  I suppose I would have been happy if I quote "graduated from college".  But I was not trying to graduate from college.  I was trying to become a scientist.  And these are things I had--if I, if I do the things required to be a scientist, I will graduate.  That would, that would just occur.  But you understand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was, so I was okay.
Story_ID: 30583
Speaker 1: All right, so was your major biology?
Speaker 2: Major in biology, minor in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any outstanding teachers at Miles [College, Fairfield, Alabama] that--
Speaker 2: Yes, there are, there were three.  I had Dr. Jones, I don't think he's cited there.  Emmet, Emmet Jones from Detroit [Michigan].  Gotten his Ph.D. at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan].  And he was a biology teacher, he taught me four courses.  But very much like Mr. Sanders--now given the fact that I have a job and I'm not around very much, he gave me the opportunity to be his teaching assistant after I went through one or two courses.  And what that really meant is that I had a job uncompensated because the privilege of being a teaching assistant is I prepared the laboratory.  But you should get paid for that, at least in the rest of the world that's what happens.  But it was just--I did it because it was just a fantastic learning experience.  Because what I was literally doing as a junior was running the laboratory for sophomores, a course that I had just taken the year prior.  So he was, he was incredible.  And also he was very inspiring and he was very motivational in the sense that he, he urged me not to even take a microsecond to, to interrupt my path toward becoming a scientist.  So he was very useful.  There was another professor who taught organic chemistry, Mr. Artis, A-R-T-I-S Lark, L-A-R-K.  He didn't yet have a doctorate, he does now.  He taught organic chemistry and he was exceedingly demanding in terms of the amount of material covered per semester, I would argue it was the most demanding course I've ever had.  But I loved it and he was--he and Mr. Jones both knew, Dr. Jones knew of my aspirations.  So often the two of them talked to me together.  And the third person was Dr., who also was a chemist, Dr. Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, McPherson, M-C-P-H-E-R-S-O-N.  He was a Miles College graduate who had gotten his doctorate at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana], and that was my first awareness of Purdue as a major institution.  Similarly, he was very helpful in the fact he attempted to convince me to leave biology and come and be a chemistry major.  But the three of them were forces.  And the last person at Miles College was the president.  And there's a photograph included in there with me.  The President at the time was Dr. Luichus, L-U-I-C-H-U-S, Luichus H. Pitts, P-I-T-T-S.  I got to know him because I was in the honor society at the college and I was--had a leadership role in the honor society and he really valued high academic performance.  So, you know we got to know each other and he learned what I desired to do.  And he had come to Miles College as the president after serving a leadership role in Atlanta.  So he knew--he was very familiar with Atlanta University.  So as I was--I didn't, I didn't really get to know him until I was a senior.  As I was about to graduate, he suggested to me that rather than going directly to a Ph.D. program, a doctorate program.  Maybe I should take a master's degree at Atlanta University as a kind of finishing exercise, and I understood what he meant.  You know, Flatwoods [Elementary School], Hale County [Training School], etc. before you go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], you need to maybe strengthen you further.  So I considered it.  I applied to Atlanta University for the master's program.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1961, right.
Speaker 2: 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30584
Speaker 1: Applied to University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], someplace else, Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  I can't remember all of them, but I know those two.  Was summarily rejected by both Wisconsin and Michigan State.  Was admitted by Atlanta University.  I make reference--
Speaker 2: Why did they reject you if you were on the honor society and all that?
Speaker 1: I had nearly straight A's
Speaker 2: Is it because of Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Since the third grade, Miles College, yeah.  I'm sure that was the case.  But I think it was more than that.  In fact I think, I later learned--remember later in my life I'm on the other side of the--I'm at Wisconsin and Michigan State, right?  As a faculty member.  And I saw how the Admission Committee disposed of applications that came from black students independent of where they were from.  Even if they had been from Michigan State.  Anyway I was rejected.  I make reference to that because those two rejections served to--as fuel to what was already a burning aspiration.  And the idea was this:  I didn't really know how it would be accomplished, but what I said to myself that summer of '61 [1961], as I was about to depart to Atlanta, the only school that had accepted me, Atlanta University.  That if life is kind, one day I'll have a conversation with Michigan State and Wisconsin about rejecting me, and I'll do it by my performance.  So I went to Atlanta University and I was there two years, took a master's degree.  Worked with a wonderful and brilliant woman named Dr. Mary Logan Reddick, I think it's in the material.  I make reference to her in particular because she had gotten her Ph.D. from Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachuetts], you know at that time women could not go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So the parallel school was Ratcliff.
Speaker 2: So this is a black woman?
Speaker 1: It's a black woman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate.  Incredibly brilliant.  Very demanding.  Not only in terms of the rigor of science, but expository writing, everything.  I mean she, she was just a consummate intellectual.  I took my degree with her.  Then I had met a student, fellow graduate student [Constance M. Marion] who was one year behind me.  And so we decided to get married right after I got my master's degree.  And--but she had an additional year at Atlanta University.  So Dr. Reddick recommended and the president gave me a faculty position as an instructor in the same department in which I had just taken my degree.  Now that's--to be candid, that was not altogether unusual because I had had another wonderful situation there.  Dr. Reddick often allowed me to team teach with her.  So it was not--when she made the request to the president, she was not doing it just based on my being a student, but of the instructional role in which I had served.  So we--my wife [Constance M. Marion] and I remained there a year.  She completed her master's, and then in six, that was '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  And then in '64 [1964] we moved to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].  Applied to Purdue and a host of other places and I was accepted by all of them.
Speaker 2: Were you ever in New Orleans [Louisiana] for any reason?  I have a note here that you got married in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's just her home.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: She's a native of New Orleans.
Story_ID: 30585
Speaker 1: Okay so you were still in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  I got married in New Orleans in, in August '63 [1963].  And shortly thereafter we went off to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].  And she worked with the master's degree as a researcher and I went to graduate school for four years.  And I was advantaged while I was at Purdue I, I would argue in two regards.  One at that time, the government, the federal government through the National Institutes of Health, was seeking to develop talented scientists, biomedical scientists.  So I got in--a NIH pre-doctoral fellowship.  In effect, the government paid for the last two of the four years of my graduate education.  You know they paid the tuition and fees and provided a living stipend.  And I think it should be listed as something called a pre-doctoral fellowship, right?  Okay.  The second way in which I was advantaged is that I selected as a major professor a person named Frederick Neidhardt.  He was a superstar, he was young, won a major national research award, but ran one incredibly demanding, intellectually demanding laboratory.  However, many multiples are used.  I couldn't understate how demanding he was.  I was the only black student in his, in his, under his supervision so he had, I don't know, six or seven students and young post-doctoral colleagues working with him, technicians.  But for three and a half years, he pushed me.  And the desirable--this is the point I'm trying to get to, desirable output from that.  A year before I graduated, got my doctorate, I had co-authored a similar publication in the Journal of Molecular Biology.  Now what I'm trying to say here among journals there's a hierarchy.  Journal of Molecular Biology is a, is a journal produced by the MRC, the Medical Research Council in England.  And its editorial board is who's who in science, all facets of science including a plethora of Nobel laureates.  So if you're an American scientist, forgetting about whether you're Luther Williams, if you're an American scientist, if you're Fred Neidhardt, it's a privilege to get a paper in that journal.  Well a year and a half before I graduated, I co-authored a paper with he, proceeded to, because he was so demanding, proceeded to--and we had done the work and made the discovery.  At the completion of my doctorate degree, we had a second paper in the Journal of Molecular Biology.  So the, so the issue is I started my career, publishing, at the epicenter.  Now maybe that would have happened if I had worked with someone, or had been trained by someone who was less demanding, I don't know.  But the fact that even dared to insist that we publish in the premier and most competitive place, speaks volumes about what he was about.
Speaker 1: Was, did, well with your history and work ethic, did you consider Purdue easy, easy?  You know I mean because of--I mean you didn't have to have another job or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  And I didn't have to have another job when I was in Atlanta [Georgia].  When I say it was demanding, I mean, I mean that in terms of the, the, the intellectual workload.  But to precisely answer your question and, and I am thinking about it very carefully.  I don't think I've ever--that's not true.  It's rare that I have felt overwhelmed intellectually in a class.  I'm trying to be honest.  I don't want to be overly egotistical about it.  But I'm, I'm being--that's the truth.  I didn't feel challenged at Atlanta University [Georgia].  I did not feel challenged when I went through all the courses at Purdue.  I didn't feel challenged in terms of I can't understand this in, in my research.  I was talking about the volume.  I was talking about the--
Speaker 1: The workload, not the challenge.
Speaker 2: I say that with some pride because as a sense of relief, the, the (unclear) experiment didn't work.  The gatekeepers who said you must go to Flatwoods Elementary School, lost.  The ones who said you must go to Hale County Training School, they didn't win.  The ones that said you go to Miles College because you can't go to the University of Alabama, which is seventeen miles from where I grew up, and as a state university, I could have gone there for almost peanuts, they lost.  Because all of those decisions made by them were made with high level intentionality.  They clearly intended to constrain me.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll pause here again for a second.
Story_ID: 30586
Speaker 1: We're rolling now.  In terms of why there's so many barriers to black students and quotas, you had a comment.
Speaker 2: I've approached the issue from the following context:  I know so very many black scientists, black academicians who have uniformly defied the odds and achieved despite all kinds of barriers.  On the other hand, I have taught scores given where I worked, prior to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I've taught scores of students, period.  And the frequency of the rare person in a large pool is very low.  You have to start with a sample size of several hundred to find five absolutely outstanding performers.  I know scores and scores of blacks who have done what I just described.  So my guess by conjecture is that people in charge of the system knew that from a long time ago, probably measured from slavery and erected barriers based on that knowledge.  As the ancient expression goes, they knew there was gold in those hills.  But if you don't want gold to be the product, then you erect a whole set of systems of impedance that make sure that you get a low yield.  What's remarkable is that it didn't work.  Far too many people effectively transversed it and soared despite it.  And even put in the contemporary context, one of the things that I, as you undoubtedly know, later in my career I became very much concerned with the issue of producing minority scientists.  And I, I, I lament strongly the fact that we seem to have lost some of the facility to do that.  If I compare 2011 to 1951.  The production rate was higher then than it is now, despite the numbers, the production rate was higher.  But the talent is still resident in the population as it has always been.  So the question really is, is doing the necessary analyses to evolve different strategies.  I'm not trying to suggest that in 2011 you can use the same approaches that were employed fifty years ago.  I know in the current world very, very few young people would live the way I did when I went to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  That, that's not what I'm asking for.  But what I am observing is that there's a huge chasm between what I am convinced is the sustained talent base and what we're getting as a yield.  So we have to change that dynamic.
Story_ID: 30587
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So okay well can you tell us a little bit about your dissertation?  What was the title of it and what was the--what was it about?
Speaker 2: It was Control of Argininyl, A-R-G-I-N-I-N-Y-L transfer, T-R-A-N-S-F-E-R, R-I-B-O-N-U-C-L-E-I-C acid, A-C-I-D, synthetase, S-Y-N-T-H-E-T-A-S-E, in a bacterium called escherchi coli, E-S-C-H-E-R-C-H-I C-O-L-I [Control of Argininyl transfer RNA Synthetase in E. Coli].  Now what that means is this:
Speaker 1: That's e coli from.
Speaker 2: That's e coli, any coli, right.  What control refers to is the following:  All living systems have X genetic capacity encoded in individual genes.  But genes are not necessarily expressed continuously.  Let me give a simple example.  In the human body at birth, we have a total set of genes that controls, that results in the production of a whole series of hormones.  From birth until puberty, only those genes that have to do with juvenile development are turned on.  Post-puberty, in fact what triggers puberty is the beginning of the expression of genes that calls for hormones that will not produce until then.  Then as one transitions into adulthood, there's a decline in the puberty specific hormones you turn on other genes.  At the final end, not final, but at the end of the, the continuum as the aging process begins to occur, a whole series of genes that were on through young, mid, late adulthood, are shut down.  Perfect example of a cyclic process.  So what I wanted to know was the following:  These tRNA synthetases, they're enzymes that attaches an amino acid to the code, the gene product, that's tRNA, that allows one to produce a hormone.  A hormone is composed of X number of amino acids.  So what I wanted to know was whether this protein which is crucial for that indispensable process, whether its expression was regulated.  Was there a switch on its gene.  Because if so, that switch then could determine whether you, you produce that protein product or not.  Well heretofore that had not been explored.  So we--I used a variety of genetic approaches, which meant I introduced--if you want to learn what a gene is doing, you change it such that it moves, changes from functional to nonfunctional, so you mutate it.  You create a variant of it, you render it defective.  It's a plus minus exercise, okay?  As long as the normal gene is there and its expressed, I can't really learn anything about it in terms of mechanistically.  I can describe it, but I can't learn anything.  I can't answer the question of whether it has the capacity to be turned on or off.  So what I do is that I compare the normal expression to one that I have genetically altered.  In fact not one, I create a whole cascade between normal, say from one hundred to zero.  And then take those products and look at, biochemically and chemically, look at their expression.  And then once you, once you get the first answer, yes the gene's expression is regulated, then the next logical question in the scientific process is why and how.  So then you, you do additional studies to try to determine what's the trigger.  And I already know there's a switch.  It can be in the on position and the off position.  Does one push it from one position to the other just simply by moving the switch, or is there something else that controls the switch?  Okay.  So that's essentially what I did.  And, and showed in the case of one--there are twenty of these genes.  In one of them that is from my dissertation thesis work, that is regulated, controlled, and how its controlled.  Then rapidly expanded it to three others so I knew that was the case and it had never been done before out of four out of the twenty.  And then subsequently shown that it's true, period.  That was, that was the work.
Story_ID: 30588
Speaker 1: All right.  And what would be the practical application of that research?  Not, not that it has to be, but --
Speaker 2: The practical application--but there's one practical application is, is that exists right now.  If, if one desires to do gene therapy and, and after all of the sequencing of genomes we're now able to do that, you can take a normal gene-you have a defective gene and you insert into an appropriate system, a normal gene.  The question is not whether the gene is there, the question is whether it can be turned on.  Follow me?  So, so gene therapy is not just taking a, a defective product and overlaying it by a normal one, you have to actually express it.  And the expression has to be controlled because a condition--you can either--if the gene is defective, you have a hypo condition, inadequacy.  An equal disease is a hyper condition where you produce too much.  So, so a direct application of, of what we discovered a long time ago is now finding its expression in gene therapy and in fact it's been used a whole array of modalities.  Let me give you another example.  One huge problem in, in, in human medicine now is that in hospital, hospital settings, it's necessary to try to control bacteria so that when people are resident in a hospital as patients, they don't get an array of bacterial infections.  Well the way in which we have been doing this as a country, as a culture, as a world for a long time, is, is scrubbing all of the surgical equipment with antibiotics.  Well what has happened is the bacteria have mutated.  And they're now, they're resistant to those antibiotics.  So the chances of going to a hospital and getting a serious infection today is by orders of magnitude greater than it was fifty years ago.  Well the organism which also speaks to another part of science, obviously if you continue to stress a system, it finds the capacity to compensate for it.  So obviously the bacteria--what, what caused the bacteria to mutate to become resistant is that we continue to feed them products that were undesirable form their perspective.  Well what we need to be able to do now--you can't eliminate bacteria from contact with human beings.  For every one cell I have in my body, there are ten microbes.  So bacteria, fungi, the number of them in my body are ten times larger than the total number of my cells.  So we are carriers of this microbial world.  The question is how to live, meaning human, to the microbes that you carry, live together.
Story_ID: 30589
Speaker 1: We seem to live in a time where there's a lot of fear of bacteria and these hand sanitizers, antibacterial wipes, which people really think they're really doing something.
Speaker 2: They're not.  You're not even dealing with the important part.  When I--what I'm talking about the ten to one ratio, I'm not talking about bacterial on my skin.  I'm talking bacteria in my lungs, kidneys, intestines.  They are within me.  So a human body in terms of cell types, is a composite of both human and microbial cells.  So sanitizers do absolutely nothing to the bacteria that's in my kidney.  So this is a waste--but it's doing something that's worse.  It is actually enticing the bacteria that are on the surface of my skin, some of whom will penetrate my body, to become resistant to the chemicals that are in the sanitizers.  So the sanitizers, they're mutagenic agents.  They're causing the cells to become, I mean the bacteria to become resistant.  So it's, it's, it's growing like--I mean sanitizers are the mini version of cell phones.  I mean Americans will convince themselves that they must have them and it's a billion, trillion dollar industry that has no value.
Speaker 1: I spent a week in the public schools and children now are given a--there's a gallon tank of sanitizer.
Speaker 2: That's what I mean.
Speaker 1: And they're squirting it on their hands instead of washing their hands.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.  They're bound, they're bound.  But the point I was trying to make is that in order to change that dynamic, what one needs to do is to learn how to control the genetic expression of the bacteria.  That's what I meant.  You don't get there by forcing, by pushing--just think of it in terms of evolutionary pressure.  If you continue to push the bacteria toward an environment where they live less well, natural selection pushes back in the other direction and they're going to adapt.
Speaker 1: So you'll get super bacteria.
Speaker 2: You'll get super bacteria.  It, it's like, it's like--it's an analog to continue to ask amphibians that only have lungs to survive for a small period of time on land.  Over time, they develop structures like lungs.
Speaker 1: You mean gills at first.
Speaker 2: Or the gills, yes, yes.  It's, it's--that's an exaggerated example of what I mean.  It's an adaptive process.  All living systems do it.  Another example is using pesticides in--to kill fungi and so forth on agricultural crops.  The take home from that is that you administer the pesticides for ten years, and then suddenly they don't work any longer because you force the microbes in the soil, and they are in abundance compared to this few plants you're talking about, to override it.  The key is to not apply that selective and adaptive pressure.  The key is to work in harmony with the living system, find a way to modulate its expression so the plant can grow and the fungi can grow.  That's really what you want to do.  You're trying to grow a tobacco plant or a tomato plant.  You're not in the business of killing microbes.
Speaker 1: It seems like there's an application in that theory in foreign relations too, but we don't want to get into it.
Speaker 2: There is.  There's an application, there's a powerful application of that relationship I would argue in all human conditions.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is getting deep, so (laughs).
Speaker 2: But it's true.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30590
Speaker 1: Well now you, you went for a postdoctoral fellowship.
Speaker 2: Right, I got my degree at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] and then as a (unclear) at least in molecular biology, one does additional research before you take a faculty position.  So I went to State University of New York at Stony Brook as a postdoctoral fellow, and it was funded by--had a, had a postdoctoral fellowship funded by the American Cancer Society.
Speaker 1: This is 1969.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '68[1968], '69 [1969].  I was there a year, also it was very productive, published several papers.  And at the end of that year, I went to Atlanta University [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now just to back up a little bit.  Now you were in school, intensely in school during most of the Civil Rights drama in the south.  Did, did you ever feel compelled to participate in any of--
Speaker 2: I participated, given my work schedule, I participated moderate--intensely but moderate, sporadically when I was at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] because that was a turbulent time.  Preceded the 16th Street bombing.  I was there.
Speaker 1: In '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: I was there until '61 [1961].  When I went to Atlanta [University, Georgia], it was also very fervent.  Almost everything was occurring there.  I didn't participate there.  But by interesting coincident, my wife and I were literally in Birmingham [Alabama] the Sunday morning of the bombing [16th Street Baptist Church Bombing, 1963].  We had--we were driving from my great-grandmother's [Annie Ellis] place back to Atlanta and the way--at least the way we did it then, is that you came from Sawyerville, Wedgeworth [Alabama] up to Birmingham, then to Atlanta.  In 1968, '69 [1969], at least for me, I had a great time living out on Long Island, doing the research.  Stony Brook [New York] is almost--it is, it's the mini Hamptons.  It was a gorgeous place, right on the Long Island Sounds [New York].  People were wonderful to us.  But it was a very difficult time to be there because that was--I don't know if you are old enough to remember this.  But there was a huge conflict over the integrated schools, something called Ocean Hill-Brownsville [teacher's strike].
Speaker 1: Yeah in Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn.  And it was so disgusting.  And I had a friend, a Jewish friend who was very much into--he's from the city, very much into it.  And he and I actually participated occasionally.  So that was it.  So the early part, the most substantial period was when I was in college, when I was at Miles College.  Because it was unavoidable.  I mean I was dealing with it every day.  I was riding the bus, the segregated bus downtown and I worked in the middle of downtown.  And of course imagine my working and I'm delivering something and I--there's a march and a third of the people I know because of my classmates from school.
Story_ID: 30591
Speaker 1: I believe what was Hosea Williams was a chemist wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was he at--did you know him?
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew him from Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause I lived in Atlanta on three occasions.  One when I was a, I was there three years as a student and then one year I worked there.  And then I went back to Atlanta as I was about to indicate, in '69 [1969].  And then of course went back later when I was president.  But I knew--
Speaker 1: Marion Berry was a scientist too I think.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  He and I--long story, he and I spent some productive times together when I was at the National Science Foundation [NSF].  When he was the mayor, I don't know, the second or third time.  After he had been in prison.  And we had, we had some good conversations.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  I don't know if you know him, but the mayor of Chicago [Illinois] after Harold Washington died, Eugene Sawyer.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Eugene Sawyer is from, is from Greensboro.
Speaker 1: Is he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I knew him.
Speaker 1: And he was a scientist too, a chemist.
Speaker 2: Yes I know.  Yeah, yeah, he was two years ahead of me.  He, he is a graduate of Hale County Training School, Eugene Sawyer.  Yeah, I went to school with his younger sister.
Speaker 1: And we've interviewed him too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's quite (unclear).
Speaker 1: I was just thinking there's a lot of science connections here, civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes that's right.
Speaker 1: Did, did you ever meet Dr. King?
Speaker 2: No.  But I knew well [Ralph] Abernathy and--well I met him, I've shaken hands with him.  But I never really talked with him.  But Andy Young I knew exceedingly well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I knew Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King.  Because when I was the president of Atlanta University [Georgia], she and I--I would interact with her then.
Story_ID: 30592
Speaker 1: Right.  Do you have a story from 1968, from Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was--on April fourth I was writing my dissertation because I was going to graduate from Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] with my doctorate one, three or four weeks later.  I'd nearly finished it.  Was in the lab.  My wife [Constance M. Marion] called me and we, she and I went to [Frederick] Neidhardt's, one of the major professors, house.  And he and his wife and Connie [Constance M. Marion] , my wife, myself, watched the television, ever ending recitation till about 3:00 in the morning.  And then there was a blur from then until he was in Sisters Chapel.  That was just like two days later, you know when there was a public viewing.  And the blur was I thought about it later and I think what happened was it conjured up some of my own residual fears from a very different time I had when I learned about Emmett Till.  I, I am trying describe it in the following way:  I understood then and I understand even better now that the, the country and the world has realized a very, very high price for that disruptive event.  But on the other hand, I am, I am enormously buoyed by the brilliance.  And what I mean by that is that this man in thirteen years, thirteen years transformed America.  There's no debate.  Again, about the gold, it's in the hills.  So that allows me--I couldn't do it then, but that allows me now to, to think of it in a less painful context.  What I, what I found very difficult to handle was the, the dastardly way in which it was done.  You understand what I mean?  No, if you're going to get killed, you're going to get killed.  That's not really what I'm saying.  But to be instantly and cowardly shot from a distance by some--it, it was, it was almost not real.  You understand what I mean?  I have a theory, but I don't want to discuss that.  Maybe I shouldn't--
Speaker 1: Shouldn't say it.
Speaker 2: I, I'm not opposed to the theory.  Let me just say this.  The theory is "ascientific," so a scientist shouldn't engage in it.  But let me just say it this way.  At my present age and experience, experiences, aggregate experiences, unlike when I was twenty-eight or twenty-seven, that homeostasis, this balancing process I made reference to, I think it's existed throughout time.  If you do your work in an extraordinarily brilliant and expert fashion in thirteen years, it's done.  You understand what I mean?  And there are notable examples throughout history.
Speaker 1: So is it--
Speaker 2: There's an Indian mathematician that continues to fascinate me (unclear).  He did a mathematical calculation having to do with N numbers.  And he died when he was thirty-two.  And the mathematics world is still trying to solve that problem.  One of the most brilliant formulations ever done.  And etc., etc.
Story_ID: 30593
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in a religious environment.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To be sure, down South.  How do you reconcile science and religion?  They often seem to be at odds.
Speaker 2: No conflict for me.  I would positively, with absolute certainty that living systems are the precise product of a long evolutionary chain.  But there are phenomena that science has not explained.  What it has not explained in part is the original event.  Somebody asked me recently, a young person, what were the--sort of like the Shakespearean analogy seven stages of life, in the sixth or the seventh stage of your scientific career, what do you think are the ten most important scientific questions that have not been addressed?  One clearly on my list is the origin of the universe.  The quantum mechanics just doesn't get you there.  Am I optimistic that full understanding will be achieved?  Perhaps.  But I think we need capabilities that extend human capacities, huge computational resources and so forth.  I think we can get it.  The religious part goes to the following:  You take a very, very complicated system like a human being, and endow it with the capacity to act effective or not effectively, positively or negative, and that's true.  It is possible, depending on the belief system, that you take seriously, to optimize behavior.  If you, if you start with the premise that, that our mental construction, our synaptic construction allows anyone to commit murder, I mean potentially, as a potential.  How does one live far removed from that?  You follow what I'm saying?  Is it possible ala Mother Teresa to do good despite what the world thinks because it's not about you in the world.  It's about you and your belief system.  Resoundingly, yes.  That's not in conflict with science.  You follow me?  The science part is the, is the molecular character of her liver and her cardiovascular system, and her nervous system, that's science, and the over arching physical forces.  She cannot defy gravity despite what her belief, religious beliefs are.  You understand?  Those are the science.  But to believe, but to--to live if you will, at a different level of civility, which is in part what I'm talking about.  Sure, there's no conflict.
Story_ID: 30594
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so now, now we're at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --after Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York].
Speaker 1: So after Stony Brook we go to Atlanta University--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you take a position as--
Speaker 2: Assistant professor.
Speaker 1: Assistant professor, okay.
Speaker 2: I was there a year.  And when I went to Atlanta University, I had three other job offers.  One of which was at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana], from which I had just graduated.  I had an understanding with them that if I had a successful postdoctoral period when I was at Stony Brook, they would offer me a job.  So as I was about to go to Atlanta, they did offer me a job as did Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], as did Harvard's medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts].  So I went to Atlanta with, quite frankly, some mixed feelings.  But I think it was a godsend in the following regard: I was lucky to get two--my first two research grants, which is how you initiate a career.  One from the National Institutes of Health, and one from the American Cancer Society that had supported my postdoctoral studies.  So I arrived in Atlanta [Georgia] with two grants.  Immediately put together my research laboratory and attracted a large collection of graduate students at Atlanta University working on their master's degrees.  And in the middle of the year I decided I really wanted to go get back in the high power environment of Purdue.  Neidhardt [Frederick C. Neidhardt], the person with whom I had taken my degree, had just gotten a job as the head of the Department of Microbiology at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  So he was vacating his laboratory, the laboratory in which I was trained.  And the department had the audacity to offer me the position that he once held.  So all bets off, I was leaving Atlanta.  But I negotiated, since they very much wanted me to come, and this is an outlier and I don't mean it arrogantly, but I do mean it in terms of what is possible, I have never applied for a job in my entire career, and I've had many jobs.  I've never--I've always responded to someone's overture to me.  So the department head says--I said I don't, I'll take the job, but I've started this effort of training these minority students.  And if, if I take the job, will you admit them as graduate students?  And the answer finally was yes.  So very rapidly in the middle of the summer, after all of the application deadlines were passed, my students submitted papers and I took seven students from Atlanta University to Purdue with me.  I'm a starting, green assistant professor.  And instantaneously my laboratory became what it remained throughout my active career.  Beyond my research, it became a major, major training center for African American scientists.  Of those students, one of them spent a year with me at Purdue and, and took his degree from Atlanta University because he was nearly finished.  He subsequently came here to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and chaired the Department of Biology for twenty or thirty years.  Another student who was my younger brother, had taken a master's degree at Atlanta University, got his Ph.D. at Purdue with a friend of mine. Because of nepotism, I couldn't serve as his major professor.  Another former student that went from Atlanta to Purdue with me, Dr. McGinnis, is a full professor at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and chairs a department there.  Another of those students got his Ph.D. with me, Dr. Coleman, went to the NIH after he got his doctorate with me and he's had a very productive thirty odd [years] career at NIH, et cetera.  Incidentally, in the publications that I gave you, you will see that most of those--the ones I selected I did it deliberately, are co-authored with these students.  So out of that Atlanta University to Purdue University transition, I was able to bring together what I re- what I regarded as the, essentially a sacred vocation.  Because I had the choice, I mean I had the option.  All I had to do--I had my grants.  All I had to do was do my own research and do my career.  But I challenged myself to see if I could do both and, and I am exceedingly proud of the output.  After I was at Purdue for three years, in, in higher education it normally takes six years to get tenure.  Are we together?  But I actually got promoted from assistant to associate professor in three years and received tenure, which as you know is a lifetime appointment.  There had been--
Story_ID: 30595
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: That was in '73 [1973].  I went there in '70 [1970] and got tenure in '73 [1973] as associate professor.  I had published an awful lot by then and was fairly well known.  And the joke, the buzz in the field was Luther was, Luther's good but he can't handle the top.  He can't, he can't handle [University of California] Berkley, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so forth.  So MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] offered me a job.  They had offered me a job earlier.  So I left Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], but I, I left cleverly.  I took a leave of absence from Purdue because I had tenure and I went to MIT and I was there as an associate professor, meaning that MIT had to extend me the same appointment that I held at Purdue.  And I was there '83- no '73/'74 [1973/1974].  That was also disconcerting time, you asked me about civil rights.  Because I happened to go to Boston [Massachusetts] when this woman, [Anna Louise Day] Hicks was leading the South Boston buffoonery [refused to acknowledge de facto segregation in Boston, Massachusetts, during the 1960s].  But then I went back to Purdue and after I was there in '74 [1974], 1976 the following thing happened:  Obviously I was well known on campus at the university in terms of producing minority PhDs.  So I was asked to move this program on a university, Purdue University-wide basis.  So I created something called the Minority Center for Graduate Education.  And in order to do it, I had to be a general university administrator.  So I became an assistant provost on a part-time basis, which meant I continued to teach, I continued to train my students, I continued to run my research program and I also did this administrative task.  And I did that from '76 [1976] until 1980.  Each of the three jobs.
Speaker 1: Now let me go back a little bit here.  A couple of papers here that are noted, but I think they're about the same thing, so I'll talk about the second one.  A paper published in '74 [1974] in the Journal of Bacteriology, co-authored by E. McGinnis and L. S. Williams.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now I'll let you give us the name of the paper, The Depressional Synthesis of--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Branched Chain tRNA Synthetases.  It's in your folder.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you want a (unclear), that's one of the papers there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But the point is McGinnis is a person who took a doctorate degree with me and who is now a senior faculty member and administrator at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], that was the point I was making.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?
Speaker 1: And the--now does the paper advance what you had previously?
Speaker 2: That's what I had done.  I had moved from synthetases, one class of genes, now two another class of genes.  The idea is that what you ultimately would like to do is to explain how many gene cells control in this fashion.  I started my work by working with one class.  I got grants from NIH [National Institutes of Health] and the American Cancer Society where I proposed to extend that research to other classes of genes.  So what that paper and my students are doing is, is talking about another class.  The branched chain amino acids, then we went to non branched chain amino acids, we just kept extending it.  And each of those papers that I--publications that I have in the sample, deals with a different one to try and give you the range of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's 1980, oh in 1979 I was promoted to full professor, which you made reference to in your short bio.  But that is not only a tribute to me, that's a tribute to Purdue University because nine years from the time I arrived there as an Assistant Professor, I was at the top of the professorial ranks.  And that I could have performed off the curve, the university still had to have the, the willingness to actually acknowledge it.  It's a special place to me because of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you moved--'79 [1979] you began a relationship with the National Institutes of Health?
Speaker 2: '79 [1979]--what you are referring to?
Speaker 1: It says you began a long relationship with the National Institutes of Health in '79 [1979] and served on various--
Speaker 2: Yes, well one of the things that happened in science is that if you--when you acquire X stature, you then are asked if you, if you, if you get grants from the National Institutes of Health and you are very successful with them, then the National Institute of Health starts asking you to be a person who decides whoever, who else gets grants.  So not only as review of grants, but also policy.  So the National Institute of Health has what are called National Advisory Councils.  And on those councils are "Who's Who" in biomedical sciences.  Deans of the major medical schools, Nobel laureates, etc., etc.  I was appointed to--in '79 [1979], the first of those.  In fact I'm still on one.  I'm on one now for the--that reports to the Director.  So I started this, this relationship that started in--this work for them, service for them which obviously is an honor for me.  It opened, has opened a lot of doors, started in '79 [1979] is continuing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You served as Dean in 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay now back to Purdue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I put together the Minority Center for Graduate Education.  A former student of mine was my deputy and then Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri] approached me to be the Dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and a full professor of biology.
Story_ID: 30596
Speaker 1: And so I moved from Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] to St. Louis [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri].  And continued my research program.  The other wonderful thing with NIH [National Institutes of Health], every time I moved from one institution to the other, they allowed me to move my grants, so I never interrupted my research program.  I was dean of the graduate school.  Near the latter part of '83 [1983], University of Colorado, which has a university-wide system, meaning there are multiple campuses, like Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] has, for example.  The major campus is in Boulder and there are three other campuses.  And there's a president of the entire system, and I was the vice president for academic affairs for the entire system.  I had barely gotten--arrived in Boulder in '83 [1983], when a delegation of people from Atlanta, Maynard Jackson the former governor, I mean former mayor and a host of other people, came to talk to me about the possibility of presidency of Atlanta University [Georgia].  So I had a long conversation with the president of the University of Colorado.  He understood the pressure and the problems were at that time, Atlanta University, because unlike when I went there in the early '60s [1960s], black students were going to graduate school any place they desired.  So there was a loss in students, loss in finances.  They were having an enormous financial challenges, etc., etc.  So they were looking for a knight in shining armor, that was not necessarily me.  But they convinced me because of my long connections with the place, to try it, so I went to Atlanta.  So I left Colorado with the president and I having reached a very good--he understood why, why it was like a call home.  It's like Baddy saying come home and repair my roof.  So you go.
Speaker 2: Had you intended to stay in Colorado for a long time?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  I had no intentions, I had no intentions--that's why I'm explaining it that way.  I was only there three months before they came to, to ask me to consider it.  Well obviously I just accepted a job.  So step one in the process is I have to talk with the president of [University of]Colorado.  And he actually was very helpful to me and we sort of decided look, try it.
Story_ID: 30597
Speaker 1: So I went to Atlanta [University] and I was there three years.  But within the first month I was there, I--at least my approach to problem solving, I couldn't see any way I could solve the problem by growing it.  Because obviously people don't like to--philanthropic communities don't like to pay bad debts.  Second, I had to accept the fact that the idea of a standalone graduate school without being undergirded by a college really was no longer a viable idea.  Now one outcome of that was the merger of Clark, the undergraduate college and Atlanta University.  But second, it didn't make any sense in my judgment to deplete the university's scarce endowment that has been around for almost 120 years.  So you got to stop using that as an operating revenue.  Well the only way to--if you're not getting any new money, the only way to stop doing it is to squeeze your operating budget, which of course is what I did.  And it meant that you got a--people have to perform at a higher level and so forth and so on.  So I didn't really know what the eventual result was going to be, but I thought that was the appropriate strategy.  And I'm going to be very candid.  I did not--people in Atlanta knew this--I was not there for the long term.  That's not really what I wanted to do.  I mean obviously if that was the case, I wouldn't have gone from Purdue [University West Lafayette, Indiana] to Wash U [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri], to Colorado [University of Colorado, Boulder], you understand what I mean.  'Cause opportunities existed prior to them.  Leaving aside the fact that I was fully vested in training African American students.  So a very, very demanding--I shouldn't say three years, about a year and a half, but I got the problem under control and they were--the two institutions were positive for the merger.  And I had worked out an arrangement in advance with NIH [National Institutes of Health].  I mean I didn't exactly go to Atlanta as a full time risk taker.  I had an option, I had an escape valve if I had to get out.  And so I stayed there until '87 [1987].  I am extremely pleased of the outcome if I look at it now.  Clark-Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and their graduate school are prospering.  We raised money and built the first huge, huge science building that had been constructed since the early '60s [1960s].  That school is doing well.  But it also forced Clark Atlanta to collaborate more closely with Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Clark, I mean with Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and so forth and so on.  So I think it's been to the benefit--and another huge bonanza after I left, the world-- Olympics as you remember were held in Atlanta.  And an awful lot of the physical structure for the temporary use by the Olympics were on the campus.  And they have been able to substantially improve their physical plant.  So it was a continuum.  Then I decided I'm going to return to science administration.  So I went to--now remember I'd been serving all this time on all these policy boards for the NIH.  NIH at that time was just developing biotechnology as a major research area, very much like what we were talking about earlier.  And my job for a year was to organize the biotechnology program, agency-wide, meaning the entire agency.  And I was a special assistant.  And everyone has to have, not have to have, but finally they decided to make me the deputy director of the Institute.  And I began to do work beyond NIH proper, including the National Science Foundation [NSF], and eventually I left NIH.  I wasn't sure whether I was going to stay at NIH or go back to Colorado.  But I decided to go to the National Science Foundation and see if I could do on a national scale what I had been attempting to do as a single scientist with minority students.  And I took on the job of assistant director for what is called STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics] Education, which I'm sure you've heard of.  That's K through 12, undergraduate, graduate and institutional.
Speaker 2: This is '89 [1989]?
Speaker 1: This is '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 30598
Speaker 1: 1989.  And I did that until year 2000.  And one measure of the success we experienced; when I took responsibility in 2009 [sic, 1989], the budget for that operation, that part of the total agency was about $220 million.  And when I left, it was a few pennies short of a billion.  $990 something million.  And we had developed a plethora of programs that serve, that continue to grow.  One of which was probably the flagship program that is focused on minorities, about which I'm the proudest, is named for Congressman Lewis Stokes.  He was my advocate in the House, that's an understatement.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the program?
Speaker 1: It's called Alliance, A-L-L-I-A-N-C-E, Alliance for Minority Participation.  AMP, Alliance for Minority Participation.  I started that program in 1990.  It has operated every year since then.  It's extremely popular with the Congress, Republican, Democrat.  It has grown tremendously.  And the net addition of African American, Native American and Hispanic and among the three groups the divide would be about 40 percent, 40 percent, 20 percent, is in excess of 155,000 bachelor's degree recipients.  And whether I make this statement or whomever makes the statement, that is truly transformative.  Here's the baseline.  I am saying we added that number over that timeframe.  And you can, you can go almost all over the country and you can see the result.  Go to Boeing [The Boeing Company, Seattle, Washington], go to Raytheon [Company, Waltham, Massachusetts] in case of engineering, the science apparatus, look at the products of graduate schools, etc., etc., etc.  We, we started up an analog to it, something called HBCU UP, Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program.  And the idea was while the AMP Program operates independent of type of institution, let us see if we could render HBCUs even more productive than they are.  So this program now has operated for about fifteen years, Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] is one of the grantees.  And it is beginning to yield very, very powerful results.  So I, I'm not sure that this is correct.  I'll leave it to historians to judge it.  But excepting for my--discounting my--ignoring for the moment my own career, my own scientific accomplishments.  I think the two most important things I've done in my career are one training large numbers of African American biomedical scientists per se.  The reason that's so powerful, I trained one African American Ph.D. who over a thirty year career, is touching hundreds of young people.  The multiplier is, is incredible.  And I would also say this without apology; in a non-minority institutional setting that is in the majority institution, I don't anyone else who, at least in the biomedical sciences have done this.  And the awards and acknowledgements would seem to support it.  The second most important thing I did in my career that I think from the point of view of the culture, point of view of the country, is the work that we did at NSF.  Not only the undergraduate programs, but I was telling you I spent a lot of time with Mayor [Marion] Barry, Mayor Barry in Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 30599
Speaker 1: We started another program called the Urban, U-R-B-A-N Systemic, S-Y-S-T-E-M-I-C Initiative.  And the idea of this program was as follows:  We would focus only on the largest twenty five school districts in the country, most of which had large numbers of minority youngsters, most of which were not really having very productive learning outcomes, so Chicago [Illinois], Dallas [Texas], Miami [Florida], Cleveland [Ohio], etc.  And we gave them a five year award incrementally, $15 million, $3 million a year.  Now I understand the total budget for the school, that's really not the point.  The point is only science and math instruction.  So what I said to the folks in Detroit [Michigan], you take these monies and you use it to promote incremental gains.  I'm not asking you to replace your fundamental operation.  You understand what I mean?  In other words, one of the reasons that you're not getting the learning gains you need is that you're spending your one dollar, but what you really need is $1.22.  So I'm funding the delta.  But that means you've got to purposely use your one dollar.  So it really was intended to be reform, I was trying to reform the--I was trying to use these monies to leverage the system to be a higher performer.  Of the twenty-five --the powerful lesson that came from this is that that's tough to do.  But there are four successes.  Four them worked well and they're still in business.  They improved and they've been able to sustain their improvement.
Speaker 2: Which ones?
Speaker 1: The four are Boston, Miami, Miami Dade, so it's Miami and Dade County [pause] Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas] was an abject failure.  I would say I'm tempted to use the fourth one, but I'll say three, I'll leave it at three.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the hedge is that San Diego [California] would have been the fourth one.  It did well for about nine years, but in the last, last few years they're lost, they're beginning to lose their momentum.  Now I know there's been just a huge influx of immigrant, students.  So I know we're really not talking about the same set.  And they have, they have other kinds of challenges.  But I don't think it's fair to include them.  And the other ones, they have been on a positive trajectory since funding, and that's twelve years later.  So I now know the following:  I now know programmatically in, in the United States of America, you can do the following.  You can put in place a program, a STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics] education program that starts at the fourth grade and you can run it productively until you've met a bachelor's degree recipient in STEM, a master's degree recipient in STEM, and a Ph.D. recipient, in fact I overlooked that.  You can get a two year degree recipient in STEM technology.  So you can, you can actually do this.  You can, you can start at the elementary level, and you can have a large pool of high performing middle school students.  You can move the middle school students to high performing high school students.  From the high school graduates, you can--if you have a program like the AMP [Alliance for Minority Participation] as a support mechanism, you can get a large fraction of them into college.  Some of them get two year degrees, others get four year degrees.  You can do the whole process.  And that's I would argue the reason why I refer to it in terms of significance because that's, that's not the National Science Foundation's challenge.  That's America's challenge.  Is to, is to have a productive learning operation that starts at the beginning to the end.  If in fact the country is--the leadership of the country is committed to solve its deficit.  And I'm not exaggerating by that.  Because there's no conceivable way to do that unless you improve the quality of the human resource base, particularly in STEM.  So all of the conversations about reducing deficits and, and downsizing Medicare and Medicaid and whatever.  Those are useless exercises.  The point is our competitive stance vis a vis other people.  They're not in this country.  They're not the recipients of Medicare, it has nothing to do with our fundamental problem.  So at least it says there's a roadmap and there are three, there have already been four seminal evaluations of what I did, and there's now about to be another one that's going to integrate all of this.  So long explanation, but I tried to explain it.  Those are the two most important things I've done in my career, in my judgment.
Story_ID: 30600
Speaker 1: Okay along the way, through various units of employment we have two children who grew up and one of which in 2000, year 2000, just started her career as a young assistant professor at Washington University Medical School [St. Louis, Missouri], having taken her undergraduate degree and medical degree and residence and so forth.  So I am now sixty, approaching my sixtieth birthday, well actually I'm past it.  So the idea was--and I had a plethora of jobs and of course I no longer have a research grant, 'cause I'm in the government.  So what should I do?  So what we thought is that we had spent thirteen years living in suburban Washington [D.C.].  We enjoyed the time I was in St. Louis before, and our daughter is there and that was a major drive.  And so we decided to St. Louis and quote "build our dream home" and retire and I was going to write a book, and which I'm determined to do.  With what I was just describing to you because I think it's, it would be very efficacious and I also think the country needs it.  They don't need me to write it, but the country needs the book.  The country needs this evidence, proof that it can do what I just said.  But I went there and during my prior tenure there I had a very good friend who was the director of the Missouri Botanical Garden.  And so he'd rather, rather than writing a book from 2000 to 2005, I took another position as a chair director of STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics] Education at the Garden, and worked out something called the Garden Education Compact.  It just was a partnership between this incredible resource, the Missouri Botanical Garden and the St. Louis [Missouri] Public Schools, inner city schools, where I did the work that I had been funding people to do in Detroit [Michigan].  Except I'm doing it now.  I'm the performer, and I'm the awkward performer because the school, the superintendent in charge of the school, I'm in charge of the inquiry teaching resource at the Missouri Botanical Garden and I had to really, really collaborate with them in order to get the students from the schools to the garden.  But we did it to very good effect for five years.  We built a powerful inquiry base, a science education center funded by the same person who funded my chair.  I still have interactions with these young people, some of whom have gone--that I met as fourth or fifth graders who are getting ready to go to college through this program.  We also did something else that I, of which I'm very proud that connects with Tuskegee.  Missouri Botanical Garden as you know with all botanical gardens, there's a whole series of themed gardens.  Dr. Raven and I had the idea that we should have one such garden focused on an African American.  So we decided it should be George Washington Carver.  So we built, raised the money and built a George Washington Carver Garden at the Missouri Botanical Garden.  And in the Fall of 2000-, October of 2005, we opened it.  And it consists of a six foot statue of Carver at the edge, standing at the edge of a reflecting pool, and the entrance too has--is a literal from his childhood to end of his death, famous quotes by Carver.  So imagine you walk around, along this serene pathway up to the statute and you're hopefully overwhelmed by it and, and this reflecting pool.  But at the periphery of the reflecting pool is an outdoor laboratory.  So it's a teaching center.  And the students come and very much like what I was doing when I was growing up as a kid, collect samples of materials and do real time experiments.
Speaker 2: Are the plants that grown there, like do you have a peanut plant for instance, or--
Speaker 1: We have some of that.  Some of the different plants.
Speaker 2: Some of the different plants
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  It's very much, very much like that.  But it's an--it has, it has become almost a center of meditation for people who have nothing to do with why we have it there because it's so, it's so--it really is in human terms, just overwhelming.
Story_ID: 30601
Speaker 1: Anyway, sometime during that work, the Director of the National Science Foundation had a conversation with someone at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] regarding a new Ph.D. program they desired to initiate here.  Something called the Integrative I-N-T-E-G-R-A-T-I-V-E Biosciences, B-I-O-S-C-I-E-N-C-E-S, Integrative Biosciences Ph.D. Program.  So other words, Tuskegee was getting into the doctorate degree business in the case of biosciences.  It always had a large collection of master's degree programs.  In fact, one of the students I trained at Dr. Davison, at--when I was at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], was a graduate of the--undergraduate in the master's program here and took his doctorate with me.  But anyway, they sought guidance from NSF with respect to someone who might help them put together this program and to summarize, they suggested me.  So I came down here, spent some time working with them.  Then they asked me, recognizing that I was quote "in retirement" if I would direct the graduate program, having been a graduate dean before.  So I did that on a part-time basis only for six months because while I was doing--I was dividing my time between here and St. Louis [Missouri].  While I was doing so, unfortunately and unexpectedly the provost of the university passed.  Then I was asked to assume that role.  So in 2000, June of 2006 I became the provost in addition and I served in that role until November of 2009 when the then-president Dr. Payton, retired.  He retired shortly thereafter.  And then I, I was named a distinguished professor at the university, resumed my role as the dean of the graduate school, applied for and received another NIH [National Institutes of Health] grant, which I had not had for eons.  And started doing work again.  Then as things would happen, the university got a new president and he came in November and in December he asked me to serve as the provost again.  So for five months I returned to what I was doing before.  And at some point I'm going to go home one day and stay.
Speaker 2: Where do you consider home now?
Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: St. Louis, okay.
Speaker 1: That's still my--my wife [Constance M. Marion] is still there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just commute, which I was doing on a part-time basis.
Story_ID: 30602
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Not a major thing, no, no.  The one thing I have not done that I think is--it represents an omission not from a career perspective, but in terms of impact, I should have found time to, to have written more.  There's too much of what we have done that cannot be extracted from public documents.  Lessons learned are extremely important because you don't have to--it gives courage to people that they can actually tackle hard problems and actually make a difference.  There isn't a sense that this is a virgin transaction and so forth and so on.  That was an omission, and I just had an interaction with someone recently who was telling me about a program that we started at NSF [National Science Foundation] that a lot of people thought was not going to work and it has produced--I have a lot of former colleagues as you can imagine.  The operation I ran at NSF had about three hundred people in it.  So at least two thirds of them are still there, so it's a lot of communication.  He was telling me it's four thousand odd individuals have been produced from this program.  That's, that was a mistake.  And it was possible to have done it because certainly when I was in the government, I actually could have funded a kind of write and think tank entity to have done all the basic work for me and then it's a question of my actually pulling this story together.  It's very difficult for me to, to take that up here because my responsibilities are so enormous and--but long answer.  But I regard that as an omission.  Not something, not a major thing that I would have done differently, but something I did not do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was watching 'Nova' last year and they were talking about the on and off switches for genes.  I'm thinking about this as you're telling me what your research was about.  Do you have a scientific legacy that you--what do you consider to be your scientific legacy?
Speaker 2: Contributing to the understanding that nature confers genetic capacity.  One has the capacity to do X.  And we assume that the conference of that capacity necessarily translated to function, action.  It does not.  To discover, my legacy is to have contributed to the understanding that that expression is what's crucial.  I think this work, not just me, everyone who's worked in this area, is soon going to be expressed in the following fashion:  I'm reasonably certain the training of, just give one example, the training of physicians will have to be changed to either the following.  Medical education is premised on the notion that there's an absolute continuum between prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure.  The bulk of medicine only really deals with the first two, I'm sorry, the second and the third one, diagnosis and treatment, not cure and not prevention.  The challenging parts are the first and the last one, and that's where the bulk of my work and the work of others has its placement.  And that continue--in fact I know people in first line medical schools are already beginning to, to rethink how to actually train medical practitioners who understand that you are only administering a drug to placate gene expression after it has occurred.  It's useless.  You understand what I mean?  You are--it's a maintenance process, that's what I mean by treatment.  The original issue minute after minute, continues to be express itself.  You have defective muscle cells, the muscle cells remain defective.  The treatment is to minimize the consequences of the defect.  And that's what medicine basically is, the practice of it is.  When in fact the critical step precedes it.  It's to train people how, physicians how to in a very, very analytical fashion, do the diagnosis correctly.  It's not that the muscle cells are malfunctioning, its why?  And if you don't understand the why, you don't optimize the treatment.  That's the contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can apply that to agriculture, and that's the other part of it.  You can apply it to agriculture, you can apply to health--you can apply it to almost any living system.  You can apply it to the ocean.
Speaker 1: How do you--
Speaker 2: It allows you to understand why organisms can live in thermal vents in the ocean.  But if you remove them from the ocean and you put them in the laboratory at regular temperature in Ohio, they die.
Story_ID: 30603
Speaker 1: It seems to be different voices of the world who speak out against, speaking out against genetic manipulation of any kind.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You think that's more of a religious problem or--
Speaker 2: Well it's more of a religious problem.  But also I think it's, it's a sociological hierarchy.  My view, the world's resources are disproportionately aligned such that the few control the majority, and the rest of the resources, say this is 90 percent, the 10 percent is then shared by everyone else.  That is, that partitioning which has existed for centuries, is not knowledge premised.  It's not premised on understanding.  One of the consequences of what I'm talking about is that it will disrupt that.  Said another way, genetic manipulation is an equalizer.  You follow what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay.  In terms of--
Speaker 2: Equalizer in the following sense:  Is the royal family [England] necessarily healthier than the rest of the population?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The royal family gets disproportionately the best that the society has to offer in terms of prevention of diseases, and gets the very best in terms of sophisticated diagnosis, and unlimited treatment.  Follow me?  Now all of that is--that's an artificial advantage premised on quite frankly, ignorance.  Now if you, if you have in the body of the society, knowledge that is over the transom, it's available to anyone.  In fact the example I was using recently with someone is the powerfulness of, not knowledge, but information in terms of turbulence in a large fraction of the world.  It's because people are increasingly aware.  And I see two million people objecting to oppression and I no longer accept this as a constant condition.  That's what I meant by an equalizer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that will be the benefit that would resound to the benefit of the 90 percent of the population that's not privileged.  And I would argue unearned privileged.  That's the powerfulness of it.  It is not in the best of interest of every economy to have an equitable agricultural production.  You know that's true.  In order for me to have a scandalous excess, some fraction of the population has to be, has to live with minimum.  So what's at issue here is progression toward a more, if not perfect, a more reasonable human operation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that should be the output from science.  And throughout history in the main, it has been.  It's not always been the case.  I mean you can, you can, you can--nuclear physics has been used for not good purposes also.  But in the main, that's the case.
Speaker 1: Most people have--
Speaker 2: --who have contributed to a process that offers that as a possibility to mankind is, is very satisfying.
Story_ID: 30604
Speaker 1: I didn't--well a little bit more about your family.  Now did your great-grandmother [Annie Ellis] live to see you get your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did she react to that?
Speaker 2: It was, her--I learned that upon her death, her residence was a virtual shrine, not only of the Ph.D., but all the, the efforts along the way.  Because I, I shared with--almost at the level of our conversation, I mean if I published a paper, which we did frequently, I sent a copy to her.  She has no idea what it is, she has no--but she--but my name is on it and she knows what that means.  So she had made--and of course when I, when we would visit, I think--I'm not sure what she would do with these things.  But they were not scrapbooks she had just taken folders and had them labeled by year.  It was--it's incredible.  And I spoke with someone who--an older person in the community who would visit her often and, and that's, you know, they gathered and had coffee and she would drag out--let me tell what this boy has done in the last month--this is what, this is what--yeah, it was.  She was very proud of it.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you were able to help your brother [Arthur Williams] achieve a PhD as well, right?  At Purdue.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he, he--when I--the year I went to Atlanta University from Stony Brook [State University of New York, Stony Brook], he had just graduated from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And he came and took his master's degree with me in Atlanta.  And he was one of the gang that I took to Purdue.  And got his Ph.D. there.  Had a young wife and she worked for me as a technician.  She was a biology major also.  And she actually took her master's degree under my supervision.  And then he, his first three publications were with me, co-authored with me.  Then he went to the University of Kentucky [Lexington].  We collaborated, published again.  And when I was the president of Atlanta University, I employed him, he was a faculty member there.  And for three years he, he--see I didn't end my research program until I went to NIH [National Institutes of Health].  Through all of Purdue, Washington University [St. Louis], University of Colorado [Boulder], I maintained my research program.  So as sort of an analogy back to college, this business about working and going to school.  I ran the university and I ran my research program.  Of course I worked less in it, and so it was run by technicians and post docs, but my brother was crucially important because we're trained in the same field.  We do the same work, and of course he looked after it.  And we published our very last common publication in '85 [1985].  So that was about a seventeen  year collaboration, yeah.
Story_ID: 30605
Speaker 1: That's something.  And we--now is there anything I have not asked you, you think that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, you've done it exceedingly well.  It was very gratifying.  I, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You didn't ask, but it's sort of intuitively obvious.  What I'm doing here is very deliberate.  It's short term.  But I'm trying to bring what I learned at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Colorado [University of Colorado, Boulder], Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri], NIH [National Institutes of Health], clearly having had a major role at NIH that in itself is helpful to Tuskegee and Garner and research funds.  You didn't ask me this, but I actually teach here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I teach, I teach in the Integrative Bioscience Ph.D. Program.  And as the students will affirm, I say to them the closest large body of water to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] is something called the Chattahoochee River.  You probably crossed coming from Atlanta [Georgia].  But that notwithstanding, let's pretend it's the analog to the Charles River in Cambridge [Massachusetts], or the San Francisco Bay in California.  And what I'm going to do with you in this class is exactly the same thing that's happening at MIT and [University of California] Berkley.  So no excuses, no down time.  There's only one performance standard.  For about three weeks they're struggling.  But what I'm proudest of before the semester ends, they're there.  Another evidence as I discovered with training minority graduate students, you do--it's almost reprehensible to have an elastic scale.  Set it where in fact you know it should be, where you know they must compete, and demand that they reach it.  And even if you only get 75 percent of the way, they're in good shape.  And what I'm trying to do is, at least in a limited period of time, trying to seed that idea throughout the university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as it was a different kind of conversation, but as my colleagues [Legand] Burge [Jr.] and--I made reference to Burge and Dosier (ph.) could tell you that that's uniform.  Tuskegee is, like any HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], is tremendously challenged.  It no longer has a window that existed when these wonderful photographs were taken.  It has a quasi-monopoly.  But I will not accept the notion that it should be by its own intent, an also ran.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do it.  Fail.  Do it again.  Fail better.  Become very good at it.  But don't set your threshold at a level that--about which the world can be fully dismissive.  Because it doesn't matter.  I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 30606
Speaker 1: Okay.  My last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an individual in early life presented with a host of challenges who believed that one's god-given capacity is the real divider and actively pursued it.  And part of that pursuit was to, through my actions, make the world better, a better place.  Especially for those individuals likely to have to confront similar barriers.  That's how I would like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that science was simply the vehicle by which to do it.  But that's what drives me.
