Story_ID: 307881
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Full name as in birth certificate, is William, W-I-L-I-A, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, middle name Harold, H-A-R-O-L-D, last name, Wheeler, W-H-E-E-L-E-R [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler], and on the birth certificate, there's a junior behind it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 14, 1943, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician, that's the overall description, but underneath that is composer, conductor, arranger, I guess that's it--that's enough--producer.
Speaker 1: And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I think, is October 3, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my home and in Encino, California.
Story_ID: 307882
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: It's chicken--fried chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The Christmas holidays, between Thanksgiving and Christmas, that whole month.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean, lately, it's been--the last twenty-five years--Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is, and I think it's, the best way to gain self-confidence is to try to do something that you're afraid to do.
Story_ID: 307883
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Wheeler, Sr.] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  (Background noise) Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Full name is Roxetta, R-O-X-E-T-T-A, maiden name is McGee, M-C-G-E-E, and her married name Wheeler.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Natchez, Mississippi.  Date of birth, oh my goodness, I don't want to forget that, but it's 1927.  I don't remember her birth date, September 27, there it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very interesting because I only about ten years ago started to try to do, you know, a search and I knew all of my relatives in St. Louis [Missouri].  My grandparents were deceased, but just from talking to family members really about ten or fifteen years ago, I mean, I learned, you know, more and more about, you know, both sides of the family.  My, Jessie McGee, J-E-S-S-I-E, was my grandmother who, of course, I never met and she was married to my grandfather, who was Willie McGee, W-I-L-L-I-E, and they were from Natchez, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are all the ancestors on that side of the family, or is that basically the place of, I mean in the South (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's basically, we're all from Natchez and they migrated to--to my knowledge, the only one who migrated to St. Louis was my mother, and I never saw either of my grandparents or any of my aunts and uncles or anything.  So, it's, except for names that I've gotten over the years, it's somewhat of a mystery.
Speaker 1: Now, there ain't no, Natchez is one of these real historic places with a lot of information written about it back in the slave days and there have been novels written about Natchez in the days, and the Indians [Native American]. I think the Natchez Indians resisted the French and the British, and everybody else and they held out longer than anybody else in the South, I think, from what I read. And then, are there any stories in the past now from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: No.  I know that my mother was half Indian and I had taken photos that I have seen of her as a, when she was a child.  You could see that, that long black hair, but you know, I think to a great degree when my, you know, mother left Natchez.  She was try--and just the whole lifestyle, you know, there were things that were happening down there in Mississippi, you know, post slavery and she really wanted to get me and my sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler], you know, she wanted to get away from that and raise a family somewhere else, so she never really talked about a lot of the things that really happened there.  I heard, you know, more stories about their trials and tribulations, you know, through other relatives from my father's side who she told, my mother told stories to, you know, a few little things about that she never discussed it with me or my sister, and in a way she was, I think, sheltering us from, you know, that whole side of how she was brought up, but--so--
Speaker 1: Is your impression of Natchez is it was like a tough kind of vice-ridden place or what?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I mean, my impression of, that was also my impression of the South in general and it's interesting because I'm not sure.  I always looked at St. Louis, Missouri, as geographically the Midwest, and St. Louis is on the southern tip. A lot of people, other people around the country, said, "No, no, no, St. Louis is the South. Face it, it's the South," and my mother obviously looked at that, was getting as far away from the South as, you know, she could get but the attitudes in St. Louis, you know growing up were, you know, they were like the South.  They were like the South. I mean, there was the integration and the whole thing, but she, you know, I guess my mother tried to keep as much of that away from us as she possibly could, you know, and I, I regret it in a sense because there's a lot of history that I don't know about, you know, my grandparents and about my mother growing up and so forth, that I would love to know, you know, and of course now most of the people that have that information have passed away and, you know, so a lot of that would just go unknown to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you ever get a chance to visit your--you never visited--
Speaker 2: Never, never went down.  I didn't make it down to Mississippi for--forty years later, you know, forty years later.
Story_ID: 307884
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler]--she didn't talk about growing up down there or anything?
Speaker 2: She never talked about growing up down there. Just to say it was a hard life, you know.  It was just, it was about poverty and black and white, you know, the problems between the blacks and the whites and black, as far as I was concerned, near poverty and white near wealthy even though I'm sure there were a lot of whites there that were just as poor.  But, so, I mean we felt like we grew up rich because, you know, some of the things that she went through and she said she had one pair of shoes for five years, and that was a hand-me-down, and that was it.  You know, so just little things like that, you know, and I know that she had two dresses, one was for Sunday for church and the other two were for school and they were all wash-and-wear.  No such thing as going to a cleaners, you know, so, and I sank my, she tried to raise my sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler] and I in such a way where we had more things.  I think this is what most parents do.  You want your children to have a better life than you do, and it's one of the reasons I think she didn't discuss, you know, how bad it was, you know, for her, but I do remember that one pair of shoes and that was, those shoes were for school and church, you know, and you didn't drag your feet when you did it, you know, and they kept getting soled every time you needed it, with a hole in the bottom, scratch on it you just cover it with shoe polish.  But, I mean, I'm sure it was a rough life, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us, now, did your mother, how old was she when she moved to St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: She moved to St. Louis, see, I was born in '43 [1943], my sister is three years older, so she must have moved in about 1938, '38 [1938], '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: What did she do in St. Louis when she got there?
Speaker 2: She was a beautician.  She had a beauty shop in the basement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she go to school in St. Louis at all, or did she go to school in Natchez [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: She went to school in Natchez, never finished high school, and so when she moved, she finished through high school in Natchez, and when she moved, there was no college, no nothing, just straight into life.
Story_ID: 307885
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Same as mine, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Harold, H-A-R-O-L-D, Wheeler, W-H-E-E-L-E-R, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was Oc--October 10, 1892.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Don't have a clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's even a dark--
Speaker 1: No idea at all?
Speaker 2: That's a darker side of the, you know, I even know that his grandmother, I know was born in the South and I know, for some reason, he doesn't talk about it, because he escaped the South to keep from ending up in jail for something.  And I, all I know from the family is, they were going to try to lynch my daddy for something he didn't do, and he made it up here to St. Louis [Missouri] and that's the extent of the story and I've try to get the answers for people about what, you know, what was it my dad was in.  You know, he got here by the skin of his teeth because they were looking for him.  Somebody said once this had something to do with a white woman, and I know that my father's side of the family was very light-skinned, you know.  I had an aunt that passed for white for, most of her natural life in St. Louis, so it may have been, I just assumed that maybe there was some because of his complexion, you know, that he had some relationship with some white girl and they found out that he wasn't white because--
Speaker 1: Could your father pass for white?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And that whole side of the family, you know, always, I mean, I just remember that they all looked like they were white.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] look like?
Speaker 2: My complexion, you know, you know, medium brown skin, so, you know, I have pictures of, I don't know, when I look at them now, I mean, I say they are obviously light-skinned black people, you know, but when other people have come by and seen photos around the house, who's this lady?  I mean, it's like, that's a picture of my grandmother [Laura Wheeler (ph.)].  Is she white?  No (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand that, yeah.  So, your father didn't, did he ever tell any stories about growing up at all?
Speaker 2: No, he never told any stories, you know, at all about growing up.  I mean, I know that his occupation was, he was a bartender.  I think he was a bartender there.  His first job that I remember, you know, as he is my father in St. Louis, was a bartender and, on the side, a numbers runner, which to me was an honorable, you know, honorable profession.  It was, of course, it's illegal, and we used to, when he collected the numbers during the day when I was a kid and my mother was doing hair down in the basement, he used to take me with him, and it was just from one bar to the next and he'd stop and get the numbers and he'd sit me on the bar.  The bartender would give me a Coca-Cola, and I remember I would entertain all of the guys at the bar drinking by saying my ABCs, 'cause I could say my ABCs at three, A to Z, and I can almost remember, I mean, how far can you remember as you really go back.  I can remember me sitting on the corner of the bar, you know, all of these guys from the neighborhood sitting around drinking their beer and their bourbon, and so forth, and I'm just going, "A, B, C, D," with this big grin on my face, and he'd come pick me up and we'd go to the next bar and collect the numbers and--
Story_ID: 307886
Speaker 1: Is that your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That's my earliest--well my earliest childhood memory was--that's probably one of my earliest with my father [William Wheeler, Sr.].  I mean, there are others after that, because I couldn't be more than three or four at this time, and all these men--they were like my uncles.  All these men--I'm talking about, you got hundreds of 'em.  You know, if you go to ten bars, you know, find out everybody's number, you write some down, you know and, but I think the tension of that is what killed him because here he's trying to raise a family, looking over your shoulder all the time, wondering if, you know, the cops are coming after you, wondering if you have enough to pay off the cops.  They will let you off if you pay 'em off, and then there are those who won't and just want to lock you up, so--he died of colon cancer, and I just think he ripped him apart, just that whole, that whole tension, but--
Speaker 1: When did your father pass?
Speaker 2: He passed away when I was twelve, so that'd have been in '55 [1955], '55 [1955]. He was fifty years old when I was born.  My mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] was thirty-three, so he was, by all standards, you know, getting up there, you know, when he passed away, but we had some good time, good times together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He played a violin and he only knew how to, and it was left-handed violin.  The strings were on backwards, in other words, and he only knew one song.  It was called 'Trees' [Joyce Kilmer].  "I think that I should never see, a poem lovely as a tree," and it's a poem and somebody had written a melody to it.  He taught me at age four how to play that on the piano, and three or four times a week in the evening, he'd take out his violin and we'd play that one number over and over.  We'd play it and have fun together, but that's, I mean, I think that's what started--we had this old beat-up piano in the house and I think that's what really started me getting interested in music.
Story_ID: 307887
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Roxetta McGee Wheeler and William Wheeler, Sr.] met?  I want to get back to the music beginning, but is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Because my mother was always a church going person.  My father joined church as a formality one month before he died, so that he could have a Christian burial, but he never went to church and my mother was always a church going person and, somehow they met at a church function but some friend of his kind of dragged him to.  He didn't want to go, and you know, he started a friendship, started a relationship and it went from there and, you know, she spent, you know, all the years that they were married trying to get him to go to church.  He went a few times but he never joined until a couple, maybe a month or three weeks before he passed.
Story_ID: 307888
Speaker 1: Can you describe for us some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  I mean, well, before you do that, what neighborhood did you grow up in at St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or did you move around?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in two, two distinct neighborhoods.  One, really, it's not a, it's not what we call today a project, but it was a project type, type-living.  It was two rooms, a kitchen and a bedroom.  There was one little bathroom off to the side.  My sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler] and I slept on mattresses in the kitchen and my mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] and father [William Wheeler, Sr.] slept in that room.  We were there until maybe I was six years old.  Then, we moved to a three-room house, which I mean, they call it like on a railroad flat, it had three rooms, living room, bedrooms in the middle and the kitchen was the last one, and during the day the living room was the living room, and at night my mother and father slept in there and my sister and I slept in the middle room.  In the back room, there were two rooms.  There was a kitchen, which is a little eat-in kitchen, and a teeny little office where I did my homework, and later on in the night is where my dad did his numbers to see who he owed and had to pay off, and so forth, the next day after the number came.  But, we, I remember in conversations with my mother, the house, the second house, costs six thousand dollars, and I think the old Ford Fairlane that we drove cost fourteen hundred dollars brand new in that year, and I learned to drive on that little Ford Fairlane, you know, but, and it wasn't until many years later that I went to, after I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], after my first year, I came back to another house, which is what we really call in a middle income area, you know.  I don't know what that house cost, but my mother paid for it without a mortgage and all, and put it in my--me and my sister's name; you know, she, no monthly payments, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: So, she had a large sum of cash?
Speaker 2: From doing hair, you know, from doing hair, and fortunately when I went to college, you had a scholarship so a lot of the money that she had saved, but I don't think that house costs more than fifteen, sixteen thousand dollars in that middle income, huge, two story in what do they call it in St. Louis?  A two-family flat, you know, two doors in front, one leads downstairs and one leads upstairs, but my sister still lives in that house to this day.  But, that was upscale living as far as I was concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you lived there for the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, until I went off to college, you know, I lived there.
Story_ID: 307889
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember, you know, you know, I think it's one of the reasons I love chicken so much, I never, my mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] made some chicken, you know, and that was my favorite.  I mean, I think right now I could exist on chicken, you know, if that's all that was there, that's it.  You know if it was veal or steak, I'd get tired of it, but chicken, I'd never get tired of.  But, you know, it's just her cooking, the smell of cooking, the smell of hair from the basement 'cause they used those curling irons and, you know, those are the two things that I remember because we're not coming home from school, so I wouldn't be upstairs by myself, you know.  I'd go downstairs and do my homework so she could watch me, where she's is doing hair, you know, and all of her customers are like, "Here comes little Harold, Jr. [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler], you know, he's doing his homework, isn't that nice?" and the whole thing.  But, you know, it's the chicken, and I remember chicken and peas and rice, and she used to cook cauliflower, which I hated and that's the only thing I think I remember that she made that I didn't really like until I must have been in my forties.  She made liver, but it was like shoe, like shoe leather, you know, and I, my sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler] and I would say, "Liver for dinner tonight."  You know, we hated it.  But it's basically the chicken and peas and rice, and that hair from downstairs in the basement.
Speaker 1: Did she always just operate out of the basement?  Was it operated as a legitimate shop, was it kind of a side--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, this is what she did for a living.  It really wasn't legitimate, 'cause all of the others were residential areas where you weren't allowed to run a business there, so there was no advertising or anything, just, you know, she had her customers, the folks from the church, and they knew this is where they come to get their hair done, and she was very good, you know, and she stayed very busy with it, and she really helped put me through college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, because I was on a tuition scholarship, but that doesn't pay for dormitories, it doesn't pay for books and it doesn't pay for your meal plan either, but I have some solutions for that which, you know, I recommend to anybody that's broke, you know, you get a girlfriend on campus, who came from a little better off and use her meal plan and you can go get seconds and you just walk in with her and she eats and then you, which is what I did (laughter).  I ate seconds off her plate.  With the meal plan, you can get all of the seconds you want, and she'd go fill up that same plate she ate out of with seconds of everything, bring it over behind this post, and I'd eat.  I spent two years doing that before I actually got a job and started working, but, basically I mean, she, my mother just worked in her beauty shop and went to church on Sunday and made sure my sister and I did our homework and stayed out of trouble.
Story_ID: 307890
Speaker 1: What personality things, traits I mean, from your parents [Roxetta McGee Wheeler and William Wheeler, Sr.] do you think that you take after?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always wondered what's hereditary.  I know that you, how you bring up a child, makes, it becomes very important in their life, and we were raised in a church, you know, my sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler] and I both, so we had those virtues about us.  We knew the difference between right and wrong based stealing, we knew it was bad even though I went through a couple of periods, where, you know, through my buddies, associates, you know, there are little trouble things that happened, but I think from her I got that virtuous side.  I don't know whether, from my father and his dealing in the bars and the numbers, you know, gambling always fascinated me, so I don't know how much you pick up, you know, of that, but you know, all through as I was growing up any chance to make a bit on something always interests me.  You know, in my life I've done a little gambling and done well by it, you know, but I think I'm a decent human being and that side came from my mother, because my mother passed away in 1991, so I was already into my profession and successful in everything there.  I, many times, just remembered a lot of the things that, you know, that she had you know, you know, taught me and my sister that really carried through, you know, just about how to treat other people, you know, so, all of that good side, I think came from--I know, came from her. You know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the little raunchier side came from our dad, you know.
Story_ID: 307891
Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a little kid?  What, you know, you've got a sister [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler] at home, so the family consists of your mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler], your father [William Wheeler, Sr.], and your sister, and you.  What was your personality like?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean music always fascinated me.  I mean, I never looked at it as ever being a profession 'til much later.  You know, I mean, I played ball with the kids and my mother always made me try to be careful because I played piano and you just have to be careful with your hands when you play piano, so she really babied me to a degree, because when I was six years old, I was playing piano for my Sunday school.  I knew all the hymns, you know.
Speaker 1: That's incredible, six.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, and so therefore she saw, my mother saw the potential talent that I had, and it's called child prodigy, is what she called me, and only in looking back and recognizing in a young person now what you consider a child prodigy, I look back at my life and realize by those same standards that I was a child prodigy.  You know, I mean, I didn't look at it like that.  I looked at it like, at times, I preferred being outside and playing baseball, football with my buddies and my mother wouldn't let me.  You know, fortunately my sister and I got along, you know got along well and every now and then when I would sneak out, my sister would cover for me, you know.  She's cover for me, "Where's Harold Jr. [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler]?"  "Well, he went down to the store to get"--and then she'd run down to where I was playing and say, "You better get home quick.  Tell momma you were at the store, you know, buying a nickel piece of candy, penny candy, or something."  But, it was a very happy, very happy household, you know, and the restraints that I had were really just anybody bad in the neighborhood [in St. Louis, Missouri], you know, my mother would not let me play with 'em, you know, because she was very protective, because in the neighborhood, you know, it was a neighborhood with some good people in it and, you know, and some people who had no vision for what they might want to do in life, come home, don't do homework, just go out and play, hang out at night and drink a beer and their parents didn't care.  So my mother sheltered, sheltered me away from, you know, most of those.  I ran into--I had a few friends like that later on in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], you know, with just peer pressure.  So, got in a little trouble here and there, you know, but, see, because my father was a numbers runner.  He knew a lot of people in the police department, so when I made one big mistake once.  I had a buddy that, in 1954, he used to break, we used to break into '54 [1954] Chevys [Chevrolet] and all you do is you break the vent and you look inside first and there are three positions.  There is lock, on, and start, and you can take your key out in the on position, or you can take it off in the lock position and a lot of people didn't turn it all the way to lock and we'd see it in the on position, break the vent and go joy riding for about an hour and we take it to some street where there were buildings and new complexes and park it, and two days later, you know, we go get another one and stupidly take it back to the same place, you know, and as if, you know like two days later we get it out of there and finally one of my mother's customers said, "I didn't know Harold Jr. drove."  And my mother said, "Oh?"  You know, I mean, I was twelve years old.  You know, "Oh?"  So, she asked me about it.  She didn't ask me about it, she did some research and spoke to this friend of mine that wasn't so good, and he broke down and ratted on both of us and I was at a piano lesson and my sister called me and she said, "Mom and Dad are coming to pick you up."  I said, "Both of 'em?"  She said, "Yeah," she said, "'Cause you're in trouble.  They know about you and Fleming [ph.] stealing those cars," and my dad did the real scare tactics.  He brought us to the house and he brought his buddy from the police station, sergeant, and I mean it scared, if you're talking about scared straight, you know, that was it.  And we thought we were going to be handcuffed and taken away, but it was just a warning and we told him where the cars were and returned the cars to the owner, but--I don't know, so this is probably the worst thing I've--worst thing I've done in my life in terms of legal and illegal, you know.
Speaker 1: One thing that resounds throughout this is that your sister really looked out for you.
Speaker 2: She really did.  She really did.  She--
Speaker 1: What's your sister's name?  Did you give her--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  It's Jessie, who was named after our [maternal] grandmother [Jessie McGee], Jessie, J-E-S-S-I-E, and her married name is Cartwright.  C-A-R-T-W-R-I-G-H-T, so it's Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she still lives in St. Louis [Missouri].
Story_ID: 307892
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to, there's two schools, Turner Branch [Turner Branch elementary school, St. Louis, Missouri] and Turner [J. Milton Turner School, St. Louis, Missouri], because Turner Branch went up to eighth grade. No, Turner Branch went up to sixth grade, and Turner went to--Turner School went, I think, seventh and eighth, and then nine, ten and eleven and twelve, was high school, which was Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Ok.  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I mean, I loved it.  I loved it.  I was never very good in math, but I loved everything else.  I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any favorite teachers from school, or teachers that really helped you out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a teacher in, okay, in terms of rating of students this was very interesting because when I went to high school, the smartest students based on entrance testing and so forth were in this, what they call an accelerated, you know, program and we had a special advisor.  His name was John Buckner, and there were twenty-six kids in the class and I was, and they were supposed to be the brightest of the brightest kids in the school.  School had maybe eight hundred people, and I was number twenty-six, so I was still in the smart group, but not as smart as all the others, but I've looked back to see what some of the others did with their life.  We were the nerds of the school, so to speak, and we were picked on by, you know, a lot of people, you know, for that reason.  I went out for football, just to get out of the nerd category, you know, once, even though, I mean it wasn't the, I was never any bigger in high school than 118 pounds.  I didn't start to put on weight 'til I was thirty-five years old, and I was between 118 and 125 from elementary school straight up to age thirty-five, then I started to blow up like a balloon, but, you know, it was, I was considered one of the nerds, so I was one of the bright ones and this, you know, John Buckner, he looked after and he stayed with this group for four years, and if anybody in that school was gonna excel, although there was twenty-five of us in that class, and I'm sure if you really looked at the class books, graduation books, you'll see aspirations, doctor, doctor.  You know and mine said I wanted to be a musician, you know, which is how I turned out, but doctors, lawyers, morticians.  Everybody had these dreams and there was one reunion that I went back to ten years, fifteen years later, and I don't think we've done any reunions after that, you know, and half of them made it, you know, and half of them just didn't, you know, and some even went into crime and I think it was rebelling against the parents because the kids in this class, some of their parents were, you know, doctors and lawyers and, you know, really professional people, and the rest of the school, I guess the kids were, parents were postmen and just general service, you know, kind of people, and even though my parents, you know, you can't, bartender was my father's [William Wheeler, Sr.] official business, bartender and beautician.  That's very different from doctor, lawyer, dentist, mortician, which is the other big profession to go into, you know, in the black community, you know.  But, I was a very good student.  I worked hard because I had to because of this class I was in, and there was a real class distinction, too. I mean, if you were in the accelerated class, you were something special and all other teachers treated you, the teachers who taught the individual courses treated you that way, you know, and as opposed to the other students, they expected more from me, so you know, it was pretty tough.  And my mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] just, she did not expect, you know, anything below a B plus, you know.  If you snuck by with a B, don't bring a B minus home. I mean, she was--so, and she looked over our homework to make sure that I complete it, understood the assignment and completed it properly, you know, so--to the best that she could.  I mean, algebra.  She just said, "You sure this is right?"  You know, (laughter) I mean there was algebra and those things and there was nothing she could do, but, I was a good student.  I mean, I was a good student, I mean, I was an A and B student all the way through.
Story_ID: 307893
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of music, I mean, what kinds of music was influencing you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I had kind of three separate things going.  When I was in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], our school had a choir that was very well known in St. Louis [Missouri], Sumner High School Choir.  We would perform the 'Hallelujah Chorus' with the St. Louis Symphony orchestra, we would be the, I mean, it was the most prestigious chorus, choir at any of the high schools in St. Louis, and Kenneth Billups, B-I-L-L-U-P-S, was the choir director there, and when I started and he found out I played piano because, you have to understand, I've been playing piano since I was five years old and taking lessons since I was seven.  I became the choir accompanist, you know, so to kind of get away from the nerd thing and, you know, you're wearing glasses and you play piano. That makes you a sissy.  So that's when I went out for football, but they would not let me play.  I was a water boy, because they were afraid I was gonna hurt my hands, so I was on the football team for one semester and then I played organ at the school for all of the assemblies, and I accompanied the choir and the choir, I mean, we made trips to, we made a trip to New York to Abyssinia [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] to perform when the minister was who?
Speaker 1: Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell, when he was there, you know so, so all along the music is being nurtured.  I had a little singing group called, you know, the Silver Tones [ph.], we called ourselves.  It was a doo-wop group, and you know, we would perform at little local teen affairs, you know, doing, we were singing the songs of the Platters, and the Drifters, and, you know, all of these things.  I mean, and we were good.  Good, good.  I was kind of the leader.  I was the lead singer in the group and I had, on the other side I had a band that played illegally in a strip club.
Speaker 1: Now you had a--you were part of the band?
Speaker 2: I had a little band I put together.  It was six of us, you know--
Speaker 1: And you were in high school at the time?
Speaker 2: I was in high school and--
Speaker 1: Well, how did you get the job in the strip club?  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, the club owner knew the police, you know, they found out from my dad [William Wheeler, Sr.] who said, you know, "My kid plays piano and he's got these musicians he works with, a little drummer, you know." (Singing) "Yup, te-tup, te-ta," and you know, we're playing all night looking at these strippers, and because my dad had the connections in a police department, the police department knew we were under age, shouldn't have been in there drinking and all of that, so nobody bothered it and at the end of the night, one o'clock in the morning, we were doing this during school time sometimes, certainly on Thursday night, Friday night, and Saturday night.  Thursday we still had to--school Friday.  He would come, pick up everybody in the van and take 'em home.  He took all the kids home and he'd pick us all up and take us to the job, but--
Speaker 1: So, this is in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Late '50s, [1950s] right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you came out of high school in 1961.
Speaker 2: In '61 [1961], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we had you know, so I've been involved, and then at the same time I'm playing in the strip joint on Saturday, closed at one, go home, grab a few hours and go to Sunday school and play for Sunday school on Sunday. So, I mean, there was always music.  There was music at school with the choral stuff, there's the doo-wop group, the band playing in the strip clubs and church.
Story_ID: 307894
Speaker 1: And you were coming along during the emergence of, rhythm and blues and what people--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: What we called rock and roll then, which is now, and rock and roll is something else, but it's with Chuck Berry and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember listening-
Speaker 1: --later on they were coming on the radio.
Speaker 2: Chuck Berry went to my church, you know.  He only came maybe six or seven times a year, but the minister would make him stand up and the minister used to say to him, "Chuck Berry has come home.  Stand up and let the people see you."  And he'd say, "And take the conk out of your hair before it falls out one day."  But he would, Chuck Berry would come to the church maybe a half a dozen times a year, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of your church now?
Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist [Antioch Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I used to stay up late and night and listen to Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner live from a club in St. Louis [Missouri], so--
Speaker 1: That's right.  They got this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and it was a club.  I can't remember the name of the club but--
Speaker 1: They were live on the radio?
Speaker 2: Live on the radio, live on the radio, on weekends.
Speaker 1: Antioch Baptist. I don't know--who else now was around.  St. Louis is really a hotbed of music, so--
Speaker 2: Oh well, you know, [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo from The 5th Dimension, you know, was from the St. Louis area, John Hicks, jazz pianist, you know, from St. Louis. Miles [Miles Davis], of course, was from East St. Louis [Illinois] across the bridge, and that's an area that--that's a whole different ballgame.  I mean, you take your life into your hands when you go over there, even today, you know.
Speaker 1: St. Louis has a kind of a tough reputation itself, but East St. Louis is probably one of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Grace Bumbry, in the classical field, she was, you know, from St. Louis and a Sumnerite [student from Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] also.  You know so, a lot of talented people, you know, in the music industry were in St. Louis.  I remember when I graduated from high school, I had a girlfriend who had one more year to go and we'd talk on the phone for, you know, as much as you could afford from Washington, D.C., 'cause I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she was, she ended up going to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], so a buddy of mine called me and, Howard got out, finished before high school did and the buddy called me and he said, "Man, you better get over here.  Some cat, for the last month, he's really been hitting on your girlfriend, and I think she's falling for him."  I said, "Oh yeah?"  He said, "Yeah, some, I think some smart, rich-type kid.  He's a tennis player, you know."  So, I said, "Okay."  So, I go back and I go over there and there's a school assembly that's there and I go over to kind of scope out who this guy was and it happened to be Arthur Ashe.  He was, there was a tennis pro in St. Louis, and he was a young kid and he was there studying with him, but he was Arthur Ashe and I remember years later, God, twenty years later, you know I mentioned as I happened to meet him and we were working together in the same kind of benefit or something and I mentioned to him, and I mentioned his girl's name to see if he remembered her, and he didn't, but he remembered the year that he was there and I said, "That was my girlfriend and a buddy of mine called me and he said you better come down and straighten this cat out, you know."  And he was a little kid, Arthur Ashe, a little skinny kid so I didn't mess with it (laughter).
Speaker 1: You weren't much bigger, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't (laughter) but somebody told me later, a friend of mine, a drummer, Grady Tate.  Years later, I lived in New York [New York] and I had a very noisy next door neighbor that moved in and it was John McEnroe, and he had no respect for the building or anything; late, all night, making noise, music going loud, so I said, told Grady, I said, "You know, I'm gonna open the door and as soon as I open the door, I'm gonna take a punch and punch him right in the face."  He said, "Don't do that."  He said, "Because if he hits you, he'll break your jaw if he hits you with his tennis arm."  He said, "Anybody that can swing a tennis racket like that" and he said, "If you don't believe me, look at his arm one day, his tennis arm, and look at his other arm."  And he was right.  It's twice as big.  And he said, "And, he's got, his father's [John McEnroe, Sr.] a powerful lawyer."  He said, "He'll have every dime you have, you know," but he said, "Don't do it."  So I thought back about the time when I was gonna go after Arthur Ashe and it's a good thing I didn't.  I'd a had my jaw broken at age nineteen.
Story_ID: 307895
Speaker 1: In high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] now you played music.  Did you do anything else, or were you part of any clubs in high school, or did you run for class office or that kind of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I was class treasurer for one year and most of the class presidents, vice presidents, secretary, all came from this group, though, from the group of, you know, the accelerated class, but I was kept so busy with the music stuff, between the choir and I played for all the singers every year when we had the talent contest and all, you know, and everybody wanted me to play for them and, you know, so it was really then that I realized that, you know, I really think I did want to make a go of this music thing, but I also realized that because, from my parenting, you know, mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler] and how she raised me, there wasn't a lot else I could do.  So, when I reached the twelfth grade, there was nothing else to go into but music, because I had no other aspirations, and I didn't know how to do anything.  She kept me away from sports to protect my hands for so many years, that I wasn't good at anything.  I was on the track team and I was fast, but that was it, but track is not a profession.  That's not a profession unless you're gonna work your way to the Olympics and then become athletic director of Sumner High School in St. Louis, Missouri, you know, years later after college.  I mean, that was the most I could hope for, and so when I went to college to go into music, I mean, it was like the only thing I knew.
Speaker 1: But, did you take it for granted?  I mean, sort of?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea of what you could do with that kind of talent?
Speaker 2: I, every contest that I was in I won.  And, it was just normal.  I was supposed to win and that's the way it is.  I'm better than everybody else, but I never looked at it that way until many years later, that this was a special gift that I had, and it's, I can even remember calling my mother and just thanking her so much for, in case I didn't get a chance to thank you, when I was living there, thank you now because this is quite a gift that I realize I have, and it's partially when I realized what, when you put yourself up against other people, it took getting out of St. Louis and putting myself up against other people like me from around the country to realize that I'm still winning all the contests, you know, piano contests and different things, and I can do things that none of them can do, that there must be something special.
Speaker 1: What did you think was your specialty in high school in your teenage years?  What did you play better than anybody else and what kind of things were you interested in playing the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I played everything better.  I mean, whether it was classical music, whether it was gospel, whether it was, you know, R and B, and I'm not afraid of any of it.  I've played it all and I thought everybody should be able to play it all, only to find out that the classical people could only play classical, and the gospel people, that's all they really play and they couldn't even touch classical music, you know, so as far as I was concerned is what's wrong with all these people?  Why can't they play any kind of music?  Jazz.  Most of your jazz players, that's all they play is jazz.  I play jazz.  I went where the little jobs were; I mean, twenty-five dollars a night you got paid, but if it was a jazz gig, it was a jazz gig.  I just changed my bass player and drummer, because my rock and roll band, or strip club band, that's all they played.  You have to (unclear) the other guys and none of us played it well.  You know, we're talking about ages fifteen and sixteen, you know.  I mean, Wynton Marsalis at fifteen and sixteen, played very well, but we weren't great, you know, players.  But, in college it was jazz.  Jazz that, you know, paid for all those little extra things that, you know, the family couldn't afford.
Story_ID: 307896
Speaker 1: These different genres of music, did you have like different mentors in each genre, or did, how did you pick them all up?
Speaker 2: What I discovered, which made me kind of, separated me from the others, is I had an ear. I mean, I loved every, when I wanted to study classical music, I wanted to be Andre Watts, that's what it was.  He was my only, the only black classical piano player I knew of, and so that was my aspiration, and listening to all the other things, I would listen to records that came out of stacks, you know Vogue, and some of the earlier Motown things and I would just listen to how they played it and I would play it and I had a good feel for it.  Same thing with jazz.  I mean, Wynton Kelly, you know, Bill Evans, I loved, you know, Art Tatum and Oscar Peterson, you know, and I would just try to emulate them and because of the classical training I had, I had the dexterity to do whatever it is I wanted and the rest was the ear, so I've never studied on anything but classical music.  The rest you just listen to and find out what really makes it work and that's what I did.  It became a life-saver in the years to come and then I worked in so many different areas of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did you play the radio a lot around the house?
Speaker 2: All the time.  You know, and the interesting thing is, and in kind of looking back, I never played classical music at home; it was always the R and B stations, even though I was studying classical music and I was studying with a teacher who demanded nothing else but classical music, you know, so when I went out and played a little jazz gig or something like that, that was, if he had known that he would have dropped me as a student, and this guy was a teacher who taught people who only wanted to go into the classics.  Nothing else.  Forget this pop stuff.  You know, Horace Silver, I don't know who he is, but I saw a record in your case of his, and I could tell by the way he looked he is not a classical pianist, so, I don't want you listening to that stuff, I don't want you--and I said, "Yes, sir!"  I mean, I did it but I became an excellent classical pianist because of that discipline, you know, and I in later years, accompanied singers at Town Hall [The Town Hall, New York, New York]. I mean, it was, I was all over the place.  I was all over the place.
Story_ID: 307897
Speaker 1: Now how did you choose your college?  You went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you said, right?
Speaker 2: I went to Howard.
Speaker 1: And, how did you end up choosing Howard?
Speaker 2: The principal at Howard said to the choir director, who was really the head of the music department, he said, "Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler] ought to go to the Eastman School of Music [Rochester, New York] in New York, because he needs to put himself up against all of the white kids around the country that are good.  This will be the real test."  My music teacher said, "He should go to an all-black school, Howard University, where I know he will be amongst his peers, there may be some better, there are some not as good, you know, but I'm afraid if he gets up at Eastman School of Music, he'll be a little fish in a big pond and I don't know whether Harold would be able to handle that, and at Howard he'll be a big fish in a big pond, or a little pond, even, you know, depending on the quality of musicianship amongst the other students," and I'm convinced to this day even though to some degree I'm sorry that I didn't go to the Eastman School of Music, I don't think, because in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and elementary school, I skipped grades.  I mean, I was smart enough to skip grades, so I was already one year younger than anybody else in freshman year, in high school and freshman year in college.  They just skipped me over because they didn't want to make me study something that I really knew, and I said growing up, it was a bad thing in one sense, because you go to a party and everybody at your party is older, and a sixteen year old kid, girl doesn't want to have anything to do with a fifteen year old boy.
Speaker 1: Sadly, it's the truth (laughter).
Story_ID: 308138
Speaker 1: Now, who was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Now, you know, well, Charles Johnson [HistoryMaker Charles F. Johnson], who is a brother who is a producer of the TV series, 'JAG,' you know, he was there, you know.  I'm trying to think who, who has stepped out in kind of accomplishment.
Speaker 1: There was--
Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, Stokely Carmichael was there at the same time.
Speaker 1: Wasn't Roberta Flack there around the same time?
Speaker 2: Roberta Flack was actually, you know, a few years before me, you know but Roberta and I were friends.  I was best man at her wedding.  It didn't last very long, the marriage, but she married a bass player [Steven Novosel].  I told her, I said, "Don't marry a musician.  Worst thing in the world you could do." (Laughter) But Roberta and I are still friends to this day and go back a long way.  But she did finish Howard just a little before me.  Donny Hathaway came in as I was, the last year that I was there, and Donny was another one of those talents that only the things I did at Howard, Donny took over because in my senior year, they used to tell me, "Look out, Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler].  There's a new kid in town."  And it was Donny (laughter) and he's just wonderful, you know.  He's really a great, great musician. But--tragic how that ended, too.  But, you know, the pressures of the business. I was so worried about Dave Chappelle, with this whole thing because Dave Chappelle was under the same pressure that Donny Hathaway was, and Donny handled it the way he handled it and Dave Chappelle handled it in his way.  He just walked away from it.  It's a pressure that $50 million will put on you.  He didn't want it, and was a very simple person, leading a very simple life, didn't need it, and didn't want it.  May go back to an easier life, and sometimes in the pressures that, that I face in these years in this industry, I look back and say when I do my tax return, I'd say I'd give anything to be amongst those people who make a certain amount every year on this little job they do, and file the short form.  My taxes are so complicated. You know, I mean, because when you get to a certain level, I mean you know, it just gets very complicated, the deductions, the things that are deductible and the things that aren't. I mean it's like simple things, it's like when I go to the cleaners, it's a deduction because this is wardrobe.  When I go to get a haircut, you know, that's hair and makeup, you know.  I mean, so it's if I'm not getting a haircut because my hair is long, it's because I'm gonna be on a TV show, so it's all considered a deduction.  You know, I'd just rather the simple life--take out my money and give me my return, do a little short form (laughter) you know, but that's, for Donny, the pressure of being, becoming Donny Hathaway, you know, was so much that he just couldn't handle it and I'm happy to see that Dave Chappelle just walked away from it and didn't do a Donny Hathaway.
Story_ID: 308139
Speaker 1: Were there are any teachers at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that made a special impression on you?
Speaker 2: Basically, you know, see--a different thing happened when I was at Howard.  I was, let's see, because I had studied privately in St. Louis [Missouri] with this private piano teacher and then another place I went every Saturday, called a community music school, I was the only black student there, where you studied music theory, music history, music appreciation, and all kinds of, every aspect of music in addition to studying the piano, that when I went to Howard, I went and they tested me as they test all freshmen coming in and it was like a four-hour test, and at the end of the four hours, they say, "We need you to come back tomorrow."  I said, "Why?"  They said, "Because you passed everything, you know everything we could teach you in your freshman year so we want to give you the sophomore final exam."  I said, "Okay."  So, I came in the next day and I took the test and I passed everything that a sophomore at Howard would know.  So they met and they said, "We'll have him come back in two days and we'll give him the junior exam, but he's got to take these classes, otherwise, he won't have enough credits to graduate."  So, I came back in and I passed all of the junior exam.  This is the kind of training that I had that I thought everybody had.  I went into college knowing everything that the students would learn in the first three years I had studied privately in St. Louis.  So, they set me down and they talked to me and they told me this and they said, "But you have to take theory 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, and 106, and it'll be very boring for you, but you have to take them," so what happened, so my first year my report for grades were all A's first semester, all A's second semester, and I showed it to my daughter [Samantha Wheeler] now to show you what can happen when things go wrong, but what would happen with the teacher at Howard, because they knew, they said, they'd come in and say, "Okay, here's the lesson plan for today.  Harold's [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler] gonna teach," and they'd go take a cigarette break. You know, if I gave a test, I was grading the papers.  So, I was doing all of the teacher's work because they knew, it doesn't make any sense for me to sit there and take this test.  You know, so this school became boring, they had the liberal arts courses, because music school was boring.  The liberal arts courses, the English classes that I had to take, and the psychology classes I had to take, I had to really work hard at it because there was nothing challenging--those were the only challenging things that were going on.  So, if you look at my, for four years of college my transcript read A, A, A, A, A, A.  Second semester A, A, A, A, A, A, B.  Sophomore year A, A, A, A, A, A.  Second half of sophomore year D, D, D, D, F, and then all A's junior and senior year.  College got so boring that I was going to college, I had a half a pint of Old Pro stuck in my belt.  The teacher would turn to write on the blackboard and I just (gesture), I just didn't care.  I didn't care about anything and when I look, and if you looked at that transcript, you'd say what happened here!  And I remember one of my college professors, Mark Fax, F-A-X.  He said, Harold, when he looked at that, he said, "I know what happened and it happens to a lot of students," he said, "Because if you take a look at the definition of sophomore, it comes from the Latin word sophomoric, and sophomoric, the definition of it is wise fool," and he said, "It just happens, you know it all, you're so smart that you just screw up," and that's what happened.  When I came back for that third year, everything was fine.  I said, "I'll never make this mistake again," but it's what kept me from graduating certainly magna cum laude.  I graduated cum laude, you know, but that one year just pulled my average down, you know, but I didn't really care so much about that, partially because in the music business unless you're going to be college professor, to get a job on Broadway you do not have to show your degree.  To get a job in a club, you don't have to show your degree from college.  You only have to show your degree from college if you're going to work in some education--educational system, you know.  I'd like to see Coltrane's [John Coltrane] degree, Miles' [Miles Davis] degree; they don't have 'em.  You know what I mean, so it's just, it's not required and though I don't recommend that to young people, to forget about college and forget about your grades 'cause it's not gonna matter if you're gonna go into, you know, profession, you want to go into the record business, become a, you can be president of a record company.  You know, it doesn't matter your degree.
Story_ID: 308140
Speaker 1: I worked in every kind of club you could imagine through college because, and the thing I used to do was in the early years in Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when I really couldn't afford, my mother [Roxetta McGee Wheeler], I had a tuition scholarship and I had a work scholarship, two scholarships, and I worked three days a week in the dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] as a janitor.  I would go in and cleanup for four hours a night, clean up and nearly all that would go in the wastebasket, pull the gauze out from when they had been (gesture), and dump it, and the buffer and buff the floors.  So I had a work scholarship and a tuition scholarship and it wasn't enough to eat.  So, what I would do is I would date anybody who worked in a restaurant.  I'd go in a restaurant and wink at one of the waitresses and the next thing you know, we'd be talking and talking and that's my girlfriend, so I could always go in there and get a meal.  She'd say, I'll slide you something, a burger or something.  So, that's how I ate my first year.  Then when I started working around Washington, D.C. in the clubs and so forth, I became a big thing and Roberta Flack was working, singing some songs there, turned me on to some places.  "This guy's good," you know, and I was a singing piano player, you know, and you could come up and make your request, I had my little brandy snifter there, and put the tip in the bowl.  That got me through.  But the other thing it did was it pulled me away from the classical music because it made me say if I'm going to be Andre Watts, I'm going to have to go to Europe and then become famous and then come back here, because nowhere in the states is there going to be a black person.  It's just, you don't go that route.  If you gotta go famous, go to Europe and get famous and come back here and then be accepted.  You know, and I didn't want to go that route, plus I liked other, I liked jazz, I liked art, I liked all of that, too much, and Andre Watts, I'm sure, could only play classical music and if you said, you know, you ever heard of [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes?  He'd say, "No, what does he play?"  He wouldn't know.  And I loved all of that stuff too much, you know, so, my classical playing started to lack that discipline that you needed for that, so I decided that my senior year at Howard that I was not going to go into classical music, and I didn't know what I was going to do, but I said I'm not going to go that route, because I really would have to become as good as Andre Watts.  I would have to give up all of the other kind of music I love, and I didn't want to do that, and the risk of, you know, once you're famous in the classical world, you can make a lot of money, but if you don't, that's it.  And I could always play clubs and eat.  I could always do anything like that and eat, you know, so that became a concern.  Plus, I liked all the other kind of music. You know, I liked it all, so I had to give up the classical and I, if I had to sit down and really play a serious classical piece now, I'd have to work on it very hard.  I still have the dexterity in my fingers to do it, but I listen to classical music on a Sunday because it's very easygoing and very relaxed, you know, any other time, I'm listening to any other things.  I'm not a great fan of hip-hop, I'll tell you quite frankly.  Some of it's very good and, you know, some of it's not, and I've done some hip-hop, you know, recordings and things, you know, but my musical tastes have changed through the years and some of it has changed as the industry has changed, and it's just keeping up with the musical trends because that's kind of where the money is, but my classical background has always been there, and it's always put me in an area where I can do, you know, I can play jazz, but I can also do this and we need somebody who can do jazz and this, so you're talking about [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler. Instead of hiring two people, you got him in one.  You need somebody who can turn around and play for Brian McKnight in one minute, and play for Leontyne Price five minutes later, so, that's Harold.  So, it's been a blessing to be able to do all of these things, you know, and people know that I do, in the industry they know this now, so I'm never out of work.  I have to force a vacation.
Story_ID: 308141
Speaker 1: Did you finish the program at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I finished Howard, oh yeah.  I finished Howard and I came to New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: What year was that? '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: It had to be '64 [1964], yeah, '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I finished Howard in '64 [1964] and I stayed around Washington [D.C.] for a year--
Speaker 1: You said you knew Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], too.  Did you tend to get involved in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was getting, and Stokely was staying right across the hall from me in the dormitory.  You know, and I got very much involved in it. You know, almost to the point where certain visible thing I know, I didn't get a job once 'cause my picture was in the paper, and they said, "Was that you?"  They said, "We can't have you working around these white people at this piano bar."
Speaker 1: What were you doing in the paper?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, in a rally and I was standing right there next to him, and I ended up in The Washington Post, and so I said, "Well I would be very careful, you know, because I just lost a job that would feed me for a long time," so I got behind the scenes a little bit where I was very much a part of it and even when I left Washington and went to New York, you know, I stayed in a part of it just in terms of supporting, you know, supporting those causes, you know, but--
Speaker 1: So you went to New York after?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I spent a year in Washington, working, trying to figure out what I was going to do since I knew I wasn't going to go to Europe and go through that grind.  I spent a year working in, just varying clubs there and I reached a level where, you know, that level where your name is in the paper, appearing nightly, such-and-such at the such-and-such, I mean this little spot in the entertainment section of the newspapers, and I saw that, you know, this isn't going anywhere.  You know, I saw ten years from then, I would be the Bobby Short, of you know, Washington D.C., and I said that's not what I want to do, there is so much more I want to do, and I was scared to go to New York, because this is a big city.  This is where all, either you make it there or you don't.  So I actually went to New York to get into the music business, but in case I couldn't break into some form of the music business, the recording studios or something, I can always say, "Well, I didn't go there for that, I went to get my master's degree, so I enrolled in the Manhattan School of Music [New York, New York], and--
Speaker 1: This is '65 [1965] or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is '60s [1960s]. September '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 308142
Speaker 1: Manhattan School of Music [New York, New York], and there was a two-year master's [degree] program and the summer after my, I took so many courses the first year I could have finished in a year-and-a-half.  I had two classes to take to graduate.  The summer before, the summer before that, I got a job at CBS in the library, programming music, just listening to records and writing down information about the records so that the programmer could then program them for all the CBS stations around the country, and they were gonna get rid of him and they asked me to stay on as program director, and I said I can't do this and be a student, so maybe I'll not finish those last two courses, and I spent three years at CBS in a three-piece suit, martinis for lunch, secretary that was making five hundred dollars a week, stock options, whole thing, I was a CBS executive.  Did nothing with music outside of if you want to get your record on the station, you've gotta come to me.  So, I just sat behind the desk and listened to what everybody else was doing and I reached--
Speaker 2: So this was from 1967?
Speaker 1: This was about '68 [1968].  This started about '68 [1968], yeah, and I had played, you know, just did little jobs before that when I first got to New York [New York], and I had, one of the jobs that I had was that I played piano for a musical comedy class at a studio in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], I think it's the Herbert Berghof Studio [HB Studio, New York, New York]. It's a very famous studio where students go there and they study acting and music, and so forth, and I was the pianist for the musical comedy class, you know, and after being an executive, I'm sitting at CBS, phone rings, and he said there's a guy named Ray Ramirez [ph.].  He wants to talk to you.  I said, "Ray Ramirez. Where do I know that name from?"  He was in one of these classes and he said, "I'm in Richmond, Virginia performing my night club act, and the piano player here is not very good.  Can you come down and play?"  I said, "Well, I don't do that.  I'm in a kind of another end of the business now.  I'm a radio executive."  He said, "You really gotta do this for me, man.  You know, you played for me in my classes, and you really have a feel for the entertainment business and please, can you just come down?"  I said, "Well, I don't even know your music."  He said, "You'll know it."  He said, "You read anything.  Please come down."  I said okay and he put the club owner over with me and the club owner told me how much I'd get paid and it was, it didn't matter because my salary at CBS was, I didn't care about this, this would be fun.  I went there, rehearsed with him for an hour in the afternoon, rehearsed with the band, did the show, was having a good time too, and there's an expression, "The smell of the grease fire, the roar of the crowd, the smell of the grease fire--."
Speaker 2: "Smell of the grease pan in the fire."
Speaker 1: Well, he said to me when he came to the part when he said I'd like to introduce my musical director, [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler, and I stood and the crowd just roared and so forth, and I said, "This is what I've been missing."  And I got back because I got in the car, I drove from Richmond to Washington, D.C., where I was gonna catch the shuttle, and I drove around Washington in this rental car for about three hours, and I made up my mind, and I returned the car, flew back to New York and gave my notice to CBS, and so I went from an executive salary to thirty-five dollars a week coaching singers.  I only had one student and the word got out and I went to seventy dollars a week, and I got three or four more students, but for a year I just struggled, and this is that thing of going to New York to get into the business but just being aware that this is the dues you pay in doing it.  This job at CBS was luck.  You know, I just stepped into it.  They were getting rid of the guy that preceded me and they liked what I did, and said, "You know, you're now program director."
Story_ID: 308143
Speaker 1: I struggled and everything from there was just being in the right place at the right time and having the talent, but see having the talent in Washington D.C., having the talent in St. Louis [Missouri], will only get you so far.  Having that talent in New York [New York], where you're exposed to everything, you know, and it was Burt Bacharach, who, I took one of my singers I was working with over to audition for a show that he and Hal David [Harold David] wrote, 'Promises, Promises.'
Speaker 2: Now, who did they take?  Who was the singer?
Speaker 1: I don't remember her name because they didn't pick her.  But, I just remember that the stage manager, because they were auditioning all these people, the stage manager said, "Forget her, find out who that is playing piano."  And the stage manager came--Burt said that--and the stage manager came over and he says, "Excuse me, can you come up to the stage on your way out?"  And I said, "Yeah."  I said, "What's your name?" He said, "Mr. Bacharach would like to meet you."  And he said, "I like the way you play, man.  I like your feel.  How would you like to play piano in my show?"  I said, "Yeah."  So, I was the pianist for 'Promises, Promises.'
Speaker 2: I can hear that, I can hear that.  I know the music (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's funny because while we were out on the road, the last stop we went to Boston [Massachusetts] and Washington D.C.  When we were in Washington D.C., he really didn't like the conductor.  He said to me, "I want you to conduct my show."  I said, "You want me to--."  He said, "Yeah, we're going to be coming to New York in two weeks and I want you to be the conductor of the show," so I ended up at age twenty-five being the first black and the youngest ever to conduct a Broadway show.
Speaker 2: Now that's when Bacharach, I guess, and he's still big--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: But, he was at his really height of success.  He had everything, movie scores and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Movie scores and records with Dionne Warwick--
Speaker 2: Dionne Warwick, Dusty Springfield, and all them like, some of these big hits of his, so you were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, I mean it, it all started, then you get all of the people that come to see 'Promises,' you know, I remember Liza Minnelli saying that she came to see the show and afterwards I'm down conducting and she came and she hugged me and she said, "Oh, I love watching you work.  Let me take you to, to get something to eat."  And we went out to a restaurant there in New York.  The next thing you know, I'm writing music for Liza Minnelli.  It had just, it just grows.
Speaker 2: Burt Bacharach, 'Promises, Promises,' what year is that?  I suppose that the year that you were coaching singers was '71 [1971] to '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  'Promises, Promises' opened--I have to check the date.  I think it was '71 [1971], '71 [1971] when it opened, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  And Liza Minnelli?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I did the first thing for Liza Minnelli was just some performing things for her and it must have been late '71 [1971], probably, or early '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 308144
Speaker 1: This was about the time that you started dealing with [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles' songs.
Speaker 2: The same time with Melvin, you know, because once you get in the Broadway circle, you know, of people, I was looking for the brothers that were doing something on Broadway and there weren't a lot of them.  I mean, there was 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant] and 'Ain't Supposed to Die,' ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death: Tunes from Blackness,' Melvin Van Peebles] and 'Don't Play Us Cheap' [Melvin Van Peebles].  Those last two are Melvin shows.
Speaker 1: Now, did you miss, like 'Big Time Buck White' ['Buck White,' Oscar Brown, Jr.] was before you--before you got--
Speaker 2: That was before me, yeah.  'Purlie' was coming in around the same as, you know, 'Promises, Promises,' but they were staffed.  They already had their people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well tell us about the Melvin Van Peebles--how did you hook up with him?
Speaker 2: Well, the stage manager for 'Promises, Promises' was a brother named Charlie Blackwell [Charles Blackwell], and Charlie said to me once, he said, "You know, there's a brother who could use your kind of expertise in this theater thing.  He's gonna try to crack into the theater thing, 'cause, you know, Melvin was, I think 'Sweet Sweetback' ['Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song'] had come out the year before, and 'Ain't Supposed To Die' capitalized on a lot of things that were in 'Sweet Sweetback.'  That was the sequence of that so, Melvin was crazy.  I mean, I love him, you know.  We got together and worked on his show, you know, cast it, put it together, and I put a band together and did all the arrangements for it and conducted it and, you know, it's been a lifetime association and I tell Mario Van Peebles now, I said, "You know, we go back a long way, Mario."  He said, "Yeah, I know.  You babysat me."  I used to babysit Mario when Melvin was going out on a date, and he didn't want to leave him there by himself, and his sister Megan [Megan Van Peebles].  So, he said, "Can you look after Mario and Megan for me?"  I said, "Yeah," and I'm babysitting these kids.  I mean, they weren't babies, they were six, seven, eight years old, whatever.  But he still wouldn't leave 'em.  So, I'd look after 'em.
Story_ID: 307905
Speaker 1: You were telling us about the show, 'Ain't Supposed To Die a Natural Death' ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death: Tunes from Blackness, Melvin Van Peebles].
Speaker 2: Right, you know, it's, the wonderful is if you saw 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song,' you know, nobody wanted to release that movie.  I mean, he [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles] couldn't get the money from anybody, he couldn't get distributors, he couldn't do anything, so he did what they called four-walled it.  He bought, you take a particular theater in the community and he'd buy it out for the weekend.  He put his people in the box office and he put his people selling the popcorn, and the only person that stayed was the projectionist, and he put his bodyguard outside a projection room, because the union guys didn't like the idea of the four-walling, so they'd try to send over, send somebody over and destroy your film.  You'd have somebody sitting out there with a shotgun outside of the projection room, so nobody could get in there and rip up the film, because he bucked the system, you know, to say if you won't release my movie I'll rent your theater for the night.  Everything about it, he had his people selling the popcorn, he had his people doing everything.  The only thing he had to have was the projectionist, and the projectionist ran the movie, and in many cities, that's just what he did and that's why he could take the lion's share, because that was his box office now.  It was his box office.  You're not paying, you know, somebody all of this money, I mean you're not receiving a small percentage, you know, from the owners.  He's the owner of the movie.  You know, so that whole concept, you know, really stuck with me in a lot of ways that, to this day, that I do business, you know.  There are just certain things that I do, if you want me to do it, I've got to own it.  I've got to own it when I'm finished with it, and if, and I've reached a point where if somebody says, "We can't do that," and I say, "Well, that's okay, I understand, nice talking to you."  And that's it.  And some have said, well, let me look into that, and they call back and they let my lawyer know, yeah, we can do that.  It just means you can't do anything you want with my music after this first usage of it.  You've gotta come to me first, you know, and it's paid off in a lot of ways.  You know what I mean?  So, and that's something I learned from Melvin, 'cause Melvin was, he's a very smart man, very smart man, and he taught Mario [Mario Van Peebles] all of that, and right now with their production company and the things they're doing, they're very successful because they own it outright.  You know, they don't have all these silent partners and they're doing, making money for doing nothing.  They're not borrowing money from and owing banks and all these silent partners.  They don't have it, you know, so, I learned a lot from, you know, from, working with Melvin.  He's a little crazy, and loves his women.
Story_ID: 307906
Speaker 1: You have any stories about him being crazy (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles] and I, we had--we used to--when Melvin lived in California and he had a place in New York, we used to sit out and have a contest.  We'd sit with some jalapeno things in front of us, a whole bowl.  I'd have about a dozen of 'em and he'd have a dozen of 'em.  And we'd have a shot glass and he'd have a shot glass and a fifth of 180-proof rum and we'd say, "Go."  He'd pour, pour (gesture), and he'd take a jalapeno (gesture), bite it, and he says, "You ready?"  "I'm ready."  So, it was all a matter of seeing who was going to give up first, and we'd get through, I mean, six--eight shots of this 180-proof rum followed by jalapenos (laughter) and he always won 'cause Melvin's not gonna let anybody, anybody beat him, and I would just, I would let him--to win all he had to do was if he had eight, all he had to do was have the ninth one, you know.  But, Melvin was the type of person that after he finished the ninth one, and said, "I won," he'd go have three more just to make you look bad (laughter) but we use--I mean these are the kind of crazy things, and then there are some things, you know, that we did that I could never go on tape--never go on tape saying--you know, Melvin had a philosophy.  He said, if you want a girl you know, you don't have to go through a lot of things then, there's always somebody out there for you.  And he said, "Come on, let me show you."  We left his office in New York [New York], and we went down to the corner of 46th [Street] and Broadway and he said you stand right beside me.  We stood against a wall and a girl would walk by and he said, "Wanna go to bed?" and some would say "Get out of here" you know, and by the way today you couldn't get away with this, you know.  And he said--somebody would spit at him.  Somebody would take us, try to smack him, sixteenth girl he said, "Yeah" he said, "come on Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Wheeler]." I mean, that's the kind of person Melvin was.  There was this craziness about him.  You know, that a--that was it. You just, that was it.  "You wanna go to bed?"  "Nope."  "Okay."  "You wanna go to bed?"  You know, and who would think, but he was saying this is how easy it is to get a girl if you want it (laughter).  But, he's a very creative person, you know, just had a wild spirit about him.  He, I--my first motorcycle ride was with Melvin in California, 'cause he didn't have a car.  He had a motorcycle and I'd never been on a motorcycle in my life, and I didn't have goggles, so you knew when you get in a motorcycle and that air hits you, your eyes look like a car riding in the middle of a rainstorm without your windshield wipers on.  You can't see anything.  They just tear up, and the other thing I didn't know is that when you turn on a motorcycle, your whole body has to turn.  It's not like you turn and you lean the other way.  If you lean the other way, the motorcycle will go straight.  And we went to make a freeway entrance ramp and I'd never, we had been going straight up to there and it was the first time we leaned and I thought I was going to fall off, leaning to the right, so I leaned to the left and a motorcycle wanted to go straight there and he said, "No, no, no, don't ever do that.  You lean with me," and I'm sitting with my arms wrapped around him going down the freeway at sixty-five miles per hour, saying what am I doing (laughter)?  But that was how he got around, on a motorcycle.  So, but we see each other.  It's always just a big hug and remembering, you know, all those good ol' days back when we were younger.
Speaker 1: So, you worked on another project with him, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'Don't Play Us Cheap,' [Melvin Van Peebles] which was a Broadway show, which, then we went to, I think, Santa Fe, New Mexico and did a film of it, which lately I've seen on cable, you know, so, but we worked on, those are the two things.  A couple of other projects we're trying to get off the ground, but then Melvin went into the stock market.  He became a stock broker, and had this whole profession, oh, yeah, he wrote a book on how to make money on the stock market. I mean, this is Melvin.  He just gets an idea, it's an idea he had, and he said, "Oh, this is a good play.  I'm gonna write a book on this."  I forgot the name of the book; I wish I remembered it--the 'Code of Green,' [sic. 'Bold Money: A New Way to Play the Options Market,' Melvin Van Peebles] or something it had, but he's a jack of all trades, jack of all trades.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the son is quite an entrepreneur, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Very, I mean, he instilled in Mario [Mario Van Peebles] that in Mario and I love it.  I said, I knew Mario when he started his acting career.  I said this is great, but then I saw, you start to see produced by Mario Van Peebles, I mean, different projects.  Then I saw a couple projects that he was not even in on camera, but, you know, he was producer of it, so I said, "This is the way to go. This is the way to go."  That, he learned from, from his dad.
Story_ID: 307907
Speaker 1: So what were some of the other memorable projects that you worked on, as we go through chronology in the '70s [1970s], through the '80s [1980s], and up to now?
Speaker 2: Well, during the '70s [1970s], I went through, I guess it was the '70s [1970s], the disco era, you know, when the disco era came and Donna Summer and Gloria Gaynor, I did a lot of Gloria Gaynor's records, you know. I didn't do 'I Will Survive.'  That's the one I wish I had done, but a friend of mine, Freddie Perren, who was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time I was at Howard, you know, wrote and produced that record, but I did the 'Never Can Say Goodbye' record with her, and a couple other things, and I had my own group, called Consumer Rapport, that came out with a hit called 'Ease On Down The Road,' so, you know, it was a wonderful era.  People frowned and looked down on the disco when you look back at it now, and the big hit I had was the 'Star Wars.'  You know, we had a disco version of John Williams' music for Star Wars.  It was under the artist called Meco, and I mean it made it to number one on the charts, and stayed there for about nine weeks, and it was, it was fun and it used a big orchestra for this, too.  You know, so it took me back to my classical training here.  It all comes back in.  A lot of the other disco people don't have that training so they don't know how to write for strings, they don't know how to write for flutes and French horns, and so forth.  So, this was, you know, and all the time there was a theater, I had a jingle house, I was producing jingles. My account (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which ones?
Speaker 2: My accounts, I have Folgers Coffee, I had McDonald's, TWA [Trans World Airlines], General Electric, Hanes stocking, I mean, I must have had--I've done about five hundred commercials through my company, Burger King.  I had McDonald's and Burger King at the same time.  They don't let actors do that, but behind the scenes people, they don't care, so from 1977 to '85 [1985], you know.  I was just doing all these commercials.
Speaker 1: So, you're composing the music?
Speaker 2: Composing the music and when there was music already composed, I would arrange it and orchestrate it.
Speaker 1: Can you hum one that we would remember?  Just off the top?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "The best part of waking up, is Folgers in your cup."
Speaker 1: I didn't even know that was black music at the time.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It's catchy, very catchy.
Speaker 2: And that's the key to, you know, any jingle.  It's catchy.  Something that you can remember.
Story_ID: 307908
Speaker 1: We passed by 'The Wiz' for some reason.  But, tell us about 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 2: During the, the, I guess the era when, I mean because all of these things are happening simultaneously.  I mean, I'm doing jingles at the same time I'm doing disco at the same time I'm doing theater.  You know, 'The Wiz' was a wonderful opportunity because it's a black composer, black producer for the show, all black show, you know, and since Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles] shows, you know, there hadn't been--I had done music on 'Chorus Line' ['A Chorus Line'] and here comes 'The Wiz' and it's like it was wonderful.  Stephanie Mills was fifteen years old, and Stephanie is still a good friend to this day, and it's, it was a pleasure working on it.  It got bad reviews and partially because, I think, the white press was saying, "How dare you mess with 'The Wonderful Wizard of Oz' ['The Wizard of Oz'] with Judy Garland and the whole thing." But we went on a campaign, which is something that the producers learned from Melvin Van Peebles, how to get the black audience into the theater, so we went into the churches.  We started bussing them from Baltimore [Maryland], Washington, D.C., Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], everywhere, and giving the impression that this show was the biggest thing since you could name it. It took six months before we built up to the point where you couldn't get a seat, but the people that read the reviews first said, "I'm not gonna come out," they're white audiences.  They're not really supporting the show, until the word was out that you can't get a seat.  It's a hit.  And we started to get the white audience in there, and then one of the critics from The New York Times agreed to come back and re-review it and one year later on the anniversary date of when he hated it, and he gave it a rave review.  He gave it a rave review, realizing he--I, and he printed his old review at the top half of the entertainment section and it's a new one underneath, so you could even compare, you know, and then it was history.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre; Tony Award] for director.
Speaker 2: Geoffrey won, yeah.  So, you know, it was my first theater experience with an all-black show on that level.  You know, Melvin's show was a smaller show, you know, intimate, twelve people in the cast, but this was considered a big Broadway musical.
Story_ID: 307909
Speaker 1: And the one to follow that ['The Wiz'], of that time was 'Dreamgirls' you know, which was, again, a lot of stars came out of, came out of 'Dreamgirls.'
Speaker 2: A huge show and people stood in line for hours--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And it's interesting because 'Dreamgirls' was immediately accepted as a hit.  And you know black people have a tendency to be late coming to the box office.  I mean, they said, "I'll get around to buying my tickets," you know. Well, I remember after 'Dreamgirls' opened, I stood in the audience every night for about a month.  I'd go down to the theater and I'd say, "Where are our people?" Ninety percent of the audience was white.  We're just late getting there because for a show that's a major hit, if you don't get to the box office early, it will sell out for six months.  You can't get a ticket 'til, you know, if it's September, they say well we can give you a seat in February.  And, we're used to going to the movie.  As always, with, can't see 'Dreamgirls' here, maybe I can go see it down here or down here and this is it, and there are people that came in to the theater that had never been to the theater, and this happened during 'The Wiz' too, that intermission, and they're just coming in, and they say, "Where's the popcorn?" There's no popcorn in the theater and you're looking for the popcorn and the drink?  And they actually sit down and say well, "We'll watch the second half and then we'll stay for the next one," as if it's right after and they're gonna run it again.  I mean, they just didn't know theater (laughter) but they learned, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Dreamgirls' ran about ten years, I think?
Speaker 1: Yeah, six years and then it came back.  It came back for another round, and it's, of course, you can always find 'Dreamgirls' somewhere touring.  Now, I hear they're about to make a movie out of it, now, with Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles-Carter], Eddie Murphy, I mean these are the people that they're going after.  At this point, I don't know whether they're signed yet but I think so, you know, and Fantasia [Fantasia Barrino] from 'American Idol' to play one of the roles. I mean, it's so, it's a big thing.  I think ever since the movie of 'Chicago' was such a big success and won all the Oscars [Academy Awards], there is safety in saying, "Ah, we can bring 'Dreamgirls'" because there was a fear to will people come to see a musical, you know, in the theater.
Speaker 2: For a while, it sort of almost died out, you know.  You didn't have like the big screen musical--
Speaker 1: Right, so. But, those two shows remained two of my favorites, partially because, you know, they're black shows and they have withstood the time.  There's always somebody doing 'The Wiz' and 'Dreamgirls' somewhere, you know.  And, you know I've done plenty of other shows, 'Full Monty' ['The Full Monty'], 'Hairspray,' and all, but there's just a little personal pride in the black shows that make it, that make it, and for me to have been a part of it, and part of it is that I didn't realize until I had gone out to different universities doing little seminars about theater how proud young people are of me and my accomplishment and what, and they see that I've done this and I'm actually coming to their university and they're gonna get to meet me and I'm their inspiration.  I wanna do what you do, I wanna be you, you know, and it's why I go around to a lot of the schools and when I go, I mean, it's only to the black schools or to schools that have an African American studies program and there may be a few white people in some of these classes, but I mean I go there because these are the people that need to see the people in the industry.  They need to see.  Jerry Seinfeld can go to any of the schools and be the inspiration for them, you know, but Jerry Seinfeld is not gonna be an inspiration for the black people.  You know what I mean.  So, I've gotta be one of the ones that go out there to be an inspiration, you know, to them and I just finished doing the hurricane relief benefit in Oxford, Mississippi, and the black students and I conducted the orchestra for them as a musical director, and the black students were like, with their mouths open, that I did a big show like this, because it was on the level of the Emmys [Emmy Awards] and the Oscars. I mean, and the stars that came down to participate, were unbelievable, to see a black guy leading this orchestra in Oxford, Mississippi.  They was, I mean they were just tickled pink.  They were tickled pink and I spent time with them, you know, talking.  You want to ask me questions, ask me.  I said, I'm on a twenty minute break, milk my brain (laughter) with anything, because they don't, I'd do anything short of giving them my home number, because I know they would just ring for everything.  But, you know, these kids, you know, they're proud and they let it be known.  They let it be known.
Story_ID: 307910
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], too.  That was '96 [1996] when you did the orchestrations for the Olympics (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. The Olympics--
Speaker 1: It took you three, we were talking about this before we started.  It took you three years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The process of preparing for the Olympics, and it's for every Olympics too, not just '96 [1996] is, when the Olympics in '92 [1992] started, all the work began then for what we were going to do for '96 [1996].  My call came in '93 [1993].  They said we want you to be musical director for the opening ceremonies, and it's a huge job so I split it with one other person.  There's just too much, you know, for one person to do, but we worked for three years deciding what it is we were going to do, what kind of music we were going to do, the kind of things we were going to hire.  The talent pool, we used about twenty thousand people from Atlanta [Georgia] and surrounding areas to be a part of this pageantry; dancers, marching bands, and you know, the whole thing, and of course the orchestra was the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra.  And again, I come from a classical background, so this was something that I was not afraid of, and there were a couple of black members of the orchestra when I conducted my first big piece for them, and so forth, they were looking around and the rest of the orchestra was sounding fine and I looked back at one of the sections and I see a brother back there and he says, (gesture) he gives me the thumbs up and he's just so proud to see a brother, doing this, but it was a lot of work and it's very hot in Atlanta but I did a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] tribute, and we, a tremendous amount of the music that was, that was used, but it's a four-hour ceremony and I have a video tape of the whole thing and it's probably one of the highlights of my career, just because it's the Olympics.  I mean, I've done a lot of things but this is a very special and the producers of the show who asked me to be a part of it had worked with me on other shows, Kennedy Center Honors, and lots of other shows, so they were calling me simply because, he's good at what he does and this is the Olympics and we only want the best, and they're not looking at black and white at all, the people that hire me in the industry, and I'm happy about that.  They do not say, "We're fulfilling a quota."  They say, "This guy is good."  Now, I believe if there was somebody white that was better or just as good, that might get them, but they know what they get when they hire me.  They know it's gonna be quality work and I feel the pressure always to give them quality work.  I cannot slip.  I cannot slip at all.
Story_ID: 307911
Speaker 1: Black people have had a presence in the music, in the movies, and on radio and television for quite a long time, and I think a lot of people, black folks in the neighborhood are like listen, half the country just don't know who's doing what most of the time.  We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste in New Orleans [Louisiana] who orchestrated all the Sonny and Cher music and all that, and [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate, and the people like that, and a lot of us don't read the small print and find out who's who.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the wonderful thing about this series, you know, HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], because I've taken pride and sort of been glad to a lot of degrees that I work behind the scenes, and I can do the Olympics, I can do the Oscars [Academy Awards], I can do the Emmys [Emmy Awards], I can do records for, it doesn't matter, and I can walk down the street and not be recognized, and I like that.  So, the way, when I introduce myself to certain people, and I say [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler, and they say, "The Harold Wheeler," and I say, "No, just Harold Wheeler," and they say, "Are you the one that did so-forth and so-on?"  Because there's nothing visible where they can see, oh, that's Harold Wheeler.  Let me run over and talk to him, and I've always liked it that way, you know, and I just recently did a TV series called 'Dancing With the Stars,' and I got a lot of visibility out of it, camera shots and all, now, the worst thing in the world that I think has happened to me--I go in the bank and the bank teller that's been handling my transactions for the last eight years says, "That was you, right?"  And I say, "What, what?"  "On television."  I said, "Yeah, that was me."  And she calls over all the tellers, "I told you that was him."  That's our customer, Mr. Wheeler, Mr. Wheeler."  You know, and the same thing, I went to the post office and the same thing had happened.  They let me jump in line in front of a bunch of people. They said, "Come on." I said, "What?"  They said, "Come on up here."  So I go up and they said, "He was here a few minutes ago.  He's just finishing his transaction."  They said, "That was you on the show we saw last night."  So you know, I have to get used to that, but I think for young people it's good to put a face on some of these people behind the scenes who are doing things that you wouldn't know.  I mean, the producer of 'JAG' is black.  And it's, you wouldn't expect that.  A lot of the camera people, the directors, [HistoryMaker] Oz Scott (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oz Scott. We talked to--
Speaker 2: Oz Scott, yeah.  Oz, and Oz, he's worked with 'Soul Food' and a lot of other things, but he's worked in areas that nobody would--name goes by Oz Scott, that's not necessarily a black name, so you don't, you know, you don't know.  So, and so Oz was a dear friend too, I mean we just work in all those circles, and that's how we, you know, stayed busy.  I mean, I did the Essence Awards for years, and would turn around and finish the Essence Awards and do the Emmy Awards, two totally different things, and then in 2003, I did the, conducted the Oscars, which was the first time a black person has ever conducted the Oscars.  [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones conducted one number one year when I think his company produced it, but to conduct the entire show, three-and-a-half hour broadcast, you know, it's the first time, and my phone rang off the hook and I'm saying it's just another awards show.  I've done the Emmys for years and my phone didn't ring off the hook, but the Oscars is considered the grand-daddy of all the award shows and people in the industry and outside of the industry, everybody, family, friends, and everybody was so proud of that moment, that it made me sit back and say, "Well, I see the way the industry really looks at--."  People magazine did a piece on the most powerful people in the Oscars, and I should try to find it for you, and I was listed there as the number three person.  The number three most powerful person involved in the Oscars in that year, because I hold all the music together for the whole show, so it was, you know, it's a wonderful, I've been very blessed, been very blessed.
Story_ID: 307912
Speaker 1: We were touching upon it before, being unconsciously a role model for people even if you may not even think of yourself as being one, and the significance of that, really for people who don't see a lot of possibilities from the neighborhood they live in and what they know of the world--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when they find out that you actually did something that you--I mean, I got a thrill finding out that you composed, "The best part of waking up (laughter) is Folgers in your cup," (laughter), you know--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I used to take it for granted when people would really be, you know, praise me on that.  They're coming from a different level.  It's something I do all the time, so what's the big, big thing?  But, I started to really accept that people can be very proud.  If they're seeing something that they don't get to see often, I'm a role model for their kids.  You know, one woman even told me when she said I was watching whatever-it-was, and I saw you conducting and my son wants to go into music and he watches television and how often does he get to see a black conductor?  When it was on, she slapped him and said, "Look, look, see?  You practice and this is what you may be able to become one day."  And for him to look and see and say, "Yeah, it is possible."  You know, because it happened in that kid's lifetime and hopefully, as he is seeing it, it will even get better.  You know, so, I accept the praise.  It comes from our people, and I don't, I said to someone, I did a project once that had an all-black orchestra, and I did a, I had some people that were just listening and all the white people in the audience said, "Wow, an all-black orchestra!"  At no other time in their life probably had they said, "Wow, an all-white orchestra." I mean, they look up and see an all-white orchestra and they may say, "Oh look, they have a black conductor."  And that stands out.  But an all-white orchestra with an all-white conductor, "Oh, the orchestra was wonderful, weren't they great?"  "Oh, yeah."  An all-black orchestra, "Wow.  An all-black orchestra.  Weren't they great?"  But they have to add that to it because it is, it is the oddity, you don't see it.  And I have put people to the test.  I fooled sometimes and they didn't even know what they were saying.  They didn't realize what they were saying.  I said, "Do you realize what you just said?"  They said, "Oh, yeah."  "Would you have said that if it were an all-white orchestra?"  "No I wouldn't have."  If they were really being honest, just say no because that's the norm.  That's the norm.  And I'm not the norm, so, it goes noticed.
Story_ID: 307913
Speaker 1: Tell us about your record producing activities and stuff.
Speaker 2: Well, I, during the '70s [1970s] when there wasn't--'70s [1970s] and part of the '80s [1980s], when there was an active recording business, now everybody's got little studios at home and everybody's a producer and everybody has, you know--I dealt with a lot of, a lot of different acts.  I produced for a year-and-a-half all of Gloria Gaynor's records during that era.  I did some of the, I co-produced with Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles] the albums on his shows, 'Ain't Supposed to Die' ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death: Tunes from Blackness,' Melvin Van Peebles] and 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant], but I produced--arranged for a range of singers.  Even arranged things--
Speaker 1: 'Don't Play Us Cheap' [Melvin Van Peebles] not 'Don't Bother Me.'
Speaker 2: I mean, 'Don't Play Us Cheap,' I'm sorry, right.  I've done stuff for Engelbert Humperdinck, I've done stuff for Tom Jones--
Speaker 1: Those are classy, orchestrated things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Classy, orchestrated things, I mean, and this is, and I do it, they hire me because I know the record business and I know this kind of music, and when Engelbert Humperdinck requested me, when I walked in he said, "May I help you?"  He didn't even know I was black.  He just says, "I hear what this man has done and I want--," you know.  And it didn't matter to him.  He said, "Okay, right, yeah." I didn't, I've done a lot of live things with Diana Ross, and a lot of them are symphony things, because she travels around the country doing symphonic concerts in Berlin Symphony Orchestra, and just everywhere and I've done a lot of stuff for her, and they used to call me the West Coast Motown, 'cause I do all the Motown stuff and whenever they're performing, you know, they call me, but in the record industry, it's, you know, it's been a lot of, Gloria Gaynor, black artist, there have been a couple of my own groupie--Consumer Rapport, the Meco, the 'Star Wars' things and we did a musical rendition of the music from 'Close Encounters' and those things, producing all of those.  And, I mean, just a countless number of other artists, some of them I can't even remember, the one-shot single things that we've done, but it's been good, a lot of fun, you know, a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 307914
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I think there needs to be more of a, especially amongst the young people, and I always start from the young people because if you don't start there, once you get a certain age, you're settled into certain things and it's hard to turn the mind around, you know, once that you get a certain age.  If we could get the young people to think in terms of family and the expression may be over-used that it takes a village to raise a child, but I almost hated it when Hillary Clinton used that expression, because I kept saying that's our expression.  We've been saying that for years.  Now, it's not that it cheapened it, but when I grew up, that was what it was about.  It was about the community.  You know, when I got in trouble, when something happens at the time, it was one of the neighbors that busted me and would come and turn me over and whack me a few times.  Now, that's considered child abuse.  But, I think if we can start with the young people and education, you know, and I know our school systems that are in the country are not very great, but we gotta work with what we have and get these kids to learning and getting them to have some kind of ambition other than trying to be Michael Jordan, because there's only gonna be one of those every ten years.  There's only gonna be one Kobe Bryant.  I think if we start training our young kids to want to amount to something, and with education as a main focus, 'cause it all starts, it all has to start there, you know, I think it will improve the lifestyle totally of our communities.  You know, we need help from the cities and so forth, you know, but God helps those who help themselves, and I see what's happening and the churches have done more to help the people of Louisiana and the people from Mississippi than the government's done, the churches, stepping in and people have said to me, give some money.  Yeah, and it's the Red Cross [American Red Cross], but give it to some churches that you know it's going to get to our community.  Give to the black churches, even the white churches there. You know, because there's a point where they've opened up and they say, we're not just helping our white people, we're helping, you know, everybody but, if we can start, and there's got to be a starting point, there are some I think are lost causes now.  The older you get, you have no aspirations.  You know what I mean. You don't have a job, you're not looking for a job, you know.  I don't want to say there's nothing we can do about that, but boy, if we could start another generation into another kind of thinking, we can never get to that level again where it's just, nobody cares, you know, but it's got to start with the young people and it's got to start with the parents, 'cause these young people, and the parenting sometimes is in the community and the church, and people don't go to church anymore.  So you know, and I will certainly do everything I can and when I see young people--one of my dear friends is Samuel L. Jackson, and he is talking about a role model--and Sam will jump on kids when you go--and say boy, "Tie your shoes up."  "Pull your pants up, why you wearing these baggy pants?"  "'Cause that's--that's not the way to go.  You're not gonna get a job nowhere going there looking like that with these baggy pants."  I mean, I try to do the same thing--everything I do, starting with the young people.  The adults--I mean, I've washed my hands of them. But, you know, I'll talk to the parents, I'll say, "Don't let your boy do this.  Don't let your girl do that," you know, whatever.  I didn't do that, and look at me.  I got where I am with another set of ethics and I'll talk to the parents like that, you know, 'cause, as long as they don't have a wine bottle in their hand, then they're not listening.  I'll just do anything to help the kids, 'cause that's what gonna turn it around in the generations to come.  I see it with my daughter [Samantha Wheeler], the way I've raised my daughter.  She's gonna raise some good kids, so we got it.  She's gonna, we got another potential good parent there now, who's gonna create good children and when this multiplies, we're gonna have a better world.
Story_ID: 307915
Speaker 1: Is there a project that you really would like to do, you know as a--that you're thinking about now, I mean a big project that you've always dreamt of doing?
Speaker 2: Well, if I had to, to me it's not always a big project.  It's, if I had my druthers, what I would do right now is build about a dozen music schools all around the country, and north, south, east, west, and charge a nickel, 'cause I don't believe getting something for free is good, with anything.  You gotta pay five dollars a month to have your students come here and be trained, and I'll pay for the whole staff and everything, and all the things to build up some musicians and actors and dancers.  You know, I did a seminar once with dancers and singers.  What did the dancers want to do?  All they wanted to do is, "What is your aspiration?" "We want to do music videos."  This is dancing to them.  Music videos.  I said, "Will you ever think of dancing on a Broadway stage?  You ever thinking of dancing in a big TV production number?"  "No."  So, to broaden that scope, I said, "How many of you have studied ballet?"  No hands.  "How many of you studied a little tap dancing.  I know it's not in these days, but you ever heard of Savion Glover?"  They had all heard of Savion Glover and they admired him, but nobody wants to study tap.  Nobody wants ballet.  Nobody wants any of that legit training.  You learn all of that, you know, you know the hip-hop moves become real easy then.  But I would just set up, it's not like one big thing.  I'd rather do twelve small things and set up these twelve music schools and really train a new generation of young people in the arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back on everything you've done at this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it over?
Speaker 2: Well, that is very interesting.  I always say to myself, what if I had gone to the Eastman School of Music [Rochester, New York].  It would have been a harder level and a different level of training from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I probably wouldn't have gone in knowing everything that they taught in those years.  They would have found a way in the first year to train me like a senior and then like a grad student.  I just wonder what that training would have done.  I'll never know.  I'm happy the way my life has gone.  I've been married three times, the first two divorces.  I'm still happy to have experienced those two marriages, otherwise, it may have happened with my third and the one that I've been with for twenty-six years now, I'm very happy with so I don't really look back and say--I think everything happened for a reason.  All of the lowest points had to happen to bring me to where I am, so if I say I wish this moment hadn't come in my life, it wouldn't have taught me, I wouldn't have grown to the point where I am, so except for I'm wondering what would have happened had I gone to a first class white music school, what would have happened, and it could be a sad story.  It could be a sad ending and I don't know.
Story_ID: 307916
Speaker 1: You were talking about your marriage to [HistoryMaker] Hattie Winston and being successful, and what else about your family--you were talking about your daughter--anything else about your family before we--
Speaker 2: Well, I have two daughters, (cough) excuse me.  I have two daughters, one from my first marriage and one from my marriage to Hattie Winston, and the first, I was twenty-one years old the first marriage and maybe forty-two with the second child and I said, oh boy--the second one you're kind of ready for it, and you've lived enough of your life.  The first one, I was trying to find myself.  But I'm very proud of both girls and it's always been girls, and it's always been girls.  I have two granddaughters.  I just can't seem to get a boy in here at all, but I'm very proud of them, Samantha [Samantha Wheeler] and Marion [ph.], and my grandkids, I love them, and have finally reached the point in life where this is part of what life is about now.  It's being a grandparent, and I'm loving it.  Hattie and I have been married for twenty-six years now and it's just getting better and better, so that's--I'm happy.  I'm a very happy man.
Story_ID: 307917
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done from this point back, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I, every time I go to a memorial service you know, of somebody that's really loved and respected, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, and--I say I wonder what people will say about me at my memorial service, and I'm hoping, I mean I know everybody will say what a wonderful musician, but I'm just hoping that they can say, "And one of the nicest men you'll ever want to meet," and I just try to treat everybody, you know, with all of the things that I've done, and the Oscars [Academy Awards], the Emmys [Emmy Awards], the shows, and all, they're wonderful, that's work, it's a legacy of work that will be out there forever, but what a lot of people can't say is, "And he's the nicest guy you'll ever want to meet," and this is what I hope they'll say at my memorial, I mean, I hope.
Story_ID: 307918
Speaker 1: That's a photo of me, [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler, and it was taken when I was nine years old, to go in the newspaper for when I was doing my first solo recital in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Perfect.  That's exactly what we're looking for.  Next.  And a description for this one please.
Speaker 1: That's me and my sister, Jessie [Jessie Cartwright-Wheeler].  She has to be five or six, which would make me three or four (laughter), taken, it's one of those family shots they love taking (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next. Go ahead, Mr. Wheeler.
Speaker 1: This is me at the piano, same, in preparation for my concert when I was nine years old.
Speaker 2: Good. Next slide.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is one of the classes of my, I was in an accelerated high school class and these are the twenty-six students in those classes in 1960.  Look how we're dressed.
Speaker 1: And this is my high school graduation photo for the graduation of 1960, Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School], St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Harold Wheeler.  I remember posing for this.  I was fourteen months old (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother when she was around thirteen or fourteen years old, Roxetta McGee [Roxetta McGee Wheeler], she was then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me, my sister, my father [William Wheeler, Sr.] in the center, and two of my aunts on either side, St. Louis, Missouri, maybe age six for me.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my daughter, Marion [ph.], her husband, my son-in-law, Andrew [ph.], and my two grandkids, Lena [ph.] and India [ph.].
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my grandmother, Laura Evelyn Wheeler [ph.].  I don't know what year when it was taken, but that's who it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my wife, Hattie Winston Wheeler [HistoryMaker Hattie Winston], and this is our wedding photo, in 1978, standing on top of Rockefeller Center in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is the official photo of me now, 2005.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, another shot in 2005.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: These are some pictures of me working, Harold Wheeler, during the era.  I think in this particular project, I was working with [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is the same setting I was working on 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death: Tunes from Blackness,' Melvin Van Peebles] with Melvin Van Peebles.
Speaker 2: Got it, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the original cast album for 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death.'
