Story_ID: 579516
Speaker 1: Okay, hi, I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Would you like to introduce yourself also?
Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey.
Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey, with The HistoryMakers, the videographer.  We're being observed today by Mary Washington and David Hosansky which is H-O-S-A-N-S-K-Y.  We just do that for the record so 50 years from now everyone will know who was sitting in and who was doing what.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So we will start by having you state your name and spelling it out for us.
Speaker 2: I'm Warren Washington.  The spelling is W-A-R-R-E-N, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: No middle name?
Speaker 2: Martin.  I'm named after my, my mother's father.  His last name is Morton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we will start.  I'm just gonna get your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: I was born August 28, 1936 in Portland, Oregon.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: This is April 20, 19--no, excuse me.  April 20, 2006.
Speaker 1: The location of the center here?
Speaker 2: This is at the National Center for Atmospheric Research on Table Mesa (ph.) in Boulder, Colorado. And your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm a Senior Scientist here at NCAR.
Speaker 2: So we'll start.  I have five sort of People Magazine-type questions that will appear on the website.  And these are just your favorites.  So we'll start with your favorite food.
Speaker 1: Oh, I (laughter), I eat all kinds of food.
Speaker 2: What's your favorite?
Speaker 1: But I, but I like Italian food.
Speaker 2: Your favorite color?
Speaker 1: My favorite color is blue, I think.
Speaker 2: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: It's definitely in the summer.
Speaker 2: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Well, we, Mary and I, like going to Europe.
Speaker 2: Where in Europe?
Speaker 1: Well, we visited many different countries and I think that we sort of like France and we like Italy.  But there's other countries we haven't been to yet that we hope to see.
Speaker 2: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) My favorite phrase, I suppose is "Nobody loves me" (laughter).
Story_ID: 579517
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna start.  And we start with your family tree.  Let's see.  So we're gonna start with your mother and your mother's side of the family and we try to keep it in a structured way for research purposes.  So if you can just give me your mother's name and your mother's date of birth, your mother's place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was, her name is Dorothy Grace Morton.  That was her maiden name.  And she was born in Portland, Oregon in 1911.  And she actually went to college for a while, but she didn't like it very much because there were only a few black students going to the University of Oregon in Eugene, Oregon and there was lots of racial problems when she was going there.  She had two sisters who went to the University of California, Berkley, but didn't like it very well because of the same problem as my mother had.  So they ended up going to Fisk University in Nashville, and they met their husbands who were medical doctors--
Speaker 1: All of them did?
Speaker 2: Two of them did.
Speaker 1: Two of them went to Fisk.
Speaker 2: And at least one other who had gotten his MD at Howard and the other at Mcharry.  And he was a long--and the one who was at, who graduated from Mcharry was a long-time professor there.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Treehern (ph.).  He was in obstetrics and gynecology, and had taught for probably over 25 or 30 years.
Speaker 1: What did your mother end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a housewife because we had four, four other brothers.  We had five boys in the family.  And then after we had sort of grown up, she went back and got a nursing degree and became a nurse for a few years before she actually retired.
Speaker 1: So, what do you remember of your mother as you were a child?  Tell me some stories from your point of view of your mother as you were a child?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very articulate lady.  She was a good mentor for all of us.  She was rather strict.  She also sort of taught us all how to use the English language in the proper way.  She was very concerned about our school work and trying to do well in school, kind of a formal lady in many ways.
Story_ID: 579518
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother's mother.  Did you know your mother's mother, your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, my mother's mother, her first name was Bessie, and she came from Weatherford, Texas which is near Dallas.  And she had 16 brothers and sisters and she was the oldest.  In fact, many of those brothers and sisters came with her to Oregon and they populated Bethel AME Church and helped found that church.  And I have a church picture that we would like to show a little bit later that actually demonstrates that there were black people living in Oregon.  In fact, in that one picture, they're roughly five percent of the African Americans who lived in Oregon.  I think the census in 1930 was something like 3,000 black people living in Oregon.
Speaker 1: So what's Bessie's--Betsy or Bessie?
Speaker 2: It's Bessie.
Speaker 1: Bessie.  What was her date of birth?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I'd have to look that up.  It had to be sort of in the 1880s I would think.  Now, my--her husband was Wert Morton.  He was born in 1871, and he had a very profound effect on all of us because he was a very religious person, very articulate, was well read.  He kept up on all of the issues of African Americans, you know, at the turn of the century.  And in fact, he was born in Richmond, Virginia, and he and his mother and his sister actually crossed over into the--by train, into California.  And they lived in San Francisco.  And they lived in San Francisco at the time of the great earthquake.  He had a job as a repairer of these doorbells, you know, on the type of doorbell where you turn the doorbell on the outside and it dings on the inside, where there's a ringer.  And then he, along with many other people, moved over to Oakland.  And actually, he and his mother and sister had bought a house in Oakland.  And he got a job as a Pullman car waiter, I mean as a Pullman Porter on the Southern Pacific Railroad that went from Oakland up to Portland.  And that's how he met my grandmother.  And they got married I think around, sort of 1910 or so and they bought a house in East Portland.  And I remember that house because that's where they lived and that's actually where my mother was born.
Speaker 1: Well, did he have any stories about the great earthquake of San Francisco?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember him ever talking to us about it because I was a very young boy.  But from the interviews of my mother which actually were carried out by my second daughter as a school project, I did learn a little bit about sort of the effect of the great earthquake in living at that time in Oakland and San Francisco.
Story_ID: 579519
Speaker 1: Well, why did he and Bessie move to Oregon?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Bessie had, as I said earlier, several older brothers and sisters.  She had 16 brothers and sisters.  And one of the brothers actually went to the Lewis and Clark Expedition, I think in 1904.  And they found that Oregon was so pleasant compared to Texas--because you can imagine that in Texas, it was very hot in the summer and no air conditioning.  People had to work in the fields a lot whereas Oregon in the summertime is rather pleasant and with lots of vegetation and cool.  And so he convinced all of his brothers and sisters, I think, except for a few to move from Texas out to Oregon because it seemed like paradise compared to the ominous weather for Texas.
Speaker 1: Well, what did Bessie do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, she was just--I don't know exactly what she did before she was married.  But I imagine she probably did sort of like, act as a maid or something like that in people's homes because that's what a lot of the women did in those days.  But then when she got married and started to having children, she had two girls--or actually three girls and one son, and his name is Wert Morton, Jr., that they really needed somebody to stay at home.  Now, in those days, even though he was a, working as a Pullman Porter, he actually made enough money to buy his own home.  And he also had a Model-T Ford which had to be somewhere in the '20s [1920s] that they had the Model-T Ford.  But they--but it, there was a (unclear) on the car that you would only drive on Sundays, you know, after church or to church and back.  In those days, in Portland, they had a very good trolley system so if you had to go to work downtown or that sort of thing, you would use the trolley.  You wouldn't actually drive your car anywhere, unless you were an extremely wealthy person.  But my point was that even sort of working a job on the railroad allowed you to live a very good, middle-class life.  And, of course, a lot of African Americans used the railroads as a way to achieve sort of middle-class lifestyle.
Story_ID: 579520
Speaker 1: So let's take it one step further back--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to Bessie's mother because she must have been born into slavery.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in Texas.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Jamison.  I don't know what her maiden name was.  And so the family was mostly into sort of vegetable gardening and agricultural and that's how they kind of lived there in Texas.
Speaker 1: So then Bessie was the first of freed, after the Emancipation
Speaker 2: Yeah. --would have been the first free--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --person within your family.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did she know her father?  Did she ever talk about her mother and father?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes.  Actually, there's (unclear) of all of this.  They were also from Richmond.  And they were able to free themselves.  I don't know exactly the circumstances, but somehow they were able to travel from Richmond to Texas and then start this little farming.  And then they had a very large number of children so that they were able to, you know, live fairly well.  In fact, they were sort of well known.  There's a street named after them in Weatherford, Texas.  Unfortunately, they spelled it wrong.  It isn't the actual spelling that was the family name.  Now, on my grandfather's side, Wert Morton--as I said earlier, he came from Richmond also, but when I checked some of the family who has kept, you know, the very good records, he was never a slave even though he was--his parents weren't slaves.  And so he was a free, a free African American.  And in the early '60's [1960s] I had an opportunity of actually driving by his home that he had in Richmond.  And it was kind of a shock to me as it was a house that huge white columns in the front so that they were definitely upper and middle-class people who lived in Richmond.  And there was a--so I did a Google search on some of the family history, and I was able to find some of the, of the family members who actually had went to places like Yale in, sort of in the 1830s, 1840s.  And so it apparently was an upper, sort of middle-class family in the area of Virginia.
Speaker 2: Now, with Bessie and--now, let me just ask.  So what are the origins.  Is everyone 100 percent--no one's 100 percent, but like the origins of the family as far as you can tell.  Whose father was white in the family or?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't--
Speaker 2: I don't know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't know if I can really know that.  If you look at the old family pictures, you'll see a lot of light skinned African Americans on my, you know, my grandfather's side.  And I don't really know sort of the actual family history of who was married to what.  My daughter has been looking through census records and finding things and other relatives are doing family history searches.  But there obviously must have been some intermarriage in early--in the eighteen, sometimes.
Speaker 2: But no one's traced anything back to Mount Vernon to Washington himself?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, I think--and the difficulty, of course, as many people know, when slaves were freed, they often took presidential names for their last names.  And so it makes it very difficult to attribute the family to a presidential family.  So there are some exceptions, of course, within the Jefferson's, but I don't know of a lot of good examples of where you can really trace it back that far.
Story_ID: 579521
Speaker 1: Okay, then just to come back to the future, let's talk about your father.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is an interesting story because he's--his father's name was George Washington, okay.  And, however, my father was Edwin Washington.  Now, he graduated from Talladega College in 1928.  And many years later, I was invited back there to give lecture. So when I finished the lecture, I went over to the college librarian, and I said, do you have any pictures of my father?  He graduated in 1928.  And so she went and looked up in the yearbook and she came back, and she came back, and she says, your father didn't graduate from here in 1928.  And I said, well, I'm pretty sure he did.  Can I look at the yearbook?  And I looked at the yearbook, and there he was, but his name was George Washington.  And he didn't like George Washington (laughter).  So when he moved to Oregon, he changed his name to Edwin Washington. He just--I imagine that he got teased a great deal about having the name George Washington.
Speaker 1: So your father, you said, went to Talladega.  What was his major?  What did he major in?
Speaker 2: He was a History major, and in the yearbook, they had sort of made fun of him because he liked to argue History.  And I can remember even when I was growing up that he had a great interest in reading "Time Magazine" every week and arguing with people about History and so forth.  And there were times, for example, he was mad at President Roosevelt for something or other, and other times he was happy with him.  I can imagine that he experienced a lot of, you know, racial prejudice as a waiter because people wouldn't treat you right but you had to treat them nice.  In fact, I have a quote that I got permission from NPR radio in the book.  And it's an account by John Hope Franklin.  And it's an excellent account of how it was living in the South in the 1920s and '30's [1930s] when every African American knew about lynching's.  And he gave some very personal accounts about how everyone was--didn't trust people because of the lynching issue and speaking up.  People felt suppressed and be able to express their opinion.  And I think after--I was so impressed with John Hope Franklin's account of that, that I wanted to put that in the book just to give a prospectus of somebody who was living in the South in the '20's [1920s] and in the 1930s just because there had to be a lot of fear and a lot of anger.  And my father was very angry about his experiences.  And, in fact, when we moved to a house in Portland, Oregon, and we bought the house, I think, maybe about 1934.  And it was mostly in the white neighborhood, mostly.  And I remember my mother telling me that he had to set out in the--he sat out on the front porch with a gun to kind of let people know that he wasn't gonna be run out, sort of run out of the neighborhood.  And he just wanted to let people know that he was there, and he wasn't gonna go any place.  This was his house.
Speaker 1: So your father had a college degree and was a waiter?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that's the, I mean that was the only work that was available to African Americans at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, there were probably other things that you could do, but a lot of people in the 1930s especially, the work--in the '20's [1920s], worked on the railroads.  And those were good middle-class jobs.  But they didn't use the skills that they were often trained for.  In fact, a large number of the college, of the waiters, as my father was on Union Pacific, they were college graduates.  But they couldn't get jobs because of the racial attitudes.  And I could talk a little bit more into my personal history about--
Speaker 1: The racial attitudes.
Speaker 2: On the racial attitudes and the fact that even though you were living in the North, there were still a lot of segregation and racial prejudice attitudes towards African Americans.
Story_ID: 579522
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your father's father named?
Speaker 2: George.
Speaker 1: So they were both George?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually know less about them, except that my father--my grandfather, George Washington, owned a small store in Birmingham.  You know, in those days, in the '20's [1920s], there were often these little stores on the corners.  And we have a picture at home of him in the store and my father in the store.  My father was about five or six years old.  And it looks like a county store.  There were big barrels.  There was stuff stacked up.  I guess people bought things by the pound, you know, you'd go in and get oatmeal or grits or whatever people got in those days and you would just, you know, put it on a scale and weigh it and then put it into a sack.  So, it was an interesting time, you know, that African Americans actually owned property, owned stores and small businesses.
Speaker 1: And so he was--in what city in Alabama did your grandfather live?
Speaker 2: It was Birmingham. Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Birmingham.
Speaker 2: So, they were in the city itself?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, unfortunately, I don't have much history on that side, you know, exactly sort of that store was and things like that.  And I suppose with a better family search, you can maybe find those things out.
Speaker 2: So how did your mother and father meet?
Speaker 1: Ah--
Speaker 2: Do you know the story?
Speaker 1: I really don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know the details, but they did meet at a dance, I believe.  And we're very fortunate that we have the love letters that were written between my mother and my father.  Apparently, my mother saved them throughout--you know, so that we have a package--
Speaker 2: Because he was away a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was away.  And what was interesting about those letters is how well people wrote each other and how much care people took in making sure that their letters were clearly written and nicely written, I suppose.
Speaker 2: What were some of the things he said in those letters?
Speaker 1: Well, that they loved each other very much and they couldn't stand to be away from each other, all of the things that you would wanna see in two people that love each other very much.
Story_ID: 579523
Speaker 1: So at Union Pacific, was he able to work out of Portland?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So he was stationed in Portland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So he and your mother lived in Portland when you were born?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you born in a hospital, home?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Good Samaritan Hospital.  And the reason I mention that is there was a--later on in my life, I worked at that hospital, and I worked at the same hospital where I went to college.  And I actually mopped the same floors that--and worked in the same kitchen that--I was born in that same hospital.  So it's interesting, the Good Samaritan Hospital had a good history for me because it was really a benefactor.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were born, did your father continue throughout his professional career, he was a waiter for Union Pacific?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, just to be accurate, I think that he probably wasn't working for the Union Pacific Railroad when I was born.  I'm not sure.  I think it was about that time.  He was having trouble finding a regular job when they first got married, but he did find employment, at least for a few years at the Montgomery Ward store stocking.  I don't think that they allowed black people to actually be out with the customers.  And then he eventually got a job on the Union Pacific Railroad.  It had to be about the same time that I was born, and I'm not sure if I was born first or if he had, you know, got a job later or how that was.
Story_ID: 579524
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna go back.  We're gonna get some things in so that people (unclear) can do further research.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But your maternal grandfather, Morton--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who had the big house in Richmond that we talked about, his mother that we briefly mentioned, so we have her name here.  So if you can just--her name was Isadora.
Speaker 2: Isadora.
Speaker 1: So, I'm going to have you just say that and to spell it out for us because that was his mother who was also free, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And her name was Isadora.
Speaker 2: It was Isadora Sullavou Balantine.
Speaker 1: Can you just spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, on the Sullavou is S-U-L-L-A-V-O-U and the Balantine is B-A-L-A-N-T-I-N-E.  And there were several brother, okay.  And she was from Richmond's Sullavou family where Emanuel Sullavou about the same time.
Speaker 1: Who was Emanuel?
Speaker 2: Okay, he was like a cousin.  And he Emanuel had went to Phillip Exner (ph.) Academy, the Class of 1867.
Speaker 1: Now, this Phillip Exner Academy, you say it was a prep school in Richmond?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's still there.
Speaker 1: So was it a black school--?
Speaker 2: No, it isn't in Richmond.  I think it's a prep school in the Cambridge, Boston area.
Speaker 1: Now, is it a black school or white school?
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was definitely a white school.  Now, they have admitted some black students along the way.  And also after he finished the academy, he graduated from Harvard College.  And he became a prominent lawyer.  And there's a website.  If you do a Google line, you can find out more.  What was interesting was he was born in 18--he was in the Class of 1867.  So he was older than my grandfather who was born in 1871.
Speaker 1: But that was the year we had emancipation, though, 1867?  Isn't that when--
Speaker 2: No, I think it was a little bit before that, wasn't it?  1864--
Speaker 1: Five?
Speaker 2: --or five [1865].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, five [1865].  So, anyway, the family history had gone back, and I have a cousin who lives in Nashville, (unclear) and she's been searching the family history on that side.  And she's--through her search, the family was never enslaved.  It was a free family.
Speaker 1: So do you--what possible reasons could that have happened?  I mean what could be--how could they have not been slaves?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it could have happened that maybe in earlier generations on, they could have been slaves, but often slave owners, maybe through guilt or whatever, felt that slavery was wrong and they would often put into their wills that if they have any slaves, that they be freed at the time of their death.  And, in fact, George Washington, the President of the country, actually put that into his will so that at the time he died, all of his slaves were freed.  And I don't know what the circumstances could be in each case, but some people were actually given properties, land so they could do some farming or sort of be on their own.
Speaker 1: But that name Sullavou or how did you pronounce.
Speaker 2: Sullavou.
Speaker 1: Sullavou, it sounds French.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does sound French.
Speaker 1: Now, were they Creole or had they come through New Orleans or--?
Speaker 2: I don't think I know that history.  It does sound like it's a French name.  And what's interesting about that name and I probably couldn't have traced it otherwise, is when I did a Google search on it, I found on this person, this Emanuel Sullavou, and he came from Richmond.  They had pictures of him, and he looked somewhat like my grandfather.
Story_ID: 579525
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are your earliest memories of Portland.  And you were born in 19--
Speaker 2: --36.
Speaker 1: --36. [1936]  So let's just say 1940, you're four years old.  What are your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest memories were at church (laughter).  That's where we spent lots of time, and always going to church on Sunday and then going to choir practice at least once a week.  And we had to go on the bus, or the trolley's in those days, and it probably took us a half hour to get there, but I remember that.  Now, I grew up in a mixed neighborhood, as I mentioned earlier.  So I had both black friends and white friends.  In fact, some of my friends are lifelong friends.  If I could just mention one sort of event that's gonna happen very soon, I've been asked to give the commencement address at Oregon State College or I should say Oregon State University.  It was a college at the time I was there.  And I'm also getting an honorary degree there in June.  And I've invited at least one of my friends.  His name is Bert Gerven (ph.) who I went to school with in kindergarten all the way through college.  And so I've been invited him to join the celebration.  But going back to growing up in Oregon, when I got a little bit older, I did all the normal things.  I think I joined the Cub Scouts and I was in the Boy Scouts and Explorer Scouts and--
Story_ID: 579526
Speaker 1: And before you go on, just stick to those clubs, Boy Scouts, Cub Scouts.  Were they integrated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were all integrated.
Speaker 1: Now, was Portland--I mean was Oregon an integrated state or were there so few black people that conditions were better than they were in the South or the Northeast?
Speaker 2: I think, of course, I think they were a little bit better than the South, but Oregon had active Ku Klux Klan back in the '20's [1920s].  There was some argument would achieving statehood, whether it would be a free state.  In other words, Oregon would allow slaves to live there.  And in order for them to get into the Union, they had to promise not to allow slaves to be there.  So they'd had a lot of the struggles and people from the South actually moved there a lot.  And so they had some of the Southern racial attitudes.  And I had a chapter in my book that when I talk when I was going to high school, I was the vice president of the Junior NAACP.  You know, the thing to do was to be active.  And what they were pushing for in the early 1950s was a public accommodations law so you can go to restaurants and hotels and not be turned away.  And it--I don't know if there were active sit-in's and active things like that, but if you went to the store counters to get food at those places--what were those places called, Mary.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Lunch counters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the lunch counters at the department stores, you couldn't get served.  You know, if the waitress felt like she didn't want black people there, she could tell you to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had said that your father had a lot of anger about how he'd been treated?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're just a kid, and you're in mixed Cub Scouts.  I mean the Cubs Scouts are mixed, the Boy Scouts are mixed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're living in a mixed neighborhood.  How did you reconcile what your father was saying had happened to him, you know, with white people versus what your experiences were at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, in those organizations, I don't think I was mistreated or anything like that.  Where I was mistreated as most black kids were, people would call me nigger, you know, walking to school or you get other kinds of slights.  And so you knew that there were some people, certainly not all--and I want to emphasize that, you knew that there was sort of racial attitudes that were hostile to black people.  And, you know, as a child you're sensitive to that.  But I was taught by my parents to a certain extent to sort of ignore that kind of situation because if you struck out and started fighting all the time whenever you got in those kind of situations, you would be hurting yourself as much as maybe hurting somebody else.  So--and you kind of learn to sort of know what kind of situations to deal with and how to handle them.  And my parents taught me that very well, you know, because they wanted me to do well in school.  They didn't want me to get mad and flunk out of school and sort of, you know, not do well.
Story_ID: 579527
Speaker 1: Well, what sorts of things would you do, let's say in the summers, even before you started school when you were four or five years old with the other kids in the neighborhood?  Was there a place you guys went swimming?  Or what did you do (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: At four or five, I'm sure we didn't do swimming, but what we would do is roller skate and we would also make little cars out of apple boxes with skates on them.  Our fathers would have to help us do that sort of thing.  But there were--you know, in those days, you could just sort of run around with your friends and be relatively safe.  You wouldn't have to worry so much as I think parents do these days.
Speaker 1: Did the children come to your house as well as you going to their houses?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, there were a lot playing hide-and-go-seek and playing hop scotch on the sidewalks, and doing all those kinds of normal, early-childhood sort of games.
Speaker 1: So you have three other siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you just list the order, including yourself that they fall in?
Speaker 2: Okay, there were three boys at first.  And my oldest brother was Edwin Washington.  He was named after my father.  He was the junior.  And my second brother, his name is Ronald Washington, and then I was the third.  And we're all about a year and a half apart.  So I think this was in the days when birth control wasn't very effective.  Maybe they wanted children, I don't know (laughter).  But anyway, the interesting thing is that we were all very close in age.  And then there were two younger brothers after me and the next one, his name is Darryl.  And he was born nine years later.  And then another brother, Glenn, who was born four years after that.  And I suspect that they were accidents (laughter), I think, but we were all five boys.  And my mother had to be kind of stern with us because my father was away for five days and then home for five days.  So she couldn't just wait until the evening for us to get disciplined.  She had to discipline us on a regular basis, on the spot, so to speak.
Story_ID: 579528
Speaker 1: So where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was to Highland Grade School, and I suspect at that time there weren't more than maybe 10 black children going to that school at the time.  It was a school that was about five or six blocks away.  So I would walk back and forth to school.
Speaker 1: Who were the teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember the teachers' names (laughter).
Speaker 1: And when I say that, I'm looking for any that may have made an impression on you or had something to do with who you became, like a teacher who said you are really smart, young man, and you're gonna go far or?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember much about grade school in terms of the teachers having a profound effect on me.  I was more impressed when I went to high school with particular teachers.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the high school years.  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to a school that was called Jefferson High School.  It still is in Portland, Oregon.  At that time, maybe 25 percent or so of the students were African American.
Speaker 1: Now, what number does that constitute?
Speaker 2: It was a big high school because the high school had somewhere around three or 4,000 students.  It was a big high school which was kind of in a middle--upper--I would say it was a middle-class to a lower class sort of neighborhood.  It wasn't in one of the more expensive neighborhoods in Portland.  But I had profound teachers there that affected me.
Story_ID: 579529
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about them at Jefferson High School.
Speaker 2: Well, let me just back up for just one second and say that my mother took us to public libraries.  I can remember as a young boy, and we would often check out books.  In fact, I considered one of my prize possessions was a library card.  And I thought it was a fantastic place just to go and browse through the library and, you know, bring home books.  I did a lot of reading.  And it turned out that--especially, when I got in high school, I was very curious about Science.  I had done reasonably good in mathematics like algebra and then I just liked trying to figure out how things worked and how to do things.  And so often the books I would get would be people like Einstein and George Washington Carver, you know.  It would be a mixture of black and white scientists and even women scientists.  I was just impressed with their biographical stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you to name a woman scientist from the era that you read one of the--
Speaker 2: Madame Currie.
Speaker 1: Madame Currie, okay.
Speaker 2: The story of her life.  And I think that was impressive to me how she was involved in the use radium and an early understanding of nuclear physics.
Speaker 1: So was it unusual for an African American kid to have a library card in Portland at the time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  At least in the neighborhood that we lived in, it was like middle-class families, and I think they all pushed their kids to read and do well in school and, you know, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: But even that the library would welcome is--
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, but I don't ever recall having a problem in the library.  In fact, I always considered a library a kind of a--
Speaker 1: Safe haven?
Speaker 2: --a place where it was very quiet.  People weren't talking.  People were very respectful of each other in terms of, you know, allowing you to sit down with a book and read.  It was an ideal place to learn as far as I was concerned.
Speaker 1: Because I know throughout the South Carnegie had put money towards opening black libraries because even the libraries were segregated in the South.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you were allowed to have a card and to use it freely and to participate in the public library--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --along with everyone else?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 579530
Speaker 1: Okay.  You'd said to me that some teachers during your high school years had had a profound effect on who you'd become.  Who were a couple of those teachers and how did they--(unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the most profound of them was a lady chemistry teacher who actually kind of got me started in Science, I think, because she was not the type of teacher that would lecture.  She would demonstrate.  For example, she would put the tennis ball into liquid nitrogen, throw it on the floor and it would shatter.  And I think asked her--and this is probably what started me into Science, was I asked her why were egg yolks yellow?  Okay, and she says, find out.  Now, she may have known the answer, but she--and so that started me reading in the area of chemistry.  In fact, and she insisted every student buy something called the "Handbook of Chemistry", and it's a big, thick book, like a thousand pages.  And I think it only cost like $10.00 or something like that, which is filled with an enormous amount of chemistry information.  And so just by searching into that and doing research, and, of course, it was library research.  It wasn't chemistry research, but it was library research where you say, well, kind of how come an egg's yolk is yellow.  Well, it turns out that there's certain sulfur compounds and sulfur is yellow.  And those compounds are in seeds.  Chickens eat seed, and so you can kind of do--I mean sort of chain together the events which explain why egg yolks turn out to be yellow.
Speaker 1: What was her name, that chemistry teacher?
Speaker 2: It's in my book and I forgot.  I should remember her name off hand, but it's in the book.  I've got a description of how she would do the Science.  She would make it very exciting for us.  Everyday you would come in and this lady was like a magician.  She would do some kind of experiment or change the colors of something.  Or she would, you know, make things that smelled bad or smelled good.  And so you got a sense of an excitement of discovery.
Speaker 1: So what were your Science projects?
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything right now other than trying to find out about why egg yolks were yellow.  But it took some time.  You know, I had to go and I had to keep searching and even reading scientific papers to unravel that.  So I think it is the adventure of discovery for me that I think later helped to convince me that I wanted to go into Science.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother think about what you were doing in high school at the time you'd become extremely interested in Science?  What did your mother and father think about the fact that you were interested in Science?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that she liked it, you know, because I thought she, you know, she encouraged us to learn and to do well in school.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you think she'd hoped you'd become at that time, your mother?
Speaker 2: I don't think that she had anything special.
Speaker 1: What did you want to become?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I wasn't sure until I had this teacher.  And that teacher was in my junior year of high school.
Speaker 1: So then did you start to read about George Washington Carver and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: No, I think I was able to read even before then.  But the thing that kind of clinched it for me was my senior year, and I can remember the teacher's name was Mr. Wood.  He was a physics major--I mean he was a Physics teacher.  And I just really ate up Physics even more than the Chemistry because it explained how energy works, how forces work, how leverage worked, how the mechanical things worked and how, you know, the basic things that are in our physical universe work.  You know, you can explain a lot from sort of Physics principles.
Story_ID: 579531
Speaker 1: And, in fact, I was so much impressed by Physics that when I did go to college, I went as a Physics major, and if I could just tell a little story about that part of it.  Obviously, I didn't have a lot of money, and so I was working as a dishwasher in the hospital at that time.  And I was working as a--well, I also did a lot of things in the hospital.  I helped sometimes move people, even dead people and put them into the morgue because they had a temporary morgue when people died.  And then I would also mop floors or other times work in the kitchen.  And so in the kitchen, I would be doing most of the pots and pans and that kind of stuff.  Now, I asked the dietician sort of one day, could she help me find a place where I can go to college that had another hospital.  And she says, Oh, why don't you go to Oregon State because they have a Good Samaritan Hospital--I was working for the Good Samaritan Hospital in Portland.  So she hooked me up with the dietician.  I think that she actually contacted the dietician.  She says, I have this young man that wants to go to college there, and can he get a job.  And I said, that would be great.  So I was earning $0.72 an hour.  This was 1954, and when I went down to Oregon State, I think I got $1.00 an hour.  Okay, now keep in mind that the tuition was $47.00 a term.  So if I worked every evening and got a free meal, I could easily work myself through college.  And, in fact, I was feeling kind of middle class because I even had a car.
Speaker 2: What kind of car?
Speaker 1: Well, my first car was a 1936 Ford that I paid $75.00 for.  And it was kind of ironical because I bought this car--and my brother helped me because he was an automobile mechanic at the time.  He found this car, and I paid for it.  What was interesting about it was I paid for it when I was 15, you know, working in the hospital.  But I was rather foolish because I was wrestling with a good friend who became a doctor, and I broke my kneecap in the hospital.  So, and when I became--my sixteenth birthday came, I had this car out in the street, and I couldn't drive it because I had a broken--I had crutches on my right leg.  And I was a sad case because I would go out there and wash it and shine that car every day.  And I couldn't drive it, even though I was 16 years old.  And you know, that's a hard thing for a 16-year old to sort of deal with.
Story_ID: 579532
Speaker 1: So, what year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: In 1954.
Speaker 1: Brown versus Board of Ed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --same year.  Did you think about that at all when the Supreme Court came down with the ruling?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I thought much about it, and I followed--and remember I said earlier that I was the vice president of the Junior NAACP in Portland.  So there was a great awareness of civil rights and the early inklings of, you know, things were starting to open up.  But we didn't have the problem that my wife and others had where the schools were segregated.  There was no segregation of the schools, as far as I know in Oregon.
Speaker 1: When were you a part of the NAACP as a teenager?  This was--
Speaker 2: As a teenager, sort of like 1952 to say 1954.
Speaker 1: Why did you join?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of us middle-class people joined, and the reason was, for two reasons.  One is they had a lot of activities for young people, like dances, basketball.  It was kind of almost a social club as well as an educational sort of thing.  And at that time, especially, in the early 1950s, campaigning the legislature to pass a public accommodations law.  And so there was lots of activity in the black community, putting pressure on the politicians and so forth.  But they didn't have a lot of political strings other than moral persuasion because the number of blacks was so small that we couldn't, for example--and I don't know if there were any black legislators in the state legislature or anything of that sort.
Speaker 1: When did Oregon have its first black legislator?
Speaker 2: I don't think I know.  But I don't think it was in the 1950s because we didn't have enough of a concentration.
Speaker 1: How many students were in the NAACP at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would imagine there were probably 30 or 40.  I mean, you know, a lot of the middle-class families wanted to make sure that the kids were engaged, you know, civil rights and getting things like public accommodation law were high on everybody's mind because people were very sensitive to getting turned down.  You'd go to a restaurant, and they'd say, well, we don't serve blacks or you'd go to a hotel and they'd say, no.  You know, in those days people used to travel long distances by cooking fried chicken and potato salad--
Speaker 1: Make you a picnic lunch and put it in the car.
Speaker 2: And driving from one destination to another, only stopping to get gas.
Speaker 1: Or if you have a friend who lived somewhere in between, you might spend the night with them.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 579533
Speaker 1: You were telling me about just traveling across the country and there being no place to stay so that was one of the things that you fighting for as youth in the NAACP.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What other things that were on the radar at the time as things that you wanted to change?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was eating at lunch counters and in restaurants, and I think those were--
Speaker 1: So public accommodations (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At the time where, like when you were born at Good Samaritans Hospital--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were there two separate wings, a black one and a white one?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was only one.
Speaker 1: So Oregon, entire, there was no segregation throughout the state, period?
Speaker 2: You mean in terms of schools and things like that?
Speaker 1: Schools.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In terms of public facilities.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I just think that there was such a small (unclear).  In fact, the population in Portland of African Americans sort of mushroomed during World War II when they needed people to work in the factories, help with shipbuilding.  In fact, there's a big shipyard that was established just on the North side of Portland during World War II to help build ships.  And so at that time, the population of African Americans increased substantially.
Story_ID: 579534
Speaker 1: Any of your family members go off to war, World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes, my uncle, Wert Morton, my mother's younger brother, he went to war.  And there was actually a benefit from that for the family because he went to Germany and he--I don't think he ever--I think he worked on these amphibious vehicles that were able to drive, change from being a boat to a truck sort of thing.  And anyway, he had a 1936 Dodge car, and so he had to leave the car with someone.  So he left it with my father.  And we had it in the garage.  And we would only drive it to church because in those days, gasoline was rationed because you had to save the gasoline for the military.  So you got these little ration cards that would allow you to have a little bit of gasoline.  And so if you didn't have any other reason to have a car.  We could only drive it on Sundays.  So we'd drive it to church and back.  Otherwise, we'd just look at it in the garage.
Speaker 1: But he got the cards so you could have gas?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So were there any other benefits of him going, like did he get a GI sort of loan?  Did anything else come from him going off to war?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  He came back a little bit angry from being in the service because the military was segregated for most of the war, and so you--they often treated the African Americans as second-class people who could only work in the service kind of area.
Speaker 1: What did you pick up on from what they were saying about their experiences because at the time, you were, what, eight to 15, 16?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 579535
Speaker 1: So what were your feelings?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was, I guess I didn't let it stop me.  One of the things that kind of discouraged me, I shouldn't say that discouraged me, but I felt bad about was, even when I was taking Science courses at Jefferson High School, Algebra, Trigonometry, Chemistry, that many of the black students who were bright didn't take those classes.  They kind of felt, oh, that's too hard, I don't think--you know.  They felt that they couldn't succeed.  And so I think that was a missed opportunity.  I think that the teachers were there to help and work with you, but some of the students just felt they didn't have much of a dream about what they might do with their lives.  And I did have that dream.  I thought I could be a scientist, even in high school, and that's why I went into Physics at college.  Everybody knew Physics was a hard subject to go into, but I felt I could do it.  I mean I had that kind of confidence, and it was kind of disappointing to me to see so many of my friends who didn't have the feeling that they could succeed and, you know, do something positive with their lives.
Speaker 1: Was Mr. Wood black or white?
Speaker 2: He was white.
Speaker 1: Did he recognize your ability, your Physics ability?
Speaker 2: I think so because I think I got an "A" in that course.  And I think he must have realized that I was okay.
Speaker 1: Well, did he encourage you to go to college?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  However, I do remember the high school counselor that I had.  He tried to discourage me from going to college.  He thought I should go to business school.  And I said, no, I want to be a scientist.  And I wish now, you know, looking back over these years, that he would see where I am now and that his advice was bad.  And I think this is a problem for a lot of black students even now.  I think that they sometimes get counseled out of following their dreams and desires.  I think that it's important that we have counselors that are encouraging and willing to have students take a risk with their lives because there's a lot of negative stuff around.  And I think you don't need to have counselors trying to tell students, no, I don't think you should go on to college.  I don't think that you should try to do this or that.  I think you need to have counselors who are encouraging more.
Speaker 1: What did he expect for you to do as far as business?  Why was business--why did he think business was better for you than going off to college for Physics?
Speaker 2: I think perception probably, and I'm just speculating here.  The perception was, gosh, Science, a black scientist.  That seemed like an improbably thing for somebody to be going into.
Story_ID: 579536
Speaker 1: And if I can just reflect for a minute on my college experience.  I went to Oregon State.  And I think there were like seven or eight--
Speaker 2: Let's pause for a second. [pause]
Speaker 1: All right, so we're just gonna go back to the story.  At Oregon State you were telling me, you were relating a story to me.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I went to Oregon State University, and there couldn't have been more than about 10 black students on the campus.  I think seven or eight of us were on the football team (laughter).  And so, and I was living in a town called Corvallis (ph.).  And Corvallis had only one black family living in that city.  So you can see that it was a situation where there wasn't a large number of black people to interact with.  So I had to kind of deal with that.  And it wasn't a major problem because I'd lived in a mixed neighborhood so I knew how to deal with everyone.  But it was, it was strange, if you could imagine, because I was not only--I'm not only an athlete on the football team or playing some other sport, but I was also involved in a hard Science curriculum, Physics.  Now, several things happened to me during that time.  One of them was I discovered, and I didn't discover this until even later, that the first African American to graduate from that college actually graduated in 1948.  So that was only six years before I went there.  I think I did okay.  I think I did fine.  However, it was a struggle because I think some of the other students who had gone into Physics probably came from better high schools in terms of, you know, Science backgrounds and so forth.
Story_ID: 579537
Speaker 1: Well, your mother was a stay-at-home mom--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and your father was away a lot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So who helped you with the college entry process, like applying for schools and--
Speaker 2: I think I pretty much did that on my own.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you have the wherewithal to do it on your own?  Had your brothers gone to college before you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were you the first in the family to do so, in the immediate family of your brothers?
Speaker 2: I had an older brother, Edward, who had gone to the University of Oregon.  However, he went actually after me because he went into the service for a few years, and then he came back.  And so all three--and my second brother, he went to a local college, part-time in Portland.  Okay, so in a certain sense I was probably going to school, starting school at the same time that they were actually starting college.
Speaker 1: So you'd aunts who had gone to Fisk?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you choose to go to a historically black university?  Why did you choose to stay at home?
Speaker 2: I think it was a money issue, you know.  I really didn't even look around for a lot of different school for my undergraduate.  I actually, through this dietician at Good Samaritan Hospital, actually just sort of picked where I was gonna work.  And I applied to Oregon State and they accepted me.  And so I didn't really apply to a bunch of schools like most kids sort of apply at different school since I had gotten my first choice.
Speaker 1: So this good Samaritan at the Good Samaritan Hospital (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Got me started.
Speaker 1: --got you started.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 579538
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your experiences in college, the college years?
Speaker 2: I think it was very good.  I had moved into a dormitory, and I talk about this in my book, my first day of school.  I'd moved in.  It was Weatherford Hall that I moved in.  And what was interesting about it was I unpacked and everything, and then this student walks in who had gone to--who grew up in Eastern Oregon.  And I was the first black person that he had actually talked with.  He had seen blacks in movies, and there were some blacks who came through to pick some of the crops and that sort of thing.  But he had never interacted with a black person.  And so he was kind of shocked that here I was, his roommate in college.
Speaker 1: What did he say to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember exact words, but he was very surprised and a little timid about, ghee, what does this mean that I'm in the room with this black person.  But we became friends, and he went off and he became a medical doctor later in his life.  I kind of lost track of him, you know, after all these years.  But I lived in that dormitory for a little while, and then I moved into a co-op because it was cheaper.  I can remember the co-op costs $27.00 a month to live in, but we had to do a lot of the work.  Everybody who was in the co-op had certain work, sort of details.  And I became the vice manager of that co-op.  And we even had to hire a house mother because in those days you had to have a house mother living there.  And it was a very good experience because we were in charge.  We had to make sure of the meal, buy the food, who was gonna do the cooking, who's gonna wash dishes, who was gonna clean?  Everybody had a detail that they had to do.  And so you can imagine, I worked like three or four hours a night, making a dollar an hour.  And I was able to go to college and work myself through college.
Speaker 1: What were your extra curricula activities during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, if you're a Physics major, you don't have a lot of extra-curricula activities (laughter), other than studying.  But I would go to the basketball games and the football games and all of those things.  Oregon State had lousy football teams at that time.
Story_ID: 579539
Speaker 1: What about clubs on campus, organizations?  Were you in a Science club or was there--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember being in any Science clubs, but there was one issue that I was involved in and the students, not only the black students, but a small group of us had a meeting with the president of the university.  And that was, at that time, all of the sororities and fraternities were segregated.  In other words, you could not join the sororities and so, we arranged for a meeting with the president to complain about this segregated behavior because in a certain sense, fraternities and sororities on campuses are a part of the college or university so they're not completely separate.  You know, things like Rush Week and all those things, there's a lot of coordination with the university.  And I think that was where I got my first shock about disappointment because the president said he thought it was an amoral issue.  And I'd never used that word, amoral.  In fact, I had to go look it up and say, what does he mean by an amoral issue?  It's not an issue that is of concern to him as the president of the university.  So I think that was a disappointment.  Now, I didn't let that ruin my life or anything, of course, but I think that was where I learned the lesson that even though you have a just cause, that you can sometimes fail in trying to achieve your objective.  And I think that's a useful lesson for any young people to learn.  You can fight for something, but you may not win even though you're on the right side.  And so I think that made me a little more--I wouldn't say cautious, but just a little bit more wise about picking battles that you may not win in later life.  And if you don't, you just pick up and fight another day, sort of thing.  I think that's a lesson to be learned there.  You don't always win, you know.  And you can look at the history of civil rights, you can look at the history of people getting political rights, fighting for pov--you know, poverty issues or whatever, is that you don't always win, but you hopefully learn something from those experiences and you can go on and fight another day.
Speaker 1: Do you know when they actually integrated fraternities and sororities?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it came much, much later.
Speaker 1: How much later?  Sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 2: I think in the '60's [1960s]--
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s]?
Speaker 2: I think after, I'm sure that there were some fraternities and sororities that integrated much earlier.
Story_ID: 579540
Speaker 1: I want to just jump ahead for a little bit.  You're speaking at the university now (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: In today's climate, is there--I don't even know what I want to ask really, outside of, I mean so I'll just speak blunt, like, you know, what room is there to talk about race relations in the world today at a university in this case?  I mean would you--I don't know how to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think--
Speaker 1: But you went there.  You tried to integrate this sorority.  It didn't happen.  Now, they've invited you back to actually speak.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think the issue is now colleges like Oregon State and almost every major college and university in the country now is trying to deal with increasing their diversity on campus, not only of the students, but of the faculty, okay.  Those are the major issues, and they're getting push-back from this administration, the Bush administration because they're saying affirmative action, affirmative approaches to trying to get that good balance of diversity, is something that we shouldn't be doing.  In other words, just let the natural processes work.  Well, if we let the natural processes work, it's going to take a long, long time.  I think affirmative action is still needed, and it can be done in a way that's sensitive, isn't just quotas and that sort of thing.  And I'm very--if I can jump just a bit ahead, in my later career as the Chairman of the National Science Board and other things that I've done, I'm constantly pushing for diversity.  You know, that's an issue that is very apparent, and I look upon it as something that not only benefits the individual, you know, trying to get sort of more broader perspectives, but also it benefits on the nation because the lost opportunities of having the future researchers, future teachers, professors and all different fields, getting different perspectives in front of the student body is very important.  I mean how can you teach history, American history without having a few African American or Hispanic or Asian people talking about their pasts in the American history.  And so you really need to have all of these perspectives on the campuses, in the student body to be sort of brought out.
Story_ID: 579541
Speaker 1: But something like Physics that's void of one's own cultural or ethnic background, how does that also keep, how does that model apply?  Like history, you can see it.  You need Asian and African Americans. How do you take that same model and apply it to something like Physics, whereas you (unclear) like, we need black scientists?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I think it's the mentor and example situation.  On yesterday, I was at the Fermi Labs which is East of, actually West of Chicago in the suburbs, a very high-energy Physics lab.  And I did a lecture there about climate change.  And they introduced me to a fellow by the name of Herbert White--I hope that you interview him in your series.  He's a high-energy Physicist, brilliant guy.  He'd been there for like 25 or 30 years, and a very senior person in the lab.  I didn't even know about him until I got a chance to talk with him.  But he's in an area of Physics that I didn't know there were any other African Americans.  I mean normally when you show these pictures of Einstein and others that were doing Physics, you don't see any black faces.  In fact--gosh, I'm jumping around a little bit, but--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, but it's interesting, I include in the later chapters in my book about Einstein, for example.  In later life, he didn't like to travel a lot.  He had gotten every award, Nobel prizes and all of that stuff.  But he was invited to Philadelphia to Lincoln University or Lincoln College, this black school.  He accepted that and it was curious as to why did he choose to go to this little black school to give one of the few lectures in the last part of his life.  And it had to do with, he felt that African Americans were treated badly in this country, and it was a disgrace for the country.  And he talks about it.  And I have in the book.  And so he, even in 1950, because he died in 1955.  I'm not sure exactly when he had this lecture, but I think it was some time, like 1951 or something like that.  But he gave this lecture and it was magnificent because he foresaw on the day that we were going to have to have in Physics, for example, and the sciences in general, greater diversity of students because these people were capable of learning Science.  And so even such a great person as Albert Einstein, to take time out of his life, to articulate this issue to the American people in this very famous speech that he gave, it's interesting that he was 50 years ahead of his time.
Story_ID: 579542
Speaker 1: I wonder if I can sort of back up now to my college days.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, we're gonna go back.  That's exactly where I was going so go ahead.
Speaker 1: In 1955, I was a sophomore, I was contacted by someone, I'm not sure at that time, to join the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity in Portland, Oregon.  And that was an interesting experience because the members of that fraternity were lawyers, journalists, very famous, not famous, but well-known people, doctors and so forth.  And I was only a sophomore, but they must have heard that I was a Physics major.  So they also invited a good friend of mine, I think, Paul Cook of Portland, Oregon to join me, join on the chapter.
Speaker 2: What was Paul's major?
Speaker 1: I forgot exactly what his major was, but he went to Oregon State a little bit too.  I'm not sure he graduated but he became a banker in the community, like a vice president for one of the banks.  Well, anyway, the point was that these were great role models in addition to my parents and the family to encourage me to go to college and to do well and so forth and so on.  And ironically there was one member of that black fraternity who was white.  He was married to a black lady and they had invited him to become a member of the Alpha Phi Alpha.  And he became a member.  And it was just interesting, as we were meeting, and we would meet, it wasn't like the student chapters on black campuses in the South where there's lots of going through the burning sands, initiations and (unclear) to humiliate and bring you down to earth sort of thing.  Everything there was like going to a business meeting.  You know, they would have somebody speak and they would have somebody, you know, everything that was done.  They would have picnics and things like that, but they were all kind of like grown-up activities, not like, you know, college pranks.  But I was impressed because everyone got along.  It was very good.  In fact, one of the people that you might want to interview was William Hillard of Portland, Oregon who had worked for the "Oregonian Newspaper".  He eventually became the editor of the newspaper.  In fact, he was so famous that he, I think he carried out one of the debates for the president.  There was one in Portland, Oregon and he was the lead moderator of that debate.  So he might be a person that you want to look at because there aren't too many black editors of major newspapers.  And the Oregonian was at that time, the leading newspaper in the State of Oregon.
Story_ID: 579543
Speaker 1: So we have two minutes left on this tape, but I want to ask you what year did you graduate the University of Oregon or is it Oregon State?
Speaker 2: Oregon State.
Speaker 1: Oregon State.
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1958 with a Bachelor's in Physics.  Then I went to--
Speaker 1: Immediately afterwards?  You didn't do anything in between?  You didn't work afterwards?  You went immediately--
Speaker 2: Well, I got a job in the summer because I wanted to get a Master's at least at Stanford, at the Stanford Research Institute, SRI, as a mathematician in the summer, as a research mathematician.  And I worked on a project that had to do with building computer models.  And so I came back and finished up my master's at Oregon State, and I then immediately went to Penn State for PhD.
Story_ID: 579544
Speaker 1: Okay I think
Speaker 2: Just to let people know what we're talking about, you're going to tell us about how you go the job in 1958 at Stanford in research that summer before you went off to grad school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  As I was going to undergraduate school and finishing up my bachelor's degree, an advisor I had apparently knew a scientist who was at Standard.  And he said, why don't you go work with him for the summer because he's into computer modeling.  And that's how I really got started into computer modeling.  Just keep in mind that computers were very primitive in those days.
Speaker 2: Right, I'm thinking 1958.  It must have been the size of this room (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Yes, it--
Speaker 2: What was it like in those days?
Speaker 1: Well, actually, if I go back to when I was a junior at Oregon State, they had gotten a computer called the Maniac and it was modeled after the Inniac (ph.).  Inniac was the first electronic computer that was at Princeton.  And the Almac (ph.)--I guess it was called Almac in that time, it was a military computer.  And it was a computer where you had to program with paper tape.  You didn't have punch cards or disks or anything like that.  And you had to program in hexadecimal.  Instead of the numbers being to the base 10, they were to the base eight.  And if you look at the binary system, I won't go into that, if it's a factor of two or four or eight, you can do certain arithmetic operations quite simply.  But it was difficult.  To just do the most simple thing, it took all day to program and to do.  So the first computer model of the atmosphere was actually done in 1947, '48' [1948].  It was the first, one of the first jobs that went on the first electronic computer.  And then it slowly started to emerging as a scientific field.  So that by the time I got into it in 19--
Speaker 2: '58' [1958]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, fif--actually it was 1959 because I had already started on my Master's program.  It was a brand new field.  And I said, oh, yeah, that's a great opportunity.
Story_ID: 579545
Speaker 1: So I went down there and I--to Stanford and I spent the summer working with a very good person whose name is Manfred Hall.  He'd gotten his PhD at UCLA in California.  And when the summer was ending, I asked him, I said, where could I go to enhance this work so I can work on a PhD.  And he said, well, why don't you go to these schools.  And he listed them out.  So I applied to all those schools after I got back.
Speaker 2: What were those schools?
Speaker 1: They were Wisconsin--
Speaker 2: In Madison.
Speaker 1: In Madison.  They were Penn State which is where I actually did go.  I had Florida State, MIT and I got accepted at most schools except MIT didn't accept me.  And the reason was that my application fell behind the desk of the person and wasn't found until many months later.  So I was never even processed there at MIT.  But anyway, Penn State turned out to be an ideal place, and do you want me to kind of talk about my experiences there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, obviously, I was married at that time.  And I had a child who was about a year old, and we drove across the country and we started there.  I was making $200.00 a month at that time as kind of a research assistant.  And I can remember that the rent was $90.00 a month, so we only had $110.00.  Now, it turns out that I wanted to get status as an in-state student.  And the registrar at the college was an active Republican.  So I told him that I was a Republican and he accepted me for in-state tuition.  That was the only time in my life that I was a Republican because it had some big advantage in terms of the cost of going to school.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't even Affirmative Action, just being a Republican (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, so anyway, so I'd worked with a professor there whose name was Robert Dukette (ph.).  He was a Canadian educated person, but then I also worked with a guy by the name of Hans Pinoski (ph.).  There were two Pinoski's.  One had got his PhD at 18, and my thesis advisor was the second one, and he got his PhD at 21.  So they were very bright people.  In fact, Hans Pinoski's father was a very famous Art Historian at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton University.  And Hans often was the chauffeur for Albert Einstein when he was growing because I guess Albert Einstein didn't like to drive a car.  So there was a very close family relationship with Einstein.  He was a good friend.  So anyway, he was a great thesis advisor, who I worked on my thesis, got my PhD. In 1963, actually, '64 [1964] because I came here in 1960--to NCAR in '63 [1963].  I passed my orals, and I needed to make some changes to my thesis, and the actual graduation ceremonies weren't given until the Spring semester.  And I got my PhD. Officially in 1964.  So I've been NCAR since 1963, for a long time.  And in those days, things were very informal, you know.  The field was very small.  Everyone knew who I was, and when I was applying for a job here at NCAR, I was hired with a salary $9,000 a year as a young PhD. and I've been here ever since.
Story_ID: 579546
Speaker 1: But I just want to go back to what did you--you can take a drink.  What did you write your dissertation on back at, which one was it?
Speaker 2: For my PhD?
Speaker 1: For your PhD. at Pennsylvania State?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Actually, I did work on trying to figure out how to get the models started because in order to carry out a forecast you used certain mathematical equations.  And those mathematical equations were basically the laws of Physics, you know, the conservation of momentum, the conservation of energy, the conservation of mass, all those basic laws (unclear) that is applicable to the atmosphere.  Now, the observations of how the atmosphere is behaving are mostly things like temperature of the atmosphere, you know, sort of in a two-dimensional or three-dimensional distribution, temperature, pressure and winds.  Now, at that time it was unresolved as to when could you use the winds to help initialize the atmosphere that you put into the computer model or should you use temperatures.  So I did a little theoretical work on trying to establish under what situations are the winds more reliable for getting the initial state of the atmosphere versus temperatures.  And also I took, well, I essentially wrote computer models that could be used to test out some of these ideas.  And so I think I helped develop some of the early theory on how to use these computer models for forecasting the weather.
Story_ID: 579547
Speaker 1: So 1968, you were an adjunct associate professor of Meteorology, Oceanography at the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you get that position?  How did it come about?
Speaker 2: Well, in the early days of NCAR, where I work now, it was required that every scientist affiliate with an academic institution.  And the person who had hired me to come to NCAR later moved to Michigan.  And so he asked me if I would come and spend some time at Michigan which was kind of awkward because like you, your family is here in Boulder, but you'd have to go there.  And we were expecting a baby, (laughter) and the baby came while I was there.  So there was a little bit of frustration of not being home at the time.  But that was an interesting experience for me because not only did I have to teach class, but I had--this was a time in 1969, yes, '69' [1969] through '71' [1971] where the Civil Rights issues were boiling up.  The Vietnam War issues were boiling up, and they'd asked me to, as a place to stay, I would be faculty in residence, at a huge dorm.  This dorm had over 4,000 students in one big building.  And I had all these horror stories of girls knocking on my door at night saying that my roommate has broke up with her boyfriend and she's gonna kill herself in the cemetery across the street.  So I'd get my flashlight and go out looking for the student and tell her that life's worth living even though she broke up with the boyfriend, you know, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 579548
Speaker 1: Was there any racial unrest on the campus?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, in fact, that was the time that they were exploring different ways of dealing with racial issues.  They tried to set up a floor or a part of a floor for black student.  And--
Speaker 1: Exclusively for black students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, only for black students because black students felt, at least some of them felt they were in a hostile area, and a hostile institution and they wanted to all be within themselves.  But I would lecture to them and try to counsel them that, just like I gave the example of my own experience with the President at Oregon State, is you could get so worked up as a student about the way things are no the campus and people look at you in a funny, and you can kind of get angry, and say, I'm not gonna stay here anymore.  I'm going to go home and give up on your college education.  And I think, what I counsel them was, you know, you can live through this.  You can deal with it, you can, you know, kind of keep your eye on the ball which is to get an education and not let the, sort of the annoyances and petty things that go on deter you from getting your education.  And I think that's what I always kept telling them.  Don't, you know, if you're angry about how someone treat you or gave you a slight or something like that, don't let them force you out of getting a good education and carrying on with your life.  Just settle down, you know, don't let these things be the primary concern of your life.
Story_ID: 579549
Speaker 1: Now, were you the first African American in your position here at NCAR in 1963 when you came aboard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, definitely, yeah.
Speaker 1: How were you treated?
Speaker 2: I think okay (laugher).  I knew, I think, to a certain extent, although it's not perfect, you know, in the science community, but people are fairly well educated.  And they're more wise because of world experiences.  They go to different parts of the world.  They live in an era of being concerning about the bigger issues.  And here at NCAR, I think I haven't really experienced a lot of racial prejudice, as far as I'm concerned.  If it's occurred, it's been so subtle that I sometimes haven't seen it.  I'm sure that there's things that happened, if I really think hard about it.  But, you know, I'm a very senior person at this institution, and I'm well respected by most scientists.  So I think that I've done well here.
Story_ID: 579550
Speaker 1: So is there an African American scientists community?
Speaker 2: Here in Boulder?
Speaker 1: At large, in the country?  I mean--
Speaker 2: You mean in the sciences?
Speaker 1: In the sciences--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --an organization that you are a part?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you talk to me about (unclear) (simultaneous) because you've been here so long.  You've done a lot of work.  And we'll get back to the what you consider the highlights of the work you've done here, but if you can just create for me the community in which a black scientist exists in the country.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, obviously, the first place that you ought to think about, very discipline has scientific society, you know, it's an organization of professionals in that field.  And one of them that I've been involved in heavily is the American Meteorological Society.  I don't know if you ever noticed when you look at weather forecasts at night, you see that AMS, okay, it's the American Meteorological Society.  And I've been very active in that.  In fact, I became president of that in, I think, 1994, (unclear) president.  And just about that, the population of African Americans is probably around one or two percent.  So, I can't count on the black vote to vote me in (laugher).  I really have to operate and be appreciated by a much larger community.  And there's other societies.  The American Association for the Advancement of Science which is the largest scientific organization in the country has very active programs.  There are two particular people in that society, Shirley Malcolm and Yolanda George who actually won the education, sort of directorate.  And they deal with trying to increase diversity all the way from pre-kindergarten through K-16 to get people into the field of science and mathematics and engineering.  So, and I was on their board of directors of the Triple AAA-S (ph.).
Story_ID: 579551
Speaker 1: So I'm sort of well known which is probably why, if I can just jump ahead a little bit, why I ended up being a member of the National Science Board which is appointed by the President, gives advice to the President and Congress.  I had, I was appointed by Clinton [President Bill Clinton], and got a six-year term.  And just before Clinton left office, I was reappointed for another six years.  And for the last four years, I've been the chair of the Board.  And it's governing board of the National Science Foundation.  It's the one that makes the big decisions about budgets and priorities and so forth.  So if I look back, in all of these organizations, I'm the first in many of them just because there aren't a large population of African Americans in the sciences.  But all through my career, you'll see that I've been trying to work towards increasing the numbers.
Speaker 2: So if we step back, Carter also, you worked with the Carter administration [President Jimmy Carter].  Before that, did you work with another president?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  Carter was the first one.  He appointed me--
Speaker 2: So what year was that?
Speaker 1: 1977.  He appointed me to another Presidential appointment which was the Committee on Oceans and Atmospheres, okay.  And it was, it actually--and I had to be confirmed by the Senate too, and so we gave advice to the President and Congress on issues dealing with fisheries, with the Coast Guard, with respect to all of the weather services, in other words, NOAH, and the climate.  And we actually met--and believe it or not, I was on that for four, actually more than years.  Yeah, maybe more than that, actually, twice a month in Washington.  So it was a lot of trips back and forth to give advice.
Story_ID: 579552
Speaker 1: Do you know how you came to be nominated by Carter?  How did all of that come about?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well, in those early, I think in the mid-'70's [1970s] I was very active in Triple AAAS.  In fact, I have a photograph of me with the big Afro, and I remember how it actually started was the president of this organization at that time was University Corporation for Atmospheric Research which actually runs NCAR, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, the former director and then president of UCAR, was the president of the AAAS. Remember, AAAS is the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the biggest scientific organization in the country.  And there was a meeting that they had in Chicago where there were demonstrations over the Vietnam War.  The young scientists were very upset with the way the country was going and the organization was going.  So Walter Ore Roberts, the president of this organization, actually asked each board member to bring a young scientist to the next board meeting to critique on whether the organization was up to the times and not living in the past.  So he invited me and other board members invited young scientists.  And we--in those days, they met over the weekend because the president--many of them were teaching and they didn't want to lose time.  So we listened to them, you know, talk at the board meeting about what they were doing and so forth and so on and just observed.  Then on Sunday morning, we came back a report.  And in those days, I wore beads and a Dashiki.  I think my wife over there has seen pictures of me in those days (laughter), and we essentially told them that the organization was out of step with the times and the meetings were kind of dull, and that they weren't working on problems to increase the diversity with minorities and handicapped people.  And they weren't doing much in education, all of those things.  And they said, we'll give you a budget to flush out your recommendations.  They gave us $28,000 to meet, for meeting money and included me as the Chair of something called the Youth Council.  And youth was a strange word in those days because I think I was 33 years old when they appointed me, so (laughter).  I think that--because most of these people on the board were very famous, like sort of people that had Nobel prizes and very famous, but they were all in their '60's and '70's so they were old people.  Now, that I'm almost 70, it doesn't seem that I'm old anymore (laughter), that people in that age bracket are old.  But anyway, I think that started me in a dual sort of career because I still worked with a scientist here at NCAR by the name of  Casahari (ph.), Okura (ph.) Casahari, a Japanese scientist, and myself.  We led the effort to start building computer models here at NCAR and so as that grew, as that capability grew and the models got better and better, at the same time, I had this other sort of broader career in science policy and trying to change or improve things in Science in general.  And so I think the reason I got into it is that people knew, hopefully, that I was a credible scientist, but also I was sort of an activist on these other broader issues.
Story_ID: 579553
Speaker 1: Can I ask what those issues were that you were being an activist on?
Speaker 2: Well, Science really should deal with more societal issues.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, at least in my case, it had to do with, we even had early indications that the climate was getting--
Speaker 1: Warm?
Speaker 2: --degraded.  It wasn't getting warmer at that time.  In the '60's [1960s], we weren't so sure. But you said it was what?
Speaker 1: It was getting, there were environmental concerns, you know, we're increasing carbon dioxide, we're seeing even early signs of changes in the climate system, but we couldn't study them very well.  So we had to do, had to build models to help us understand what was going on.  There were issues of women were a very small percentage of Science and so getting more women into science was a big in the late '60's [1960s] and in the '70's [1970s].  And I might add that now we have more women in Science than we have men which is a good sign because it'll take some time for them to catch up even though they've got, sort of more of them are graduating.  But if you look at the demographics of the faculties of universities, and sort of research institutes like, women are still a small fraction.  But over time, as more and more of the males retire, the percentage of women will kind of rise up to where it should be.
Speaker 2: Just to stick with that for a moment, do you think that will change anything in the pursuant of science as more women rise to levels?
Speaker 1: I think there'll be--(laughter) how can I say this without being sexist or anything?  I think that there'll be some positive benefit out of this because women will probably be more interested and concerned about issues dealing with education.  I'm just talking about in general, and even diversity.  I think that they--I'm not saying this is true of all cases, of course.  I don't wanna make it that simplified, but I think often women teachers are better mentors, just because they're more nour--they have more of a nourishing sort of behavior.  And I think that'll help. And I think, there's a lot untapped talent in the female community as there is in the minority one to use those talents to advance, you know, Science and Engineering and, you know, I think it'll help also, for example, if we had more female teachers who are teaching in the universities.  You don't see a lot in the sciences.  So all of these things I think will help things in proof in terms of the demographics.
Story_ID: 579554
Speaker 1: So the appointment with Carter [President Carter] is the first?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did your parents think about that?  Were your parents alive at the time, and where they able to see the accomplishments you had made?
Speaker 2: Ph, yes, but they didn't quite understand.  I can remember my father would--I would send him, you know, every once and a while, some publication or some PR article or something about me, and just send it home, just to, you know--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, to kind of let him know.  But I can remember my father sitting me down and saying, "Now, son, tell me what you really do." (laughter)  So it was always a very hard because, you know, my research was kind of theoretical and mathematical and so forth.  So for the lay person, it's a little hard to understand, and I don't know.  I didn't bring in my book to you, but did you see it on my book that I wrote--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --with Claire Parkinson.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Claire Parkinson who was a former student and then now she's a big famous scientist that Aetna (unclear) and NASA (unclear) (ph.).  In fact, she runs a big satellite program that's like $800 million and so she's a very famous scientist on your own right.  And so I'm very pleased to do that.  One of the projects that she and I both worked very hard and very jointly with, was on trying to write this book because the book actually was the first book written that would be useful for students who want to get into the field.  It starts with the very basic science equations that they all learn in first-year Calculus and Physics and goes through step-by-step all the way to how you build these state-of-the-art models of the climate system.
Story_ID: 579555
Speaker 1: So continuing, after the Carter appointment--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the next presidential appointment (unclear)?  What happened after that?
Speaker 2: Okay, when you get appointed to some of these committees like the National Science Board or the National Advisory Committee for Oceans and Atmospheres.  It was called NACOA by President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], it was a standing sort of committee.  So that even though I was appointed in 1977, my term--just before Carter left office, the night before, he reappointed me to it, okay.  So then I served under President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], okay.  Now, it was night and day when Reagan came in.
Speaker 1: What were the differences?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll give an example, and I testified to this.  Reagan wanted to privatize everything.  He wanted to get rid of the weather service.  He wanted to give it to the private sector.  So if you were a poor person out in Mississippi and you wanted to know if a tornado is coming down, you would have had to pay for a forecast.  It wouldn't be given out by the weather service.  You would have to pay for it.  Well, I testified and the committee actually when we--when these issues came up, I would testify, saying no.  I said all taxpayers contribute to these things, and it's the responsibility of the government to be concerned about the public safety of people.  And one of the major jobs of the government is to protect people from harm, natural or terrorists, or whatever it is.  Of course, terrorism wasn't an issue in that- those days, but natural disasters were, you know.  So--so, why should somebody have to pay for a public service?  I mean that just was ridiculous.  But he wanted to privatize everything, help the business community and so forth and so on.  So it was a completely different thing.  But he didn't fire me off of the commission, or the committee.
Speaker 1: I bet he wanted to (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I don't know.  He was probably too busy to worry about this young guy that was causing trouble.  And anyway, he actually worked in a way that was opposite to most of the environmental concerns.  You know, for example, the Clean Air Act.  They wanted to change the Clean Air Act so it didn't have any teeth in it, you know.  He wanted to do all kinds of things to make it easier for the business community to operate.  And some of those were harmful to the environment.  And so we had to kind of keep fighting, but as time went on, we actually were losing ground because most of us on the committee were Carter appointees and then as time went on, and we got more and more Reagan appointees, who were more sympathetic to Reagan's sort of philosophy, and finally, they started giving such bad advice that [U.S.] Congress just abolished it.  They thought that the committee had been sort of corrupted by having appointees on it that were sort of one-sided in only wanting to work in the negative way about the environmental issues such as fishing and clean air and all those other issues.  So it was abolished by the Congress.  But, so I served under those two presidents, okay.
Story_ID: 579556
Speaker 1: Then when President Bush, the senior was president, I was invited to give, to come and speak to the Cabinet, okay.  And I also was asked to provide a computer model that John Sununu--you remember John Sununu who was chief of staff?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was kind of a gruff kind of guy.  He misquoted me in "Newsweek".  There was an article that they had on some of the work I was doing.  And he essentially said that the climate's not going to change very rapidly.  And, you know, he quoted me as saying, that I said that in "Newsweek".  And I was away and so I sent a telegram to him and said, you didn't quote me correctly.  I said, if you looked at the way the article was written, it was clear that I still think that climate change is a very immediate and deeply concerning problem for the future of the country and the world.  And so when I got back from that trip that evening in Boulder here, I was home in the evening and I got a call from John Sununu, and he was chief of staff, you know, and here's this guy who was running the entire government for the president.  And he was querying me, he says, what do you, tell me what's in these models and explain to me how I was wrong and all that.  So I was just talking to him, and then I said--and then he started asking me some technical questions about the models, about what was in the models.  And I said, well, I've written this book with Claire Parkinson, and I could send it to you.  And he said, oh, good, send that to me.  And I said it with kind of a--I was a little naive, I suppose, I said, what address should I use?  And he says, everybody knows me here (laughter).  If I don't, all you have to do is put John Sununu, White House, Washington, D.C.  And if they don't get it to me, they're in trouble (laughter).  So we sent it to him.  He didn't get it the next day until, because he called me back early in the morning and said, I haven't got that book yet.  I said, well, we sent it overnight.  He eventually got the book.  And then as time sort of went on, he asked a few more questions.  He would call.  I could always, you know, if he called me, I could call him back.  And I could get him out of any kind of meeting.  So he instructed his secretary for me to have good access.  And, in fact, when I did go and speak with the cabinet members, several of them pulled me aside and said, how do you get such good access to him?  I can't, I've been trying to get an appointment with him for six weeks, and you can call any time and get him.
Story_ID: 579557
Speaker 1: Anyway, the White House science advisor took me into his office one day and said, can you, he's gonna ask him for something.  Could you just say, yes, to it?  And I said, what is it?  He said, I can't tell you.  It's a secret.  And so I went in and he said, John Sununu said to me, he says, I want you to get me a model I can run on my computer in my office.  I said, wait a minute, we run these models on giant super computers.  We can't just, you can't just run it on a PC because he had a Compaq 386 computer, and just by today's even laptops, was pretty primitive.  So anyway, we kind of left.  I agreed to do it, but when I got outside, the science advisor said, he's busy, he's not gonna ask me to do it.  And then about six weeks later, he calls me up, the science advisor, and says, get him off my back, and could you build him a model that he can run on his computer?  So I put together a little team of scientists here, and we built sort of a three-dimensional model, which is a single, vertical dimension, simplified model.  And he actually ran that on his computer in his office.  The "New York Times" and the "Washington Post" were after me to reveal what I had done, but I wouldn't say anything.
Speaker 2: Can you reveal now what you'd done?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it actually appeared in an article the "New York Times" later on, after Bush left office.  But I didn't want to, you know, and when you get asked by somebody in the White House to do something, even if it's a stupid idea, I've always felt it was not good to sort of embarrass them about it.  You know, it's better to try to work with them to try to get them to understand the science and understand the problems and the issues associated with it.  So having the window opened to the White House is a good thing.  So anyway, that ended up, so if you can count number three, I didn't get a presidential appointment again.  But I did get--I was advisor to the high level in the White House.  So that was number three.
Story_ID: 579558
Speaker 1: What was happening for you at the same time here at the Center?
Speaker 2: Well, what I was doing basically here--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --is I was building with the support from the National Science Foundation and from the Department of Energy, a better and better climate model, okay.  So models that we started with in 1964 were very primitive, and as we go forward in time, models become more and more sort of realistic.  We're adding more features into the models.  For example, the early models were simple atmosphere models.  Then we added oceans.  Then we added sea ice.  Then we added land surface vegetation.  We're adding things like carbon cycle, you know, where the carbon is going.  And we're methane and we're adding nitrogen cycles.  We're adding ice sheets like Greenland and Antarctica are being added into the models.  So the models have gone from what I would say, very crude tools to successive generations to being more and more realistic in terms of simulating the real climate system.  And we test these models by actually reproducing the climate from say, 1870, up until the present because we have lots of data to compare.  Is the model going wrong?  Is it not doing this right.  Clouds are in the right place.  Is the jet stream not in the right place?  Are the monsoons working right?  All of these things, we have lots of data to test.  And the way they will use the models in the future is that we make some assumptions for example, are you gonna keep driving a Hummer and using up lots of fossil fuel so that carbon dioxide goes up?  Are you gonna be prudent and buy a Toyota Prius (ph.) (laughter) and then sort of us economical--so we've kind of put certain assumptions in there.  And then we can carry out these model simulations into the future out to the year 2100 or 2200.
Story_ID: 579559
Speaker 1: And we can start giving feedback to the nation, to policymakers, internationally, how is the climate likely to change if we keep on the same path that we're going at.
Speaker 2: And how is it likely to change if we keep on the same path?
Speaker 1: It's gonna warm up substantially.
Speaker 2: And exactly what does that mean?
Speaker 1: It means that if you look at the climate from say--
Speaker 2: 1870.
Speaker 1: 1870 or so, we have warmed up the planet six-tenths of a degree, okay.  Actually, that's centigrade so I have to double that.  So we've increased it by 1.2 degrees Fahrenheit.  Now, that may seem like a small change, but it's not.  In the tropics, it probably represents the order of a degree but up in Alaska, it probably represents five or six degrees.  We're seeing tremendous changes in the Arctic, in Canada.  For example, under, if you take the worse case scenario that by the end of this century, there will be virtually no sea ice in the Arctic.  And if you watch HBO on Earth Day, you'll see examples there showing the sea ice disappearing.  And whereas you're hearing stories now about the polar bears can't hunt for seals or they're finding it very difficult to hunt for seals on the sea ice because the ice is breaking up, and the seals can't swim more than like 20 miles or 30 miles.  If they try to swim for 50 or 80 miles, they drown because they can't go from one ice thing to another.  We're seeing the vegetation changes in the higher latitudes.  So we're making a profound change in the climate system.  And it's estimated roughly, that we'll change the climate by the end of this century if we keep on the same path by roughly three or four degrees centigrade.  Now, just keep in mind, when I say three or four degrees, I'm talking about centigrade now so you have to double it for Fahrenheit.  And keep in mind that that amount of temperature change is the same amount of temperature change in between the last ice age and the present, okay.  So we're talking about profound changes in the climate.  And we're seeing glaciers melting all around the world at a much rapid rate.  Glaziers are moving faster.  So all of this is leading to a change in climate that we haven't seen for thousands and thousands of years.  And the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere, for example, where we burn of fossil fuels, the concentration of carbon dioxide, which is a greenhouse gas is greater than any time in the last 600,000 years, okay.  So we're making profound changes on the climate.
Story_ID: 579560
Speaker 1: I've been told, and I don't know if this is true or not, you can set the record straight for me, that, like one of the signs of--at least one of the effects of these changes is that poor people around the world will be most affected.  How can that be?
Speaker 2: Well, in various ways.  For example, although I won't, I can't probably go into the details here, but we're seeing the subtropics, where a lot of poor people live, actually becoming dryer, okay, which means that the chances of them raising their crops as well, because there's usually living in kind of marginal places where it rains a certain time of the year, and then it's dry.  Those places are going to be dryer.  So the vegetation is gonna be harder to grow.  But the other complicating factor, and this is something that's a big societal thing we haven't really faced internationally, is the populations in some of these countries, just can't sustain a moderate lifestyle.  In other words, you don't have enough food to feed all the people.  And so things get worse, hostilities between countries and in betw- inside of countries becomes worse because the poor people are getting poorer and then the few rich people are getting richer.  That's leading to a social dynamic that is unstable.  We're seeing that in Africa and so many places.  You know, but we're used to, you know, be a situation that was closer to sustainability, you know, where you had enough food, enough game.  The people, even though there were some hostilities, they could kind of at least get along, you know, somehow.  And now you can't grow enough crops to feed everybody.  For example, in Africa, would keep, you know, in places like Darfur [Sudan] and places like that, where you had some bad governments, but they're completely dependent on outside groups coming in bringing in food, which is fine.  You know, I think that's a responsibility of the world governments to help out.  But it doesn't get them into a sustainable lifestyle.  And so climate change makes that worse because if they can grow fewer- and less of their crops, the population is increasing.  I just--I'm not optimistic that we have a good grapple on this situation in terms of a solution.
Speaker 1: So you're also for the poor people will be affected most by climate change?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think wealthy people can always go to where it's good you know, and isolate themselves from the miseries of the world.
Speaker 1: Well, then Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] comes on board, and he appoints you to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to the National Science Board.
Speaker 1: --to the National Science Board.
Story_ID: 579561
Speaker 1: And I'm talking about the fish now, do you think like when the extreme weather conditions we're seeing, and then--I mean I'm making a huge leap here with the weather, but I mean, for example, like the poor people in New Orleans and Katrina (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's a good example.
Speaker 1: That's an example of what you've talked about--well, in a certain way, not exactly, but is that similar to Darfur and the people having to get out of the way?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I think that's, and let me just saying about that.  I'm not sure that it's only climate change that's driving, of course.  We already know from our modeling studies and some scientific studies using observed data, that what's happening is in the Gulf and Caribbean as part of the global warming, is the ocean temperatures are getting warmer, okay.  Now, so why is that important?  It turns out that energy for hurricanes comes from evaporation from warm water.  And so when you increase the ocean temperatures, you get more evaporation, more water vapor in the atmosphere, and that is the driving force for the intensity of hurricanes, is evaporation and then how later on that water goes into the storm system, it condenses; it gives off more energy and heat and that drives a stronger and stronger storm.  So we expect that hurricanes will become more intense on average.  And now, that's one aspect of Katrina, for example, in New Orleans is you get a stronger hurricane than you would have for otherwise.  And the other is, the sea level is going up a little bit, okay, just because you warm up the ocean, the ocean expands a little bit.  And so that you're actually increasing in the sea level.  So you can imagine when we get these strong winds that come on the Northeast side of hurricanes, they can push a lot of water up and even with all of the improvements that they've made, I can imagine that the levies will probably break again, okay, even though the Core of Engineers, U.S. Core of Engineers, is building these levies over again.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, what has been your advice to them?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I haven't actually given advice.  On Tuesday, we had, the National Science Board had a workshop in Pensacola, Florida, and I as there.  I opened up the workshop as part of my responsibilities as Chair.  And we heard presentations by many different experts dealing all the way with storm intensity to levies to social impacts, you know, getting people out in time, all of that.  We had all these experts there giving us advice.  And so we're gonna be writing a report over the next couple of months, making recommendations to the President and to the Congress about sort of what should be done because we've had three workshops.  First, we had the government people come in from all the way FEMA to the Core of Engineers, NASA, NAOA, all of the science agencies, you know, giving us advice.  And we've got tons of advice.  Now, we've got to put it all together and issue a report.  But clearly, global warming is an issue that is part of the recommendations that we have to deal.  But in terms of Katrina itself, as one individual storm, a lot of it was badly handled by the federal government, you know, the scenes of people at the convention center, not getting fed, evacuation plans were kind of non-existent or poorly handled and carried out.  All of these things have to be improved before I would feel comfortable about people going back and building their homes there.  I just worry about people going back to the same situation without the basic problems being fixed.
Story_ID: 579562
Speaker 1: So when Clinton appointed you in 2000--what was it?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I think '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: '94 [1994].  I guess between '94 [1994] and--well, what happened?  Were there any incidents in '94 [1994] whereas you had to go testify?
Speaker 2: Oh, many times.
Speaker 1: So can you give me a couple of examples?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I'll give you one example that Mary likes to have me mention about.  See, as part of my responsibility as Chair, I'm often asked to testify in representing the National Science Foundation and the Board.  And most of it's around the appropriations hearings for the-- you have to go twice a year, one for the Senate and one for the House of Representatives.  And I give a formal testimony.  Now, it was a year ago March, it was a year ago March, I think it was, I was asked to give my normal testimony.  But at the end, the chairman of the board-of the appropriations Committee, I think his name is Representative Walsh at that time, he asked me, well, aren't you supposed to give advice on more general things than the National Science Foundation?  I said, yes.  And then I said, he says, and what do you think about the idea the President has of going to the moon and Mars for exploration?  And Mary says I hem-hawed around for a little bit, but (laughter) I said to him, and I said, I think it's a bad idea.  And he said, why?  Why do you think it's a bad idea?  I said, we can accomplish most of the science that we want to accomplish by sending up robots and these robots will go up and sample the soil and do all kinds of tests, and come back with the scientific data that gives us some understanding of how Mars and the moon evolved in historical time.  And if, for example, we made going to the moon and Mars a high priority, and we have a huge budget deficit, then we would suddenly have to stop virtually all of the scientific programs that are going on right now to accommodate this new initiative of the President, and we can't afford it.  And the money's not there, and where would you get the money?  It would come out of existing programs that are doing biological research, you know, sort of research on weather and climate, on understanding high-energy Physics, on astronomy, on biology, new plants and all of kinds of biological discoveries that are going on.  All of that would be in jeopardy of just having a man walk on the moon or on Mars.  And I said that that is too big of a risk for us to take, is that we would be in a sense jeopardizing all the existing research just to carry this one grand kind of experiment.  And I think that would devastate the scientific and engineering community in that there wouldn't be any funds to do anything else.  And they agreed with me, except that they did--since it was Republican Senate, and I think it was the House, and they did go along with the President just because they wanted to agree with the President, but on the other hand, they didn't really put any money into it, and so, in a sense, they agreed with me (laughter).  If they had put a lot of money into it, then I would have been very worried, but they put a little tiny bit of money in there.  And certainly going to the moon and Mars is like 30 years away.  And anyway, for some big enterprise like that, I also make the point too that it's so expensive that it should be done by the World community of nations getting together to pool their resources to do it.  You know, sort of, why should we do it on our own?  It's like us going into Iraq by ourselves.  I think that was one of the mistakes, among others that we were trying to do it sort of by ourselves.
Story_ID: 579563
Speaker 1: So, we're continuing.  We will now talk about, but just to wrap it up with the presidential.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was appointed by Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in 1994 to the National Science Board.  And I served for almost six years, and then he reappointed me just before he left office.  It was kind of like Carter, President Carter, so now I've been serving for the last six years under Bush.  Now, for the last four years, the Board elected me as Chair of the Board which is a very prestigious honor.  And I've tried to carry it out as best I can.
Speaker 1: Now, did you see a big change in Bush and Clinton the way you saw a big change between Carter [President Jimmy Carter] and Reagan [President Ronald Reagan]?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, what had happened, I think to the credit of the presidential science advisor, Jack Marburger, the people who were appointed by Carter were university presidents and major institutions or researchers or even Noble prize winners, very reputable scientists, had very good reputations.  And President Bush has also done that.  He's appointed people.  So there was less of a political change because the National Science Board is supposed to be giving independent advice, the best advice.  It's supposed to be non-partisan, and so he wanted to have people on the board who were credible individuals who could, you know, give their advice to the Congress and to the president.
Story_ID: 579564
Speaker 1: And we can't talk about global warming without talking about Vice President--and his name escapes me.
Speaker 2: Chaney?
Speaker 1: No, Clinton's vice President.
Speaker 2: Oh, Gore.
Speaker 1: Gore, global warming.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, in fact, I have many stories in my book about Gore.  In fact, Mary and I actually met him several times.  And I was aware of his book, "Earth--I've forgotten.  "Earth Out of Balance" or something like that, and he invited me one time to his office when he was a Senator.  And I--
Speaker 1: In Tennessee?  What was the Gore from (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, in--yeah, he's from Tennessee, but in Washington, D.C. and I came with several other scientists.  And he had this huge graph showing the carbon dioxide increases.  He exaggerated the scale so he had to stand on a chair to get to the last point.  He had to point out how it's increasing very rapidly.  And he actually tried to help us in many different ways.  He helped us try to get faster and faster computers because for our work with these big climate models, we needed to have state-of-the-art computers, so he helped get that done.  And then we were invited at least to one conference out in Monterrey, and actually Mary got a front seat tickets, not tickets.  She pushed through the Secret Service and got us up to the front, and she got all of the heads of some of the agencies.  And then Mary would say, oh, the head of NOAH, he didn't have a seat so Mary got him up to the front, and also the Secretary of Energy, Jim Watkins, she brought him up.  So I knew all of these people, you know, because I'd worked with them over the years, and I knew them very well.  In fact, I was part of Clinton's transition team for the science agencies.  So I knew a lot of these people, and Mary was very effective about getting seat in these occasions.  She knew how to deal with the Secret Service all the time.  So over the years I've interacted with him, and I've got some stories in my book about that.  Now, the--under Clinton and under President Bush, his administration isn't necessarily hostile to global warming, but they don't wanna do much about it, you know.  I think if Gore had been elected president, we would have probably a more aggressive program in dealing with the mitigation of global warming.  In other words, trying to curve the increasing of greenhouse gases using more, using renewable energy sources, things like that because I think we need to start doing some of these things now.  We can't wait for another decade as we have under this administration.
Story_ID: 579565
Speaker 1: So let's talk about some of your awards.
Speaker 2: Okay, as part of my responsibility, I've been mentoring people all along, not only African Americans, but I've had many students that I've worked with over the years helping them use these models to do research.  In fact, one of the students that I worked with, carried out the first calculation of the Ice Age using an earlier version of our computer model, and we published that.  Then in 1988, I was selected to be one of the 16 people featured by the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry, which is a well-known museum.  And they had a big gala.  They had a display that was, that featured some of each scientist's work or engineer's work, something that the kids could actually play.  And in Chicago, it was seen by I think something like 400,000 students.  And then it went on tour, for like six years, all around the country.  And the whole idea of the exhibit was to encourage minorities, especially African Americans, to go into science.  And I remember one time I had to go and gave a talk at Penn State University.  And a young lady, and typically what I try to do if I go visit a university, and they usually ask me to give a lecture, a broad lecture for everybody to come, sort of thing.  And I would ask them to, why don't you have the minority kids come and meet with me to have dinner, the ones that are in science.  And those were always nice occasions because the kids would come all dressed up, you know, and, you know, all suit and ties and dresses and so forth.  I remember one time a girl came up and she had just finished up her PhD. at Penn State.  And she said, you're the reason that I went into science.  Of course, a tear came down because, you know, that's the sort of thing you really like to hear because you, because that meant that you're helping get a student, in this case, and maybe others--and I've gotten emails and so forth and letters from students over the years, and I've tried to archive those because I just think that part of my job, just as I was mentored by some great mentors, I want to mentor a next generation as much as I can.  So this morning I got a call from a young lady that's got a, she's a scholar at that same university that Shirley Jackson is the president of.  I think it's--
Speaker 1: Is it down South some place?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, it's in, yeah, Rensselaer.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's what it is, yeah.  But anyway, she wanted to come out and work for me which I'll have to tell her no because I've (laughter) already got too many students I'm working with already.  But I'll try to get her into a good spot, you know, because I'll take the time to call those students back and tell them kind of why don't you contact so and so.  And I have those people in the back of mind all the time, is, I can help them by being an interface to other people that can help them, if you know who I'm speaking about.
Story_ID: 579566
Speaker 1: So a couple of other awards.  I mean you have almost--you not only have dozens and dozens, something as important as the E.B. Lemon Distinguished Alumni Award.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And it's a very high award at Oregon State University where I went to school.  One of the previous awardees was Linus Pauling, so I'm proud of that one because Linus Pauling also went to Oregon State.  So it's getting to the alumni, yes.
Speaker 1: You were inducted into the National Academy of Engineering in 2002?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was a great honor because, you know, being a member of the academy, may of the academies, essentially represents like, less than one percent of the scientists, okay, in that field.  So it's a great award.  You don't, you know, not many scientists get that.
Speaker 1: And then the Reed College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the Reed College was a very interesting one because they don't actually give it at the commencement.  It's actually given at the time when the new freshmen come in, and their families are with them on the first day of school.  And you get dressed up in your cap and gown.  The faculty comes out and then the awardee comes out and speaks to the students.  And I was very proud of that because the previous awardees were, let's see, the previous year, it was Steve Jobs, the head of Apple Computer, and the year before that it was Bill Gates, the head of Microsoft.  So I felt good (laughter), and I grew up in Portland, and Reed College is an excellent school.  I mean it's just top flight.  I don't know how any parent can afford to send their kid there because it probably costs like $40,000 a year to send them there, but it's an excellent school.
Speaker 1: And most recently in 2006, you were elected as an honorary member of the American Neurological Society which is the highest award given by any society?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was given in January of this year.  So and certainly, the first African American, and actually--in my field, that has gotten on that award.  And it's only given to .01 percent of the membership.  There's only like about twenty honorary members of the society.  So that was quite an honor.
Story_ID: 579567
Speaker 1: So when you look back over your career, the awards you've received, the people you've mentored, the appointments by presidents and models you've made, what stands out as the most rewarding?
Speaker 2: Wow, (laughter).  I think the most rewarding to me is working with my colleagues here at NCAR and some of them outside and for Claire Parkinson who I wrote the book with, being able to contract models of the climate system and seeing them come from very crude and elementary sort of tools to now being able to reproduce most of what happens in the climate system.  So I look upon that as being my major achievement in life other than having my family and having children.  And I think that that is my highest career objective, and I've accomplished that.  And now I'm close to 70 years old, and so that much of that mantle now is being passed onto others because I'm at a point in my life where I need to probably slow down a bit and sort of do some other things in the rest of my life.  And I've been much rewarded in these last few years by having a wonderful partner in life and that's Mary, my wife.  She's been a wonderful person.  She keeps me straight and on the narrow and makes me take care of myself as much as I can (laughter).  But I know that I have to kind of slow down at this point in my life.  And there's so many things going on that I know that I can't keep up the pace that I am.  And May 10 of this year, 2006, I'll step down as the Chair of the National Science Board.  So that'll be my last day.  And I'll do some other things, and I'll keep doing some research also.  But I want to keep doing good.
Story_ID: 579568
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Wow (laughter), I think as a good person, as a parent, as a husband, as somebody that feels strongly that this world needs to take care of this planet.  We are in peril of losing a lot of what we have in this world by not being good stewards and not worrying about what we should be worrying about and that is the next generation and the future generations.  We have a responsibility to worry about them because, you know, I think that's the legacy of mankind is to worry about the future and to do it in the proper way.  Thank you for the interview.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for being a HistoryMaker.
Story_ID: 579569
Speaker 1: One last question I want to ask.  Why do you feel it's important, or do you feel it's important or you feel it's important for African Americans to pursue careers in science or the sciences?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that a career in science ought to be one of the options that they look.  I'm not saying that everyone should be a scientist or engineer or whatever.  I just think that by the fact that we have such small percentages historically, that are going into science, that we're losing capability that can benefit, not only themselves, but society.  And that is by having a diverse workforce and professional cadre of people in all races, all religions working to advance American as well as advance internationally.  I think it's very important.  And the fact that we've failed in our school systems and our society in general in using the talents of everybody, I think is a wasteful part of American life, that we should be using everybody's talents.  If people are talented in whatever background, they should be able to exploit their talents to the maximum.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 579570
ANNOUNCER:  The following program was funded in part by The National Science Foundation [NSF] and Lockheed Martin [American aerospace, defense, security and advanced technology company].  Born and raised in Portland, Oregon, he went on to become a pioneer in climate modeling and a luminary in the global warming discussion.  Since the 1970s, he has advised five presidents in the areas of science education reform and global warming.  ScienceMakers, an innovative African American educational initiative is proud to present 'A Night with Warren Washington'.  And now, to the president of the National Academy of Sciences [NAS], Dr. Ralph Cicerone [atmospheric scientist, a former chancellor of the University of California, Irvine, and president of the National Academy of Sciences] [Applause]
Speaker 2: Tonight, we will honor one of America's leading climate scientists.  Please help me in welcoming to the stage, Dr. Warren Washington.  [music] [photo slides]
Speaker 1: Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome to the stage, Dr. Warren Washington.  [Applause]
Story_ID: 579571
Speaker 1: Many of you have known Warren Washington for a long time as I have, and I'm going to start by asking Warren a few questions.  One of the pleasures in preparation for this evening, for me, was to learn, begin to learn a little bit about Warren's family background in Portland, Oregon.  Can you get us started from there, Warren?  Where did--how did all that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, I want to pay homage to my family who are sitting up here in the front and my wife, Mary, who's been a partner in this adventure in learning about science and climate change.  And I think I'll start the story of my background and the family background in talking about my father [Edwin Washington].  He graduated from a small, black college, called Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama].  He left there in, almost immediately after graduating as part of the migration of African Americans out of the South.  In the late '20s [1920s] and early '30s [1930s], the time that my father left the South, he talked about his friends who had been lynched and the difficulties of African Americans at that time, especially educated African Americans.  Now, on my mother's [Dorothy Grace Morton] side, they came from Richmond [Virginia], and, in fact, one of the relatives that was the next--are the older generation and my grandfather, went to Phillips Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] in the Northeast.  And then he went on to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and graduated in 1871.  Well, there's a--there was a family, sort of tradition of education.
Story_ID: 579572
Speaker 1: We have a little video clip about that great migration that we'd like to show.
ANNOUNCER:  Railroads were the lifeblood of America at the dawn of the twentieth century with jobs for many, including African Americans like Warren Washington's grandfather, Wert Morton and his father, Edwin Washington, whose teaching dreams were deferred by the segregation of the day.  After moving his family to a mixed neighborhood in Northeast Portland, Oregon, Edwin spent nights on his front porch with a gun by his side.  Warren Washington was born on August 28, 1936 to Edwin, a dining-car waiter and Dorothy [Grace Morton], a nurse and housewife.  Hard work, discipline and religious training at the family church of Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church was expected of young Warren and his four brothers.  Washington's prize possession was his library card.  And he read books on scientific pioneers like George Washington Carver, Thomas Edison and Albert Einstein.  At Jefferson High School, while active in the youth chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Washington's love for science was encouraged by his chemistry and physics teachers and his father's love of astronomy.  Upon graduation, Washington attended Oregon State University [Corvallis, Oregon].  This created the foundation for what would be his life's work.  [Applause]
Story_ID: 579573
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds that you were strongly influenced--this emphasis on education that you mentioned a minute ago.  You were pretty well tracked to go to college in some ways.  Your father got you interested in science, I understand.  So when you went away to college, what did you decide to study or did you decide before you went away to college?
Speaker 2: I had an interest in science, but what really kind of got me started was I had a, a chemistry teacher in my sophomore year who knew how to explain science.  And one day I asked her, why are egg yolks yellow?  She said, why don't you find out?  And she required all of us in chemistry to buy a book called 'The Handbook of Chemistry', and I didn't find my answer in that book.  And I started searching through journals--of course, they didn't have, you know, deeply scientific journals in--
Speaker 1: Like no index terms, "egg yolks."  [Audience laughter]
Speaker 2: Yeah, no (laughter).  And I worked with the librarian in the reference section.  And we found some information.  And I thought that was neat, you know, I mean to be able to find out about how something in nature works.  And then the following year, a physics teacher--it was Mr. Kelmer (ph.), and he made physics sound exciting to me.  And I really made my decision some time in my senior year, you know, taking physics, that this is what I wanna go into.
Story_ID: 579574
Speaker 1: So many things were different then, and what do you remember growing up in Portland [Oregon]?  Was it a great experience?  Was it one that you wish could have gone ten years faster?  How did it go?
Speaker 2: We had this problem in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s].  Oregon did not have a public accommodations law.  So African Americans could not stay in hotels, motels, could not eat at certain restaurants.  And I became an activist at that time.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was very active in trying to get a public accommodations law in--enacted.  And in the early '50s [1950s], I was chair of the Junior NAACP.  It was kind of like an affiliate of the regular one, but they wanted to get the young people involved.  I took on a leadership role in helping get the law changed.  And in 1953, it was eventually changed.  I was kind of proud that I, you know, spent some time helping make that change.
Story_ID: 579575
Speaker 1: Well, when you all went--when you went off to Oregon State University [Corvallis, Oregon], you had just had this experience working with the Junior NAACP and the laws governing hotel occupancy and so forth.  What was it like on campus?  Were you drawn into similar activities?  Was it a different world?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: I was working as a dishwasher in a big hospital in Portland, Oregon.  I asked the dietician, if I go to college, is there a place I can go that you could help me get into a job.  And she said, well, we have a Good Samaritan Hospital also in Corvallis, Oregon.  And so she called the dietician on the, right on the spot.  So that's the reason I went to Oregon State.  Now, Oregon State only had about 4,000 students at that time.  There were 10 African American students there.  Eight were on the football team (audience laughter).  There was two of us who weren't athletes.  And it was only one African American family living in Corvallis at that time.  And, in fact, it was only ten years earlier that they graduated the first African American student.  So it wasn't a hostile environment though.  It was a wonderful environment for me.  I was very active, and I had plenty of time to do my studies.  And I worked at the hospital a bit, and I didn't have any kind of problem with racial discrimination, except for one, on the sororities and the fraternities at that time.  Some of the fraternities had discrimination clauses in them.  And we got together, a number of students--not only the black students, but several other students had a discussion with the president about this issue and it being inconsistent with the changes that were taking place nationwide.  Remember, this was a little bit before the Civil Rights--
Speaker 1: On 'Brown versus [Board of] Education' [1954]?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he said something to me I didn't quite understand.  He thought this was an amoral issue.  So I had to get a dictionary to look up that word (audience laughter) and see what it meant.  And really what it meant, it was that he didn't wanna do anything about it (audience laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly.  I was grasping to try to see the connection between the dictionary definition of "amoral."  Now, I understand.  There wasn't any connection.  (audience laughter)
Speaker 2: You know, as I look back, I thought it was kind of ordinary life, but I don't think most students had to go through that.
Speaker 1: Did you work on campus?
Speaker 2: I did a bit because we lived in a co-op where we had to--had to all sort of do the work.  It was a male co-op, but we still had to have a house mother.  So we hired a lady to, not do anything.  She didn't have to work other than just be there to make sure that we were not unruly.  In those days, there wasn't any coed dorms.  They were always separate.  Now, you know, these days, we don't seem to have that (unclear) (audience laughter).
Speaker 1: I actually wasn't watching Warren's face when he said that.  Was there an expression of regret there?  (audience laughter)  I couldn't tell.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Story_ID: 579576
Speaker 1: Warren, at Oregon State [University, Corvallis, Oregon], you jumped right into a fairly tough field, a very quantitative one, physics.  Did you make a good decision?  Did you enjoy it, and it did it lead you in ways that you wanted it to?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did, but I--I have to kind of explain, and I tell this to the young people all the time.  At that age, I didn't know what I wanted to really do.  And, and a nice thing about physics was that you get basic training in virtually all of the areas of physics.  And so that prepares you to kind of be capable of almost jumping into anything.  And what really happened was, I got a summer job at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] as a mathematician.  And I was working with a small group of scientists who were starting to put together the elements of a climate model or a weather model.  And I thought this was terribly exciting to sort of get into this.  So after that summer, I applied at several graduate schools that specialized in this area to see if I can get a Ph.D.  I was accepted at all of the schools except Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida].  Florida State wanted me to send my photograph (audience laughter).  I wonder why.  (audience laughter)
Speaker 1: Let me just mark an irony here.  One of the people who used to--a scientist, a very good scientist who used to work under Warren at NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado] is now the president of Florida State University.  (audience laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Story_ID: 579577
Speaker 1: At Oregon State [University, Corvallis, Oregon], and your work as a mathematician at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], you got in on the ground floor of this very exciting field of mathematical modeling of weather and climate.  And I wanna make sure nobody leaves here tonight thinking that the models we're talking about are made out of Lego or Tinker Toys (audience laughter).  So let's take a look at a clip that describes some of this early work, and then ask Warren to talk a little bit more about what that work was all about and why it's important, why it was worth paying all the dues that they had to pay.  Let's have the clip.
ANNOUNCER:  In 1950, when President [Harry S.] Truman signed the National Science Foundation [NSF] into law, ENIAC [the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer was the first general-purpose electronic computer] performed the first computerized, numerical weather prediction.  Norman Phillips' climate control simulation showed the basic structure of the atmospheric circulation.  In 1957, Roger Revelle and Hans Suess talk about the greenhouse effect while Charles Keeling detects a yearly rise in the world's carbon dioxide.  In 1960, while earning his master's [degree] in meteorology, Washington becomes interested in atmospheric science and went on to earn his Ph.D. from Pennsylvania State University [Penn State, State College, Pennsylvania] in meteorology.  In 1963, around the same time of the March on Washington and the Birmingham bombings, Warren Washington was hired at the newly created National Center for Atmospheric Research [NCAR] in Boulder, Colorado.  While at NCAR, he worked with colleague, Akira Kasahara [ph.] on one of the first weather and climate models to forecasts weather days in advance.  Washington, who was one of three black Ph.D. atmospheric scientists grew concerned about the lack of diversity in his field and the struggles of fellow minority scientists.  He began a personal mission to increase opportunities for minorities in the sciences.  He led symposiums to celebrate the accomplishments of famed African American scientists like the chemist, Percy L. Julian and anatomist, Montague Cobb.  A pioneer himself, Washington was the second African American to earn a Ph.D. in meteorology and the first African American president of the American Meteorological Society.  In 1978, Washington was selected as principal investigator for the [U.S.] Department of Energy [DOE] contract that led to the first climate models to study the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere at NCAR.  At first very primitive, these models grew in complexity as computer technology improved and oceans, land cover and sea ice were incorporated.  The first NCAR, fully-coupled climate models were created.  And they showed the earth's rising global temperatures were rising from increasing carbon dioxide concentrations.  This research and that from others, showed that mankind was warming the planet by burning fossil fuels and causing global warming.  [music] [Applause]
Speaker 1: Well, the results are turning out to be very important, and they're going to have to guide us in our current generation of people and the next generation.  But putting the pieces together must not have been as easy as it sounded, getting the mathematics to mesh, trying to program these stupid computers to do what you want them to do, rather than what they want to do.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of those struggles and how many late nights you worked at NCAR?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know how many nights, but it was (laughter), it was almost every day that we had to battle something.  In the early days, just solving the mathematical equations was the premier difficult subject.  You know, we had to work with the applied mathematicians to come up with appropriate schemes to solve the equations.  And we had to deal with the limitations of the computers.  In fact, the first computers I ran on was an ALRAC (ph.), which came just after the ENIAC, where you had to--
Speaker 1: Did it use electricity?  (audience laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah--
Speaker 1: Or did you just peddle--
Speaker 2: It was almost that bad because actually, the computer cord had less power than your iPhone [Apple, Inc. device] processor.  And we had to do it on paper tape, and we had to program in machine language.  It was painful, but we forged ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, you were making rapid progress.
Speaker 2: That's right, and, in fact, it took--if we wanted to simulate one day, it took one day of computer time.
Speaker 1: You'll never get ahead like that.  [Audience laughter]
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) [Audience laughter].
Speaker 1: It's bad for forecasting.  [Audience laughter]
Story_ID: 579578
Speaker 1: Warren [Washington] said earlier this evening that he tended to have several activities going at once.  His involvement in the Junior NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] while he was a student and so forth, but other things were happening here.  You got married.  You started having a family.  Tell us how you balanced all that out and just the rewards that you remember from those days.
Speaker 2: Well, I've always been sort of a believer in a balanced lifestyle.  And I started with a family fairly young.  I was twenty-four years old.  And then the family grew.  We had the three girls, and we adopted a boy.  And I kind of enjoyed the mixture of academic-type work and research as well as raising a family.  And now we have a big family of sixteen grandchildren and two great grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Congratulations.  [Audience laughter]
Story_ID: 579579
Speaker 1: When Warren [Washington] left graduate school from this pretty advanced program at Pennsylvania State University [Penn State, State College, Pennsylvania], as I understand it, he had two job offers, one in California that would pay about $12,000 a year in those days and then the other one in Boulder, Colorado with an exalted salary of $9,000 per year.  And you chose the $9,000.  So something else besides money was in your mind.  What was it?
Speaker 2: In the summer of '63 [1963], I went to a conference in Canada.  It turned out this was on the border of Canada and the U.S.  And it was in a bar, and I had some of the world's leading scientists sitting at a table.  In fact, if you sat on one side of the table, you were in Canada [audience laughter], and the other side, you were in the U.S.
Speaker 1: I hope there was a North Side in Canada and the South Side in the U.S.? [audience laughter]
Speaker 2: That's right.  [audience laughter]  And I asked them, where should I go, to this new place in Boulder, Colorado or go to the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California.  And they all said, go to the new place because you'll be getting in at the ground floor.  Even though you don't make as much money, you'll have more freedom.  And the other thing that was attractive to me was the founder of NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research] was Walter Orr Roberts [astronomer and atmospheric physicist].  He called me into the office, and he wanted to chat with me.  And NCAR didn't have a lot of paperwork in those days.  In fact, I had been there for six months and somebody said I hadn't filled out an application [audience laughter].  But anyway, he sat me down, and he said, why don't you spend half of your time on what you think a national center should be doing, and the other half of your time on what you think is an interesting scientific problem.  And I think that's the latitude of freedom that I've really enjoyed over the years.  I think it's gotten a little bit more bureaucratic since those times.  They were hiring, at least at that time, the best of the scientists and that they really wanted them to be involved in carrying out the research and coming up with the various hypotheses and so forth, and not be just told from top down what to do.
Story_ID: 579580
Speaker 1: I worked at NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado] in the 1980s, but I can tell from stories like Warren's [Warren Washington], what an exciting place it must have been twenty years earlier, fifteen years earlier.  So much was going on.  You were--you were taking mathematics into areas it had never been taken before with these computer models.  This was a young staff, people with a leader like Walt [Walter Orr] Roberts [astronomer and atmospheric physicist] telling them things like that.  It must have been very inspiring, and yet I know you've always had other activities.  So what was going on socially in Boulder, Colorado?  What was the racial scene like?  What did you get involved with there?
Speaker 2: Well, I was involved in several things.  I was, I served on the Human Rights Commission for the city and it wasn't an easy time in the '60s [1960s] because a lot of unrest from the Vietnam War, and there were a lot of people sleeping in the parks and very upset with the government and the establishment.  I think we wanted to kind of deal with everyone's concerns in a humane way.  And things like police brutality weren't there, even though sometimes I'm sure the police got very aggravated with all of the demonstrations and all of that.  But I remember every once in a while getting up in the middle of night, called to go downtown and help calm people down on both sides, the people that were protesting as well as those on the police side of things.
Speaker 1: It was an active time.  It was an active time and place.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I've heard something about an interaction you had with Dan Rather [journalist and news anchor] over an institution in Boulder.  I thought it was an interesting story as I remember it.  I wonder if you'd share it with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll be happy to.  I heard that Dan Rather was coming to Boulder, and he was on a speaking tour.  And he, he was gonna be speaking at the Elks Club.  Now, the Elks Club at that time was segregated.  They didn't allow African Americans to come.  So I sent him a letter, and he was the White House correspondent at the time.  This is 1968.  And I published that in the local newspaper, my open letter to him, speaking at that organization.  I didn't hear anything.  And then one day when he was supposed to speak in Boulder, I was at work, and he called on the telephone.  And he said--
Speaker 1: Or it was a good imposter [audience laughter].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I've seen him in his shorts--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --cause he was putting on his tuxedo for the evening [audience laughter].  So I rushed over to the hotel where he was at, and he was literally putting on his tuxedo and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so I'm probably one [audience laughter]--I'm probably one of the few people who've seen him in his shorts [Audience laughter].  Anyway, he was getting ready to go over to the Elks Club.  And we presented the case to him, he said, "Gee," he says, "I have--how about if I give you two options?"  He was supposed to speak about, on the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] days because he was from Texas, and he knew the Texas politics, and he knew about Lyndon Johnson's tenure in the White House.  And so he offered me that option.  The other option he said, I could talk about discrimination in Texas and the harsh effects of it.  And I said, Option 2 [audience laughter] is what I want.  And he says, okay, I'll talk about that.  He actually snuck me into the Elks Club through the kitchen so I could listen to him.  And he started out his talk by saying, "I feel uncomfortable here, and I hope you do too."  And then he talked about the awful effects of segregation in the South.  And at the end, he got no applause [audience reaction] because he really made them feel guilty.  He didn't feel comfortable speaking at a place that was segregated.  And so at least that little story gave me a glimpse into somebody that has principle.
Speaker 1: Did the Elks Club ever invite you to become a member?  [audience laughter]
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  [Audience laughter]  We eventually had to sue them.  I was part of a suit, and I think what essentially happened was, there were several Elks Clubs around the country who were doing the same thing.  And when it went to the higher federal courts, they essentially said that they would lose their tax-exempt status if they kept on segregating.  So nationally, all at once, the Elks Clubs desegregated.
Story_ID: 579581
Speaker 1: And in the meantime, Warren [Washington] was doing world-leading research on this topic of building mathematical models of meteorology and climate and was eventually invited to the White House to provide advice to a number of presidents.  Let's have a look at a short video of experiences like that.
Speaker 2: [Video of President Richard Nixon]:  Each of us all across this great land has a stake in maintaining and improving environmental quality.
ANNOUNCER:  Since the industrial revolution, greenhouse gas emissions have been on the rise.  In 1824, Joseph Fourier predicted that the increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration would create a greenhouse effect, thus warming the earth.  The issue of global warming took center stage in the 1980s and '90s [1990s] and Washington, Jerry Meehl and a few other groups doing climate modeling, would play a leading role.  At the age of forty-eight, Washington had to step down in 1984 from his presidential appointment when his late wife, Jill, was diagnosed with cancer.  It is during this time that he wrote a book with Clare Parkinson entitled 'An Introduction to Three-Dimensional Climate Modeling', a widely-used introductory textbook.  In the early '90s [1990s] Washington became active again in scientific policy with his appointment to the Secretary of Energy Science Board and later, its biological and environmental research advisory committee.  He was also chosen to chair and serve on the National Science Board under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, where he focused on many scientific and engineering issues along with the increasing problem, the lack of minority students in the STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] pipeline.  Washington would continue to advise U.S. presidents from President Jimmy Carter to President Barack Obama.  [Applause]
Speaker 2: I'm struck by the high level of those experiences.  Also in the case of the National Science Board, the sheer breadth of it.  I see Dr. [Rita] Colwell here tonight, a former director of the National Science Foundation [NSF].  You had to provide analysis and advice on any range of issues for the benefit of the country and the world, as well as human resources.  What were some of the difficult issues you had to deal with and some of the successes, some of the failures, if you will, some of the battles that continue?
Speaker 1: I was on the board for twelve years.  And then I was elected on the board itself to be a chair twice.  So I spent four years as the chair.
Speaker 2: So they didn't understand you for the first six years?  [Audience laughter]
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think Rita can sort of attest that we really had to support basic research in virtually all areas of science and also in areas of applied science, engineering and to stay focused on where are the new exciting areas of science, and where the money should be spent.  And I thoroughly enjoyed--
Speaker 2: And up until that point it was simple.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, I'm sure it was difficult, all the--for everyone that's served.  Now, one of the things that I tried to achieve was to reach as much as a consensus as we could.  Obviously, there are a lot of individuals on the board--I think it was twenty-four members.  And they all had sort of different views about what should be pushed or not pushed.  And what we had to do is work through that with the director to set priorities, to allocate funds.  And I took great pride in taking the time to work with everybody to make that whole thing work.  And it was very seldom that we actually took a vote where there was a split opinion.  In most cases, we were able to work it through, and I think we're an analog as to how the government should work these days because what we see is a very partisan atmosphere, and I think that's hurting everything, not only science, but it's hurting all aspects of life.  And we really need to compromise and to work together for the common good.  [Applause]
Speaker 2: Here, here.  [Applause]
Story_ID: 579582
Speaker 1: (Unclear) just bring up one other experience I had, and this may be something that's rather novel, and I think I see some people in the audience who were involved in this.  I was asked to speak with the cabinet during the first George Bush administration.  And--
Speaker 2: You mean George H.W. Bush?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So back in the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: That's right.  And I would--and after speaking with the cabinet, you know, about climate change, the president's science advisor, [Jack] Marburger, asked me a question.  Could you speak with the chief of staff, John Sununu, and--
Speaker 2: It was Allan Bromley--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: It was Allen Bromley.
Speaker 1: --oh, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Right, and he asked you to speak to Sununu, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we go into his office, and I don't know--I didn't have any idea of what it was about, but it had to do with could I install a climate model in the White House?  [Audience laughter]  Now, my reaction was, whatever you want run on our model, we're experimenting with, we'll be happy to do it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) [Audience laughter]
Speaker 1: No, no.  John Sununu wanted to have the model so he could run it [Audience laughter] in the White House.  As Nancy Maynard--who is here, knows 'cause I worked with her at the time, I had great powers because he wanted to run it a Compaq 386 computer [Audience laughter].  And for the scientists in the audience here, he bragged about he had a Fortran compiler on his--[Audience laughter].  And so here I am needing to call and find out about things about the model number that he had on his computer, what kind of software and all that.  And I would call the chief of staff of the White House, and I would say, "This is Warren" to his secretary.  And she would interrupt me and say, "I'll get him out of the meeting right now."  I didn't think it was that important [audience laughter].  And he would come to the telephone, and I would ask him questions like, "Could you tell me something about the printer that you have-" [audience laughter].  And anyway, we kind of worked through it.  And so I put together a small team of people at NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado], and we put together a model, a simple, one-dimensional model that he could run in the White House.  And I won't go on with this story, but the 'Washington Post' and the 'New York Times' [newspapers] got wind of this, but I didn't say anything.  Eventually, after the Bush administration left office, it came out in a New York Times article.  But I only demonstrate this to sort of say that we in the science community have to respond to people in the administration whether it's Democrat or Republican to requests for information and knowledge, in a formalistic way in terms of peer review, giving advice to the government.  And yet, there still is advice that's not always taken seriously by policymakers.
Speaker 2: No? (Laughter) [Audience laughter]
Speaker 1: But we have to keep trying because we, what we do in the academies is based upon our knowledge of the science.
Speaker 2: I had never heard that story about John Sununu.  Sununu was not only a professional, but an advanced mechanical engineer who knew a fair amount about fluid mechanics, probably the elements that would go into climate change modeling.  And he asked a legitimate question.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So you're absolutely right.  We have to respond.  Now, he was hostile at the time, and he was making some side comments that indicated that he probably didn't think your work was very good, things like that.  But nonetheless, when they make a legitimate request like that, I think we have to respond.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I think we all owe you a debt of gratitude for doing it.  [Applause]
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 579583
Speaker 1: Let's jump back to Boulder [Colorado] because in the meantime, while Warren [Washington] was doing all this extracurricular activity, being a good citizen and all of these other things, including the important racial causes of the day, he was--he had a day job in Boulder, Colorado which was to develop this new class of computational techniques [at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)].  Computers were just growing in their capability like this.  So just keeping up with the capabilities of the computers that were coming out was a huge opportunity.  So what went into that development?  How many different things did you stuff into the computer model, and when would it blow up, you know, hot stuff--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --how did you manage that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that we transformed ourselves a bit because--and I see Rick Anthes is in the audience here, who's the former president of UCAR, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--he was my boss (laughter).  I think he and others in our group and, you know, Jerry Meehl, who was a part of this, we all thought that this was beyond what could be done by just a small group of people.  And we broadened it to bring in expertise from a large number of disciplines, oceanographers, hydrologists, people who were experts in the upper atmosphere, people who were experts on the boundary surface between the atmosphere and the ocean and vegetation and all these areas in which you're--we do have some idea of how they work.  But how they work together has always been a question.  So we put together a team that numbers like 300 scientists now, who work on improving various aspects of the model.  Then groups like Jerry Meehl and I, that concentrates on carrying out future scenarios of climate change, based upon whether we're going to cut emissions or not cut emissions, and things like that.  So this big family of scientists at NCAR meets every summer, in the third week in June.  And we all get together and we have our working groups, and we're organized in such a way that we can make decisions about what we do next and what has to be put into the newer and newer versions of the model.  So I think that when I look at what we started with way back in the early 1960s, and what we have now, the models are many times better, more accurate.  They can simulate the changes of season.  They can simulate the twentieth century changes in the climate to first order, and we can use them to make some very educated guesses about the future climate, if we based it on--sort of based upon, are we gonna cut back greenhouse gases or are we going to let them rise at the present rates?  So all of these things have led to a very valuable tool for society.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, the value in any estimate of the future that has any value whatsoever to it, and it's demonstrable, as you say, the way you just demonstrated some of the good results that have already been obtained, the value of obtaining those estimates years ahead of the time when the changes actually place, it's just very high.  The stakes for society, for investors, for sustainability, for national defense and security, they're just enormous.  So this is very important work you've been doing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, but the developments were not always easy.  I remember once being in a room with Dr. Washington and Dr. Anthes, when computer memory was the problem.  Nowadays, we have such volume, such huge numbers of things that you can have stored on a computer chip or magnetic memory or whatever, that it's hard to remember that that used to be quite limited and very expensive.  So the discussion that day was to, how to take the output from one of these climate models that Warren was running, magnetic tapes, and how to change those magnetic tapes from computer, to computer, fast enough that the computer wouldn't have to stop.  And the best idea at the time was to hire students from University of Colorado on roller skates.  [Audience laughter]
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I am not kidding.  Fortunately, there's been a lot of progress since then.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) [Audience laughter].
Speaker 1: Looking at that progress, Warren, do you think it's fast enough?  You said that you have as many as 300 scientists involved over the course of a year.  How could it go faster--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --because the stakes really are quite high here.
Speaker 2: I think the challenge right now is two things.  One is, we wanna make our models better.  And the other is to increase the resolution of our models so that we can get really down to the River Valley and the issue there is that we have now got models that can run on three or 400,000 processors all at once.  And, you know, if you think about that we're--at the time I started, we only had one processor, and it was slow.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  [Audience laughter]
Speaker 2: And so we're able to, to do resolution and compare with, for example, satellite data or other types of data.  And so see if our model is deviating in any strong way and to look for ways to improve this on the simulation.  We're always verifying as much as possible, our models, you know, with observations.  So observations still are vital to the progress in this field.
Speaker 1: Well, the stakes really are quite high.  It's not only a question of curiosity, but a lot of the decisions that the rest of us are gonna have to make in order to be able to manage in the system, if we're lucky to be able to avoid the decisions.  I'm not so sure.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 579584
Speaker 1: During the course of these years, Warren [Washington], you've had the opportunity and the call to advise people in high places.  You mentioned John Sununu, when he was chief of staff under the first President Bush [President George H.W. Bush].  You mentioned President [Jimmy] Carter, I think, but you've also been called to advise other presidents.  Tell us about a couple of those experiences, if they're not too off color.
Speaker 2: I think that most presidents, irregardless of the party, have regarded this possible change to the environment as a serious problem.  In fact, the first President [George H.W.] Bush actually helped set up the U.S. Global Change--the research program.  And he took it seriously.  He listened to people like Roger Revelle and others.  So I don't think it's just one party has sort of felt that climate change is not real.  There is a lot of people who are still saying that climate change is a hoax.  And I think that's absolutely wrong.  We're seeing climate change happen world-wide.  And we think that we understand many aspects of it, but there're still some open scientific questions.  But we're getting closer to narrowing down those, those scientific questions.  And our models are better.  The observations are better, and that we're understanding the overall climate, earth system much better than we did, even five or ten years ago.  So there's been progress.  So, at least I feel a responsibility of policymakers to start to face (unclear) on this issue.  And one of the reasons is, when you burn a molecule off fossil fuel, that carbon dioxide has a resonance time in the atmosphere of roughly ninety years.  Now, that's the average resonance time.  There will be some molecules that will disappear earlier.  Some of 'em will be there for 500 years.  So, it's a little different than water pollution or air pollution where, once you--you would take a course of action, you'll see within months or years an improvement.  With climate change, if we wait until the, say another fifty years or a hundred years to sort of deal with it, we will have built into the system a lot of heating and increased sea-level rise that will last into centuries.
Speaker 1: You must have met some pretty interesting and important people along the way, either in debates or arguments about those questions or in finding new ways to understand what's going.  Have you had a pretty good cadre of co-travelers in this business?
Speaker 2: And, yes.  I think many of the people in this audience know, I'm a gentle kind of guy.  And even the skeptics, I can count them as friends in some ways.  I don't sort of agree with them all, their science, but I can be civil.  And I think that's important that we stay civil and not just name call.  But I don't think that we can kind of ignore skeptics.  Skeptics are very important for--if they're serious skeptics.  If they're skeptics who just say, "I don't--I believe it's a hoax," that's not real skepticism in science.  Skepticism in science ought to be someone putting forth another hypothesis about what's happening and that they ought to prove on what they're talking about and publish their results in scientific journals.  And I think the true skeptics in science improve our science.  But the false skeptics just do a big disservice 'cause they mislead the public and policymakers.
Speaker 1: And you've seen both kinds, I gather?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have.  I was preferring not to name names (laughter) [Audience laughter].
Story_ID: 579585
Speaker 1: Well, throughout the course of this leading research and the public commitment that Warren [Washington] has had, he's also received a little recognition along the way.  We'd like to give you just a brief summary of some of the awards that Warren has received and put a little context behind it, if you will.
ANNOUNCER:  With nearly five decades of service, Washington continues to be an international leader in the field of climate change and diversifying the scientific profession.  For over two decades, Washington, Jerry Meehl and his NCAR [National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado] team have issued groundbreaking reports on global warming.  These were heavily involved in an international effort that was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007.  In 2010, he received the National Medal of Science from President Barack Obama.
Speaker 1: [President Barack Obama audio]:  It's no exaggeration to say that the scientists and innovators in this room have saved lives, improved our health and well being.
Speaker 2: (MALE VOICE):  The 2009 National Medal of Science to Warren M. Washington, National Center for Atmospheric Research [NCAR], for his development and use of global climate models, to understand climate and explain the role of human activities and natural processes in the earth's climate system and for his work to support a diverse science and engineering workforce.  [Applause]
ANNOUNCER:  From the AAAS Board of Directors to his election as the first African American president of the American Meteorological Society, to his role on the National Science Foundation [NSF] Board, his service has been exemplary.  However, Washington's most valuable honor comes from his family, his wife, Mary Washington, his children, step children and grandchildren, assure that Washington's family life is as rich as his public life.  Pioneer, mentor, distinguished scientist, Warren Washington is a true role model and leader that has carved a path for generations of scientists to follow.  [Applause]
Speaker 2: I'm going to have to find out who that (unclear) was, the photograph of the young Warren Washington.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's pretty good.
Story_ID: 579586
Speaker 1: Warren [Washington], we've just received some questions from people in the audience tonight, asking you to talk a little bit more about what's so important about climate change?  What are the ways that it's affecting people now and can affect people during their lifetimes and beyond?  What are the things that you're looking out for?  What are the situations that you see coming or that could be avoided, for example, that could be dangerous about climate change?
Speaker 2: Well, let me put it into kind of a broader context of sustainability.  If, if we see--and there's already some signs of this, in certain areas of the world, we could increase the droughts, for example.  Or in some places, getting too much rainfall, and we kind of understand where these places might be.  For example, in the subtropics, we tend to think there'll more drying of the soils, whereas, in the tropics itself, it'll probably be raining more intensely.  And that could be generating larger and more destructive hurricanes and cyclones hitting our coastlines.  Also, we're seeing that as you put more carbon dioxide into the oceans, that the oceans are becoming more acidic and that that will affect on the marine life, especially the skeletal type sea animals.  Also, we can expect that, and one of the ramifications of the melting of the glaciers is that--and we see the melting of the glaciers mostly in the Northern Hemisphere, especially over Greenland and the mountain glaciers, have certainly less than the Southern Hemisphere at this point, could lead to an increasing sea level rise and that that could affect countries like Bangladesh or some of the island states and cause them to have to migrate to other parts of the world to live.  And then that would put pressures on countries.  It could lead to national security concerns.  And they--the thing that we need to keep in mind as we warm up the planet and see changes like this, that the people that will be mostly effected are those who aren't burning the fossil fuels at the rates that the industrialized world is doing.  So they view this situation as unfair to them and that they will get the effects that others have caused on this problem.  So I still think, even though it's very difficult to get through a Congress or the world governments, that we need to do something about this.  And the earlier on, the better.
Speaker 1: Well, you're certainly doing your part by developing the science into a tool that can be used to provide much better guidance, and at the same time translating the way you just did, in your own words, what it all means and what it can mean.  And what you're betting is right now, that's very important.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Ralph [Cicerone], I have a large family, as--even though I may not be around at the time that the worst effects come about on the children, the grandchildren and future generations are the ones who are going to be affected the most.  So we have a responsibility to deal with this now.
Story_ID: 579587
Speaker 1: You know, when you father [Edwin Washington] helped to send you off to college, I'm not sure what he expected, but do you think he would look at what you just said as a measure of your success?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think he'd be proud.  [Applause]
Speaker 1: And I should say, "and my mother [Dorothy Grace Morton] would too."  [audience laughter] [Applause]
Speaker 2: Speaking of such questions, what do you think would be a great legacy for you, that people would look back on your career some day and how would they summarize it in a way that would please you?
Speaker 1: Well, I would want on my tombstone (laughter) [audience laughter]--something along the, these lines, "He did a lot for humanity and for science."  [Applause]
Speaker 2: I think you're halfway there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) [audience laughter].
Speaker 2: Well, this has been a real opportunity, to hear more about Warren's [Warren Washington] views, his lifetime, his achievements and to hear it in such a venue where there's so many of Warren's friends and colleagues is just a special treat.  So, but we couldn't have done this without Warren's cooperation.  So, let's all give Warren a round of applause to thank him  [Applause]
Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you.  [Applause] Thank you.
