Story_ID: 50497
Speaker 1: Thank you again for being with us Mr. Young. Can you give us your name and spell it for us, as well as your birthdate, any nicknames.
Speaker 2: My name is Anthony Young, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y Y-O-U-N-G.  My birth date is December 11, 1948.
Speaker 1: And the city?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 50498
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, I would say seafood.
Speaker 1: [OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION]
Speaker 2: Seafood. Is that too broad of a response?
Speaker 1: All seafood?
Speaker 2: Most seafood.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have one.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer, I like hot weather.
Speaker 1: Color, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And when you take a vacation, where is your favorite place to go?
Speaker 2: My favorite place is the Bahamas, Paradise Island.
Speaker 1: You like to gamble?
Speaker 2: I like to gamble and I like the water.
Story_ID: 50499
Speaker 1: Would you name both of your parents and spell their names for me?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Clarence, C-l-a-r-e-n-c-e and my mother's name is Barbara, B-a-r-b-a-r-a.
Speaker 1: And how about your siblings, name them in birth order.
Speaker 2: I have one brother, his name is Clarence.
Speaker 1: Is he older or younger?
Speaker 2: He's older.
Speaker 1: So you were the baby, did they spoiled you?
Speaker 2: I was the baby.  Yes they did.
Story_ID: 50500
Speaker 1: Can you tell me the earliest memories you have of growing up and the most significant of your early memories of growing up, in the Young household?
Speaker 2: It's hard to give very specific memories.  It was an, overall, I had what I consider a wonderful childhood.  I was and have been very happy most of my life.  Significant, my father [Clarence Young] died on my eleventh birthday and that was not a happy time.  But he and my mother [Barbara Young] had been divorced prior to that so even though I had a relationship with my father, we did not live together.
Speaker 1: What do you remember of your father, specifically, in your relating to him individually, when you were very young?
Speaker 2: I remembered that most of the time spent with him, since we did not live in the same household, was a joyful time.  It was more play time than serious time because of the fact that it was weekends and summers.
Speaker 1: And what was your relationship like with your mother very early in your life?
Speaker 2: I've always had a wonderful relationship with my mother.  I was basically raised by my mother because of the fact that they divorced at an early age and he passed away when I was eleven and my mother, I think, did an excellent job of being father and mother.
Speaker 1: Is there any memory of like a specific exchange you had with your mother?  Perhaps maybe she was in the kitchen baking and cake and something, it was just yours transpired?
Speaker 2: I think because there was so many of those things that there is not one that I could quote or stand, stands out right now.
Speaker 1: So your very warm and secure childhood, I guess that has helped you on your path all along.
Speaker 2: I think that's a very accurate description I had of what I, a very warm and I felt secure most of my childhood.  I had an extended family of aunts and uncles so I was raised by my mother but there was that extended family that led to a feeling of overall security.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Story_ID: 50501
Speaker 1: So on you first day, if you remember when you went off of to school, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well I had an older brother [Clarence Young] so we went to school together and again, it helped me feel secure because I didn't have to venture into a strange setting alone.  And even though my brother and I had all the childhood conflicts that I think all siblings have as regard to the rest of the world, we stuck together and so it was nice having an older brother at school, especially when I first started.
Speaker 1: And in your elementary years, what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a, I think I was a very good student.  Actually I was a good student most of my life.
Speaker 1: And you liked school?
Speaker 2: No I wouldn't say I liked school.  In terms of the give and take between parent and child, I found out at a very early age, how important school was to my mother [Barbara Young].  And in terms of my ability to do like most children want to do, which is whatever you want to do, that is, while I was making good grades then that translated into almost doing whatever else I wanted to do, as long as the grades were good.
Speaker 1: What kind of experience of memory stands out for you for your school years in elementary and middle school?
Speaker 2: Again, I don't have any outstanding memories of grades one through eight.  It was mostly a pleasant time.
Story_ID: 50502
Speaker 1: And when you got to high school, how did things change?
Speaker 2: Things changed in high school because I went to an all boy Catholic school.  I went to St. Rita High School [Chicago, Illinois], which was ninety-five percent white.  And it was my first experience going to school with white children.
Speaker 1: And what did that experience bring to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was my first experience with racism and it was actually, my first experience being on a day to day intimate basis with white people, to get to know them from other than the television.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you made the transition into becoming more comfortable and acclimated in your high school setting?
Speaker 2: Well I think it was a battle to become comfortable and acclimated and the battle was twofold.  There was a battle on the home front in that, this was one of the few areas of conflict I had with my mother [Barbara Young] in that, I did not want to go to that school, I wanted to go to the neighborhood public school where all of my friends went and where there were girls.  And my mother was adamant that I go to this all boy Catholic school.  And I'd say for a year or two, there was a battle as I tried to arrange a transfer.  And when I realized there was not going to be a transfer, that helped me acclimate myself to the school and within the school. I was--I'm a large person, I was always big for my size and age and all high school boys have to go through a certain amount of conflict with other boys and I think after you go through conflict and there comes a point in time that you don't have to any more.  And I think all that happened at the same time my realization that I was there for the four years, like it or not and the conflict I was having with the other students, at least of a physical nature, stopped.  And that probably took a couple of years.
Speaker 1: So you're moving into...socially, did you do a lot during high school?
Speaker 2: Socially I probably did.  I would say I was very average.  I enjoyed sports and I participated in that at the school I went to.  But as for other social things such as dances, those were confined more to the neighborhood that I lived in.
Story_ID: 50503
Speaker 1: And you chose Golden State University [sic] as your--for your college, what made you choose that and how were your college years?
Speaker 2: I really didn't choose Golden State [sic], it was more the circumstances of taking advantage of what was available to me.  I went to many of the colleges here in the city of Chicago.  When I graduated from high school I started out at the Circle [University of Illinois at Chicago].  I got married when I was twenty years old and still in school. I attended Loop Junior College [currently Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] for a while here in the city.  I attended the old Chicago Teacher's College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] for a semester.  And I went into the military, into the Air Force and while I was in the Air Force I got stationed in California and there was a branch of Golden Gate University [San Francisco, California] on the base.  I spent three years at Edwards Air Force Base in California while I was in the Air Force and I graduated from college from Golden State because that was the university on the base I was living on.
Speaker 1: You were pretty smart to take on a family and work and deal with school and how was all that, just daily life transitioning for you during those years?
Speaker 2: Well I think it was difficult to have a family at a very young age and the responsibility of fatherhood at a young age.
Speaker 1: But you kept going and kept going till you finished school.  What was the thing that kept you going?
Speaker 2: Because I knew I didn't want to stay in the type of jobs that my education level confined me to.  I had always thought I would finish school.  When I was in high school [St. Rita High School, Chicago, Illinois] I assumed I would just go through four years of college but life has a lot of side roads and you get derailed from your plan sometimes.
Story_ID: 50504
Speaker 1: Who is your most influential teacher in your life, certainly in your formal education years?  Do you have a teacher that stands out?
Speaker 2: I had a law school professor named David Coar [HistoryMaker], who is a federal judge now and is an African American.  His influence on me was not so much from an academic standpoint but just the fact that it was an African American with a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] education who was at DePaul Law School [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] teaching, that made me think of all the possibilities that existed, in spite of barriers that are sometimes placed in front of people because of their race.
Story_ID: 50505
Speaker 1: What made you pick law, choose law as a career today?
Speaker 2: I think my military years developed in me a desire to be able to work for myself.  I think the experience of taking orders from people who you think may not be as intelligent as you are or know the job as well as you do, but are in a superior position.  In the military it's based mostly just on time in the military.  But the experience of being, of reporting to people made me think that I'd like to have a job where I was my own boss.
Speaker 1: Now law of course, actually is, kind of combative profession, but you look so low-key [unclear] you don't look like that let's duke it out type guy.
Speaker 2: Well, I think if you do what you have to do and I have spent a lot of time in the court room, trying cases and the adrenaline gets flowing and I think you respond to the situation as it presents itself.
Speaker 1: How did you get interested in politics, generally?
Speaker 2: I was always interested in politics as a spectator sport, just Chicago politics is always been extremely interesting and it always, I recognize the affect it has on people's lives on a day to day basis and from that standpoint, I was interested as a spectator sport and after I finished law school and was in my own private practice, I was interested from the standpoint of how it can help my business.
Story_ID: 50506
Speaker 1: What was your first, most active, political activity or event?
Speaker 2: My first and most active political activity was assisting a woman named Iola McGowan who became a 29th Ward committeeman, back in the very early '80s [1980s] I believe or perhaps even the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: You were her attorney?
Speaker 2: At one time.  I had a partner, who was Judge La Quietta Hardy at this time.  We went to law school together and opened an office on the west side [Chicago, Illinois], after we got out of law school.  She was a lifelong friend of Mrs. McGowan, she was a close friend with her daughter.  And through La Quietta Hardy, I came in contact with Iola McGowan.
Speaker 1: And would you trace your path in politics that led to your entry to the degree that you ran for the general assembly?
Speaker 2: Well, again I had a law practice on the west side and I was active for a while with Iola McGowan and then I was active in Harold Washington's [Mayor Harold Washington] election.  In the area where I lived and worked in, the state representative in that area was a man named Ozie Hutchins.
Speaker 1: What area was it?
Speaker 2: The west Garfield, South Austin area.  And in the middle of his term, he wound up being charged and convicted and forced to resign.  There were some people, some businessmen in the Madison and Pulaski area where my office was who encouraged me to run for that seat.  And I think it was the combination of Harold Washington's election, which made holding office much more attractive than it had been prior to his election, and the opportunity of this seat, where the incumbent had been sent to jail which made for an opening if you would, the appearance of an opening.
Story_ID: 50507
Speaker 1: Were you able to do, in your job as an elected official, what you set out to do?  Were you satisfied with what you did and what you thought you could do?
Speaker 2: I was reasonably satisfied with what I did during my years there.  But what I did was absolutely no where near what I though I could do.  I think most people are somewhat naive as to the political process, even those people who are closely associated with politics all of their life, don't have a real understanding about just how things are done, say in Springfield [Illinois].  And how little one person can do.
Story_ID: 50508
Speaker 1: So what did you see as your biggest challenge during your period of service?
Speaker 2: I always felt that the only way that the African American community could benefit from what took place in Springfield [Illinois], was to have a very strong unified black caucus.  And by unified, I certainly don't mean voting the same all the time cause quite often it's to our benefit to be six on one side and six on the other.  But to have a unified plan and be working together for a common goal.  And I think the biggest challenge I faced while I was there was constantly working to try to keep a common agenda and meet regularly and discuss issues regularly to try to have the strength that our numbers justified.
Speaker 1: What kind of response do you think came from that effort?
Speaker 2: I think as the years went on the response certainly improved and that, not to say that again, when you talk about a common agenda, that doesn't exclude a personal agenda but there just seems there has to be an overlap of a commonality of some interest when you represent the same people, African Americans in this state.  When you look--I was in the House of Representatives, there were 118 members in the House and for the most part I believe there were at various times, the low was fourteen and the maximum was sixteen, so somewhere between fourteen and sixteen African Americans out of 118.  Which is one reason why even when you are together, what you can accomplish is certainly limited.
Story_ID: 50509
Speaker 1: Is there any tie between your experience in high school [St. Rita High School, Chicago, Illinois] and being--coming into the primarily Caucasian base in the high school population and then the same thing in the House, did you see your--was that like a little deja vu there so to speak?
Speaker 2: I don't look upon it as deja vu but I look upon those days and how they've prepared me, perhaps better than people who had not experienced it.  It's very easy for an African American who has not been in close constant contact on an equal level, such as in a high school classroom, to be a little bit in awe or to have feelings of inferiority that you perhaps won't even admit to yourself.  And I think my high school days let me know that I was just as smart as any of them.  I saw the president of the class cheating, not to pass the test but to get an A instead of a B.  And I saw that widespread throughout my high school years, so it let me, I guess you know when you see the person without their clothes on.  And so it helps you in future years deal with them in a manner where you don't give them respect they don't deserve.
Story_ID: 50510
Speaker 1: What would you say was your greatest achievement in your period?
Speaker 2: Without a doubt the greatest achievement was the passing of the Bill that changes the way judges were elected in Cook County [Illinois], are elected in Cook County.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you talk about that for us a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well prior to 1992, judges in Cook County were elected two different ways.  One way was to run county wide and the other way was to run city wide.  Either way required not only the assistance of the party, either way required the assistance of the party and by party, I mean the democratic party on a city wide basis.  The city is so large that it's very difficult to run a campaign city wide without a great deal of organized help.  And not just organized help, organized help from both--from the African American and the white community.  And we changed that and now, half of the judges at least, are elected instead of electing some county wide and some city wide.  There are no more elected city wide.  There also used to be judges elected suburban only.  They had these classes, city only and suburban only.  And the city only and suburban only were removed and the county divided into fifteen districts called subcircuits.  And judges are now, some of the judges are elected from subcircuits.  Some are still elected county wide.  But in those subcircuits, there are four subcircuits that have African American majorities.  And those subcircuits have elected nothing but African American judges since 1992 which has changed the face of the bench in Cook County.
Story_ID: 50511
Speaker 1: Can you give me your take on why it appears that state government gets a lot less attention from the constituency than the federal or city [unclear]?
Speaker 2: I think because state government is more or less in the middle.  I mean your local government is really your hands-on, day to day living, with such basic functions as picking up the garbage and cleaning the streets and things that you see and relate and shoveling the snow, that have to be done every day.  That affects you at the lowest possible level, like I said, taking out the garbage.  On the federal level, you have all the glamour and power of Washington D.C. and presidential elections and what goes on in the Capitol.  So the state government, I think, sometimes gets lost because it's in the middle.  It certainly has a huge effect on lives.  But here in the city of Chicago [Illinois], I don't know who it was that said so many years ago, all politics is local.  But we certainly are in love with our local politics and our state politics transpire, for the most part, in Springfield [Illinois].  Springfield of course certainly doesn't have the glamour or the prestige or the effect on our lives that Washington D.C. has and so I think it's easy to get lost in the shuffle.
Story_ID: 50512
Speaker 1: Do you see a way to bring or what might you suggest that could be done to bring more attention to that crucial state level, cause it affects us sometimes even more than local?
Speaker 2: I agree it affects us more than local but sometimes it's very disappointing trying to represent African American people because of the apathy that we seem to exhibit toward politics in general.  For our community it really does seem to be a spectator sport and something to read about and talk about and not participate in.  And so from that standpoint, we not only need to increase the awareness of state government, I mean, when there's an issue that certainly affects everyone's life that happens in Springfield, then people will talk about it and complain about it but in terms of doing the things necessary to influence what goes on, we don't seem to do those things.  Right now we're not doing them at any level, in my opinion.  And so I think the effort needs to be geared at increasing political participation and a political awareness at every level and by doing that you'll automatically increase the awareness of what goes on at the state level.
Story_ID: 50513
Speaker 1: You were in the House during the--those big, heavy education battles.  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well Harold Washington [Mayor Harold Washington], in effect, started the reform process and those battles again, I think, they mirror a lot of battles in Springfield [Illinois] in terms of the different interests that weigh in and greatly influence what happens.  And from our community standpoint, how something that is as important to our community as public education, what a really small role we play in developing the policy that affects our children more than any others.  And sometimes it's held from a legislator's standpoint I believe for the most part, most of the African American legislators I saw and experienced in Springfield on issues that really obviously affect the community like the education issue, want to do "the right thing" but you know, just knowing what that is is not always that simple or that easy.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things were you hearing from your constituency or were you hearing anything during those pitched battles about education?
Speaker 2: I was hearing precious little.  Very little from what I would call the community at large.  Now there was a small group of west side people who had, I would call, education activists, and so I started meeting with them on a weekly basis to get their input as to what should happen.  And then to a large extent, I followed their leads but I saw these teachers of course were interested from the teachers' standpoint and the other unions and the principals.  So everyone with a vested interest in the system more or less weighed in in Springfield in a manner to protect their own individual interests, which didn't always translate into what was best for the children in school.  The school systems have gotten a lot of praise now.  I was there when the Secretary of Education for the United States called the system, the worst system in the country.  And when the Republican governor said, 'No more money for Chicago schools until there's reform', or whatever reform is.  And it was a position where clearly there was pressure coming from so many sources that drastic changes were about to be made in the system and we had literally hundreds of groups and organization and individuals who don't regularly lobby Springfield, who were there for that issue.  And at the same time, there was, like I say, there were a few individual activists but there was nothing organized from Chicago's African American community.  And so we were, as black legislators there, for the most part we had to do what we thought was best for the system based on the input we were receiving, most of which was coming from outside of our community.
Story_ID: 50514
Speaker 1: Ultimately, did you feel like you got a good deal or did you just have to settle to quiet the home front, so to speak?  My interpretation of that period, when all that just as an outsider looking in, but it sounded like it was a big battle, politicians were doing what they do, trying to get whatever and you know, how they put on all these other extra riders to change an old picture, sometimes it appeared it wasn't education at all.  So to an average everyday person, it would appear that they're fueling a perception one might have that, oh, they're going to do what they want to do anyway, so why should I bother?  How do you get around that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you just asked me two different things but, in terms of getting around that perception, I think that perception is very well taken and that's the way it is except you said, there's a perception, they're going to do what they want to do anyway and that's true with the caveat to the extent that they're allowed or to the extent that we let them.  And so when we don't participate and we're in, then we really do let them do what they want to do.  And as far as that whole everything that happened is, we changed the structure of education really in the Chicago public school system.  That's an example of what I felt on very many issues in Springfield [Illinois].  If you relate it to a football game or to a sporting event you know, it's like, sometimes you're on offense trying to score or accomplish and the other time you're on defense.  Well most of our time in Springfield as African American legislators, I think we were on defense.  And with the education it's like you can see the handwriting on the wall.  There's all this force and movement to make some drastic changes and how can you get hurt the least?  Or how can you see these changes come in and still have some benefit to your community?  But again, most often we're on the defensive, trying to make things that are not palatable, as palatable as possible.
Story_ID: 50515
Speaker 1: Have--put on your House hat for a moment and when you look back, do you think what the whole General Assembly ended up with was the best that could be achieved and are you satisfied with it knowing the struggles all around?
Speaker 2: Knowing the struggles all around I think a great deal of the success that the schools seem to be experiencing today are because of what happened back then, in terms of putting together the local school councils and giving parents the power to having their own budgets and hire and fire principals.  And I think more so than Paul Vallas or Mayor Daley [Mayor Richard M. Daley], both of whom have taken a lot of credit for the change in education.  I think it's the parents and the schools with the ability to have their own budgets, put things like computers or reading teachers, whatever they think that individual school needs and the ability to hire or fire a principal, which just makes that principal accountable to what the parents want to talk about.  I think that more than anything is the responsible for the improvement we see in the public schools.  Now I also believe one of the big agendas if you will, that was always under the table, was the fact that one of the things we always heard then was, the bloat on Persian Road, the excess on Persian Road.  Persian Road had been run by black administrators for some years.  There was a great many of the Chicago public schools, it was almost an institution, that was dominated by African Americans.  And one of the agendas was to take that institution over, I believe, remove a great many African Americans from good paying jobs under the names of cutting the bloat, and then after they cut them very slowly, replace them with other folk.  And that has been done.  That's one of the downsides of what's happened.
Story_ID: 50516
Speaker 1: Did they have a big African American population in the staffing during Joe Hannon's day, or did it come with the reform?
Speaker 2: I think after Joe Hannon, what was her name, we had a woman and we had Ruth Love and we had...
Speaker 1: [Unclear]
Speaker 2: She came but after Ruth Love there was Manford Moore.  We had, Manford Bird, excuse me.  We had Ruth Love, we had Manford Bird, so we had three consecutive administrations that took over.  You know, Joe Hannon almost destroyed the schools but there was no huge cry for reform.  As a matter of fact he was allowed to go to McCormick Place and get rich.  Then they changed the process to keep more control so we had a white administration that drove the schools to bankruptcy and so then we brought black administrators in without the same power that the white administrators had because there was this oversight committee.  Then as the black administration stayed in for three terms, they took all the brunt and the heat for the damage that was really done by Joe Hannon's administration and then when the system was turned back over to a white control administration, time with Mayor Daley's coming into office, cause when Harold Washington was the Mayor, he couldn't appoint the school board.  The school board was elected.  He didn't have...there was an oversight committee on the elected school board.  A finance committee watching how the money was spent so he could recommend there be a superintendent of schools.  That superintendent of schools didn't have the power Paul Vallas had and there was just always a shortage of money.  And it was very difficult to pull money out of Springfield [Illinois] for the Chicago public schools.  Since Mayor Daley [Mayor Richard M. Daley] has been in office and Paul Vallas is the...there is no more oversight committee.  The Board of Education is not elected by the people, it's appointed by Mayor Daley.  Harold Washington wanted to appoint his own board but he wasn't able to do so.  If you have someone who watches the programs and stays familiar somewhat, there is no shortage of money.  If there's a problem that can be cured by money these days, then the money is there.   Magically and mysteriously, I don't know why there is money for whatever needs to be done now, but back in those days there were constant teacher strikes because the Board didn't have the money to balance the budget and give the teachers the raises they deserved at the same time.  We haven't heard any of that in the last 10 years.
Speaker 1: Right.  And it was my impression with all that pushing and pulling in that period in Springfield, set in place where we would no longer have that. But are you saying there were other things aside from the push and pull when they changed the way the school system was actually run?  And they freed up money.  The change in the structure freed up [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not saying the change in the structure freed up the use of money.  I think that what freed up the money was the political change here in the City of Chicago.  That Mayor Daley and Paul Vallas are able to receive things from Springfield that Mayor Washington and Mayor Sawyer [Mayor Eugene Sawyer, HistoryMaker] could not receive.
Story_ID: 50517
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what would you like to be remember for as it regards your public service?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered for someone who had a reputation of putting the community's interest first at all times and being hard working and on time.
Story_ID: 50518
Speaker 1: Can you--we talk a few minutes about your present career as a judge?  What do you like most about it and what do you like least about it?
Speaker 2: Well let me take them in reverse order because what I like least about it is very easy to discuss.  As a judge there's a great deal of political activity I cannot involve myself in and when I'm not running for retention, I have to be retained every six years now, and when I'm running for retention there's a lot of things I can do because I have to be re-elected so to speak myself that, during all the other years I cannot do.  I can't go to my block club, speak for and against candidates right now because that's political activity that a judge is supposed to be--remove himself from.  And from someone who has always been somewhat of a political animal, I can't speak out in terms of just what is happening in the city of Chicago or the Daley administration or the U.S. Attorney's Office and their selective indictments.  There's a lot of things that I think need to be said from a political standpoint to the people in this city that is not being said that I would like to say and that I cannot say because of the judicial cannons of ethics.  We're suppose to stay about the fray so to speak.
Speaker 1: So that's what you don't like, you're kind of hand strung politically.
Speaker 2: That's what I don't like, I'm politically hand strung, exactly.
Speaker 1: Now what do you like?
Speaker 2: I like the fact that I know in a very small setting, I tremendously affect people's lives.  I've gone from trying to affect all the people in the state of Illinois, is what the General Assembly does, in a very small way.  With one voice out of eighteen to be in some place where there's just a small number of people who pass through my court room.  But the affect I have on their lives is just absolutely tremendous.  I sit in divorce court and deal with family matters and children and sometimes I feel that I turn these families, who are going through a terrible experience, some good.
Speaker 1: When you came up on your last term in the House, did you run again or did you just decide you were not going to run and left the House?
Speaker 2: I decided that I was not going to run for the House seat and I ran for the judge's seat.  So I went from the House to the bench.
Story_ID: 50519
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Anthony Young the man.  You sort of had to be dedicated to your commitment to yourself and develop yourself in such a way that you could enjoy an influential career but, you have also had to work with and be a husband and a father and then do all this schooling to keep up with your professional activities, what kind of challenge did that offer you give me some idea of what you did to sustain yourself and overcome the real intense bumps in the road?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up like I said in a very, what I consider to be, safe and secured and nurtured environment because of the support I had from my immediate and my extended family.  And I grew up aware or instilled with the importance of family.  I know my children needed to have that same security and have that same family to fall back on and lean on and to assist. So, I guess like so many of us, the most important thing in my life has always been my children from the time they got here.
Speaker 1: How old are they now?
Speaker 2: This is August, they're both born in August, five days apart.  And so my son will be thirty-one and my daughter will be twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Does either one have an interest in politics or law?
Speaker 2: My son has interest in politics.  He has run for office one time unsuccessfully.  My daughter, she's starting her fourth year at Florida A & M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and she has been talking about law school for the last couple of years and is still talking about law school.
Speaker 1: [Unclear] Does your wife [Darthula Young] work outside the home?
Speaker 2: Yes she does.
Speaker 1: What kind of work does she do?
Speaker 2: She works for a--she does, I want to call it lobbying.  She's not an independent lobbyist.  She works for a company and has about five states that she--her company tried to do business with the governments in those states.  She's the company representative who goes to the different now--her company hires lobbyists to work directly with legislators in all those states and I guess she's the company person who goes and talks to legislators and department heads in terms of trying to secure and service contracts for her company.
Speaker 1: Do you play any instruments?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite kind of music?
Speaker 2: I like several types of music depending on the mood.
Speaker 1: What mood, just give me an example [unclear].
Speaker 2: If I had to classify it in one phrase, I like contemporary jazz.  I also like what they call, dusty music.  I like dusties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 50520
Speaker 1: What message or lesson do you have for your children, your grandchildren or the world?
Speaker 2: I think the message I have for all of those is that the saying and the phrases that we call cliches right now are cliches for a reason.  You know, you've heard them so much and they've been passed down, you say, this is an old cliche.  Well the reason something gets to be an old cliche is because it's true.  And I believe in those cliches.  I have lived my life believing the ones that say, I think the two I talk to my children about the most is, when they say "what goes around comes around" and most often that's said in a manner where you say well, don't do anything [unclear] toward people because if you do something bad, it'll come back to you.  But I explained that, that phrase works both ways also.  In terms of the good you do, it comes back to you.  And I'm a living testament to that.  That helped me tremendously in politics in terms of, say, keeping my nose clean because if I could help someone, I would.  And you didn't have to, it was never quid pro quo.  Life is not like that and I believe that any good I do I'm going to reap a benefit from that good and if I'm in a position to help you I will, and I think I'll benefit from that.  And not from you, but from somebody else in another type of way.  But it's all going to come back.  I've tried to tell my children that and I try.  I think if we took that approach in politics as a people, we'd be a lot better off.  I think too often we're looking for the immediate quid pro quo and that's difficult at times.
Story_ID: 50521
Speaker 1: Okay. Let's revert back for a moment to your family life and look at--can you tell me the relationship you had with your grandparents on each side and would you give us their names and spell it for us and tell us where they were born [unclear]?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, my grandfather's name was Homer Young and my grandmother's name was Kate.  I believe Homer was born in Florida, but I'm not sure.  I'm not sure where my grandmother on my father's side was born.  I know they were both born down south and I know they lived in Florida at one time.
Speaker 1: Did you have any relationship with them?
Speaker 2: I had a close relationship with both of them up until the time that they died.  My grandfather was a Pullman Porter, which for the time, was one of the best jobs that an African American male could receive.  My grandmother, everyone called her Grandma Young, she was a housewife and she raised my father [Clarence Young] and all of his siblings.  She have five children and she raised most of her grandchildren.  She didn't raise me but I was a frequent visitor at her house during my grade school years which was three or four blocks from my grade school.  I know the Catholic grade school I went to had a lunch program and I believe it was thirty-five cent a day at the time, and I was able to save the lunch money that my mother [Barbara Young] gave me because I would go to my grandmother's house and so I was doing two things.  First of all I was putting that money in my pocket every day and secondly, I was receiving a much better lunch at grandma's house than I would have in the school cafeteria.  And so neither one of us felt the need to tell my mother about that so it was, it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 50522
Speaker 1: On my mother's side, my grandfather's name was John and my grandmother's name was Carrie.  They were from Georgia.
Speaker 2: The last name?
Speaker 1: Hughes, H-u-g-h-e-s.  John was a postman all of his life.  He was also a retired colonel in the military.  He was in--he stayed in the reserves for approximately twenty years after he finished his active duty and he was very proud of that.  Some of his friends called him "the colonel."
Speaker 2: What was his name?  Colonel Hughes?
Speaker 1: Hughes.
Speaker 2: Did he serve in any of those well-known African American groups in the military service, like the Tuskegee Airmen or [unclear]?
Speaker 1: No, I don't believe he did.  I know he was proud to be one of the Idlewilders.  I don't think that was a military group.
Speaker 2: Did you have just as strong a relationship with your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 1: I had a stronger relationship with the ones on my mother's side.  That was the extended family that helped supported me all through the years.
Speaker 2: Now you were getting this good lunch and saving the lunch money, what kind of a corresponding experience did you have on the maternal grandparent side?
Speaker 1: Well on the maternal grandparent side it was a lot more frequent visitations in terms of, their house was the central meeting place for my mother's family and her brothers and sisters.  She had four brothers and a sister and my uncles, aunts and cousins, we would spend all the holidays at some point or another.  Everyone would collectively meet at my grandmother's house.  I said grandmother, even though it was grandmother and grandfather, but the grandmother was really the head of the family.
Story_ID: 50523
Speaker 1: Is there any story that you used to hear among your extended family that personalized the civil rights struggle for you?
Speaker 2: The story I'm told is why, on my father's [Clarence Young] side, my grandmother [Kate Young] and grandfather [Homer Young] had to come north.  Because they had to come north because of an incident that happened between my grandfather and a white man over my grandmother.  They had five children and, no, six children and two of them were born down south and four here in Chicago [Illinois], but there's a story of a conflict over my grandmother that made them have to leave the south when they did.
Speaker 1: Oh. You're aware of--you've just heard the story, so don't know the--what the story [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: --Right, I've heard the story and I heard the story from my uncles and aunts.  Neither my grandfather or grandmother would admit to the truth of the story, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I guess I will just ask you, is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have?  Anything that you didn't say that maybe you would like to say now?
Speaker 2: No, I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
