Story_ID: 442554
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sonjia, S-O-N-J-I-A Waller Young [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young].
Speaker 1: Waller, W-A-L-L-E-R?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my first married name.  My name is Sonjia Amar Waller Young.  You want all those weddings? You want (laughter)--Sonjia Amar.
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: A-M-A-R.
Speaker 1: A-M-A-R.
Speaker 2: Waller Young.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Amar was your--
Speaker 2: Maiden name.
Speaker 1: Maiden name, okay.  All right.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  You're going there.  October 6, 1941 (laughter) Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] didn't tell me I'd have to tell my age (laughter).  Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a--I own a company called Eventions [Eventions, Inc.].  I'm an events and convention manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October the--is it the 18th or the 13th? Oh--not good, Friday the 13th.
Speaker 1: Well, so far so good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can edit all that, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so far so good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So far so good.  That's what happened to your light, Larry (laughter).
Speaker 1: 2006, right.
Speaker 2: 2006.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: 2919 East Point Street, Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 442555
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: And what it is it?
Speaker 2: Lobster.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I enjoy the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Jamaica, Half Moon [Half Moon Resort, Montego Bay, Jamaica].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the final one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) (Laughter) Favorite phrase or saying. Let's think positive.
Story_ID: 442556
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Appolinare Amar] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Bernadette Louise Honore [Bernadette Honore Amar], H-O-N-O-R-E, the guy who was just on TV, that's my cousin.
Speaker 1: So Bernadette, B-E-R-N-A-D-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 2: N-A-D-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I guess, like September 17, she--1901, would it be a one?  What is this?  Does that sound right?
Speaker 1: It's 2006 now, so.
Speaker 2: What would that make her?  Old (laughter).  She's not living.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, she'd be 105 now if she were alive.
Speaker 2: That might be right, because my sister is eighty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Chenault; wait a minute, that's my father. My mother was born in--I guess what we call the country. So I think my mother was born in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]; I can't remember.  My father was born in Chenault, Louisiana [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was born in Baton Rouge or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, and are there any good stories?
Speaker 2: We did that, we did that one year a while back.  My mother's side of the family, they were all carpenters and construction people, brick layers.  My mother was a seamstress.  She did a lot of sewing and, became eventually, the younger ones became big construction people, builders.
Speaker 1: Now, did--is there a name of a company that people would recognize historically?
Speaker 2: D. Honore.  D. Honore Construction company [sic. Harvey Honore Enterprises, LLC].  Charles Honore [sic. Harvey Honore, Sr.]. He had a huge one and I think his sons have taken it over.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's still in Baton Rouge?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 442557
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down from 19th century from, you know, the Civil War days or afterwards about what the family was doing in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, they--on my mother's [Bernadette Honore Amar] side or my father's [Appolinare Amar] side?
Speaker 1: Mother's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything's mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, it was, they formed in, in areas--I know the area is called Chenault, Louisiana [ph.].  That was really my father's area, but she lived, they lived somewhere near too.  They were all in that area.  That's C-H-E-N-A-U-L-T.  I should have asked my sister on this.  (Unclear) Chenault, Louisiana, and they formed.  When I was a young girl, I went to visit and they took me to pick cotton and I thought that I had to get dressed up to pick cotton, so (laughter) when we got there all of my cousins said, "Where are you going?"  And I said, "I'm going to pick cotton."  And they said, "Well, why do you have that on?"  Starched white shirt and jeans and whatever.  Got down to the cotton field and I was like, "You've got too many bugs here, I can't stay."  And they were like, they were running and they ran under the tractor, and I said, "Where are you going?"  And they said, "We're going to have lunch, and this is the only place there's shade, so you gotta get under this tractor."  So, the next day they came to pick me up and blew the horn, you know, and all the kids were in the truck and I'm like, oh, no.  I'm not going there.  That's not for me (laughter).  So, picking cotton was something that they did, and I was from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and I, you know, more of a city as compared to where they were living and I had never picked any cotton before and hadn't picked any since.
Story_ID: 442558
Speaker 1: Honore is French.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's, it's of French derivation.  Is there a story behind that I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, I guess you know in Louisiana when the French Revolution, when they came to Louisiana, the Louisiana Purchase and all of the wars and everything, the French soldiers mixed with the slaves and then they had something of what we called the Creoles and so that's why we look like all colors, all mixed up.  The Indians [Native Americans], because there was a lot of Indian in our heritage and our background, lots of French and I'm not sure how the Irish got in there, but they're there too, and so during the Louisiana Purchase, that's when all of this occurred and I went back with my family tree to France and there's a street called Saint-Honore [Rue Saint-Honore], as you probably know, in Paris [France], and so I started the research and it's really interesting because our daughter had her, I guess, what's the guy's name who is doing all the DNA and the history of where you came from, your heritage, and what she told me that she found out is that we actually came from Nigeria, and I told our Nigerian friends that and they laughed at me (laughter) you know like okay in northern Nigeria.
Speaker 1: So, your African heritage is from Nigeria, the African side of it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what, yeah, according to my daughters.
Speaker 1: So, the French, and northern Nigeria would be the Hausa--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hausa people and I guess up around Abuja [Nigeria], and in that area that is the capital now.
Speaker 1: That could be Yoruba there.  Abuja, I think, is Yoruba territory.
Speaker 2: Yoruba, I don't know.
Speaker 1: But, northern Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, interesting.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  So, any, any stories about development on those of Honores and how they got in the contract- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I found out with my mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] and it's really interesting because my sister said you probably liked Jamaica so much because there was a Jamaican, your mother's mother's--your great-great-great-great-grandmother or something was married to a Jamaican down in Louisiana, outside of New Orleans [Louisiana], and so there was the Caribbean heritage a part of our lives too, which I didn't know about and now you make me really want to look into it, but she found the name of the guy who was from Jamaica.  He was one of my great-great-great-great-grandfathers or something, and somehow someone gave her that information.  A lot of our older aunts are deceased now, but they, they spoke in a broken French, which we called Creole, so when we were little they would say things like, that I still say, is like we're going to make grocery, and people laugh at me because they're like, how do you make grocery?  And I still say that, it's really wild.  They spoke a lot with their hands--Come here, chere--chere petite--and that kind of thing, and so it was a broken French but they spoke, not in, in just plain English, it was a very, very broken, it was definitely French but it was a broken French, so if you say bread, they would say--now, I'm trying to remember now they would call bread--du pain--so they would have (pronunciation) du-pain.  They would break up everything that was really French.  They took no French but that was a part of the heritage.
Story_ID: 442559
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] talk about growing up?  What was growing up like for her?
Speaker 2: Well, I was really young when my mother died.  I was thirteen--twelve, thirteen--so we didn't talk a lot about that.  My sister, who is now eighty-two, would talk more about what happened--what she knew what happened, but it was mostly what they would say is that they grew up in the country, and so the country folks all married one another, the Creoles all married one another.  You could not--when I was a young girl about twelve or thirteen, they had picnics--big family thing.  Everything was family.  So they would, in what we called, we called it the country, that's what we called it, and that meant that it was rural area in the Chenault [ph.] area, and they had a huge platform where we would dance and have picnics and food and just good family friends, but you know I never realized that everybody there looked like, kind of like I looked but they were mixed up.  They either had straight hair and worked, you know, olive skin, or they were blonde hair with blue eyes or green eyes, just all mixed up.  It's kind of like you grow up and these are the people around you and so that's what they are.  My sister--a friend of ours married a guy and he was dark-skinned and I remember to this day at the picnic that they would not let him in and so she could come in but he couldn't come in to the picnic and I was like, why not?--You know, because we kind of grew up in my family not realizing what we look like until this day and I'm like, well, you know, why are you looking at me so funny?  But, back then all the Creoles would have a picnic together, lots of music and dancing.  I remember dancing with my dad [Appolinare Amar] all night long and with cousins and, you know, just lots of fun and family and friends, and they really segregated themselves from blacks and they made it the separation and it was like when you went there, you just didn't realize it until you came back to the city where--'cause they all lived there, they all worked together, they all married one another and it, it's like until you get older and start realizing well, hey, this is, you know, there's another world out here.
Story_ID: 442560
Speaker 1: When I was a young girl, my father [Appolinare Amar] had a company called Amar Construction Company [ph.] and he was in partnership with a white lawyer, so his daughter and I were friends, and we were little, but they lived in a really big ranch-type house with all the horses and--and we'd ride horses and stuff together--until one night, one day I remember asking my mom [Bernadette Honore Amar] and my dad if--the man was, Jimmy Major [ph.], but they were like really good friends and they said, "No.  You can't go there."  We're like, "Well why not?"  "You can't go to her party."  And I said, "Why can't I go to her party?"  And they said, "Well, because she's white and you're not," and I'm like, "Well what am I?"  And she says, "You're black and she's white, or you're Creole and you can't go to that party."  And so, I think that was the first time I really realized I was different from the friend I had--one of the friends I had, and that I grew up in the Catholic Church, in the Catholic religion.  I grew up going to St. Francis Xavier School [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and playing basketball and there was a mixture of people there, but what I really realized that was that this is an interesting kind of situation here because I left, my mother died when I was young, my father died about three years later and I moved with my sister, and--
Story_ID: 442561
Speaker 1: Let me maybe just stop here and maybe just go to, go to your father and his side of the family first before we, we take you there, but can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Appolinare, A-P-P-O-L-I-N-A-R-E.  Amar [Appolinare Amar].
Speaker 1: Amar.
Speaker 2: His name was Appolinare Germaine, G-E-R-M-A-I-N-E, which is my sister's [Germaine Amar] name.
Speaker 1: Okay. A- wait a minute, now is there, do you know what Amar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know a lot.
Speaker 1: Amar is French, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but does it have a particular meaning?
Speaker 2: But--there is some, I don't know if it's Portuguese or something, behind our heritage on that side and--
Speaker 1: I'm not sure what Amar is just listening to it, you know, it's hard to tell--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Appolinare, I mean, sounds French, but I'm, I'm not sure.  I did more research on my mother's side and I didn't--we had--he had thre- two brothers and a sister and it's really funny because when I'd go to visit his sister, who was married to Philippe [ph.]--all I knew him as was Philippe--and when we got there he would say stuff like, "Get yourself down and pull up your (pronunciation) emergenicy brakes."  And we just--woo--because it's like this guy's gotta--you know, so it was just a whole different lifestyle, a whole different world over there, but it was, we loved it.  We had fun with relatives and cousins and we just had a good time.
Speaker 1: This was in Chenault [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  At any rate, that's where my father--
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father's date of birth and place of birth?  Was he born in Chenault?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah. He was, oh gosh, I think I'd have to go back to my Bible to see when--hm.  I'm going to have to get you that because--
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Bernadette Honore Amar]?
Speaker 2: About two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we're talking about 1899, around there?
Speaker 2: Wow.  That's a long time.  They were, maybe about a year apart, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Maybe around 1900, 1899, around there.
Speaker 2: I'll have to get you that.
Speaker 1: That's good, that's close enough.
Speaker 2: That's why you sent me--I didn't get that package to do this.  I would have talked to my sister more about that.  But, yeah, they were close to the same age.  But, he grew up there and then he left and came to Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 442562
Speaker 1: What do you know about his [Young's father, Appolinare Amar)] side of the family, and specifically, what did- you know, what's their story?
Speaker 2: He had a brother, one in which, I'm not really sure what Uncle Roy [Roy Amar] did.  The thing I do know is that at about twelve years old I went to California with my girlfriend.  Maybe I was a little older.  It might have been fourteen or fifteen. Fourteen maybe. And I met one of my friends.  I think we used to take dance together.  There was a, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] there wasn't a dance school so the lady from New Orleans [Louisiana] would come and she opened a dance school down there so we all took ballet and all of this together.  My mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] took us to swimming lessons and so we learned to swim when most Creoles at that time did not go to the public pool and we would go and take lessons and so we all went to swim and to dive and, I'm still not a great diver, but we learned to swim and ballet and was exposed maybe a little differently than our cousins.  On my father's side, I went to California one year, and I'm not sure how far to go with this, and I brought my friend with me, two of my friends and when I was leaving my uncle told me that if I ever came back I had to leave my dark friend home and I said, "Is that right?  Well then I probably will never see you again."  And that was young.  I probably didn't say it that way but I always remember that because he was what they call passe, passing for white, at that time and that's what they, a lot of people did.  I'm not sure they really went to pass, they just got out there and nobody knew what you were, you know, so, that's how they lived.  I guess it was survival.
Speaker 1: So, in the absence of definition, he (laughter) just did what he could do I guess.
Story_ID: 442563
Speaker 1: You're describing, basically, the Creole society in Louisiana and with very different ideas, I mean, in the middle of black and white and with--
Speaker 2: We re- we, I grew up on a street that had everybody on it.  But, I think most of my cousins didn't live, didn't live close to one another and so my family was probably one of the first families to, my sister [Germaine Amar] married a wonderful man and, but he was very dark and, of course, my parents were friends, I think you said the Pearsons [ph.] or somebody, but they were friends with a lot of people at the University [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] because my sister was working at the university at the time.
Speaker 1: I think I mentioned Spears [ph.], you know, Spears.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Spears family and, I forget the guy's name.  He's an architect.  We just always had everybody at our home, my mom [Bernadette Honore Amar] would cook and my dad [Appolinare Amar] was very gregarious and outgoing and he did a lot of work for a lot of different people because he was a contractor, and all I remember is him (laughter) smoking a cigar in his truck and being involved so we kind of had a house on the side of the road where everybody would come and eat and have a good time, and even when they had their problems they would come and talk to my mom and my dad and, you know, it was interesting but I just thought it was just normal, because all I did was climb up on the China ball tree and I was a tomboy--tom girl, tomboy--(laughter) and run around with the little guys in the neighborhood and could ride horses and do everything I thought they could do, I could do it, you know, and followed behind my dad while he was building houses, and stuff.
Story_ID: 442564
Speaker 1: Now, i- is there a story about how your parents met?  Were they t- was there a story handed down about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know the full story but it was all mixed in, in the family.  My father [Appolinare Amar] was married before and my mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] knew my father's ex-wife and so it evolved some kind of way that way, but they met one another when she was a widower and had two children, my older sister now and her brother, who is deceased.  And then, they got married and they had the three girls, which was me, my two siblings, and I was the baby, I was the youngest, so you know, I did know a lot of everything but that's how they met and so we had my sister, her husband, and then the three Amar girls.  They were the Darrensburgs [ph.].  Their mother was married to a Darrensburg prior to this.  Then it was the three girls; my sister Germaine [Germaine Amar], Janice [Janice Amar (ph.)], and myself, and I was the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, your mother was about forty-two, I guess, when you were born?
Speaker 2: She was what they considered older when she had me because at that time, people had children very young.  So, she was in her forties when she had me, I guess early forties.
Story_ID: 442565
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: My father [Appolinare Amar], probably.  He loved to dance.  He loved a good life and he just loved everybody and my mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] was a very special person; a little quieter, but always doing the cooking and the cleaning and taking care of my dad and making beautiful dresses for her girls and I don't have too much of that in me (laughter).  I don't like to clean and I'm not a very good cook and, you know, I think I took after my dad more.
Story_ID: 442566
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: One of my earlier childhood memories is that I adored my older sister, who was in New York [New York] and she was glamorous and she smoked and she would visit back. She went to nursing school in New York, so when she came back she was just real glamorous and, you know, she had all the latest clothes and she was, she was just somebody I admired and I loved and I would sit up at night just waiting when she was coming home, because she was always bringing me something really special from New York, and I, you know, my memory is that I was the youngest and so I was always the one who had to chaperone my older sisters and they always, you know how your baby sisters back because they had boyfriends and I was younger and so I had to chaperone them everywhere they went.  Now, you couldn't go out at that time with a young man without somebody chaperoning you, so they would have me chaperone them, and I would tell everything.  "Oh, they snuggled, oh they kissed, oh, you know" (laughter).  Yeah.  So, but being up waiting on my sister from New York, who was, who had all of her girlfriends and just kind of admired her and still love her very dearly.
Story_ID: 441924
Speaker 1: Well, I was asking you about early childhood memories.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Good fried chicken and shrimp creole and nice home-cooked (unclear), cakes baking in the oven, the smell of the China ball tree in front of my house; just, I have to say I had some very positive memories and, tussling and fighting with my siblings and, you know, just sitting on my dad's [Appolinare Amar] lap and my mom's [Bernadette Honore Amar] lap and lots of hugs and good, good family memories, really.
Story_ID: 441925
Speaker 1: Very important in our life was the Catholic Church.  We went to church every Sunday and almost every day (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  But we went there for a lot of things like bingo.  We played bingo as kids.  That's, you know, that was the social pastime when we were younger.
Speaker 2: So, the kids would actually play bingo?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  We played bingo (laughter).  Always trying to win something.  They had some little prizes that you would win but it was always a big family thing, family night, spaghetti or--
Story_ID: 441926
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that church [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] associated with Saint Xavier College [sic. Saint Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] at all?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Just a--
Speaker 2: They had a school, though, and a--it was the Catholic nuns who were very, very strict.  One was named Sister Alecia [ph.].  Trust me, if you didn't know your time tables, you got knocked on the knuckles with (laughter) with a red stick that she had, so you had to learn those numbers so, you know, I could be in bed at night just saying six times six is thirty-six, blah-blah, you know, routine.  And I think a lot of times now, kids don't get that because a lot of it was just memory.  I mean, you know, and now they say you shouldn't memorize.  Well, hey, that's how we learned (laughter), you know, even with the phonetics.  I never knew anything about phonics.  We didn't really learn that way back then, but we all learned.  We all could read.  We all could multiply and add and so, but the nuns were very strict, very strict at the school and it went to--
Speaker 1: Was the school St. Francis Xavier School [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, it was a church and a school, and it was, I forget what order of nuns it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd know what it is but I can't think of it now and I know that group is the same group that found St. Xavier College (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I can't remember the name of the order of nuns, but the priests and the nuns were part of our everyday lives and we lived like two blocks from the church so, literally everything we did was at the church and my parents [Bernadette Honore Amar and Appolinare Amar] had bought this land that I guess where Italians are as some of our neighbors were Italian and they had strawberry patches, and so we were just from our home to the church grounds, I learned to play basketball there and that's when I was really young.
Story_ID: 441927
Speaker 1: At age twelve, thirteen my mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] died and then the three girls [Germaine Amar, HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young and Janice Amar (ph.)] were in the house with our father [Appolinare Amar], and so about three years later, he died.  After he died I was high school age and I moved with my sister and she was a nurse at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], so I went to the Laboratory School [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, okay.  You were like sixteen, I guess, when your father died, right?  Was that it?
Speaker 1: I was probably fifteen.  When my mother died, I was twelve or thirteen, two years later my father died.  I was probably about fifteen because I finished high school at seventeen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that's pretty, that's pretty traumatic for that close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was very traumatic for me as a young girl, because I was--puberty, you know, and so it, it wasn't great memories but I was right at the peak of coming into myself, I guess, and then it was just a different, different life.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: But it was still good, because my family, my sister and my older sisters embraces me and, you know, all I could remember is having to wax the hardwood floors so they shined on Saturdays (laughter).  We all had our duties and our responsibilities, and the older ones, they're only, my sisters are two years apart, so the oldest one would prepare the meal.  I never cooked, because they didn't ever teach me, so I never really learned to cook, but I had to do the dishes or wax the floors.  That was my Saturday morning chore.  I had to keep a spotless house like my mom did, and then my sister lived in another part of town near the university, a couple--about a mile from the university on Harding Boulevard, which my father--at that time, my father built our home.  He also built my sister's home so, you know, you've got these brick homes because you had people in the family who--and so, when you built, you didn't spend all this money on a house because everybody, all uncles, cabinet makers, my brother was an excellent cabinet maker--they came in and built the house for you.  You know, so everybody had a really nice home.  And, she's still in that house.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is that in the Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  On the corner of Harding Boulevard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Big pink house on the corner and, at that time, it was like a huge house but, you know, now (laughter) it's old.  It's been there awhile but it's still sturdy and she still lives there.
Story_ID: 441928
Speaker 1: You were in high school there at Southern [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and well, how was, how was school anyway?  I mean, did you like school when you were going to school?
Speaker 2: Actually I always liked school.  I have never not liked school.  In, when I finished St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I think I was second in my class.  Then I went to, I, I guess I learned early a methodical way of doing my work and so it was it was never difficult, and when I went to Southern Lab School, I kind of took it on as a challenge because mom [Bernadette Honore Amar], my mom wasn't there and my sister was a nurse and she was working and my brother-in-law was working so I just, you know, I just studied and I had a way of studying and it really came kind of easy to me and so, in, I was very active in high school and drama and dance and all the things that, you know, I've been exposed to and didn't have any problems.  Had lots of friends, lots of boyfriends, lots of teacher's pets, (laughter) you know, 'cause I was always doing something for somebody, and I finished as salutatorian in high school too.
Story_ID: 441929
Speaker 1: How did having blonde hair affect you as a youth?  I'm asking that because I've got a son with the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, yeah, you know I had a girlfriend--well younger, when I was younger there were some kids on my block that used to tease me all the time about being white and whatever, whatever, and they called me a white roach and I called them a black rose and, you know, I learned to fight.  I was not going to let anybody say anything to me that I wouldn't, so, so they said, "Meet us around the corner and we're gonna show you a thing or two," and oh boy I was scared as hell, but I, you know actually learned to curse, and people would say, "Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], why do you curse?"  I'm like, you know what?  That's very unfortunate.  I kind of did it as, I think I learned how to really curse to make people afraid of me so I wouldn't, you know, wouldn't have them take advantage of me as, from, because of my color.
Speaker 1: Makes you appear rougher and tougher.
Speaker 2: That was like gonna be rough; yeah, it was rough and tough and so (laughter) they make it really funny, like, "How did you learn that?  That shouldn't come out of your mouth."  And then it's like, you shouldn't be saying that.  And I'm like, okay I won't, but if I have to I will, so when I went to high school, I was like, one of the few fair-skinned girls in high school at my high school at Southern University [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] because there was a whole different, it wasn't down in the Creole area.  I first went to McKinley High [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was a pretty rough school for my ninth grade, and then I transferred to the Lab School with my sister, where I was much more comfortable.  I shouldn't say that about McKinley, but it was, it was a public high school and then I moved with my sister up to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and to the Laboratory School.
Story_ID: 441930
Speaker 1: I was very involved with all of the stuff, I think, in high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and really enjoyed it and met, you know, had lots of friends and it was really funny because I went to a reunion.  I kind of didn't go to any of my reunions for a long time.  I went about two years ago and mainly because we were traveling and were always busy, and they were, I mean, it really takes you back when you go because most of the people have done very well and so I was pleasantly surprised that a lot of the, you know, the doctors and lawyers' kids, school teachers' kids, it was a private school and all of the instructors from the University [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] taught us, so we kind of had a heads up on everything, and all of the drama teachers and everything, they were involved with our school, and so it was a good school for me.
Speaker 2: And, were there any particular teachers that were--you know, that stand out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well there was a principal who was very loving but very strict; Mrs. Boban [ph.], and she was--she would walk the halls, I mean, literally and she would, (laughter) she wouldn't let anything happen.  You know when she came around here that she was strict.  But, also Mrs. Herson [Isabel Morgan Herson] was my English teacher.  She actually changed my name.  My name was Sonjie.  Sonjie, S-O-N-J-I-E.  It's on my birth certificate.  That was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that what people called you?
Speaker 1: No.  They did when I was younger, but when I got to high school, she said, "Your name is Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young]," and so, that is what my name became (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, is that way that's pronounced or something, or was it that--
Speaker 1: Well, it's Sonjia, she said it was pronounced Sonjia, and so that's how I pronounce my name.
Speaker 2: So, S-O-N-
Speaker 1: But, S-O-N-J-I-E--
Speaker 2: J-I-E (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is what is on my birth certificate, and they pronounce it Sonjie.  My mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] used to call me Sonjie-Ann [ph.]. (Laughter) You know. That's funny because my husband [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], we were going out of the country and he gave them that net- I said, "Why did you do that?  You know I don't go by that," (laughter) he said, "That's what's on your birth certificate (laughter)," so it's Sonjie.
Speaker 2: So she--
Speaker 1: Remember they mix it up so bad that it never sounded like what it was supposed to, so she said your name is really Sonjia.  So, that's what my name became, um-hm.
Speaker 2: So did you spell it, you spell it differently now, too, right?
Speaker 1: I do.  I spell it with an A instead of an E.
Story_ID: 441931
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], like what did you, what were you thinking in terms of career, a future career?  What did you see yourself becoming, or did you have those kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was in high school I wanted to be a model, or a dancer, all the creative things that, you know, you want to be when you're involved with that, an actress, you name it, and actually I had the opportunity of going--let's see, where, where were we?  We were at a friend's home. One of our neighbors had a tennis court in the yard and, and a pool and so we used to play tennis and swim and stuff, and, I forget, he was a, he was a professor at the university [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and the Ebony Fashion Fair came to town, and there, at Dr. Bernard's [ph.] home, which was around the corner, friends of ours, they, they had a reception or a dinner or something for the models and for Freda DeKnight, who was running that years ago. And so I went to the dinner, had been playing tennis with my girlfriend, who wanted to be with the Fashion Fair, but I did not, had no desire to necessarily do that because I knew my sister would not let me go anywhere out of Louisiana, so we went over and she was trying to talk to them about being in the show and Freda says, "Well, you really, you know, you don't--." I was really tiny at the time and she wasn't, and she says, "You, it-s--Sonjia's [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young] the one that I'd like to have in the show."  And I'm like, "Oh." I said, well--she says, "There's a young woman who is leaving who looks like you."  I've forgotten her name now, but she was, it was like the first or second show they'd done for Ebony.  And, I can't remember the young lady's name but she was on my order and so she said, "I'd really like to have her in the show," and I'm like, "Oh, that'd be great."  My sister said, "Oh, no.  You're not going anywhere.  You've gotta finish school.  You can't do anything, finish school, finish school."  Because, you know, my mother [Bernadette Honore Amar] said that we all had to get an education and so it left her to take that responsibility for me and my sisters.  So, you know, I just figured I couldn't go.  Then I started thinking, I'd really like to go on that, you know, I'm seventeen years old, I can go to New York [New York] and you say like, "Oh no, you're not going." So Freda kept calling and finally she said, I convinced her that I should go.  Only if you come back and you go directly and finish your education.
Speaker 1: So, this would take you out of school for a year or something or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: For a better part of the year, or?  When did you go, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to go, you had to go to be fitted by all the designers and trained and everything.  So, that, that's when I, I convinced her and, of course, all of my uncles thought that that was a horrible thing to do, for any young girl to go to be a model (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen, okay.  So, were you a senior in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I had just finished.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so you hadn't, you had finished, just finished high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I had just finished high school.  I was in love with, actually the guy [Walton Waller, Sr.] I wind up marrying, and so I was like really torn between should I go, should I stay, should I go on to school, and finally I thought, if I don't go I will never know that, you know, what I missed.  So, my sister agreed that I could go.  I was the youngest, actually, on the tour.  There was one other girl who was a couple months younger than me but she didn't last.  They give--they put you on a trial and so you go to Boston [Massachusetts] and, at that time, you would go to Boston and some other smaller shows and if you didn't make it through, I don't know how they judged you, by audience participation or something when you came out or something, and so she didn't make it, but actually that young lady is an anchorwoman somewhere in New York.  It's funny, 'cause I saw her one day and I know her, I know her, you know, like, it's been a long time.  You know, she was with the Fashion Fair for a couple of months.  I'm like, that's who it was.  So, you know, things go around.  What comes around, goes around, they say, so you see people that were involved in your previous life (laughter) but, but yeah, no, I made it through and so I lasted and I, I was really a little country bumpkin, hair down to my back and scared of everything, you know, thought that everybody in New York--first day I got there we were up at Ebony's office and I looked down and the cop, a policeman shot somebody robbing a bank right in front of me and I'm like (makes sound), I want to go home. It's time to go home.
Story_ID: 441932
Speaker 1: So, but Freda was a really special lady and she made everybody feel at home and she was the mother of the tour [Ebony Fashion Fair].  It was her, her, she, 'Date With a Dish' ['A Date With a Dish'], she wrote that in Ebony years ago.
Speaker 2: Right, I remember that article.
Speaker 1: You remember that?  Yeah, 'Date With a Dish' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've seen it someplace.  I mean--
Speaker 1: That was Freda, yeah.
Speaker 2: Freda--
Speaker 1: Freda DeKnight.
Speaker 2: Freda DeKnight.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a column, 'Date With A Dish,' right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And back there, actually, Freda had gone through breast cancer, which I had never heard of even before.  But, she, she was tough.  Tough, a devil bird.  She, you know, she promised my sister and my family that she would protect and that, you know, I would not go wild and whatever, you know people think you're gonna do at that age (laughter) and I was always pretty stable. I never let stuff, you know, excite me too much.
Story_ID: 441933
Speaker 1: But some of the older girls, Terri Springer, and I forget her name, she's out in New York [New York].  And then, Nancy Street [sic. Nancy Streets] and Corinne, have had a little more experience than me (laughter) and so I remember on the tour one night, Dinah Washington was in town and we went to see her, and so it was a fascinating show and then we go to her, her hotel room afterwards, all of us, and she says, "Well, I'd like you, you, and you and you to come and be on my show and sing backup singing."  I can't sing (laughter).  I like to sing in the shower, but, so, Corinne was like, "Okay, let's do it.  We should do that."
Speaker 2: This is Corinne Huff?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  From Ohio.
Speaker 1: That was my roommate.  And so, we were like little partners in crime and so she says, "We can do this and we can make lots of money and we can wear these fabulous clothes," because she had these all these clothes like, you know, furs and, you know, all this jewelry and everything and it was fascinating.  So, we called Freda [Freda DeKnight] and we say, they were like, "Well, where are you guys?  You should be back in bed."  Because they were very strict at that time; I'm sure it's not anymore.  We traveled by bus and so we were like, "We are with Dinah Washington."  Holy cow.  You need to come home.  So we were like, "No, we're gonna stay.  We're gonna stay on the show.  We're gonna go and work backup singers," and so, she called my sister.  Well, that was it.  I had to, she's like, "You either go where Frieda says go or you go--come home."  So, I'm like, "Can't do it, Corinne, I've gotta, I've gotta do what my sister says to do."  So. Yeah interesting.
Speaker 2: So, you almost toured with Dinah Washington even then (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was funny.  Oh, god.
Speaker 2: But Dinah Washington, she has, those who work with her, they really say she was quite a personality, a strong personality.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they say so.  I did- didn't--never got to know that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, right.
Speaker 1: Maybe that's good.
Story_ID: 441934
Speaker 1: So, anyway, we, we got to be friends and we had a good time and I enjoyed it and--but it was hard work.  That's why I'm taking my shoes off now.  We had to wear all these shoes that didn't fit and, you know, and so--
Speaker 2: That's a pretty tight schedule, right?  I mean, you do a lot of travel--
Speaker 1: It's a very, very tight schedule.  Lots of traveling.
Speaker 2: How many shows did you do a, a week?
Speaker 1: Oh god, I don't even remember.  It's been so long ago.
Speaker 2: Was it something every day?
Speaker 1: That's been almost forty years ago.  You expect me to remember that?  Yeah, almost every day.  I think we had maybe one day off a week, or something like that, but we'd have to get up in the morning and you'd have to have your makeup on and have to have your hair ready and everything, and you had to get on the bus, because you couldn't travel and go into anybody sitting, looking, you know, they expected you to look a certain way and I think that, Bob Johnson's [sic. HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] wife [Eunice W. Johnson] wasn't that involved at that time, but then she became more and more involved.  But, you know, they had to, it was like a family.  It was a family and friends, and I did not know how to smoke or drink, but I was trying to keep up with the big girls (laughter) and so I had to get cigarettes so I looked glamorous.  I couldn't take over one drink, and they'd chug-a-lug and I'd be like out of it (laughter).  It's funny when you think back on those things.  But, it was, it was an experience.  A good one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how long, did you just stay for that one season?
Speaker 1: I just stayed the one season.  Um-hm.  And then I came back to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, now when you came back, I mean, you're somebody who's been with the Fashion Fair [Ebony Fashion Fair] now, that's a--was that a big deal (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're like, "You don't have to wear all that makeup now.  You can take it all off."  I'm like, I'm used to doing this now (laughter).
Story_ID: 441935
Speaker 1: So, so you went to school at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I went back to school at Southern and I was majoring in interior design and I actually finished in that and then I got married to the guy that I left.  His name was Walton Waller [Walton Waller, Sr.].  He then went to the [U.S.] Army and I got married and went with him and had two children and my son, Tony [Walton Waller Jr.], who is now a veterinarian, and our daughter, Tonya [Tonya Waller Williams], who, she's on that picture, she worked with me for a while and she's working with Eventions [Eventions, Inc.] and she does what I do, and he was, when we moved to Germany after both the kids were babies, he was a part of the Purnell family, which was very prominent down there, and when we moved to Germany he was killed and he was a pilot.  He was killed in service.  So, I was a very young mother with two kids, who really did not know what was going on (laughter) at that time.  And so, I went back home.  I left Germany and his mother [Lena Purnell Waller] lived next door to my sister, because his mother, my brother left and moved to California and so his mother bought that home.  So, I was in between two loving families when I went back with the two kids, and only by the grace of God that they, we all turned out all right, because I was too young to really know what to do and, you know, so they just kind of shepherd me to, you know, growing up, basically, and it was a tough time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you finish Southern when you were--
Speaker 2: No.  I went back to school.  I stayed--yeah, I finished my degree, my bachelor's degree, and then I started with my master's degree, and I met Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], my husband now.  The kids were about maybe six, five and six or something, and he, we dated and he spent a lot of time with Tony and horses and, you know, and the kids and then about six years, I don't know how many years later, we've been together now about thirty-five, forty almost forty years.
Story_ID: 441936
Speaker 1: I was a young widow and had come back to town with my two kids [Walton Waller, Jr. and Tonya Waller Williams] and we, he had a friend named Bertrand Tyson, who was a physician, and he was the dentist, and they had a bus.  They would go to the rural areas and treat the Medicare and Medicaid kids and so I saw him, actually, one day my girlfriend and I, Juliet [ph.], who is living in Houston [Texas].  She was a teacher at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and I was back in school getting my master's [degree] and we, and he drove an XK8 [Jaguar XK8] and I liked that XK8 so (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That was a Jaguar--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Jaguar, back then. The little-he always had these exotic cars, and so we were driving around and along and I said, "Oh, that's a good looking XK8."  Well, he thought I was looking at him and I really wasn't, but it was him and his friend in the car, and my girlfriend, so they turn around in the middle of the street and followed me back to my mother-in-law's [Lena Purnell Waller] home, of all places, and I knew Bertrand, our, you know, I had heard of him anyway and so he knew my mother-in-law and they came in and I met Walt [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young].  But, he likes to tell a different story, but that's the way it really happened.  So, I met him and we dated for, oh boy, for about four or five years before we got married.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was here.  He moved to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: He had moved here a year before, before you all got married (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.  And then I came and we got married and have been together ever since.
Story_ID: 441937
Speaker 1: Was it a big step to move to Atlanta [Georgia]?  I mean, from Baton Rouge [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I never wanted to stay in Baton Rouge.  I really probably shouldn't say that, but I, I loved the people there.  I just, there's a different--y'all can't--some of the stuff you can't say, because I won't be able to go back home.  But it's just a different mentality in terms of where life is.  I never thought I would ever go back and stay there, so other than going to see my sisters, my sister and his mother [Daisy Fuller Young] in New Orleans [Louisiana].  So, I liked Atlanta, but I, it was hard when I first got here because Atlanta to me was very clannish, and in Louisiana, everybody knew me, you know, I had friends, I was, you know, I could go anywhere.  Came here and I was real open and so I speak to everybody and, I mean, a lot of the guys, people didn't know what I was when I first came here.  They're like, oh, you know, Walter's [sic. HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] married to a white woman, and then I did a couple of interviews and it was so turned around and by the time it came out, I was like nerve--I became shy of interviews and at that time Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was married to Jean [Jean Childs Young], and she was very different from me because I was still in the fashion mode and she was not, and then we became very close after that, and then she became glamorous too (laughter).  She was beautiful and very special spirit and we just kind of became bosom buddies and friends.  We played tennis together, we did everything.  We shopped together.  We took the kids out together.  At that time, she had Bo [Andrew Young III], who was their youngest son and we just, I guess we, when they left, we wound up having Nikki [Nikki Young], our baby, because we just, we missed Bo but we wanted our own child and so we had our youngest daughter, who is living here now.  She lives in New York, New Jersey.  She is an environmental engineer, so she just moved here recently with her husband.  So, we've got all the kids here and Walter has a daughter by his first marriage, Tammy [Tammy Young Williams], who really kind of grew up with, so all the older are, you know, very close and like one big family; mine, yours, and ours.
Story_ID: 441938
Speaker 1: So when you came here, were you a--what did you do for a living when you came here?
Speaker 2: Interior design.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went into interior design with Sammy Whiteman and Associate [sic. Samuel Whiteman and Associates].  He was one of the first black interior designers that handled commercial design for three universities and so that's what I did for maybe a year or two, and then in the meantime I received my master's degree in counselor education.
Speaker 1: Where did you--
Speaker 2: I went back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to finish it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In counseling education?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I started working with Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], one of their programs, and Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia].  I worked at Georgia State in the program, developmental studies program.  So, my sister-in-law [Jean Childs Young] at the time was helping to start Atlanta Metropolitan College [Atlanta Metropolitan State College, Atlanta, Georgia].  They call it Atlanta Metropolitan.  It was Atlanta Junior College then, and so she says, "Oh, you know, you know you can't stay there.  You've got to come and help us develop this program."  So, I then went to Atlanta Junior College.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I started this business in '82 [1982], so that was probably around '80 [1980], '81 [1981].
Story_ID: 441939
Speaker 1: And at the time, I, I still kind of had in mind I wanted to do something like this because I volunteered a lot with The King Center [The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia], planning their dinners and a friend of mine from New York [New York] said, "You really should start your business in this," because I did a lot of volunteer work at the time my husband [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young]--
Speaker 2: So you just kind of learned this process by volunteering or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, basically.  I started volunteering, planning the dinners and all that.
Speaker 2: I think, I don't know, correct me if I'm wrong. I don't--I never heard too much about people as event planners until the early '80s [1980s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, there weren't any.  I was like really the first event planner.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the early '80s [1980s] they started trying to teach it in school and do--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At the time that I started, I used to plan dinners.  I was volunteering to do this and had taken some time off to be with my youngest child [Nikki Young].  My older children were in college and my husband was travelling a lot to Africa and so someone called me and said, "Would you like to plan this for me?  I'll pay you."  And I'm like, "Oh, you will?"  So, "Okay.  I'll try it."  But, when I did that there was a really big convention that wanted me.  It was a banker's convention and I refused to take it, but I knew I was not prepared totally for a large event, but a friend of mine in New York [New York], George Jackson.  Do you remember George Jackson?  George Jackson was with American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.] and he was, he was really a funny guy, but he came and he says this is what you should do.  You should start your company and you should plan the conventions and then you should do the PR [public relations] for the conventions, you should--all these things.  Anyway, to make a long story short, George us, gave me kind of the blueprint.  He's deceased now, but he was a funny guy and I think that he was planning something here and he asked us to plan it.  But, I remember him telling me how I should do these things and how I should connect with the hotels and, so, he says, "Well what you need to do is you need to join Meeting Planners International [sic. Meeting Professionals International] so you learn more about it," which I had the background in design, so the creative side I had, and my girlfriend who started the business with me, Kiki Thomas, was a professor, so I figured she could do all the seminars and when I told my husband I was leaving my job to do this, he's like, "Uh, well, that's not real work (laughter).  What are you gonna do with it?"  And I'm like, well, I'm gonna plan conventions and so my girlfriend from London [England], and I told her what I was doing, I'm looking for a name for this company, and I really didn't know I had such an entrepreneurial spirit about myself, but she says, "Okay, I've got it," because I had names like Advantage Marketing [ph.], and whatever, but no one had really talked about event management and convention management.  So, she says, "I got it, I got it."  She woke up in the middle of the night, came upstairs, knocked on the door--"I've got the name of your company."  And she writes music and stuff, and we're still friends to this day.  She said, "If you're gonna do events and conventions, it should be Eventions [Eventions, Inc.]."  And I'm like, "Hey.  That's a great idea.  Okay, the name Eventions is here."  So, that's when it started.  I don't know what year--oh, wait that was 1982.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1982.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you started the company prior to naming it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In my basement.
Speaker 2: Okay. Eventions.
Speaker 1: And so, that's how it got started and some of the people who were with me, like Cynthia Childs, who was my operations manager, she's still with me today and my daughter's like, "Oh no, I'm not gonna do that.  That's too much hard work.  (Laughter) I would never do that," and then, you know, she came to work with me.  And, so we just built it from there.
Story_ID: 441940
Speaker 1: What have been some of the highlights, n- now when you were, when you started Eventions [Eventions, Inc.], Atlanta [Georgia], was really, well, it had been booming for about ten years, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was mayor. I have a picture of us, I mean I really don't know what those pictures are, but it's so cute.  We were like, (laughter) we used to dress, some of my friends that are still my friends now that had started off with me, so we'd get these good-looking women who were hostesses and we'd dress alike at every event and so it got to be a thing that you could have the Eventions staff or hostesses working for you.  So, they were all gorgeous girls, young women and some of them, one of them, actually, my friend, worked with me for a long time and she's doing this too and the other is married to Nate Goldston [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], Valerie Goldston [Valerie Hampton Montague Goldston], and she is, they had a surprise birthday party for me the other day and we were reminiscing and just enjoying talking about how far we've come and how long we've been friends, like thirty years, I mean, so it's all good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what are some of the events, I mean, when you started out did you, was there a, who was getting most of the convention business then?  Was it somebody else?
Speaker 2: Well, nobody, I don't think they really, I think they did a lot of in-house, but they weren't any minorities doing it.  There were general market people, a few of them that were doing some, not a lot of them but, tour gals and stuff like that, were, had just started business too and planning a lot of the convention stuff.  I would- I would not ever do another tour in life (laughter).  We have some real stories to tell about this.
Speaker 1: From tours, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I thought, well, we're gonna do the tours, and we're going to do, you know, the city with the conventions, and I took on this big tour as a part of the meeting planning part, and we (laughter) the people, the tour gals didn't show up.  The tour women that we hired, two of them didn't show up, so they said, "Oh, my god, Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], you're going to have to do this."  I'm like, "I can't do it.  I don't know all those dates or anything."  So Michelle [ph.] was working with me, another one of my friends was here working with us.  "Oh, yeah.  We can do this.  We can really do this."  So, I said, "Okay."  The people were librarians.  They wanted dates for everything, so we get on the bus and it was a tour from hell (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was it the American Library Association?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.  I mean, you know, sticklers for dates and times.  So, we get on the bus and I'm going, oh, my god; you know, "To your left is the High Museum [High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia] and--." You know, "Well, what year was it built?"  "Um, well, around--," (laughter).  So, we get to, so I'm going, "Okay, now how many of you here are from California?"  And they go, "Yeah, yeah, I'm from California."  "How many from Chicago [Illinois]?"  "Yeah, I'm from Chicago."  Then, they go, "Okay now, what was the date of that again," I'm trying to distract 'em from asking me these questions.  (Laughter) So, I'm like okay, when we get to the Carter Center [Atlanta, Georgia], we go to the bathroom and we get in the stall and we get this book, and we start reading it and writing down notes.  Then the bus breaks down.  I'm like, that's--the bus broke down?  I can't even believe that (laughter).  So, it was like, no.  This is not going to be a part of what I do.  It was really funny.  One lady says, "We want our money back."  And I said, "Is that right?  Well, why do you want your money back?"  She says, "That tour guide we had was terrible."  And I said, "Really?  Who was your tour guide?"  And they said, "You."  (Laughter) I'm like, "Here's your money."  It was terrible (laughter).
Story_ID: 441941
Speaker 1: But, you know, we, we planned the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 2: That's one of the biggest in the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was a huge convention.
Speaker 2: That's a huge convention.
Speaker 1: Actually, Dr. Reverend Jemison [T.J. Jemison] at the time was the president.  He was from Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  So, he trusted me to do this.  And, we really opened a lot of doors here in Atlanta [Georgia] for them.  I think they opened the Marquis [Atlanta Marriott Marquis, Atlanta, Georgia] and I served on the tour board--the Convention and Visitors [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau] tour board.  But, that was a biggie, and so we just, we learned a lot from it is all I can say (laughter).  But, it's all been good and all been fun, and I guess the most challen- we plan a lot of dinners and one of our clients was Coors Brewing Company.  Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] is one of our better clients now, and Ingrid Jones [HistoryMaker Ingrid Saunders Jones] was just been a beautiful person and helped me along the way to, and I guess they hired us because they know we're going to do an excellent job, which was have a great reputation, because we always give 110 percent for everything.  We plan a, we're planning for Reverend Joseph Lowery's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] big eighty-fifth celebration.  We plan the King dinner [Salute to Greatness Awards Dinner] every year, but we also worked with the National Association of Security Professionals, that is the Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch Wealth Management, New York, New York] guys, the financial guys.  We planned the Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Financial Group] hundredth anniversary and so, you know, it's just we worked with the chamber of commerce [Metro Atlanta Chamber] and planning the A+ Awards and, and I like it.  I mean, it's been great but there are some other things that I do want to do--
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean, with the kids.
Story_ID: 441942
Speaker 1: Now tell me, now I've got a big organization.  Say I've got something as big as the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] or a big fraternity or African studies association, so I'm coming to town and what all do you all do, I mean what all does Eventions [Eventions, Inc.] do for me?
Speaker 2: Well, Eventions start from the very beginning.  We will, we recently did the 100 Black Men's [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] national convention.  That was this past summer, and we start with the very first letter that goes out.  We plan corporate packages.  We--
Speaker 1: So, I would meet with you first and tell you what the dates are and what's going on and you would handle all the correspondence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We handle all of it.
Speaker 1: I would just give you the details.
Speaker 2: From beginning to end.  We plan the brochures that go out to each individual, we receive the broch- the registrations back online, or if they send them in we enter them.  I'll show you the books that we keep for each organization.  And then we plan their special events, because within the convention are a lot of special events.  There are a lot of receptions, a lot of dinners, a lot of galas, and so we recently did that for the hundre- the national association, The 100 Black Men nationally this summer, and, and then they may take a part of the registration or we may do the registration, but we like to plan most, I think UBS really did their registration, but we like to plan all of the events and those things because what happens is if you turn it over to another person to do the actual events, then if the registration goes well and the events are bad, then they blame us anyway.  So, we tried to manage all of it.  We hire the videographers.  We hire the photographers.  We hire the graphic designers or we used the graphic designers that we have relationships with, and, and the printers.  And we learned a long time ago that you've got to know who your printers are.  (Laughter) That's a really tough one.
Story_ID: 441943
Speaker 1: So now there are a lot of good black printers, and we try to give all of our business to minority community if they can handle it and now, they've gotten a lot better than it used to be.  It was hard to find a black printer and now there are quite a few of them; designers.  Didn't even hear of them, so--
Speaker 2: That's kind of, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's growing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the kind of thing that if black businesses are really not in that food chain, they don't get fed, right?  I mean, you know, if in a city like, say, Chicago [Illinois], where they have a tough time, they say, trying to find minority suppliers and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --all that kind of rhetoric and you wonder, you know, sometimes--
Speaker 1: It's tough to break into the general market; trust me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've had a hard time breaking into the general market.
Speaker 2: Their associations are already made that, you know--
Speaker 1: And they have, they have people, a lot of them try to do it in-house, but, for instance, let's just say the dental, I think we planned the dental convention years ago.  I heard that it was coming back next year, the national.  But the American Dental [American Dental Association], they have, their planners and you can't break into that. So you really, even General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], or, you've gotta have a contact in there somewhere to even get your foot in the door.  It's the same thing that's always been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Actually, I had a--I went when I first started kind of in this business to a luncheon and I was talking to this older lady.  She happened to have been white, and she says, "I can tell you how to make money by just picking up the phone," and I'm like, "Really?  Well wow, I need to know that."  And so, someone came by and said, "You know who this person is, don't you?"  And they said, she said, "No."  She says, "That's [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young's sister-in-law."  That was the end of that conversation.  I literally, because I think that she probably didn't know what it was and she was gonna tell me the secrets.  I never learned the secrets from her, or anyone.  I had to really learn it by trial and error. So now, someone called me today and they said, "Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], I really need to know something.  I've been doing, I'm planning a wedding," and blah-blah-blah.  She says, "And I just need to know how to charge," or whatever.  I didn't know any of that.  So, I mean, I don't mind telling people this is the way you should do this.  This is probably what you're going to get out of it, you know.  Commissions don't work.  She says, "Should I charge commissions?"  And I said, "Well they never worked for me," but she says, "Well that's so helpful because most people won't tell me that," and now everybody who plans a birthday party or a party thinks, they think that they're an event manager, you know, and so they come in and they underbid you but you get what you pay for, so it doesn't matter, really.  You really have to, have to know what you're doing to plan a major event. Lots of details.  Lots of details.
Story_ID: 441944
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you involved in planning the, the events associated with the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] back in--
Speaker 2: Well, you know who I'm related to, right?  So, that was the challenge.  I did plan some but it wasn't through the Olympic office [International Olympic Committee] because of, you know, my being related to Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].  So, a lot of people say well, you're related to him; that means you're gonna get all the business.  Not so. But, you know.  So, we worked it.  We did some things for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and for Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and some other companies but they were like parties associated with the convention.
Speaker 1: Poli- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) With the Olympics.
Speaker 1: Yeah political power does make a difference in terms of the black mayors in these cities; I mean, in terms of the other contracts, being able to get a contract.  I know in Chicago [Illinois], it certainly did when Harold Washington was mayor, you know.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: The fact that there was a black mayor made a big difference in the black business community.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  Except when they're your brother-in-law (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I could understand that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but they, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just in general, I mean, just a--
Speaker 2: I mean, and it helps even with, you know, being related to Andy because we do have a lot of contacts and I guess we know everybody now, you know, I've been around a long time.  It's like, do you know everybody in Atlanta [Georgia] and the world?  Sometimes I feel that way (laughter) but, yeah, they opened the doors for so many black businesses and that's, that's really a great, great thing.  It's the only way sometimes, because a lot of people don't realize how professional you are or what you can do, and maybe won't give you an opportunity to put your foot in the door, so that opened the door for people to get in.
Story_ID: 441945
Speaker 1: I mean, we don't do any business with the, the city or the state, but I enjoy doing corporate business more than anything anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Why that?
Speaker 1: Because they say, "Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], this is what we have to do.  This is how much money we have.  This is what you should do.  Now do it (laughter)."  You know, once they're comfortable with you and they know you're gonna do a fine job.  But, and there's not a lot of competition of, I tried to do a lot of things with the federal government with the 8(a) program.  We became 8(a).  It took a long time to become 8(a), and we bit--
Speaker 2: 8(a)? I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: 8(a) is small minority firms to do business with the federal government.  We were in that for like fifteen years.  I guess we've been in it now, we're out of it.  But, we never got one piece of business, but we took a lot of time, a lot of money bidding on, sending proposals, and so it's--
Speaker 2: It didn't pay off?
Speaker 1: It doesn't pay off.  Some people get it to work.  I just couldn't, and I just didn't, I had a small staff.  I didn't have the time to really pursue it as much as I should have, but when I did do it, it didn't work.  So, hey--you go where you know you can get the work.
Story_ID: 441946
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But this is absolutely a growing field; I mean, you know, it is, it is and it has become more high-tech and my daughter [Tonya Waller Williams] always says, you know, "We've got to get to the 21st century, mama.  I want to go to a different level."  So, she's doing some things in a different way than I did them, but what I know has been successful and we've enjoyed it and it's, it's worked.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Peoples' expectations seem to have increased over the years to the point where sometimes, I remember in '95 [1995] at the Million Man March, I expected a million black men there, but I did not expect diamond vision screens, or to expect the committee to have spent money for those.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But it's a different--
Speaker 1: All high tech, everything is high tech.  If you're not, if you're not registering your convention online, then you're not in the ballpark.  Everything, everything is high tech now.  So we've gotta keep up with the times.
Speaker 2: Registration is online--
Speaker 1: Everything.  Um-hm.  And when you go to the events, it's, you know, wide screens and just a whole different ballgame from when it first started.
Speaker 2: I remember when you used to get a badge with a, and a magic marker to put your name on--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.  My name is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do that every now and then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what is your name?  (Laughter) Some people are still doing it.
Story_ID: 442567
Speaker 1: Back to what you were saying earlier.  You're planning a big event now to honor Reverend Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  It's a tribute roast.  We are expecting about two thousand people at the Martin Luther King Chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel, Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] on Thursday, October the 19th [2006], and let me see, who's coming?  [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Don King, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, Mayor Johnny Ford, a previous governor, Governor Roy Barnes, Maxine W- Congresswoman [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, Congressman Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy].  These people will all be, you know, actually Ji- President Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] is one of the co-hosts.  He will not be in town but he is one of the cohosts.  [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young is, he is out of the country but they've all lent their name to making this a big event for Dr. Lowery, who is a phenomenal person; I mean, at eighty-five he is so funny and so bright and witty, and I was thinking maybe that's the key to a long life (laughter).
Speaker 1: It certainly seemed to work for him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it works for him and his wife [HistoryMaker Evelyn Gibson Lowery] too (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 442568
Speaker 1: Speaking of Reverend Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery], he made a keynote at the funeral of Coretta Scott King, and--which was heard by many people around the country.  Now, you all handled that, the funeral (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did, yeah, along with--
Speaker 1: Four presidents--
Speaker 2: Four presidents, yeah.
Speaker 1: Four U.S. presidents there. Just tell us about what kind of, did you have to do extra homework together (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well actually, everything changed, everything happened so fast.  I was really on my way out of town for our aunt, Walter's [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] aunt was 104 years old.  She had passed and I got a call from Bunny [HistoryMaker Bernice Albertine King], the youngest daughter of Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and said "Aunt Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], I really need you to help us with this funeral," but I had heard they were bringing someone in from Washington [D.C.].  Well, I also planned along with [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones of Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and a slew of other people, of course, Maynard Jackson's funeral.  So, I said, "Well, we're on our way out of town."  And she says, "We really need your help."  And I said, "Well I understand there's another young lady, Judy Smith [ph.], who's doing it out of D.C.," and she says, "Yeah, but we really have to have you because you know all of us," and, you know, and so, so we really, she, Judy did a lot of the PR [public relations] stuff.  We did a lot of the logistics, and so we worked together, but it was a shock, number one, because of my relationship with Coretta and the family, and then to strap up your boots and say, okay, now let's get this going.  This is really going to be quick and fast and multi-task and so it was at Eddie Long's [HistoryMaker Bishop Eddie L. Long] church [New Birth Missionary Baptist Church, Lithonia, Georgia], which meant we had a lot of different entities to deal with, and so, yeah, (laughter) it was, I think, the most challenging thing.  I can't call it an event, but it really wound up being one; one that hopefully Coretta would have been very proud of.
Story_ID: 442569
Speaker 1: Was there any, any one major consideration, the biggest issue [at Coretta Scott King's funeral], or--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was that so many people wanted to speak and be involved and, of course, it was long as it was, but we just had to--they really, the children really made the decision of who was going to speak and who was going to be there and so it was a matter of carrying out their wishes and, at that time, calls were coming in from all over the world.  People flew in from South Africa for hours and, you know, and had two minutes to talk and it was just, it was just a phenomenal event.  It was so many people who loved Coretta [Coretta Scott King] and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and it was, it just kept growing and growing and growing and so every minute, so we were up 24/7 for three days or more just planning events and the kids were planning this funeral and the children were still out of town, because they had to go and get their mother released, and then we were, so we had a lot of people, a lot of really good people working with us.  We actually worked out of our condo and it was constant with people coming in, phone calls coming in, trying to make decisions, trying to get prepared to have a program, and to have it printed in a twenty-four hour period.  It was by the grace of God that we got it all done and it all went well, and Xernona was a part of the planning too, and she helped with getting all of the stars and celebrities and the people on buses to get them in and out of there because it wasn't around the corner.  We had to travel to get them there and--
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Xernona Clayton, and [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones was there for Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia]; I mean, everybody just pitched in to do what they had to do and it was a matter of picking up the phone and saying can you do this?  And it was yes, okay, we'll do it, we'll do it.  And, it just, it worked like clockwork.  It was several different things going on, because I think Yolanda [Yolanda King] planned something which was different from the funeral at the church for her mother and it was a musical event where Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] did come and Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] was at the funeral with Bo- Robert Schuller [Robert H. Schuller], and four presidents and, you know, it just, the list went on and on and on, and I think the biggest challenge was saying that you had to limit it to some time and that who were those people that were gonna be limited, and it had to be their call, so we tried to carry out their wishes and I think that they were all pleased with that.
Story_ID: 442570
Speaker 1: Well, were the people that weren't, that didn't speak [at Coretta Scott King's funeral], were they gracious about it for the most part, or did they, did you have to handle personalities?
Speaker 2: Well, we really, everybody really was gracious, but we did have quite a few challenges that we had to work through and that's always the case, but it's a tough telling certain people that you can't sit here, or you won't be, you can't go to the stage or you, you know, when they're used to being up front.  So, I have to say that the church ushers were, and the, I guess it was the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and all of the security helped a lot because all we had to do was say this area, no one is to come to, and the really funny part is that I went to look for Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] on her bus and when I, and I had no ID on me and when I came back in they wouldn't let me in, (laughter) and I was like, "But I'm planning this," and they're like, "Uh, sorry.  You might be anybody." So, someone recognized me and said you gotta let her in.
Speaker 1: That was the [U.S.] Secret Service, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Secret Service would not let me in.
Speaker 1: Not the CIA but the Secret Service.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really funny.  They were like, no, sorry you can't come. I was like, oh, my god.  Secret Service, I'm sorry.  Did I call them CIA?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's all right.
Speaker 2: Big, bad thing.  No, it was, they were there with the president and they didn't, everything turned upside down in terms of our planning, so we had to revamp a lot of things when they came in and I think, you know, Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], the father, came, decided at the last minute so here was another change and it was interesting, real interesting, because we had to hold these people in a corridor to get them on stage and it was just all kinds of logistical, it was a logistical nightmare but it worked out and everybody, I mean, we had what I called ambassadors rather than hostesses and ushers, because these were people who were at the top of Georgia-Pacific [Georgia-Pacific LLC], you know, Georgia Power, and they were top people but they were serving as, as what I called our ambassadors because they recognized people.  They knew who they were and, you know, and the general public was able to get into, a lot of them weren't able to get into the church, but then they had another extended area where we could let people go, and so it was, it was by the grace of God, it turned out to be one of the most phenomenal funerals that we've all known, and so we were just thrilled to be a part of the planning.
Story_ID: 442571
Speaker 1: Now, I don't, well, don't know if I should even ask if, you know, how much money you all make, (laughter) but this is a big business.  This is a--
Speaker 2: Well, it's, you know, we're not huge so--because we don't have a lot of people working and I'm cutting back and cutting back, because I want to, I only do a few events now and want to spend a lot more time with the kids at the Y, and that's the Y, the Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Is that new?
Speaker 2: It's an old Y.  It was a Southwest Y, but our kids grew up there.  We planned their swim teams; my sister-in-law and I planned their swim matches years ago when our kids were little and they're all swimmers and they have recently decided to name it after our family.  And so, Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and Carolyn [Carolyn McClain Young] and Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] and I are very involved with making this the most fabulous Y that ever has been in this country, because we want the kids exposed to everybody we know, which is a lot, and everything that we know, and everything that everybody we know knows, so that they will have that exposure and we feel compelled to really making sure that it is a very special place for them.  We want them to feel the love and the concern and the commitment that we have for them, and to help them grow into, to build some leaders for our community.  We have asked Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], who is a very close friend of the family.  We consider her our family, to allow us to use her name for the teen center, and so it will be the Dr. Maya Angelou Teen Center [sic. Maya Angelou Teen Center], and then we have [HistoryMaker] Dominique Wilkins, so we'll have the gym [Dominique Wilkins Gym].  The Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] have committed to helping us and to name the gym after Dominique Wilkins, because Dominique has been involved with basketball in our community for quite a, for years, and so we want the best that we have in our community and anywhere in the world to be at this Y and it's for the growth of young, young people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You spend a lot of time with the Y and, you know, not just raising funds but actually there dealing with the--
Speaker 2: Well, not as much as I'd like to because I've been so busy with this company [Eventions, Inc.] and with my family, but that's why I'm trying to limit what I do, so I can spend more time.  Mrs. King [Diane Baker-King], who is executive director, is a wonderful person.  She's a product of the Y.  She grew up in the Y as a kid and she's so committed and she needs so much help there, so I'd like to go and spend some time with programming and intertwining people that we know who have certain resources to help us with the Y.  We are with a capital campaign of eleven million dollars and I think we've raised seven million.  We've got three more we've got to raise and we'll have the grand opening soon, right after the first of the year.
Story_ID: 442572
Speaker 1: Any other stories?  I know you're, you- you're probably involved in more than just this, but this is--so anything else in terms of volunteering?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to play a little more golf (laughter) and that's not volunteering (laughter), but I want, we want the kids to learn that too, because a lot of decisions are made on the golf course.  I have a group called, that I belong to that are called the Divvy Divas [ph.].  They are all professional women.  We play golf once a month and we travel and we, we have a great time, but even through that we want to teach the kids at the Y [Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] store is now being involved with us and so we're hoping that we will get an indoor facility for them to learn golf at this age.
Story_ID: 442573
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  I hope that we can, in some way, get back to, how do I say, the way we were because it was though you have growth and you have everything moving so fast, we don't seem to have time for one another or for the children, and I think that that's what missing in our education system in our young people, that they really don't feel that people care.  They really don't.  I think, well many of them think, well, they really don't care.  Everybody's about themselves.  Everybody's trying to get ahead, and they're not taking time.  And, I think if just each one of us took time, spent time with the young people; that would make a difference in our society.  It doesn't matter what nationality they are.  We just need to take the hand of some young people and help them to grow and understand what community is all about.  I think, when you look at what happened with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], and I say this to my grandchildren all the time, and other young people, that all these things that we wear and we buy, they could be gone in a minute, you know?  And so, there is just, not that important, really.  I mean, we all want to achieve and have nice things but, if you don't have them, you still can have a happy life, but you've got to have concern and care for one another and I just think that we have to have more spiritual, spirituality in our lives and be concerned about one another and what's happening; I mean, we're driving down the street and we're knocking down old ladies and that's just not what God intended us to be.  We can just all have everything if we just help one another and so I think that that's what I'd like to see us do.  I'd like to see us slow down a bit and try to give back and to help one another, pull 'em up by their bootstraps, as they say, but help somebody else, too.
Story_ID: 442574
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any, any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I was laughing the other day, because I said to my friend, "I probably should have been a contractor like my father [Appolinare Amar] (laughter).  Then, I would be able to do more building and--."-- No, I think I've enjoyed my life and I have a lot more to do, so I'm trying to strategically plan the rest of my life a little bit different, because the first part of it kind of fell in place.  It just happened.  Things happened because of choices, but I'd like to plan a little differently as I go forth, so I'll know that there are some things I really want to accomplish and I do--will do them.
Story_ID: 442575
Speaker 1: Likewise, if we loo- if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I'm ready to leave my legacy yet (laughter), but I think starting this company [Eventions, Inc.] was a legacy for me, because really basically, it probably was one of the first events management firm and so, I also feel very compassionate about counseling, because I still have that part in me, so I talk to a lot of young people.  I get to the point where there's a day a week sometimes I will make, set aside just to make appointments to talk to young women in particular who want to talk to me and I would say, "Oh, I'm too busy, I don't have the time."  So what I started doing is saying, "(unclear) give me a day every week or every two weeks, and whoever wants to come in and talk about anything, let 'em do that."  You'd be surprised just, sometimes, a word of encouragement to young women just makes all the difference in the world to them, and you don't realize it until they come back and say, "Hey, you know, you said such and such to me and you don't know how much I appreciated it."  And so, that's why I say we've gotta back up and take time to do some of that.  And my husband's [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] very good about that.  I tended not to have been until I realized that it makes a difference; a big difference in peoples' lives.
Story_ID: 442576
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family now.
Speaker 2: My children?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm always proud to talk about my children and my grandchildren.  My, our son, who is the oldest, is Walton [Walton Waller, Jr.], and he is, Waller, he was by my first marriage [to Walton Waller, Sr.].  His, he's is a veterinarian in Canton, Georgia.  He loved animals and wanted to be a vet ever since he was six years old.  So, he has, you know, he's accomplished that goal.  He has a son and, Marshall [Marshall Waller], who is number six in the state in swimming and we're very proud of him.  He is now twelve years old.  Unfortunately, he's getting a divorce from Marshall's mother, but we're still in contact with her and with him.  And, then we have Tonya [Tonya Waller Williams], who is, she's Waller also.  She's Tony's sister by my first marriage, and she is an events manager extraordinaire.  She takes this to a whole different level and she's an excellent writer and a planner, and I'm sure she's going to go very far with it.  I really did try to get her to take over Eventions [Eventions, Inc.], but she thinks that that's, she doesn't want to have all the responsibilities of the building, of the lots of employees, and so she has her own way that she's doing her own thing in a way right now.  She still works with us, but she does her own consulting, and she has a daughter in Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], Danielle [Danielle Bessillieu], who is my little running buddy that--she's not my running buddy anymore.  Now that she's in college she's, you know, there.
Speaker 1: Savannah State is big in arts and stuff, I heard? It's a big arts school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  It's a nice little school, and, small, but she's enjoying it and I'm happy she's in college and enjoying it, and then we have Tammy [Tammy Young Williams].  Tammy is our daughter by Walter's [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] first marriage, so we have mine, yours, and ours and they are all ours and we love them all, but Tammy is, has a young son, our grandson, Jonathan Williams, who is seven years old, and he is into every sport that you can name, (laughter) soccer and--what does he call it, not skateboarding, they call it something else--but anyway he's into all these sports, hockey, ho- some kind of hockey, he said--
Speaker 1: Seems like I ought to know but I don't.
Speaker 2: She's got him into everything and she is at home, and her husband [Terrance Williams], they live in town also.  And then there's Nikki [Nikki Young], our youngest, and that's the daughter that Walter and I have together.  She's Nikki Walker, now, Young Walker, and she and her husband are both engineers.  They finished Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  Nikki went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, she finished in mechanical engineering and then she went into environmental engineering with her master's [degree], and so they're both here.  They all have lovely homes, doing well, and that's why we raise them.  They don't have any children yet, so we have three grandchildren and we're very proud of them and we love them and we try to spend as much time as we can with them in between our travelling and our business and our volunteering and their busy, busy schedules.  So, we are just, we're real blessed to have kids who have grown up and done well and their kids are doing well.
Story_ID: 442577
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, is the- is there anything I have neglected to ask you that we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think you've asked a lot, so I don't know (laughter).  You could always call me back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to the legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I- I think I'd like to be remembered as a person who gave from their heart, who shared, which I think I do pretty well, and who shared not only material things, but spiritual things and I'd probably like to have a legacy of some type of leadership summit for our young people that I could probably raise enough funds for it to, to continue, you know, forever, and that each generation would be able to be a part of it and learn from it and that's, that's about it.  Whatever God says is gonna happen in my life now is it, and whatever I leave is going to be a legacy from, from my heart.
Story_ID: 442578
Speaker 1: Well thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: Thank you for spending time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You were very easy to talk to.
Speaker 1: Oh, good.
Speaker 2: I guess I did all the talking.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, all I did was--
Speaker 2: I didn't bring up my church, but I am very involved with my church.
Speaker 1: Oh, which one?
Speaker 2: First Congregational [First Congregational Church of Atlanta, United Church of Christ, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: First--Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  If you want to say something, we've got two minutes left on the roll if you want to say something.
Speaker 1: Do you want to talk about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you this.  I don't know whether you'll put it in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we will.
Speaker 2: With, I'm pretty involved in my church.  I grew up as Catholic, but after my mother-in-law [Daisy Fuller Young] moved here, I changed to First Congregational.  That is the church that Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] and Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] grew up in as young kids and long history there, so I've been very involved in the church.  I've led the women's [TW1]fellowship and we have something coming up in December called the Holiday Jazz Vespers, so I'm planning that for my church with a group of, Dwight Andrews [HistoryMaker Dr. Dwight Andrews], Reverend Dwight Andrews, who is a talented musician, so he put this jazz vespers together.  We are rebuilding our church and the legacy of our church and so we're having this fundraiser for family for the holidays and we've got a few top name people we hope will be coming, and so I'm in the middle of planning that in between all the other things I'm planning, (laughter) and so we look forward to our church growing and that's a pretty significant part of our lives too.
Speaker 1: All right.  Yeah, from what I hear it's one of the most informed churches in the country in terms of congregational.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a pretty, pretty powerful congregation.  The church started, the--let me make sure I tell you correctly--the first black lawyers, they had their first meeting there, the medical doctors; in other words, all of the organizations basically that started, started in the basement of that church, right downtown.  It's 139 years old, by the way.
Story_ID: 442579
Speaker 1: That's me and my mom in 1941, (laughter) probably in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in front of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Great.  That's really all you have to do.  Now I'll put the next one up and you just kind of get a rhythm.
Speaker 1: Give your mother's name.
Speaker 2: Oh, Bernadette Honore Amar.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now what about this one?
Speaker 2: That's me when--with Radiant Moore [ph.], my horse, in Louisiana, practicing my riding.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year, approximately?
Speaker 2: Oh. That probably was 19--let me think, what would that have been?
Speaker 1: The late '50s [1950s] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Wait, '59 [1959], no it had to be in the '60s [1960s]. Yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  During the '60s [1960s] or mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: That was probably, yeah, late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good enough.
Speaker 2: That's my dad and his mom, Appolinare Amar and Grandma Clemonte [ph.], from Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Location and approximate date (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's at our home, on the side of our home, and that must be in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s].  Let me see, when did my dad die?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my daughter has those still.  They just did this.  I'm going to have to call and ask her for them.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about this one please (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's our wedding, Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] and Sonjia Young [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], August 22, 1970.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my confirmation in Baton Rouge, Louisiana at the Catholic Church, probably I was, what, fourteen, twelve or fourteen, about twelve years old.  I can't figure out what year that was right now (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's good enough.
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh.  That's a high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] photo.  No, that's not high school, was it?  I'm looking at the thing where you sit.  That must have been, yeah, that had to be high school.  I think I got a new ring or something, probably in my junior year of high school.
Speaker 2: Now, that's my mother-in-law [Daisy Fuller Young], that's their home in New Orleans [Louisiana].  That's--I don't think so.  Let Walter do that.  He's got some with the family home.  I'm gonna get his, yeah, 'cause he's got some with his family home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What about this one?
Speaker 2: This was our wedding down in the Valley in our home in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: Now, I know that's not me because that's real dark hair, but that's my mom and dad--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  With one of your siblings--
Speaker 2: With one of my sisters, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that was like the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that had to be the '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s] probably.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: No, that's not Margie [Germaine Amar]. (Laughter) This must have been about my tenth or eleventh birthday, probably my tenth birthday.  In our yard, a big party, I'm the one with the balloon, (laughter) with the bangs.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my family in Los Angeles [California] when we had a family reunion.  Let's see, Nikki [Nikki Young] was about five, so let's see, when was that?  That was--I don't remember what year it was.  It was probably, maybe mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: This is Walter, Carolyn [Carolyn McClain Young], my sister-in-law, and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and it was on the cruise that she did for [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's birthday about eight years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you want that one?  These are friends of ours.
Speaker 2: This is, (unclear) Clinton, President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was here for some occasion and Walt and I were at the event, so it's me and my husband with President Clinton.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Uh-oh.  This is more recent.  This is an event I've modeled for Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] for Bob Johnson's [sic. HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] daughter.
Speaker 1: Linda Johnson? Rice.
Speaker 2: Linda, yeah, Ri- [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice, was planning something for her father's book at Macy's and a group of prominent women in Atlanta were there, [HistoryMaker] Billye Aaron and then Monica Kaufman [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson] and all of us modeled for it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Date approximately?
Speaker 2: That was last, that's probably about six months ago, 2006. This is our anniversary about two years ago.  We went with a group of our friends to Jamaica at the Half Moon [Half Moon Resort, Montego Bay, Jamaica].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Maya Angelou, my good friend and big sister, at her home here in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on one second here. Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That was a couple years ago, she's sold the house now. This is me and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] a long time ago, as you can see.  I had planned for Coors Brewing Company, The Atlanta leaders' sports challenge and I was giving him, I guess, instructions (laughter).
Story_ID: 442580
Speaker 1: This is actually a picture of me and my siblings in, what's that area that got hit so hard--Biloxi [Mississippi], Pass Christian [Mississippi].  My uncle had a house there and we used to go in the summers. Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my granddaughter, Danielle [Danielle Bessillieu], who is now a sophomore at Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, when was this taken?
Speaker 1: Probably about maybe five years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Because that's a younger picture of her.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-oh.  (Laughter) Skinny-minnies.  This is some of the Ebony Fashion Fair models.  We were at a party after the show.  I believe I was in Tuskegee [Alabama], because the girl at the top is not a model.  She was, I've forgotten whose daughter, but that's Christine Huff, I mean Corinne Huff, Nancy Street [sic. Nancy Streets], Ann Taylor [ph.], I think her name was, and I forget the other girl's name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was in 19--(laughter) '60 [1960], '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].  Yeah, and that's me right there.  Somebody messed up my hair.
Speaker 2: I don't know what this picture is, to tell you the truth.  Just--
Speaker 1: A pensive mood.
Speaker 2: --me in a pensive mood (laughter).  I should have brought that other one, a really beautiful picture, and I've forgotten it.
Speaker 1: That is my baby picture.  That was in 1941, and--yeah, okay. This is me and my father [Appolinare Amar] for my debutante ball.  That had to be in '59 [1959]; '58 [1958] or '59 [1959].  It was my senior year and my father died shortly after that. In Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is one of our first events.  One of our girlfriends opened a bu- boutique and we did her grand opening, and that's Kiki [Kiki Thomas] and Michelle [ph.] with me.  We all had to wear the same colors wherever we did (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is that an agent?
Speaker 1: Yeah, probably.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's a similar--
Speaker 1: Yeah, me telling everybody what to do as usual (laughter).  I think she still has her boutiques, but that's the one with my daughter up there.  This is a recent article that came out, I think last year, no this year, 2006. This is me and my daughter working as a team for one of the holiday issues of, I think it was, the Atlanta Tribune.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next, please.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is me (laughter) probably a year or two ago, maybe a year ago for some event we were doing for business people.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the Atlanta Tribune celebrating salute to black business owners, 1997.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is my staff [at Eventions, Inc.] at the time with Oprah Winfrey for the GCAPP [Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Power and Potential] convention that was planned.  That's--what's her name--Jane Fonda's gr- organization.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, I think it was at one of Maya's Oprah parties.  Can you see that with all that glare?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is me and my husband [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] at one of [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's parties in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
