Story_ID: 56476
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, will you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Doris Jean Young-McCulley, D-O-R-I-S, M-C-C-U-L-L-E-Y, and--
Speaker 1: Can you give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth 4/5/47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Eutaw, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 12th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: We are in my home in Flossmoor, Illinois.
Story_ID: 56477
Speaker 1: Okay, before we get into depth, we ask five "People" magazine-ish-type questions.  The first one is--and they only require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Warm places.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Can't think of one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, if you do, later on, you know, let me know--get it in here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 56478
Speaker 1: Please give me the name of your parents, and could you spell their names and their--and give us their birth dates.
Speaker 2: My father's name is Willie Thomas Young, and his birth date was November 11th, 1923.  And my mother's name was Lucille Patterson Young, and her birth date is July 29th, 1927.
Speaker 1: Now, where was your father from?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Alabama, a little town called Boligee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-O-L-I-G-E-E.  And my mother was born in Alabama, a town called Eutaw, E-U-T-A-W, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do--have they passed down any stories about their ancestors to you that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, many, many stories about their ancestors.  My father's ancestors are, certainly it's a conglomerate of Crawfords and various Indians in the area, in terms of--and we've never been truly able to trace it.  Crawfords I think were slave owners, and certainly it's been confusing in the time, but there, certainly there was a high mixture of white, as (unclear)--you know, background on my father's side.  As my mom said, they high yellow blacks (laughter), okay.  And certainly there were many stories about their involvement with the development of the area and loan--landownership, etc.  A belief in education, that was very, very strong in both families.  My mother's side, again, more a mixture of African-American slaves, as well as Indians, and from the area.  As a matter of fact, my maternal grandfather was, I'm told, was half Indian.  And I'm not sure of which tribe, but they, they seem to think the Blackfoot, but I don't know.  My father--maternal grandfather, believed in landownership.  And certainly he had brothers, and the three brothers actually bought properties next to each other.  And that's part of my heritage, even at this point, in Alabama.  And they, they worked hard, and they believed in freedom.
Story_ID: 56479
Speaker 1: Now you had an ancestor that was brought over here in 1829.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you want to talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that was my great-great-grandmother [Lucinda Patterson].  She was brought over as a, well, as a preteen in 1829, and sold in, in South Carolina.  I don't know how she, she made it to Alabama.  But she was married to a part Indian that I was telling you about, my grandfather, grandfather's father.  And I think there are a lot of stories about her that are very significant.  Number one, she was sold as a slave, and she remembered being a slave.  And she was a hard worker, and she was blessed with long life.  As a matter of fact, she was more than 115 years old when she died.  There is one of the, my favorite stories is that she never suffered.  She died probably what sounds like congestive heart failure.  She died in her sleep.  Even at the time of her death, she could still see well.  She was not totally senile.  She was sewing, making a quilt the night of her death, and told my mother [Lucille Young] that she was going to bed early because she thought she was catching a cold, and never woke up.  And there are many stories about how she loved to fish, and she would take my mother fishing with her.  And she--my mother was actually her babysitter.  And they would go fishing, and Grandma Netta would take her, her some food wrapped in some paper, and she'd carry it in her bosom.  And when she said she was hungry, she'd pull it out of her sweaty bosom, according to my mother (laughter), and pass it to her for her to eat.  And then she would take her hat off her head, and dip up water, and give it to her and expect her to drink this (laughter) water out of her sweaty hat.  And that was one of my favorite stories, you know, 'cause you can imagine how you as a child would feel if that would happen to you today. The other stories that I've, I've heard about her was that she was a remarkable woman that, that loved people and service, that she would--and this was not only told by my mother's side, by other pe--older people that knew her, that she would, she considered it her appointed duty to go around and help all the unwed, new mothers in the area.  She would go to and visit them, and she'd tell them how to take care of the unborn or newborn baby.  She would show them how to make things to, to--for the, the baby.  She would teach them how to care for different ailments.  You know, one of the things that I learned in medical school was management of asthma, and to know that my great-great-grandmother would, was able to think of how to provide the first tent--oxygen tent.  She, her homemade oxygen tent was to put a kettle on over a sheet--oil cloth sheet--and have the baby's head in there.  And you know, I think that that was unique.  The other thing was that she was very informed with the various herbs and roots that were helpful for care.  And, and I've learned these stories over the years.  One of my visits, well, about five years ago to one my aunts, she was showing me flagstone, which is one of the herbs that's there for upset stomach.  And she gave me a piece of it, and I planted it in my backyard, and you know, just as a memory, thinking about it, I've--and I was thinking that I would make tea out of it and see what it tastes like--different herbal remedies for, like for example, menstrual cramps.  Her herbal arrangement for that was nutmeg tea.  And I know, just from my scien--scientific background--that nutmeg is very high in prostaglandin inhibitors, and that is probably the same inhibitor that we take Motrin, Anaprox today for.  And so that--and you know, from a scientific basis, you could see it might help with premenstrual or menstrual cramps, so that they, and they're very similar.  As I go, I, I've, I love to hear the herbal remedies for various ailments.  And to know that my great-great-grandmother was the one teaching these things over the years has been an inspiration to me.
Story_ID: 56480
Speaker 1: Now what was your great-great-grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Lucinda.
Speaker 1: Lucinda--what's her last name?
Speaker 2: Patterson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, and how do you spell Lucinda, just for the record?
Speaker 2: L-U-C-I-N-D-A, okay.
Speaker 1: That's, that's something.  Did you ever taste the tea that you were--that, that--from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've, I've had nutmeg tea, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very hard to take (laughter).  It's not a pleasant taste, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how long did your great-great-grandmother live?  I mean--
Speaker 2: To 115.
Speaker 1: And, and she, she died when, in what year was it?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about the year.  You know, they tell you these ages and their, their--you know, you keep those, but I, I don't remember the date.
Speaker 1: Do, do you have an approximate date, 'cause your mother was sort of babysat her, you said.
Speaker 2: Un-huh, so I, I, I really don't, don't know.  I haven't--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--like in 1930s or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say about then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It had to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Then she came--
Speaker 2: But I don't--
Speaker 1: --here at age, you said age twelve in 1929.
Speaker 2: Un-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess we can--
Speaker 2: We can say probably even 1940.  My grandfather probably died in '46 [1946], so I know she was still around after he--you know, at about the same time, before me, but when he was still alive too.
Story_ID: 56481
Speaker 1: That's something.  Any other stories about any--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, one of the things that I, I liked to hear, in terms of stories, is that there is a long age seems to be pretty evident in both sides of my genealogy.  I--my grandmother on my father's side died last year, and at that point, she was ninety-six years old.  And she corroborated some of the stories about my great-great-grandmother, because she remembered her and respected her greatly.  I've heard the stories about the yellow fever epidemics and the preparation of syrup, sorghum syrup, 'cause our relatives on both sides used to make sorghum syrup.  And so those are (unclear) interesting.  The other part--stories I've heard have been about the houses, and particularly the, the high ceilings, and that they were significant because of the tuberculosis epidemics in the South.  And that's where, you know, blacks have, have traditionally respected people that were [quote] "healthy," or having a good weight on them, because they felt that if you were healthy, you didn't have tuberculosis, you know, or consumption, as they called it.  And the other point was that the, the ceilings were high because that was necessary to prevent tuberculosis.  And as you know, the, the spread of tuberculosis is air--aerosol, in that it usually goes up.  And that was something that impressed me in terms of one of my grandmother's stories about why they always wanted to have their ceilings high, yeah--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --from a historical perspective.
Speaker 1: And you have quite a few stories that are related to health in your family--
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's really related to my interests, you know.  And I'm sure that if you talk to another one of my sibs [siblings], they will remember other stories.  And you know, it's, it's unfortunate, but we've, we've all said we wanted to make a, a, an auditory recording of some of the stories, 'cause some of them are still alive, but we've never gotten around to it.  And to listen to their stories of what took place over the years has been fascinating.
Story_ID: 56482
Speaker 1: Now you, as, as a little girl, you, you grew up in Eutaw, Alabama, right?
Speaker 2: Un-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, can you tell us about some of the sights, and sounds, and smells, I guess, from growing up in Eutaw, and what was Eutaw like, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Eutaw is, in, in the--is, is a name.  One of the things that, you know, you have to remember is that I've grew in--on a rural farm, and so, until, going back as an adult, I never saw the town itself.  I grew up on the farm, and it was beautiful.  I loved the outdoors; I loved the flowers; I loved the, you know, the freedom, the feeling of just, just being outside all the time.  We had a running brook near the house, and I used to go down there and just watch the crawfish and the fish, and you could see clearly in there.  I have very good, positive memories.  When I did start school, there was a little rural one-room school.  I remembered going to school and being in this big room, but that's, that's about all.  And it was always pleasant.
Story_ID: 56483
Speaker 1: I think that the first time I realized that there was even segregation of people was that, well, I think it was about 1957.  We went back--well, we'd go home, as we called it, every summer, and I remember we took the train there.  And while we were waiting, we went into this--the signs, well, the first time I'd ever seen black and white.  And mom explained that to me.  That was the first time, and I was actually ten years old then.  Before that I hadn't realized that there was a difference.  So--
Speaker 2: And how, how did you feel when you--when she explained it to you?
Speaker 1: I think--I don't know.  I didn't have any, any aggressive feeling until later, as I understood.  You know, she explained it to me, but there were no people around, so that there was no--you, you never personalize it until later, when you could really look at the fact that there were, there was the need for people to separate like this, and, and what the true meaning of it was, that you know, there was, there was a difference between you.  And so that, that--and the initial explanation really doesn't disturb you until it becomes a personal issue.
Story_ID: 56484
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things did you--what, what, what kind of activities were you engaged in, in school in, in Alabama, 'cause I know you got two stages, (unclear) in Alabama, then you moved to Chicago [Illinois].  You moved to Chicago, you're what, about eight or--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, eight years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was it--maybe you can tell us about the difference in activities from when you were there--
Speaker 2: When I was in Alabama, you know, everything was happy, you know, like, I, I en--truly enjoyed the freedom.  The foods were great.  I have good memories of smells, you know, like teacakes and things that were just part of my growth.  I loved fresh milk, fresh butter.  I loved trying to churn butter.  That was, it was all an adventure and--to, to me.  I later went back and I've talked to my cousins, and they said that the reason I enjoyed it so much was because my father [Willie Young] didn't expect me to work (laughter).  I didn't, I didn't have to work on the farm, so I was totally free.  But they tell me that they were expected to work and be productive.  And even when I moved to Chicago I had never really worked, worked on the farm.  And I would--it was just like I just lived on the farm.  And even going to school, school was, was fun.  It was a new experience because I, I got to interact with other kids and see kids on a regular basis.  On the farm you didn't see anybody, except your parents and a, a, a couple of the people that would work to help on the farm, but that was it.  And you know, I loved school; I loved learning.  I had a good memory.  And I remember, you know, how you, you have this [quote] "adult talk," and they, they would try to keep things a secret from you, some things that you weren't supposed to hear or know anything about.  And I remember my parents, their habit was to spell (laughter).  And so, my memory was good enough that I would remember the spelling, and go to school and ask somebody what (laughter) does that mean--until the person I asked, asked--told my parents that I was (laughter) memorizing the spelling.  So that was--I cut that out.  But, oh, I totally enjoyed school and, and the fact that, well, you know, in school everybody was related to you too in this small town.  Even now, they tell you if there's another person living in the town, they were related to you in some way (laughter), in somewhere, they're cousins somewhere.  And so it was, it was great.  Even going back every summer, you know, it was like freedom.  I lived to go back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of--what, what--you had like one teacher for the whole classroom or--
Speaker 2: We had two teachers.
Speaker 1: Two teachers.
Speaker 2: The one--there were two teachers.  They were a married couple, Reverend and Mrs. Hodges, and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--the thing that I do remember, when I moved here at eight, they decided to put me back a grade because they assumed that I had not learned well there, which is, is sort of interesting.  But it was the--I was told the way of the North.
Story_ID: 56485
Speaker 1: So your, your, your father [Willie Young] was sort of protective of you I guess--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: He was always protective.  And you know, his big goal in life was for his girls to be ladies and to be educated.  You, you understood very early that you, your job was school.  You were expected to do well in school, and that was your only job.  As a matter of fact, I remember when I went to high school.  And all these--all of my other girlfriends they had, you know, different things that you wanted, like, you know, two or more pairs of shoes and, and some of the later styles that they were wearing and all this.  And you wanted to get you a little job to do that.  And I remember talking to him about that, and he says: "Look, I take care of you, and you take care of school.  My job is to take care of you, and your job is to do well in school.  That's all you have to do, and I am going to take care of you." (Laughter) So, it was, it was clear.  You know, you were expected to do well in school, and that was it.
Story_ID: 56486
Speaker 1: Okay, now who are your, your other siblings, and where do you fall in the--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, and I have five sibs.  I have a sister that's three years younger, and I have two, two brothers after that, and two more sisters.  In terms of the way--in 1955, when we moved here [Chicago, Illinois], there were, was two girls and two boys.  And then it was later, in '62' [1962], that my mother [Lucille Young] had another two girls.  So (laughter) we always think about we were all even until then (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name 'em all for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, my sister, Shirley, is next to me, and she--I was born in '47 [1947], and she was born in '50 [1950]; then comes Eric, who was born in '54 [1954]; and Harold, who was born in '55 [1955], the year we moved here; and then there is Cynthia, who was born in '61 [1961]; and Marie, born in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Interesting, because my father [Willie Young] felt so strongly about education, all of us went to school.  My sister, Shirley, went to Augustana College in Rock Island, Illinois.  Cynthia went to--no, Eric, Eric went to Augustana initially, and then came back to Chicago, went to University of Illinois for a while, and then dropped out just before the end, took a job at the University of Illinois, and has been working there ever since.  Then Harold went to Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma] in Oklahoma and finished there, and has stayed in Oklahoma.  Then mer--Cynthia is the next one.  She went to the same school I went to, Gustavus Adolphus College [St. Peter, Minnesota].  She graduated from there.  And then Marie, the baby, went to Gustavus Adolphus for one year, decided she didn't like it and she came back, and she graduated from Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 56487
Speaker 1: That's, that's quite a record (unclear)--college (unclear).  So your father [Willie Young] got through to everybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Got through to everybody (laughter).  And I think they, they, they, they did well.  I think it's important that my father's attitude about taking care of us and, and, and us going to school was important and very significant.  My father really insisted that my mother [Lucille Young] stay at home while we were all going through the primary school.  As a matter of fact, the first time my mother got a job was in 1970.  And she worked at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], which is across the street from where we lived after that.  She did, also went back to school, which I think is significant, and was important to her.  She went back and she graduated in secondary education, and I think that, that helped her feel very positive about having achieved and fulfilled her belief that education was important too.
Speaker 1: Now did, did your father go, go to college or--
Speaker 2: My father went to A and M College in Alabama [Alabama A&M University, Huntsville, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear)--and he--and what did he do for most of his life (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He, after leaving the South--he was a farmer there--he came here and he was a laborer.  He worked very hard because, you know, as I said, he believed that he, his job was of take care of us.  Most often, he worked two shifts and worked at the same job, but he would work a lot of doubles, as they called them.
Story_ID: 56488
Speaker 1: Yes, how did you family come to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a combination of, number one, it was difficult for my father [Willie Young] to manage the farm by himself; and number two, I think that they wanted to earn more and wanted us to have more, you know, and there was this [quote] "better jobs," come North, they're--the same reason everybody else came I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where, where did you all live when you, when you finally got here?
Speaker 2: To let me--to, to reference my mother [Lucille Young], she said it was much, much worse.  In the, in the South we had a very big house that we lived in, there--a six-bedroom house, the family home.  And everything was open and, and fresh air, bigger area, etc.  And she thought it was the pits to come here to this small apartment on the South Side, that everything was [quote] "filthy."  You know, you people come from the North talking about--you would think that the streets were lined in gold.  And she was very, very disappointed, very, very disappointed with the move.  And, but they stayed and they, they managed.  We, we lived in the apartment at 5006, near Provident Hospital, for the first--I don't remember how many years--probably about, about six years.  And then we moved to another apartment at 5308 South Indiana, and we lived there probably another three years or so.  And the next move, they bought a house at 9630 King Drive.  So, and that was more to her liking than any of the places we had been to before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your impression of Chicago, pretty much the same?
Speaker 2: Pretty much the same, much more restrictive.  My mother didn't want us to go outside, because she was always afraid somebody was gonna steal you or harm you.  You, you went to play in the park when she was able to go with you, but that was it.  And we lived a very enclosed environment.  And we couldn't even go and play in the backyard unless somebody could watch you.  And you know, other kids were outside, but my mother did not feel safe with her kids outside by themselves.  So you never went out unless they could watch you or supervise you.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did your father feel satisfied that he had moved to, to, to Chicago?
Speaker 2: He felt that he was earning more than he could there.  And so, from that perspective, I think he, he was satisfied.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, tell me about school here in Chicago.  Did you, you know, how did you take the school and, and what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, school here was not any significantly different.  I mean I thought that you work hard because that's what you were expected to do.  My father wasn't satisfied with anything less than a perfect grade.  And if there was a reason why you couldn't do well, then he wanted to know.  And he believed that, you know, there was no reason why his kids couldn't learn anything.  I remember one Saturday, 'cause I had problems with fractions, sitting in the kitchen with him cutting up oranges all day long, going over fractions (laughter).  And he was just like that.  He was very good in math, and he believed that, you know, you could learn anything.
Story_ID: 56489
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were in school, like what did you, did you, did you have any aspirations of a career while you were in school?  Did you think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the other reason now, and I have to tell you--and then I, I obliterated that--there was a third reason, too, for moving here, and that's why mama [Lucille Young] supported it more than anything else.  My oldest brother, Eric, had been diagnosed with glaucoma, congenital glaucoma, at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  And my mother had been told that they had very good doctors at the Chicago Eye and--Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary.  And if we moved here, he could probably see the best of doctors, and may not go blind.  So I think that was her encouragement more than anything else--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to move here.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have relatives here to in Chicago?
Speaker 2: We had relatives here.  My father's [Willie Young] sister and her husband had moved here first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I'd asked you earlier about if you had any aspirations about--I mean did, did you have any idea what you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I--well, because Eric had been born with this, this eye problem, and, and as he got older, he was in considerable pain a lot of the time, because of the pressure there, and I wanted to help his pain, so I had decided very early that I was gonna be a doctor so I could cure Eric.  That was my, as a child, you know, goal, was I was gonna help my brother.  Unfortunately, Eric was born in '54 [1954].  We moved here in '55 [1955], and so in '60 [1960] he had significant increase in pressure, and he lost that eye.  And even though he was, he was fortunate that one of the people that he had met at the Eye and Ear Infirmary--you know, adults--had been impressed with him and had decided to will his cornea to him on his death, the nerve was dead so that he could not receive a cornea com--transplant.  And actually la--on losing that eye, it was a blessing and as well as a, a curse, as you can say, the other la--the other eye became stronger and so he no longer had the pain from the glaucoma, which they had difficulty controlling, and had actually better vision with the loss of one eye.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, did, did you have any idea when you, when you thought about becoming a doctor what it would take to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Initially, no.  As a matter of fact, in, in grammar school, I remember everybody saying exactly what you're saying.  You have no idea what (unclear)--and being very discouraging, and not--it meant that you wouldn't have a family, wouldn't have children, that you were gonna spend the rest of your life in school, and that it was--it wasn't a pleasant picture that she came up with being a doctor.  And I would say yes, that's, I don't have any problems with it out of defiance more than anything else, not out of understanding.  But as I got older and understood more--I had never even talked to anybody that was doctor, so it was, you know, it was very difficult to make that kind of a commitment.  You know what I mean?  But, as I nourished this desire and got older and understood what it meant, then I, I (unclear)--that I, I still really wanted to do this.  I was very interested in the sciences and biology and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --continued.
Story_ID: 56490
Speaker 1: You were saying there were no, there were no doctors in the neighborhood that you could even talk to about becoming a doctor or, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not in the, not in Alabama, so I never had any, in, any exposure there, and even when we moved to Chicago [Illinois].  I think I was probably twelve or twelve, fourteen before I even talked to anybody about being a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, you, you say you, you did well in school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  And you went to Farren and then to--
Speaker 2: I went to John Farren [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and then went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was across the street.
Speaker 1: Now what was DuSable like?  I know that's the, that's, is the heart of Bronzeville, you know, in Chicago.  I don't know if people were calling it that then.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) it wasn't--
Speaker 1: But it's the heart of the black community--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was good for me.  I worked hard.  And I think we were talking earlier, and I mentioned to you that in that first year, I, I had been placed in a non-college prep curriculum.  And my father [Willie Young] became very irate about that, because he though, he felt all the time that I had to go to college.  And so he went up and he had that changed, and I was on the college prep course.  My high school counselor was very supportive, very encouraging for me to go away to college, and particularly was helpful in my getting scholarship funding for Gustavus Adolphus College in [St. Peter] Minnesota.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your counselor?
Speaker 2: Katherine Bogan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was interesting that she was well thought of at the school.  As a matter of fact, the school-based clinic program that I initiated, spearheaded earl--later--that first clinic that we opened up was--is named Katherine Bogan Health Clinic.  It's in the school.  And I opened up clinics at Crane [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Orr [Academy] High School [Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the other teachers and maybe even students or other people that influenced you and encouraged you when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the, there were many of them, but [Katherine] Bogan, Teller--it's, it's hard to remember--Mr. Woody, he was the chemistry instructor, Mr. Thomas, Eddie Thomas, in, in history.  There were--Ms. Brown I remember.  You know, it, it's--as the time goes on, it fades, but I cannot remember having any negative interactions with any teachers during that time.  I felt that I was well supported by really all the teachers.  And that was, that, that's something that's different than what I've heard in subsequent years.  You know, I had very positive interactions with all my teachers and, and felt very good about it.  As a matter of fact, I still see Eddie Thomas and some of the teachers from high school now because I still go to the church that's in the community at St. John Baptist on 48th and Michigan.  And they're still around, so.
Story_ID: 56491
Speaker 1: What, what other high, high school activities [at DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] were you involved in, other, other than study?
Speaker 2: I was in the National Honor Society; I was in the Black History Club; I worked with the school book, yearbook; I think I, I worked with, again, tutoring program with other young people; I was in a club called Education for Life Organization; I was a [quote] "girl scout" all the way through (laughter) senior girl scout.  So I was pretty much involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, as graduation approached, well, tell, tell me about graduation.  But just as graduation approached, you had a pretty clear idea what you were gonna do, right?
Speaker 2: When graduation approached, I was going to go to Gustavus Adolphus College [St. Peter, Minnesota], and I was going to go on to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there any significant story about graduation that you wanna tell?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That I wanna tell?  No.  One of the things that's interesting, though, one of my classmates, Cynthia, who's now Cynthia Tukes (ph.), I ran into her at, at, at our church.  And I lost my yearbook the first year, you know, right after graduation.  And she told me that she--I hadn't changed, and she had the yearbook.  And, and I said why don't you bring it one Sunday and let me look at it?  And she, she brought it.  And I had forgotten totally, but in the yearbook it says voted the most likely to succeed, and that was me.  And I had not even remembered that at all.  And I said wow, it's sort of nice to look in retrospect at what your life has been like.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were then pretty impressive young lady in, in high school I would guess, 'cause people wanted to help you, and they voted you most likely to succeed.  That's--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--I was very blessed.
Story_ID: 56492
Speaker 1: So, so you had a lot of backing, a lot of support as you went off to Gustavus Adolphus [College, St. Peter, Minnesota], right?
Speaker 2: College, yeah.  And you know, it's, it's interesting that you sometimes don't realize that part of who you are, it becomes really a fragment of all those people that are involved with you throughout life.  And so you always feel positive about others, and you (unclear)--you have a positive vibration in you.  And I think that's one of the things that's, that's helped me throughout life.  It's easy for you to, to be a giver and to, to want to give when you can say throughout my life, you know, people have been very supportive, very warm toward me.  I remember getting ready to go to college and thinking, wow, afraid to say anything about clothing and things like this that you might need because you, you know what, you know, your parents are working as hard as they can, and you know what resources they have.  And just out of the blue, there was this organization that was directed to me that wanted to have a, a young person that they would sponsor for back to school clothing and things like that.  And I--it, it's--and, and right now it still feels very warm and very positive.  The Lake Forest Presbyterian Women's Organization, they provided hand-knitted sweaters that they had--and I had no idea the winters were like in Minnesota.  And they went on a shopping spree with me for college.  And that was a very positive, warm thing that happened.  And as I said, I was a very blessed young person.
Story_ID: 56493
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find Gustavus Adolphus College [St. Peter]?  This is Minnesota, and you're a young lady who was raised partly in Alabama, you know, and now you're going to Minnesota to school.  And were there many other black students there, and were you--
Speaker 2: Actually, I think there were no more than five (laughter) of us black students.  It was [clearing throat], it was culture shock.  You know, the--you've--I really did not--being involved in the, in Bronze Town--Bronzeville--as you say, and assuming actually that what you see becomes your world, right, and so my world was bronze.  To go to Gustavus, where you are now truly the minority, the minute, and to find that when you go downtown, people actually stop their cars and stare at you, 'cause you're maybe the first black they've ever seen (laughter), it was a totally new experience for me, however, it was a growing experience.  I, I think that initially it was Katherine Bogan's desire that I go to, to Gustavus.  And I think that it was probably part of my growth overall.  It certainly was a nurturing growth, because a small environment, very supportive environment, one of--a continuation of a protective environment, actually.  Because, as I told you, my, my parents were super protective, remained super protective throughout the, the years, and still are super protective (laughter), in terms of my mother.  But going to Gustavus, it was a closed community, a college community where most of the people there worked for the college and that were in that town.  The college was located on a hill.  The staff there was very interactive with students.  It was just like another family, an extended family.  You could go and visit and talk with any professor, any day, any time; they all had open-door policy.  I could, going down, down the hill there--as I said the college is located on a hill--and could pass one of my professor's houses, and they'd say, well, why don't you come in and have coffee or pie?  And, and you'd sit and you'd talk with them.  As a matter of fact, it was nothing for the dean to invite you over for dinner.  It was just a, a very good environment, very supportive.  You wanted to succeed.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the key people that reached out to you, you know--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, in, at, at Gustavus I would say my chemistry professor.  Arne Langchum (ph.) became a very personal friend.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?  Somebody's gonna have to transcribe it.  That's why I'm asking you to spell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Langchum, L-A-N--I don't know--A--A-R-N-E--I can spell.  Arne Langchum was, was really a very--and, and Hoggenboom (ph.), they were--he was a chemistry professor.  But I, I mentioned Arne particularly--
Speaker 1: You wanna try to spell that one?
Speaker 2: No (laughter)--H-O-G-G-E-N-B-O-O-M is Hoggenboom.  But when I, I decided later, as I was nearing graduation--my husband and I had communicated from high school on--and I was deciding that I really was gonna give up on this idea of going to medical school and just settle for an MBA in, in hospital administration.  Then I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and the first--at the end of the first year, I met a very close friend, girlfriend.  And it was interesting, 'cause she and I were enjoying this MBA program, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, wait a minute.  We sped up and got you out of Gustavus Adolphus--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--graduated from Gustavus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now I'm in, in graduate school.
Speaker 1: All right--
Story_ID: 56494
Speaker 1: --And my girlfriend, Stephanie, her name is Stephanie Compton now, but at that time--Stephanie comes to me and she says, Doris, do you know that they're opening up a new medical school [Rush Medical College], and they're going to deal with, with medicine on an organ system basis?  And it sounds fantastic.  She says, let's go to medical school.  And I said well, I've always wanted to be a doctor.  She says yeah, and said you've never worked, but I have.  And so, and I don't think that you (laughter) wanna work.  So I said yeah, I think it's great.  So, anyway, Stephanie never applied to medical school.  She just planted the seed again for me.  So that evening I went home.  And I was married to Bernard [McCulley] at the time.  And so I told him, I said you know, honey, I've always wanted to go to medical school, and Stephanie is telling me about this medical school.  What do you think?  And he says, well, I think that if you wanna go to medical school, and you don't go, you're a damn fool.  And so, he says, I think you should go.  So I told him about Arne Langchum (ph.).  And I called Arne Langchum up from here, and I said, Dr. Langchum, I said I'm thinking about going to medical school.  What do you think?  He says, Doris, I think that's fantastic; I think it's great.  He says, I, I tell you what, let me write your letters of recommendation (laughter).  And that was the kind of support of people I had, you know.  And I said okay, and he says, and I don't think you should just apply to Rush.  He says I think you should apply to a bunch of medical schools.  And he says, let me get the name of this organization where you can just send application in, and it'll go out through all the medical schools.  Bottom line, I got accepted at three medical schools.  And I called up--you know, I went to, on interviews to at least two medical schools.  And one of the things that in my interviewers they would always say: who is this Dr. Langchum, because he is so impressed with you? (Laughter)  And even though I never read the letter of recommendation, I was very positive that he had done a, a superior job--(simultaneous)-- [02:27:05:14]
Speaker 2: He must have made quite an impression on him.
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, we worked together for the, for four years.  I worked as a laboratory assistant in the chemistry labs.  And it was, it was a good positive relationship.
Speaker 2: So you ended up going to Rush, right?
Speaker 1: un-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And well, tell me about, you know, medical school.  Rush is named after Benjamin Rush, right? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, Benjamin Rush, one of the first black graduates from medical school.  You know, I say, you know, that your whole background is important because each step is like a preparation for the next step.  One of the things that you have to remember is that you're taught that God never puts a task before you that He has not prepared you for along the way.  And so each step is another challenge.  When after going through the nourishing atmos--environment of Gustavus [Adolphus College, St. Peter, Minnesota], I felt secure in my personal ability to accomplish, and that was not an easy thing to do.  Because when I, when I left DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I went to Rush--went to Gustavus--I felt, a very confident student.  I told you I had worked hard.  That first year at Gustavus was mind-blowing, as the kids would say.  That first year--first semester--I came home with a D+ average.
Story_ID: 56495
Speaker 1: So you said--you were backtracking to your first--
Speaker 2: First--
Speaker 1: --quarter at Gustavus Adolphus [College, St. Peter, Minnesota].
Speaker 2: It was the first quarter.  I cai--you know, we, the, the black students got together, and every one of whom uniformly said they weren't coming back.  I had been the most successful in terms of emotionally being able to deal with the, of being a minority in an all-white environment.  It was not the professors so much, and it wasn't even the students, I mean on a one on one, people were generally nice.  So it wasn't just racism, it was, even, it was the atti--it was--on campus it was more, you know, kids either ignored you or they asked questions.  They were interested in you.  But it was, it was different.  You know, you were learning proposition for them, as well as you learning; you know, it was a give and take.  But you never got over the fact that your social life was different.  Your food choices were different.  It was a Scandinavian environment, and your lifestyle was different, okay.  So that--and we were not the hotshots that we thought we were.  You know, everybody that came to Gustavus were the upper fourth of the class ranks.  And whereas you were valedictorians and, and at least the top ten of the class at, at DuSable [High School, Chicago], the things, in terms of competition in an all-white environment, was different.  And we were not very successful that first quarter, and hadn't learned how to study or do some of the things that we, we thought we had accomplished.  And so everybody was sitting in this room talking and as a black group.  And I said I'm not coming back here.  This is it.  Only person that graduated from DuSable, Barbara Cox, said she was coming back.  And Barbara and I had been friends at, at DuSable.  She was an elementary education major.  And everybody uniformly--one of the girls had said--well, she had gotten married secretively before leaving Chicago [Illinois].  And her husband was in the Army, and she was gonna join him in Germany.  And it was hard.  I hadn't made a commitment, but I remember being at home.  And, and I told mom [Lucille Young], I said, mom, everybody's decided not to go back, and I think I'm gonna stay at home too.  I'll, I'll go to Kennedy-King Junior College and then I can stay in school here.  And I remember mama was straightening my hair with the old-fashioned straightening comb at the time.  And she, she didn't say anything at first.  She sort of put the comb down on the stove, and she looked me and she said, Doris Jean, the rest of them can do whatever they want to.  But I'll tell you what, they may kick you out of that school, but you're not quitting.  She said, I didn't raise no quitters.  You going back to that school (laughter).  And so, I went back.  Well, if you, if you gotta go back, you can't be at the bottom (laughter).  And so I made some, some real changes.  Bottom line, I graduated from Gustavus with a 3.6 or 7 average.  After I went back, I made a recommitment to studying.  You know, after all, my father [Willie Young] said there was nothing you couldn't learn.  It might take longer, but you, you can learn it--so I did more courses in different areas.  I was not satisfied with math, but I, you know, was afraid to, to, to take the higher math.  I took it pass/fail.  I took anything I thought I wanted to do, and bottom line, I was very successful from then on, every commitment.  So when I graduated, I felt that there was nothing I couldn't do as a next step.
Story_ID: 56496
Speaker 1: And I went to the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] M.B.A. program.  And one of the first things to happen to me--you know, you, you're used to Gustavus [Adolphus College, St. Peter, Minnesota] being a very positive and nurturing environment where you can talk to all the professors.  One of the first lectures I went to in accounting, and the professor I had was a publisher of the book that we were using.  And so I stayed after the lecture to talk to him, to ask him some questions in-depth just like some of the other students.  And when we got through, and everybody else was, you know, had asked their question--I'd asked my question--he turned to me and he said well, young lady, I'm glad you, you came up now to seek help.  And this was the first day of class.  He says, because most of you wait until the end, when there's nothing anybody can do for you.  And so I assume you wanna get some tutoring.  And that to me was one of the most racist things that you could have said to me because it, it, it, it hurt at the very base of your ego.  Because, you know, here you think that you are now ready for competition, and, and you find that it's not, you know.
Speaker 2: They've already judged the--
Speaker 1: They have already judged--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you're incompetent and inferior.  And so, I say that 'cause you asked, well, how was it at Rush?  Well, that was--U of C was the preparatory grounds for Rush [Medical College, Chicago, Illinois]. 'Cause you figure that you go from softer to next to next, and that's the way it progressed.  Rush was a, an experience in terms of, you know, you say well, how did you feel back then when you found black and white?  As I progressed through the educational systems, I defined the feeling of how I felt--how you feel with the separation of black and white.  We call it racism, but it's not just to do with race.  It's more a core feeling of how you feel as a human being that's judged and found inferior before you have an opportunity to excel.  And that's the--that's what was painful at Rush.  It was almost like--well, actually it is, it's learning a new language.  I think that even one of the, the, the frightful things was that it's not just the technological language that's communicated.  It's the emotional basic human communication that's communicated as inferior, different.  When you, as a medical student going on rounds, you, you learn--and we, and we talked to each other about this, in terms of black students--you, you learn to position yourself not at the end of the line of students that are going to go around and visit a, a patient.  Because inevitably, when you finished at the end of the line, the person laying in the bed would ask you for the bedpan (laughter), or they would ask you to do something, 'cause you couldn't possibly be part of the educational group that's going through here, and so, therefore, you must be there in some inferior role that you're playing--and those things that you--you don't discuss.  I think that's, that's part of the, the training that, that takes place over time.  It's not something that's not experienced by everybody. We don't communicate it to each other, to our children to expect, or one of the things that has taken place, even in terms of the history.  Your children, you, you try to avoid them having negative experiences.  But I think if you had communicated that to them, they would have been prepared for it, and maybe it made less of an emotional impact over time.  You know what I mean?
Story_ID: 56497
Speaker 1: It was only as an, an adult that my father [Willie Young] sat out, out, outside and we'd, we'd talk and we'd--about his experiences in the [U.S.] Army and how in order to avoid blacks having a social involvement with the community people, they would tell the ladies that they had tails, that, you know, that black soldiers you had to be careful.  And, and your father would tell you well how a young lady would tell him, "can you show me your tail?"  And you know, it was more of a, a poor emotional gut feeling.
Speaker 2: What, was he in World War I or, or II?
Speaker 1: II.
Story_ID: 56498
Speaker 1: And that's, that's part of the experience at Rush [Medical College, Chicago, Illinois], where you, you--it was very, it was more than the education being the task at hand.  It was facing a new environment with--from another level as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: But you, you succeed.  It, it's a challenge, but it's part of that memory that each of us that have, that have gone through very hard environments and times have felt.  I think part of the new generation, you know, I, I marvel sometimes at the laissez-faire attitude of some of the young people.  But I think it's our failure to communicate that they are now able to enjoy things at much more emotionally free level because we have gone through and, and educated over time in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, who were some of the--were there other black students there and, and, and who were--
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: --some of the other kind of students that are there?  I know when you go to medical school, you get--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a lot of other kind of people, I mean too, as well as white people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as well as white people.  I think, though, Rush being a small college--I think that first year there were seventy people accepted.  It was--we used to joke among ourselves and say there were eight black--eight blacks--not really any ethnic other groups, other than--you know, you can talk about religious group - there were so many Jewish, so many Catholics, etc., etc.  But that first group was very congruent, black and white.
Speaker 2: Okay, and now what was the joke about the eighth?
Speaker 1: Well, it was a little more than 10 percent (laughter).  You know, traditionally, if you looked--and the other thing that we talked about was the fact that usually of the 10 percent you really couldn't tell by looking at their skin color whether they were black or white, okay.  But with our group, you could tell.  You could look at 'em and say well, this, this is a black, this is black, this is black.  But (laughter)--
Speaker 2: So there is a secret black (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear)--yeah, there were.  There were some secret blacks, (unclear) the--it's-- the 10 percent wasn't all secret blacks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was a joke.
Story_ID: 56499
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, well, you know, how did it, how did it move?  What did you have to learn in medical school, and what branch of medicine did you pursue, I mean--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I thought that 'cause Rush's [Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois] organizational plan in terms of organ system approach was excellent, and it helped to integrate the information.
Speaker 1: Now what is that, for those of us who nothing about that--
Speaker 2: Well, basically--
Speaker 1: --organ system?
Speaker 2: Our organ system, instead of you learning, say, OB-gyny [OB/GYN] and pediatrics, and you know, or anatomy physiology, etc., trying to integrate all of it, the information, in one organ system.  For example, you, you do the sys--organ heart and do--you do cardiovascular diseases at the same time, or kidney, or nephrology, everything that's related to the, the diseases that affect (unclear)--and physiology, all of it integrated more than just doing a course in anatomy, a course in physiology, a course in (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you studied it by the organ and the diseases that that organ--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that were affected by the organ.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was pleased with the education and all the interaction.  I, I felt that it was a very positive educational experience.
Speaker 1: Medical school is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Grueling.
Story_ID: 56500
Speaker 1: And how did your family--did you have children at this time or?
Speaker 2: No.  I was married, as I told you.  I talked to my husband [Bernard McCulley] about going.  He was always supportive about the, the time necessary to commit.  I think what enabled me to be successful was that I'm a pretty--I can focus.  And so, but in that focusing that eliminates pretty much everybody except my immediate family, so that I lost contact with friends and relationships I had over time.  I mentioned to, to you earlier that I had a college roommate that I spent with--the whole time with; she and I were roommates throughout college.  And it's, it's actually a commendation to her that we remained friends over the time, because she maintained the contact.  I focused to the point where there was nothing except study, a little family relationship, and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so you, so you, you lose contact over the years.  You even--I even dropped out of my church family during that time.  One of the, the challenges I had found with going to medical school [Rush Medical School, Chicago, Illinois] in the beginning was, what if you have a family?  Does it mean that you can't have a family if you go to medical school?  And well, I was not blessed to have a biological family.  And so that when I finished medical school and I finished, almost finished my residency training, in my last year of residency, my husband and I decided to adopt our, our daughter.  And so Beleshia was born in 1976.  And we--I finished up the residency, and I did a fellowship at Cook County Hospital, then started working actually.  My first job was at County as an attending [physician] in infectious disease, teaching and doing consultations.  Just before I, I'd left there, my daughter was seven, we adopted our son, and he's now eighteen, so (laughter), shows you how long that's been.
Story_ID: 56501
Speaker 1: Well, what have been some of your, your most memorable experiences, I guess, as a doctor or, or as an administrator, to tell the truth?
Speaker 2: Most memorable experiences as an administrator was working as a night administrator at the Chicago Foundling Home.  That was a, a home for [quote] "unwed mothers" that were deciding whether they wanted to place their children for adoption or whether they're gonna keep them.  During that period it was a place where they could go and live like a family away from their families, and unfortunately they closed that concept.  But I was working as a night administrator for them.  Then the--it was the interaction with the girls, talking to them about their concerns, their regrets, their feelings about the pregnancy, about whether they're gonna put their children up for adoption or not, that was, that was good.  The next--as a doctor, it has been the patients and what they teach.  You know, it's, it's not--certainly, you remain a teacher throughout your life.  You learn from all the people you interact with, but you also teach.  And, and you know, it's that, that old story that if, if you give a person a meal, that's the end of it.  If you teach that person how to fish for the meal, then that's a lifetime.  Well, if I teach you how to care for your diseases, that's a lifetime.  So, I am a committed teacher, and my greatest thrill as a physician is interacting with the patients and teaching them how to manage their diseases.
Story_ID: 56502
Speaker 1: Prevention is, is a discussion that's, you know, it's been going on for a long time, in terms of the established medical community is relatively new, you know, just in the last twenty years they've been talking about--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --prevention and so forth.  So--
Speaker 2: It's been my philosophy from the very beginning.  I have, I have always had this philosophy about medicine.  And I think that it really stems from my great-great-grandmother, because that's her attitude.  She had to teach how to manage diseases.  And I've always tried to teach and really get you involved in it.  One of my--if you ask me, one of the things that irritate me most about my profession, it has been the assumption that the patient is incapable of learning and understanding disease process and how to help themselves.
Speaker 1: So you believe that most people can actually, if they knew what to do, could actually take care of themselves and maintain their health on a certain level?
Speaker 2: They are able to maintain it at a certain level much better than I can, because I can't do anything without your cooperation.  And you have to understand why it's important for you to cooperate and what you can do to help yourself.  And so, therefore, actually, I have a very small role to play.  It's really what you think of your own health and what you are willing to do to maintain it that's important.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is it, is it hard to--the general public seems to--well, I'll just say a lot--it seems to be a general notion that, you know, you just eat whatever you want and do whatever you want, and then when you get sick, you go to the doctor to fix it, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) you're not my patient.  But one of the things that I, I, I tell, you know, chronic hypertension is one of the diseases that affects blacks in, in many, many instances.  In all walks life it's one of the diseases that we have to be most concerned with.  Cardiovascular disease actually starts with you maintaining your own body and what you, you eat at a very young age.  And unless you understand that at the very beginning, basic, it's--there is no hope for me to write a pill to take care of you.  I can't fix you.  There is no fixable diseases that are around that you're going to be seeing a physician for on a regular interval period of time.  The fixable ones are pretty much the surgical ones, the corrective ones.  But all of the medical management diseases are teaching and, and, and interaction with you as the teacher.
Story_ID: 56503
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you--what's your sense of the medical needs of the black community in regards to what you just said?
Speaker 2: The medical needs of the black community is for more people to interact with them in a way where they can understand what their responsibility is in the disease process, and not to have the concept that I'm gonna write a prescription that's gonna fix you.  There is no fix that does not involve the patient interacting and taking care of those basic day-to-day things that they can do in terms of their diet, how they look at themselves, and their maintenance of the body.
Speaker 1: What are some of the health hazards of being black in an urban environment like Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's the (laughter), it's a health habit--I think it's the same for, whether you're black or white or Chinese or any, any other ethnic group at this point, but basically, the urban environment really is a health hazard to us, you know.  And I think what--all the things that we have been putting into the atmosphere makes a big difference.  The other big thing is the fast foods, what you, you eat, you know, and certainly, the salt and the overeating it's really about to kill us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, now you said an interesting thing off camera about black people and salt, and that being a--and, and survival.  Can you explain that?
Speaker 2: Oh, what I alluding to, particularly genetically, what has happened to us is that many Afro-Americans that were brought over here as slaves were the, the, the Afro-Americans, the, the Africans, that could conserve salt.  And as they, they have come into an urban environment, because of that salt conservation, that salt has worked as a detriment to them in terms of the hypertension that's seen in blacks in the urban environment.
Story_ID: 56504
Speaker 1: Can you, can you explain how this process works (unclear)--
Speaker 2: What, what I mean by the salt retention, if you notice that when the slaves were brought over, many, many of those slaves died of dehydration as the primary basis for it, and certainly they had gastrointestinal illnesses, etc., etc.  But the bottom line was dehydration, so that those that were able to conserve salt survived that tri--that passage from Africa to here.  And it continued to be a protective thing, as long as they were in an environment where they were not exposed to excessive salt.  But in an urban environment, where you continue with high sodium diets, and you're, you no longer need this conservation of salt, then it becomes a nemesis.  You--it really ri--create the rise to hypertension that we are seeing at greater numbers.  And so now you have a selective population that is exposed to high sodium salts that are conserving salt, and therefore, now are hypertensive.
Speaker 1: Sort of an OD [overdose] on salt, in other words.
Speaker 2: OD on salt, yes.  So that, that, that becomes a, a real trial, that certainly we're finding that it's not only the hypertension, but even the cholesterol problem that we're seeing.  You know, genetically the ability is to have cholesterol, probably may worked as a salvation to the nomads that, during periods of famine, but now in our urban environments, where we no longer need this high levels of cholesterol, becomes a real problem.
Speaker 1: Now, what about asthma.  I know asthma's a, a big--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then that's what I mean by the environment, in terms of the air and the irritability.  Certainly it, for a while, has been the number one killer in black males.  But I think that's more or less related to the black male population ignoring the need to be involved in their own health care, and again, that educational component of medical management.
Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas of why the asthma rate in the black community is so high?
Speaker 2: I think it's certainly going to be related to the environment, in terms of what other fomites or respiratory irritants are in that environment, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and what would some these be in--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that right now they related it to some of either rodents or insects that dwell in the home environment, carpeting, the air itself, purification.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, a poverty--
Speaker 2: --stricken area, you have higher incidences of roaches and other fomites that are in the environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, what are, what are some of the other hazards--
Speaker 2: Well, like, as I said, the exhaust, the, the pur--the ability to, to have clean air.  You know, we're killing ourselves actually.
Story_ID: 56505
Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna exhaust this topic, if you, you have something else to, you wanna add something else to it.  But I wanna talk about Provident [Hospital] too.  And--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and so.
Speaker 2: You know, Provident was another one of those challenges that came up.  And in my mind I felt that there was a need for me to give back to the community.  I still, and I always feel that because, as you said, that I've had what looks like an undue portion of giving to me throughout my life.  And so Provident was going to be my endeavor.  I, I have always felt very bad that we have very few institutions that stand over--and those things are important.  You know, you say well, institutions are only buildings, but buildings are important because they're physical inspirations of what our past has been.  And it was very significant to me that Provident should remain as one of those institutions that had survived more than a hundred years.  So when I was asked if I wanted to go back and be the medical director there, I thought I had put all the pieces together in terms of the education, etc., and the connection with the other young committed clinicians, that I should be able to do this.  And it was a big challenge because there were a lot of problems facing Provident at the time that I made the transition over as medical director.
Speaker 1: Now before we go further, I think that for the sake of this tape that's gonna last long beyond us, I hope, can you explain the historical significance of Provident Hospital, and what is Provident Hospital?
Speaker 2: Provident Hospital historically was established in 1930 [sic, 1891], I believe.  It was a black hospital that serviced the black community, for the most part, although--the poor community as in general.  It was significant because it was also a training educational site for young black physicians along the way and for many black nurses, so that it had a lot of history associated with it.  It had been affiliated with the, certainly, the tuberculosis epidemic in Chicago.  It provided the first chest x-ray testing sites for the bronze community.  It was one of the first hospitals to have a director affiliation with University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for the training of young black obstetricians, gynecologists in particular.  So it, it had significant historical firsts.  It was the first hospital where Daniel Hale Williams had performed that historical open-heart procedure on a young black that had been stabbed outside of the hospital.
Speaker 1: This is the first such procedure in the United States--
Speaker 2: First--
Speaker 1: --on anyone.
Speaker 2: --in anyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was--it's been billed as the first open-heart procedure--and so that there were a lot of historical firsts related to this hospital.  And I, for one, was very passionate about the survival of the hospital, so that when I transferred over, it had been plagued with problems related to medical staff organization, trying to man--manage the health staff systems, nursing, and integrating all the service delivery.  And I felt that my training over the years would be helpful, so I came over as the medical director.  And it was during that period that many hospitals in the Chicago area were closing.  And Provident had significant debt load, with the mortgage having built a new hospital owed to the Department of Health and Human Services, as well as debts owed to its vendors.  And it did not survive the closure.
Story_ID: 56506
Speaker 1: One of the things that I--as, as an offshoot of that, I was certainly there during the transition where we closed the in-patient facility, and tried to maintain the hospital's licensure until it could be transitioned to another holder of the license, so that even though the hospital out--in-patient facility closed, was transitioned to Cook County Hospital.  And subsequent to that, I've worked with the development of the Provident Foundation to try to maintain the historical significance and a link so that young people that are interested in the history, as well as the tradition of medically related education in the various medical rated fields that Provident was strong in, which was radiology, nursing, and medicine, could be passed on to the next generations.
Speaker 2: Now Provident--at the time you came to Provident, you said there are--there were crises among a number of hospitals in the area.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And could you talk, could you speak to what, if there was a--was there a general cause for this in the, in the medical administration community, I mean in, in terms of looking at it as a medical administrator?
Speaker 1: Well, looking at it, I, I think that we have seen a closure of hospital because there is a transition of medicine in this country.  You know, in 1970 we were talking about a national health insurance program, but before we could develop a national health insurance program, there certainly had to be a transition from the old system that we were in--private system that we were involved in to a newer system.  We have witnessed over the years the escalating costs related to medicine to the point where private industry has rebelled, and public industry has--public health care systems have, have become overburdened.  And there has been just a, a overwhelming dropout of the uninsured--poor uninsured--who are not poverty-stricken, where that, you know, we're now on a desolation course that will enter into probably a new phoenix, in which will probably be a national health service type program.  And it's a matter of organizing the bits of pieces.  Medicare at this point is rebelling because of the costs related to it.  And each little private industry is rebelling, so that out of all of these little revolts pieces, I think eventually we're gonna roll into one big ball of a national health program.  I think that other countries, particularly Denmark, Sweden, have reached those points much earlier because of the unifor--unified populations.  And we've had so, so much diversity of our melting pot, our pop--populations, that it's taken us longer to get there.
Speaker 2: Now in terms of Provident [Hospital] itself, there's, there's--were there any specific reasons why Provident actually--was there, was there still a ne--do you think there was still a need for Provident when, when you came on board?  There, there--
Speaker 1: I definitely think there was still a need for Provident.  I think as we speak, there is a need for Provident.  Because you had a, a county system that was--remains overburdened and that needed a new plant, a facility, and is in, as we speak, in the process of developing or building a new plant's that's ex--will probably open up next year.  You have seen the closure of all of these systems and the subletting, which really has not been to the health of the overall system or the quality of the overall system.  So, the big question now--has, has always been who's going to fund it, and who's gonna control the funding.  I think the, the change in, in Provident, the failure of Provident, was more a question of who's gonna control the funding.
Story_ID: 56507
Speaker 1: As, as we go towards the future, what, what do you see, or what, what's your perspective on the kind of health care that the black community needs now?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: What kind that best serves, or what, what, what system would best serve our community?
Speaker 2: I, I think that really what--it's not what kind of system that would best serve our community.  It is how do we garner the appropriate support that is compassionate to the educational needs of our community.  It's the systems that exist, even privately, are failing our community.  You know, if you're looking at the fact that we now find that even the working insured in terms of HMO are getting substandard services within their HMOs.  And I think that that's directly related to the lack of education and compassionate responsibility of the providers of the services.  You know, it's the failure to, to take on the responsibility of educating people that this is what your expectation should be, and this is what I, I will provide to you, you know.  There is no reason why people that are insured and working should not have the access to coronary bypass surgery, to not seek these services earlier, should not participate in, in the prevent of cardiovascular disease, disease information that we have generally available to everybody.  And certainly, it's time consuming, but it's something necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is there is something that, that you've, I guess that some, some bit of wisdom that you've come across that we need to know now as we go in the future about our own health care that you--that we haven't talked about yet?  Does something come up on the way?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we've, we've talked about hypertension; we've talked about diabetes mellitus being a direct relationship to hypertension, and coronary artery disease, and respiratory illnesses, and they're all integrated with each other.  And those things are, are the leading killers of the black population.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, do you see yourself in the future being part of an education--well, I guess program educating black people about what they ought to get out on their health providers or--
Speaker 2: That's (laughter)--one of the things that you, you look at, in terms of reunions, one of my college professors was saying, had said on the tenth year reunion you'll see everybody still competing and trying to, to go ahead.  After the twentieth year people slow down.  And that's another way of saying after age fifty, we should have the new people coming and fighting, going forth.  I'm past the age fifty now (laughter).  I, I consider it important to me educate as I go forward.  But in terms of new, new initiatives, I would like to see some of our younger people do it and lead the front.  I think that's the, the new frontier that we have to go to.
Story_ID: 56508
Speaker 1: And by--you, you are still young, and you know--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --even--I mean at that--what do you see then as your legacy, I mean even though you're still young?
Speaker 2: My legacy is the same legacy that I was passed to on to: number one, education.  You should try to achieve on every front that you can come to, and that is to the glory of God that you are able to achieve.  And you wanna learn as much as you can about everything you can, okay.  Number two, you want to be able to service as much as you can for as long as you can, because except for the human spirit, there is nothing more important to us being here.  We have to, we have to give back; we have provide service; and we have to develop the wisdom to pass on to the future.
Story_ID: 56509
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like for people to remember that I loved God and his people, and that I tried to give as much as I could.
Story_ID: 56510
Speaker 1: Did--how did your, how did your mother [Lucille Young] and father [Willie Young] feel about your success when you finally became a doctor?  Did they both live to see you become a doctor?
Speaker 2: They both lived to see me become a doctor.  I think they were very proud of me.  I think they were very proud of me.  I have always worked hard to, to downplay any significance given to being a doctor, because I think that the title means nothing if people cannot feel and see and, and benefit from what you have achieved, so that if it's, if it's personally helpful to you for me to delete the title, I have no problems deleting the title.  It's more important that I am able to give you the benefit of what the title means.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, Dr. McCulley, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 56511
Speaker 1: This photo was taken when I was receiving an award as Woman of the--one of the ten women of the year from that Midwest--what's the--you see that thing there, that, that, that tall one there, the wooden one back in the back?
Speaker 2: Oh, '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997] okay, 1997 Woman of the Year.
Speaker 2: Okay, now left to right, if you could identify who's in the photo for the people who create the captions back at the office.
Speaker 1: That's, left is my husband, Bernard [McCulley], and my youngest daughter at the time, Beleshia, and that's a picture of me at the end.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember the names of all these people, so I guess we can't use it, huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is--as medical director at Provident [Hospital] and from the left--from the right you have Dr. Joe Mann, who was executive director of the hospital.  I was medical director.  And then the center is Lester Dugas, who was then chairman of the board of the hospital.  And I don't know the next person, but then there's the former Mayor [Harold] Washington and his aide, Judy--I don't remember her last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, great, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken when we were [quote] sponsoring a program "Save the Babies."  This is during the height of the cocaine baby epidemic, 1980--this is probably about '86 [1986] or--no, this is probably '89 [1989], yeah.  And this is at Winfield Moody Health Center.  On the left, there is a picture of me holding a baby, and I don't know whose, whose baby.  There was the chairman of the board, William Moorehead, of Winfield Moody, and--
Speaker 2: Could you spell Moorehead, please?
Speaker 1: M-O-O-R-E-H-E-A-D.  And then there's Robert Kohl, who was then the executive director of the Winfield Moody Health Center.
Speaker 2: C-O-L-E?
Speaker 1: K-O-L-E.
Speaker 2: K-O-L-E?
Speaker 1: K-H-O--K-H-O--
Speaker 2: K-H-O-L.
Speaker 1: Un-huh, K-O-H--it's K-A-H--K-O-H-L, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, did we get a year for this one?
Speaker 1: About '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And this is inductees into the William, the Benjamin Rush Society.  And this is about '83 [1983] I think, yeah.  They're--from left there's me, Barbara Fuller--I don't remember the other--skip this one--Ellen Nolvny, and Rita Pucci, P-U-C-C-I, and all are physicians, doctors.
Speaker 2: I think we should probably take stab at spelling Nolvny also.
Speaker 1: N-O-L-V-N-Y.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my senior prom, graduation from DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  And that's me and my date, William Carpenter.
Speaker 2: What year would that have been, do you recall?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].  This is the first--I'll tell you a joke.  This is the first time I realized that I was a size nine because my mother [Lucille Young], you always bought clothes big enough for you to grow into.  And so I always bought--she always bought me size fourteen.  Unlike the kids today who go and buy what they want, you got what your parents bought you and that was it.  And every time--every dress I owned was a size 14.  And I went shopping for my prom dress, and she had promised that I could buy any prom dress I wanted, that I could--and I looked at this dress, and I thought it was beautiful.  And we went in to look--to buy the dress, and the woman said, what size are you?  And I said fourteen.  She says, well, we only have the one that's on the mannequin, and I think it's much smaller than that.  And she says are you sure you're a fourteen?  I said I think so.  And so she says, well, let's try it.  And low and behind, the dress fit (laughter).  It was a (laughter)--perfect--
Speaker 2: No, that's not a size fourteen (unclear).  I don't know a lot about women's sizes, but I know that's not a-
Story_ID: 56512
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my first cruise, Monarch of the Sea.  That's in 1989.
Speaker 2: Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, and this is at Winfield Moody with--Dr. Louis Sullivan came to visit because I had one of the premier community health service centers in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah?
Speaker 2: This is probably '93 [1993] then, okay.  That could--yeah--no, that's not '93 [1993].  That's about probably '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: And this is another picture.  This is doctor--this is William Moorehead, that was chairman of the board, Dr. Sullivan, one of the board members, and one of the FBI people that came, and I don't know his name.  And I don't know who this is.  This is Robert Gold, and that's me at the end, okay.
Speaker 2: Great.  And they can take--I'm speaking up for the benefit of the caption editors.  You can take the spelling for Moorehead and pull--call up on the previous photograph.
Speaker 1: And that's a family photo.  This is my son, Timothy, my picture, my daughter, Beleshia, my husband, Bernard [McCulley], and this is a niece, Lenassia.
Speaker 2: And what year did you, did you have this photograph taken?
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is our wedding photo in 1970.
Speaker 2: Okay, got that one. Next.
Speaker 1: That's my father (Willie Young) on the left and my mother (Lucille Young).
Speaker 2: What year, and would you like to tell us anything about the occasion or anything else?
Speaker 1: This is, we just wanted to have a family picture.  We--let's see, this is probably--I, I don't remember the year, but this is probably about 1988, yeah, yeah, about '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: And see, this is a picture of actually all the family here together, but you can't--can you magnify that?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, great. And you'll see, starting here, this is my baby--let's see.  Timothy is a little taller, so let's see, '84 [1984], '80--this is '86 [1986] 'cause he's two years old in my lap.  Okay, that's Timothy, that's me, that's Beleshia, my daughter, that's my mother, Lucille, my father, Willie, okay, this is my sister, Shirley, that's next to me, my brother, Harold, who's the youngest brother, okay, my brother-in-law, James Carr, my--their two children actually here and here, Brioni, and Brit--Brioni and Brittanie, and that's my sister's--sister, Marie Carr, there's my sister, Cynthia Powell, a young Powell, my brother-in-law, Barnett Powell, their daughter, Lenassia, that you seen in the other family picture there; that's here younger.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, bear with us.  Now that you've identified those people, there are several which we should get the spellings for because they're--it's possible they could be spelled a couple of different ways.  The first would be Beleshia?
Speaker 2: B-E-L-E-S-H-I-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you mentioned two common names, but they could have variations, Carr and Powell.
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R and Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L,
Speaker 1: Okay, and then I'm trying to remember some of the names of these kids.
Speaker 2: This is Lenassia, L-E-N-A-S-S-I-A, and she's in that picture over there, the family picture.  And this is Brittanie, B-R-I-T-T-A-N-I-E, and this is Brioni, B-R-I-O-N-I.
