Story_ID: 128581
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with Boston City Councilor Charles C. Yancey at his home at 3 Hooper Street in Dorchester, Massachusetts.  The date is February 7 [2006].  The interviewer is [HM] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Mr. HistoryMaker--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --Would you give me your full name, and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: My name is Charles Calvin Yancey, Y-A-N-C-E-Y.  And I am one of nine children, and the father of four (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very good. Councilor Yancey, your date of birth and location of birth, where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born right here in Boston [Massachusetts] about four miles from where we are right now in the hospital located at West Newton Street and Harrison Avenue in, in the South End of Boston.  And I was, lived--virtually lived all my life in the City of Boston with the exception of one year when I spent time in Durham, North Carolina on a consulting contract where I helped develop an industrial park.
Speaker 1: Your year of birth, I don't think you--
Speaker 2: December 28, 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good, thank you.  How would you describe your occupation or profession?  What, what are you. What do you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a member of the legislative branch of city government in the city of Boston.  In fact, I believe I'm the longest serving African American in elective office in municipal government.  I was first elected in 1983 to the Boston City Council.  My responsibilities include voting on the city's budget and making laws for the city.
Story_ID: 128582
Speaker 1: We have a, a few warm up questions before we--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --Get into your family history.  There are People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it'll also give those who look at your interview another dimension of your personality.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Councilman Yancey, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I enjoy pasta.  I enjoy Italian food.  In fact, when we go out I--it's not uncommon for me to order chicken parmesan with ziti (laughter).
Speaker 1: Good, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I actually enjoy the summertime. I enjoy the summer in, in Boston [Massachusetts].  It's a beautiful city.  It does get hot on occasion but it's, it's a time of year where you can enjoy many activities outside and--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --I like to walk around the block with my wife [Marzetta Yancey] a few times. That's a nice time of year to do it.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, see you didn't prep me on these, I, I like blue.
Speaker 1: Blue.
Speaker 2: Color blue, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a favorite vacation destination or place you like to escape to or?
Speaker 2: Yes, I don't get there often, I think I've only been there once but I, I thoroughly enjoyed Aruba.  My wife and I have been married for many years and we celebrated our anni--our twentieth anniversary, in, in Aruba--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --And we had a fantastic time.  We left the kids home.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And I look forward to going back.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: That was 1990 (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you're due.
Speaker 2: So we're overdue, right.
Speaker 1: I was over there to but not in recent years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I liked it very much.  Last warm up question, do you have a favorite saying or phrase of kind of philosophical thing that you like to share with people or with yourself from time to time?
Speaker 2: Well, probably a few, but one of the things I like to encourage people to do is to recognize that they are more powerful than they may think they are.  Very often they don't use the, the power or the abilities that they have so quite frankly one of my expressions, "If you don't use it, you lose it," so (laughter).  We have a lot of talented people in the city [Boston, Massachusetts], and, in fact, in the world and most of us don't achieve even ten percent of our potential, so I'm encouraging people to use the skills, the talents and other resources at their disposal for the good of others.
Story_ID: 128583
Speaker 1: We're gonna start now talking about your roots, your family roots.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that those who look at your interview over the years will have a context and a frame in terms of looking at your development as a, as an individual and your career and your education.  So let's start with your mother, whom I remember.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you give me your mother's full name and her date of birth, her year of birth, and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Alice White Yancey.  She was actually born in Winchester, Massachusetts on August 28, 1913.  She lived in the Boston [Massachusetts] area all of her life.  She was a twin.  Her sister, Eleanor White Richards Guilford [ph.], and her were indistinguishable.  In my early days (laughter) they were identical twins but as, of course, we grew and began to observe differences in, in appearances as well as in mode of operation.
Speaker 1: Did they ever play games or tricks for you and--
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.
Speaker 1: They were doing some twin things?
Speaker 2: Not intentionally that I'm aware of.  I, I, I'm number six in the family of nine.  So by the time I came along I guess all the fun and games were over (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now your mother grew up where?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Boston.  Her mother moved initially to Allston [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts] and later to Roxbury [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts].  And they've lived, lived in this, in the city of Boston again virtually all their lives.
Speaker 1: What year did she move to Boston?  How old was she when she came to the city?
Speaker 2: They were teenagers.  I actually--I believe they moved here probably when they were four or five years old. They went to the Boston Public Schools [BPS].
Speaker 1: So, is it about 1920, she was born in 1913, you said?
Speaker 2: Right, so it was probably late teens or early '20s [1920s].  And they attended the Boston Public Schools.  My mother graduated from Roxbury Memorial High School for Girls [Boston, Massachusetts]  which later became Boston Technical High School [now, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Roxbury, Massachusetts] and when I attended the school and my brothers attended the school.  And then later, well today the same building is the Boston Latin Academy [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Right, my mother claims that she was in the first graduating class from Roxbury Memorial High--
Speaker 2: Well, they could have been classmates.
Speaker 1: She was--she was born in 1910.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --So pretty close.
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: What did your mother share with you about her growing up years in Winchester and then in Boston?  What do you know about her early childhood years?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that her parents separated. I'm not sure why, but her mother later remarried to James Wolfe [ph.], and I actually know a little bit more about him than my, my grandfather.  My step-grandfather, my mother would tell me, attended Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He graduated, I believe, it was 1904 in the same graduating class as Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who later became President of the United States.  He served in the--in appointed office in state government, which was rare for an African American.
Speaker 1: His name--the name?
Speaker 2: James Wolfe.
Speaker 1: I'm familiar with that name, Wolfe.
Speaker 2: And his father was a member of either the 54th or the 55th Regiment [Massachusetts 54th Volunteer Infantry]. That's the regiment that was really popularized by the movie 'Glory.'  And he--he was a lawyer and quite frankly was the first African American that I knew who actually attended and graduated from Harvard University when I was very, very young.  So I knew it was within the realm of possibility that people of color and African Americans, particularly, could achieve academic success. And my mother sort of inculcated that in me and I had the opportunity to, to learn a great deal through his writings and, and his clippings because I got a hold of a scrapbook that my step-grandfather put together which documented the lynchings that took place at the turn of the century, and also the debate between W.E.B. Du Bois and Booker T. Washington.
Story_ID: 128584
Speaker 1: Your mother [Alice White Yancey], did she have a job or occupation that she worked?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  Her primary occupation was to raise nine children. Seven boys and--and two girls but she also had a job.  She, she served as a licensed practical nurse which basically meant that she took care of the patients at the Lemuel Shattuck Hospital [Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts].  She also created a number of organizations including the Women's Improvement League, and she was a founding member of the Roxbury Multi-Service Center [Boston, Massachusetts], and the Marlowe City [ph.]--she served on the Marlowe City's boards as well as the Board of--I think she was one of the first board members of ABCD [Action for Boston Community Development, Boston, Massachusetts]. She was a great community activist.  She got me involved in politics at a very young age when she asked me to write a letter to Mayor John Collins asking that a vacant lot across the street from our home on Savin Street in Roxbury [Massachusetts] be converted to a tot lot.  I wrote the letter, I, I think I was in the sixth or seventh grade, and lo and behold, they cleared the lot and they put a tot lot up there.  So that was the first instance of political success that I felt very good about.  I reflected upon this many, many years later and my assumption is that all my mother did was pick up the phone and called Mayor Collins and told him what to do, 'cause she had that type of relationship with, with the mayor at the time.
Speaker 1: She was also a very prominent activist in terms of improvement in the Boston Public Schools [BPS], is that right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  In fact, she served as president of the Home School Associations and various schools that I attended in the Boston Public School System.  And she had a presence in all of the, the schools that her nine children attended through the years.  She would spend a lot of time down at the Boston School Committee, challenging the committee to, to be more equitable in the allocation of resources.  She fought for the integration of the schools. And she again, insisted that the parents be the driving force within the Boston Public School system.  And that sort of stayed with me as well. In fact, I patented a law that I got passed in the city of Boston [Massachusetts] after her efforts.  It's called the Parental School Leave Ordinance which allows parents to spend upwards of three days per year during school hours with their children in the schools without losing any employment benefits.  And that became a law in 1994.  And it was my mother who actually inspired me to write that because I know she was omnipresent (laughter) when I was student in the Boston Public Schools.  I never knew when she and my father [Howell Yancey, Sr.] would be walking through the corridors of my schools and just peering through the rear door.  So, it, it made me think a couple of times before I misbehaved in schools and I was always on best behavior 'cause I never knew when she was gonna walk through.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother?  What was she like as a person?  What was her personality?
Speaker 2: She was very, very warm, loving person.  She, she strove very, very hard to nurture all of her children and grandchildren.  She had about thirty-seven grandchildren when she passed.  But she was always a warm individual.  But very strong, very committed, very concerned about the quality of life in the community.  In addition to having me write that letter to the mayor, she even recruited me and other family members to work with the neighbors to clean up Savin Street.  Every spring we, you know, she organized a Savin Street neighborhood cleanup program.  And at the time it, it seemed somewhat mundane but what I didn't realize that while she was organizing those cleanup campaigns, she was literally organizing the community and dealing with a lot of other issues, public safety issues, as well as other quality of life issues.  So she had a great deal of compassion and love and energy.  Where she got it, I do not know because in addition to raising nine of us she seemed to be outside raising the entire community as well without anyone feeling any loss in terms of the amount of time she spent in community efforts.  I just don't understand how--
Speaker 1: That's amazing--
Speaker 2: --How she did it.
Speaker 1: 'Cause often times when parents get so involved in, in out of the home activities, you know, sometimes things do suffer but--
Speaker 2: She had a way of recruiting us--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --To be a part of that effort.
Speaker 1: She got you involved in it.
Speaker 2: Yes, and so we never felt that she was absent at all.  In fact more often than not we were with her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Good.
Story_ID: 128585
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  I'd like to have his name--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --The year he was born, and where your father was born.
Speaker 2: Well, my father's name was Howell Theodore Yancey. He was born in Everett, Massachusetts.  He, his birth date was May 6, 1917.  He was four years younger than my mother [Alice White Yancey].  He worked several jobs--worked with the post office for more thirty years I believe, but he also had a small construction company. He was an entrepreneur.  Earlier in his life he worked as a clerk with the Folsom's Supermarket and organized a union, one of the first union organizers in Boston [Massachusetts].  That had to be in the, in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  He did serve in the military during World War II [1939-1945].  He came from a large family, a family of eight.  His oldest brother died in 1918, I believe, as a part of the flu pandemic [1918 Influenza Pandemic].  And we have many aunts and uncles who, who were active, not only in Everett but in the Boston area as well.  But my, my dad participated in the, in the post office band.  So he would travel around the country with, with the post office band in addition to running a construction company, where again he recruited his children, sons, to, to work for him.
Speaker 1: What did he construct, what was his--?
Speaker 2: Mostly small remodeling projects and, and, and buildings in the South End as well as throughout the city of Boston.  He also installed venetian blinds and taught us how to make those blinds. And, speaking of the Roxbury Multi-Service Center [Boston, Massachusetts], I learned that that building has 117 windows because he also installed storm windows and that was one of his projects.  And I remember one, one day I was working with him and I was on the top floor installing one of those windows and a gust of wind caught the window and I was dangling out there, I was there--you know, we didn't have OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] back then (laughter).  So I could have easily have lost my life at that point but I caught my--regained my balance and installed the window and my dad was working in another part of the building unwares of the danger this his son was in, but it was a great learning experience for me as well because I discovered how difficult it is to run a business and it requires a, a great deal of effort, and more often than not the business runs you rather than you running the business.
Speaker 1: He was working full time in the post office at the same time--
Speaker 2: At the same time
Speaker 1: --Doing the construction?
Speaker 2: Yes, but we'd take--we took so much for granted, the nine of us, but now I, I can't imagine how a couple could raise--could raise nine children in the city of Boston in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], and even early '70s [1970s] but, but they did it.  My folks were married for more than fifty years.  And they inculcated a--a great work effort on the part of all of the children.  My mother stressed education more than anything else.  And I believe that--actually I was the first one of my immediate family to graduate from college--even though I was number six in the--in the family and all of my siblings behind me, also went on and graduated from college.  But it was because of the nurturing and the support that we received from our parents that we were able to be successful.
Speaker 1: Did your father grow up in Everett?
Speaker 2: He did.  He grew up in, in Everett but spent a lot of time in Boston. His siblings, many of his siblings, actually took up residence in the city of Boston.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you about his growing up years in Everett?
Speaker 2: My dad was, unlike my mother, relatively quiet (laughter).  He would basically did a lot of things behind the scenes and would support my mother and her efforts to get around to these community meetings, and she did not drive. My father served more as a chauffeur for her than anything else for a while.  But by his action he, he, you know, he was a very dignified person even though very quiet, very strong, and he certainly was the disciplinarian in, in the family and, and maintained, maintained order with the seven boys and two daughters.  But he, by more by his example than by his words he did inspire me and I thought that he always was the consummate gentleman. He was very active in his church, St. Bartholomew's [Episcopal] Church in Cambridge [Massachusetts] where his parents were some of the founding members of that particular church.  My mother was actually a member of Saint Mark's Congregational Church [Roxbury, Massachusetts], so we would split our time between (laughter) Cambridge and Roxbury [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts] to go to church on Sundays.
Story_ID: 128586
Speaker 1: That's interesting. What can you tell me about your father's [Howell Theodore Yancey] parents, mother and father, your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Their name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Anna Bossfield Yancey [ph.] and she was actually born in the Bahamas.  And her father made a fateful decision before the turn of the century in terms of deciding whether the family was gonna move to Paris [France], London [England], or Boston [Massachusetts].  And the way my great-grandmother tells the story is that someone actually drew straws and they came up with Boston, so that's how the family (laughter) ended up here.  And my (laughter), my paternal grandfather grew up in Everett [Massachusetts] and Cambridge [Massachusetts], and he was a printer, I believe, and a member of the Heart Fellows [ph.], whatever that was.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Fredrick Harold Yancey [ph.].  And he, again was active in, in the church, St. Bartholomew's [Episcopal] Church [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And he and my grandmother raised eight children.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about their parents, your great-great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately I, I will have to consult with other members of the family to, to build that branch of the family tree.  But we haven't really researched beyond that point.
Speaker 1: Have you had family reunions?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have.  We, we have a--annual family reunion during Christmas time and that tradition has been going on for, for more than fifty years that I'm aware of.  But we had a major family reunion back in 1991 where we brought about three or four hundred family members together. That was actually a once in a lifetime event.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which we unfortunately did not continue and it was our, it was, it was very, very educational.  I discovered that one of my uncles actually worked in the White House, worked with three different presidents.  I believe, he worked, I don't know if he was a cook or a maitre d', I'm not sure exactly what his responsibilities were.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His last name I believe was White. I don't recall his first name.
Speaker 1: You said he was an uncle though, so he was--
Speaker 2: Yes, well he was actually married to one of my aunts.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: On your mother's side or father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: Father's side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You recall the presidents that he worked under?
Speaker 2: Yes, it would have been [Dwight] Eisenhower, [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt, and [Harry] Truman.  No, it would have been Roosevelt, Truman, and Eisenhower (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's quite a span of time.
Story_ID: 128587
Speaker 1: Charles, what, what is your, now let me tackle, let me ask you about your siblings.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You have six brothers or seven?
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six.
Speaker 2: Six brothers and--
Speaker 1: And two sisters?
Speaker 2: --Two sisters, yes.
Speaker 1: Could you give me their names, starting with the oldest to the youngest--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --And when they were born?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The oldest?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother was Howell Theodore Yancey, Jr. and he was born November 17, 1942.  After him was Frederick Howell Yancey the II. And he was born December 22, 1943.  You're gonna see a trend here in a minute.  My third brother was Terrence Leslie Yancey, and he was born December 7, 1944.  My fourth brother is Robert Richard Yancey and he was born, April 27, 1946.  So there was a gap there of four years.  And after him was my brother Ronald who was born January 13, 1948, very important year (laughter).  I was born in December, as the, as I mentioned earlier December 28, 1948.  So Ronnie and I were born the same year.  He had me by a little more than eleven months.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess in Boston [Massachusetts] we would be called Irish twins (laughter).  After me was our--my parents' [Alice White Yancey and Howell Theodore Yancey] seventh son, Vincent Gerald Yancey who was born September 4, 1950.  And then three years later, my sister Linda Eleanor Yancey was born on May 20, 1953.  And our last sibling Eleanor Richards Yancey who was born on Columbus Day, October 12, 1956.  So she, she's gonna celebrate her--
Speaker 1: That's great, that's great, that's great that you have the, the, the day of the month as well as the year.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Amazing. That's amazing.
Story_ID: 128588
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories?  How far back can you remember as a child?  What are some of the things that you always think about from your very early years?
Speaker 2: I remember having a very interesting childhood with all my older brothers.  And I don't remember the first place where we lived, it was on Bower Street [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. But I know that my family suffered a fire.  I think there were seven of us at the time.  It must have been in the late 1950s because there was seven boys at the time and I remember the family being split up after the fire, mostly I learned this by talking to my parents [Alice White Yancey and Howell Theodore Yancey] and my, my brothers.  With seven boys and we all, you know, we were split among the aunts and the uncles.  And I was--
Speaker 1: So you were about two years old then, roughly?
Speaker 2: I was about two years old.  Being the sixth son my mother never cut my hair, so that year--two years, two years old I had two ponytails going down to my waist I think.  And when I stayed with one of my aunts, she said well, he has to look like a boy, so my aunt decided to cut those two ponytails, so my mother was very angry with my aunt so I remember that a bit.  And, 'cause I couldn't understand why the, the two didn't get along.  But after that I remember just having fun filled days in our home at 71 Savin Street in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  My parents did manage to locate a home, they bought the building as a, a three story tenement building basically.  And we were the only, or one of the very few African American families on that street in the heart of Roxbury.
Speaker 1: This is early '50s [1950s], right?
Speaker 2: In the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Savin Street runs, I've forgotten between--
Speaker 2: Between Warren Street and Blue Hill Avenue.  If, you know, where the Roxbury YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] is today, that street directly across from it is Savin Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know where, okay.
Speaker 2: That was a--that was before urban renewal so we didn't have the, the, the width of Warren Street that we have today.  But it was, it was a very interesting experience for me because in the early '50s [1950s] when I was very young, I learned that from time to time police would just come or some law enforcement agencies would just come and visit some of my neighbors and take people away.  I learned later that what was happening was that some individuals who lived on my street, they happened to be white, were accused of being Communists.  And this was during the Red Scare and--and the beginning of the Cold War. So, it was not uncommon for people to be arrested and just taken away because of their political beliefs. They were not committing any crimes against people--
Speaker 1: And you heard this secondhand, right?
Speaker 2: I heard it secondhand but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: From, from who?
Speaker 2: Mostly from, from neighbors.  Heard some from my parents but not a whole lot.  And it was a, it was, it was an experience that I just didn't understand at the time.  And I still don't understand it.  Although we see that the potential exists even for that to happen today if you're accused of being a terrorist.
Story_ID: 128589
Speaker 1: What other early memories do you have of Savin Street [Boston, Massachusetts] as a child growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember there was a great deal of community celebration when my mother [Alice White Yancey], working with neighbors was able to get a sign erected saying, "Go Slow," 'cause there were so many children, I mean, you can imagine my folks contributed only nine children on that one street but other families had large fam--large numbers of children as well.  So, I remember that celebration in addition to the annual Savin Street cleanup campaigns that my mother led.  I remember also playing in the backyard and building forts outside in the backyard and tree houses and things and, and playing basketball with my brothers.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your home on Savin Street. Tell me about the house itself, how do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was three stories.  We did rent the top floor for a while but after the family kept expanding we took over the second and third floors, and when my oldest brother got married he actually moved his family to the third floor.  So I remember just a lot of running around and, and again there were nine of us so we had pretty cramped quarters, for, for the most part.  But I recall every Christmas and every Thanksgiving everyone coming together.  And, and we established quite a routine where the, the children would, of course, play with a lot of their toys during Christmas and as we got older, yeah, our children became the ones making all the noise in the house and running around but it was just a lot of joy and a lot of--during those occasions.
Story_ID: 128590
Speaker 1: Councilor [Charles] Yancey, would you tell me a little bit more about the Savin Street neighborhood, your neighbors, and the ethnic racial mix of, of that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Immediate community and what, what people did, what their occupations were?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very interesting neighborhood. It was very diverse, at least initially being predominantly white, Jewish, Italian, Irish.  In fact, there were gangs in the--in the area.  I don't recall the names of many of them except for the Cherry Valley Gang and--and the Band of Angels.  I think my brother, Terry [Terrence Leslie Yancey], was a member (laughter) of that, that gang.  But it was a working class neighborhood but people had a great deal of pride in the neighbor--neighborhood and they worked closely together.  It was multiracial.  Income levels were probably mixed as well.  We probably had some people who were fairly well-off and others who were struggling to survive.  I always felt, when I was a young man, I always felt that I came from a very wealthy family.  I learned later on that they weren't that wealthy at all, my, my folks actually had modest incomes at best and worked two, three jobs each to raise the nine of us, in addition to their activities outside of their jobs.  The community activities, both my mother and father were active in many activities in the church as well as in the community as a whole.  My father continued with his union organizing, while my mother worked with--at various organizations as well as serving as a leader at, in the local parent-teachers associations as well as community cleanup campaigns and community development efforts.  She also was an advocate for women as well as for children. So within that environment we found, we found a mix of people and orientations.  We, we lived on a street that had a bakery at one end, Drake's Bakery.
Speaker 1: What was the name?
Speaker 2: Drake's Bakery.  It was later--
Speaker 1: Oh, Drake's.
Speaker 2: Drake's, yes.  They were later purchased by Borden's and relocated to New Jersey.  So many of our family members actually worked at Drake's.  I had one of my early jobs mopping the floors there.  In one week I made a whopping ninety dollars.
Speaker 1: Ninety dollars?
Speaker 2: Which is probably the equivalent of six or seven hundred today.
Speaker 1: How did that happen in a week?
Speaker 2: You know, someone didn't show up.  They needed someone to mop the floors and the floors were massive, so.
Speaker 1: You said ninety not nine?
Speaker 2: 9-0.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And which was a lot of money in the, this would have been in the '60s [1960s]. But I also worked at the local drugstore and back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] in the city of Boston [Massachusetts], at least in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], you had a, a pharmacy every other corner.  Today you have, you may see a liquor store every other corner but not that many pharmacies.  We also had--
Speaker 1: What, what did you do in the pharmacy?  What was your work there?
Speaker 2: I was--I worked the counter. I prepared ice cream sodas, I sold cigarettes interestingly enough, newspapers, but basically just waited on the customers--for they, when--there was a soda fountain in addition to--so there were a lot of retail products that the pharmacy sold, in, in addition to prescriptions.  I mention cigarettes because I later led a campaign on the Boston City Council against tobacco.  And it was managed to get legislation on the books which regulated smoking in the workplace, and my very first piece of legislation in 1984 was a law which banned the distribution of free cigarette samples in the streets of Boston [Massachusetts].  Prior to that time they had very attractive young ladies passing out these free cigarette samples.  Well that became illegal after I got my law passed. But I actually sold cigarettes as a teenager and working in that drugstore.
Story_ID: 128591
Speaker 1: Can I go back to the gangs that you said--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Existed in the Savin Street neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you said that your brother Terrence was kind of a member of one of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he probably will never admit it but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Were you, were you ever involved with one of them?
Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't.  I guess the only gang I was affiliated with was the Yancey Gang (laughter).  There were--
Speaker 1: You had your own gang.
Speaker 2: Whenever we would have some conflicts and someone was bold enough to come to our door, we would send one of the brothers out and discuss the issue and if things were getting kind of rough the six of us would come line up behind him and there was no contest at that point and the offending party would, would leave peacefully or forcefully.  But it, the type of gangs that existed back then were more mythical I think than anything else.  I didn't have too much firsthand knowledge of them.  I knew that they, they existed and certainly my, my brothers would tell me about 'em a bit, and again I'm number six in, in a line of seven children--seven sons at that point and two daughters.  But I don't know much more about them.  And I don't know if there was any connection between that gang and the Winter Hill Gang in South Boston and, and other places with [James Joseph] Whitey Bulger and his predecessors.  But it, there could have been that connection.  They were primarily ethnic oriented, either all Irish or all Italian.  There may have been even some Jewish gangs at the time.  But that was in the '50s [1950s]. As we move into the '60s [1960s] there was a great transformation that took place in Roxbury [Massachusetts].  The complexion of Roxbury began to change pretty radically in the '60s [1960s] from predominantly white to predominantly black.  Still roughly, you know, working class people primarily. Most of--
Speaker 1: What was the cause of that change in the, the demographics of the--
Speaker 2: It's interesting, you know, it's been studied by many demographers over the years.  What I learned is that there's a great deal of what's known as blockbusting taking place where there was a conspiracy between the realtors and the bankers in the greater Boston area which literally used that red line to draw around a particular area and make a--a conscious decision was made to stir, to steer certain people into these areas, predominantly in Roxbury, predominantly African Americans, and to limit access to capital, to mortgages outside of that area to, to people of color.  In addition to that there was a great deal of disinvestment going on.  So that in the '60s [1960s], arson was commonplace.  In fact, Savin Street itself was significantly impacted by arson.  There was a major fire right across the street from my home that created that vacant lot incidentally that I later got converted to a tot lot. That was the site of a major fire that displaced more than a dozen families. In fact, we came very close to losing our home.  In fact, when we exited our building on Savin Street we could only get out using the rear exit because the entire facing-- the entire street seemed to be in flames.
Speaker 1: You probably know that Boston's black population in 1940 was about 23,000-- 1960 black population in Boston [Massachusetts] was 63,000.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Tremendous jump.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, the great migration for Boston came post World War--post World War II.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And that reflects what you just--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --The observation that you made about this transformation.
Speaker 2: Yes, and--and that transformation continued south down to Mattapan which predominantly Irish community--I mean a Jewish community at the--in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and now, of course, it's ninety-five percent African American and Caribbean.
Speaker 1: What neighborhoods and parts of neighborhoods do you represent today on the Boston City Council?
Speaker 2: Well I represent District 4 which is Dorchester and Mattapan.  I represent 65,000 people.  My district has the largest proportion of African Americans of the nine districts that we have in the city of Boston.  It, it's also one of the youngest in terms of the age of the population.  And it, it runs from basically from Grove Hall down to Mattapan Square.  It includes the new, newly developed area of Boston--well it used to be the Boston State Hospital site it--as I mentioned includes Mattapan Square but it also includes Codman Square, Four Corners, half of Grove Hall. I share one side of Grove Hall and [HM] Councilor [Chuck] Turner has the other, other half of Grove Hall.  It's a, in spite of the fact that it's predominantly people of color, still is very diverse in terms of the nationality.  I have the highest proportion of immigrants of any of the nine districts, and most of those immigrants are from the West Indies.
Story_ID: 128592
Speaker 1: Let's move into your, the beginning of your, of your formal schooling.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you start elementary school, and what school did you attend, and how do you remember those early elementary grade experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, it's relatively easy for me to answer that question 'cause I only went to, to three schools, all of them within the Boston Public School [BPS] system.  So I started off in kindergarten at the Phillips Brooks Elementary School [Boston, Massachusetts] which is within walking distance of my home.  It's about, about a half mile from my home on, it's located on Quincy Street.  Quincy Street is parallel to Savin Street.  And I have many memories, mostly good of elementary school.  I had no major problems with any of my teachers. They seemed to be very attentive towards me and my theory is that it was, 'cause the presence of my mother [Alice White Yancey] in those--in the schools from my earliest years.  I remember the boys being separated from the girls on the playground. And I had a little girlfriend and every once in a while I would violate the rules and run over and say hello to my girlfriend and be properly chastised after the fact.  I remember most of the teachers treated me very nurturing and very positive.  And I, I remember walking to schools without--
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic, racial makeup of the Phillips Brooks Elementary School?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly white in the earlier years, although I was not really race conscious. But as I reflect up on it, it was predominantly white.  And we had, had a lot of, you know, Italian friends as well as some African American friends and a couple of Asian friends as well in that school.
Speaker 1: And all of your older brothers were there, going at the same time pretty much?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  I would always be preceded by some of my older brothers in both elementary school and in junior, in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular teacher that stands out in your mind in the elementary school that was influential or impacted you in any particular way?
Speaker 2: Well I had such a positive experience with most of, if not all the teachers. My memory fails me in terms of remembering their names.  But I remember in the fourth grade, for example, I had a great teacher who introduced me to science--and a, at a relatively young age.  I also had a second grade teacher who was very attentive towards me.  I assume she was attentive towards all the other students as well.  But it was a, it was a very nurturing experience in the schools.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a, I was a fairly good student.  But not all straight A's.  I got one or two Cs.  But I, I usually, I did, I did fairly well throughout my public school career.
Story_ID: 128593
Speaker 1: So that took you through grade--what [at Phillips Brooks Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Grade six at that time.
Speaker 1: And what came next?
Speaker 2: And after that I went to the Patrick T. Campbell Junior High School [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], which was located a couple of blocks away.  It's on Lawrence Avenue which is like, about, about four blocks from where I, where I lived.  A little further away than the Phillips Brooks Elementary School but still within walking distance.  And that was, that was a very good experience as well.  In fact, I do have a--I found the other day a, a class picture that was taken in 1963.  And some of those folks are still around.  I still recognize some of the faces.  And that experience was, was a good one.  One of my teachers told my mother [Alice White Yancey] in front of me that if all the students were like Charles it would be a joy to teach, you know, (laughter) but again the teachers were fine.  Most, I had very few African American teachers.  I had, my second grade teacher was but most of the other teachers were white. But they were still positive and nurturing with very rare exception.  And at the Patrick T. Campbell School, the racial makeup began to change pretty quickly. From when I was in the seventh grade, I think most of my classmates were probably white.  But by the time I graduated in 1963, most of my classmates were black.  And I think that transformation took place within those three years between 1960 and 1963.
Story_ID: 128594
Speaker 1: Now it was right around this time that, the early '60s [1960s] when you went to [Patrick T.] Campbell [Junior High School, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], when the black parents and particularly mothers, began to organize themselves--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And began to complain and look at the weaknesses of the schools as they became increasingly black.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you aware that that was going on?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Alice White Yancey] must have been part of that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that?
Speaker 2: I was very much aware, aware of that and my mother was active in that effort.  She was perhaps more conservative than most parents in that she encouraged the students to, you know, stay in school.  She was not too enthusiastic about boycotts per se but she would spend a lot of time at the School Committee [Boston School Committee].  She would challenge Louise Day Hicks routinely.  And she was part of the effort to integrate the schools.
Speaker 1: Who is Louise Day Hicks?
Speaker 2: Louise Day Hicks was a member of the School Committee who gained her fame by fighting any effort which led to the integration of the Boston Public Schools [BPS].  She, and some people disagree with me on this, but she was probably Boston's equivalent of George Wallace in terms of her public persona and her dedication to standing at the, at the school room door to prevent the integration of the schools.  Of, and I'm speaking figuratively.  So she was viewed with a great deal of--she viewed as a hostile person towards people of color because she fought against the integration efforts.  But she was, president of the School Committee.  And she was very outspoken.  She was a very strong advocate for white children and white parents.  But just the opposite when it, when it came to black parents.  In fact, when I graduated from high school, I was asked to go back to Patrick T. Campbell during their graduation ceremony because I was given some type of scholar--relatively small scholarship and some recognition. I was--which placed me on stage with another one of my, classmates from Campbell.  And it was during that ceremony that Reverend Virgil Woods charged through the auditorium and pointed his finger and said would you invite [Adolf] Hitler to a synagogue--
Speaker 1: I remember.
Speaker 2: --Because Louise Day Hicks was on the stage--
Speaker 1: I remember.
Speaker 2: --With me as president of the School Committee.
Speaker 1: That was on the front page of the newspaper.
Speaker 2: Yes, well I was on stage at that time.
Speaker 1: You were?
Speaker 2: That happened in nineteen--
Speaker 1: How did you feel at that moment when all that was happening?
Speaker 2: It was, actually I was a little disappointed, you know, 'cause I was on my way to, to college.  I received a little recognition.  And--
Speaker 1: No, you were on your way to high school?
Speaker 2: No, no let's back track.  I, that actually took place in 1966--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was graduating from high school but as an alum, as an alumni--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: --Alumnus of--
Speaker 1: Campbell.
Speaker 2: --Of the Patrick T. Campbell, I came back to receive a little citation and that's why I was on stage.  So it became very chaotic, I'm not sure exactly where I ended up that day but there was a, a great deal of confusion on the stage et cetera.  I mean I understand why. I mean I certainly disagreed with Louise Day Hicks' persona and her politics, and I did see her as hostile, and I would wonder why was she there as well because her reputation was well known at that point.  And ironically, four years later, in 1970, Virgil Woods actually performed the wedding ceremony with my wife and I (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --In his chapel right above the drug store where I worked. It's now a vacant lot.
Speaker 1: That was on what street?  Was that on Blue Hill?
Speaker 2: Blue Hill Avenue and, and Quincy Street. I used to work at the Katz [ph.] Pharmacy.  And above the Katz Pharmacy was the chapel that was headed up by the Reverend Virgil Woods.  Who now is in Rhode Island.  But he--
Speaker 1: Actually he just retired.  He moved to Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 128595
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right.  He did mention that. As, you know, he [Reverend Virgil Woods] represented [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in the Northeast.  And the one and only time I met Dr. King was when I was working at that drugstore [Katz Pharmacy], he came in with all the cameras, his entourage, I was on the other side of that counter, and it was almost like a blur he came in--
Speaker 2: Was this '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: It was probably '65 [1965], I'm guessing.  It, it could have been '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: You were in high school at that point?
Speaker 1: I was in high school but I also was working at that drugstore.
Speaker 2: What high school were you now attending?
Speaker 1: After I graduated from Boston [Patrick T.] Campbell [Junior High School, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] I went to Boston Technical High School [now, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I started there in the ninth grade.  I was there from the ninth to the twelfth.  Again walking distance of my home.  There's a theme here (laughter).  It was just--it was actually closer to my home than the Patrick T. Campbell.  Located at the corner of Townsend Street--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --And Warren Street.  Townsend Street is really an extension of Quincy Street so, it was literally on the same street as my elementary school, just a few blocks away.  That was one of Boston's exam schools.  Now at the time, it was not coed, it was all-boys school.  It had converted from being Roxbury Memorial High School for Girls on one side, and Roxbury Memorial High School for Boys on another. They combined it and created a, the exam school called Boston Technical High.  All boys.  And even though it was in the heart of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], in the black community, only five percent of my classmates were black.  All the other students had to walk long distances or take a bus to come to Boston Tech.
Speaker 2: Was this what we call an exam school?  Did you have to take an exam to--
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: You did.
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Alright.  Let me back up now because 1964, Martin Luther King was here--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --At the Boardman School [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --And Louise Day Hicks was staying there and didn't want his presence.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He came in 1965 and led a march--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Ultimately ended up at the legislature, state house.  So you're in high school when King is here.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Do you remember that time?
Speaker 1: I do remember that time.  In fact, I remember that he was also prevented from speaking to the students at the Patrick T. Campbell [Junior High] School [Roxbury, Massachusetts], I had graduated maybe a year earlier, but it was because the school committee would not allow him to speak to the children--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --At the Boston, at the Patrick T. Campbell Junior High School, that upon his death in 1968, they renamed the Patrick T. Campbell School in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and my mother [Alice White Yancey] led that effort as well, as some TV personalities--I think Bill Slado [ph.] from Channel 4 actually lost his job because he got involved in that community effort to rename the school after Dr. King.  And he was one of the few black reporters we had in the city of Boston at the time.  So my memory of Dr. King was just that brief encounter. And I believe it was an accidental encounter because the chapel headed up by Dr. Virgil Woods, the entrance to the chapel is right next to the drugstore, so my theory is that he simply made a mistake. He walked in the, in the pharmacy when he should have gone up stairs or maybe he just wanted to come and say hello.
Speaker 2: I recall that in '64 [1964] we had what was called a school boycott, school stay out--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --To protest the intransigency of the Boston School Committee.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did you participate in that, do you remember?
Speaker 1: I did not.  I, I was supportive of it.  I was a student at the Boston Technical High School, and one of the sites, actually I did stop by, probably against my mother's wishes.  I probably did because I recall going into the St. Mark's Church [St. Mark Congregational Church], which was actually my mother's church at the time but they organized some classes and encouraged children to go there and--
Speaker 2: We called Freedom Schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were Freedom Schools.
Speaker 2: Because I taught black history at the Bowdoin Street YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --During the boycott.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well I did go over there but again I, I recall it was against my mother's wishes 'cause she was not that enthusiastic--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --About boycotts, she would rather change--take on the policy makers head-on, go to the City Council, go to the School Committee, go to the mayor's office and, and challenge them but stressing the need for the children to stay in school and to get an education.
Story_ID: 128596
Speaker 1: Boston Technical High School [now, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts].  Tell me about those four years.  What stands out in your mind--
Speaker 2: A couple--
Speaker 1: --As you look back?
Speaker 2: A couple of things.  I had, again a very nice science teacher who--I can't recall the names unfortunately.  But I also had some more negative experiences at Boston Tech that I did not experience both in my elementary school and junior high school.  I, it was a greater sense of alienation.  It was predominantly white student body and teaching staff, which was not, the teaching staff for being white was not new to me, but I, I got a sense from a couple of the teachers that they did not have a very high level of expectation of me and perhaps other African American students. In fact, I recall taking one test and I, my score was higher than anyone else's in class and I was the only black student in the class and, and the teacher very loudly said, "Well you could have blown me over with a feather." (Laughter) You know.  So the level of expectation was, was certainly very low for, for African American students.
Speaker 1: Was it a technical high school, and by that I mean were there very heavy demanding math and science requirements?  Did you have to take physics at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: I had, I took quite a few physics courses as well as chemistry.  For some reason I never took biology.  I don't know how I escaped that.  But--
Speaker 1: I don't either.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I doubled up in physics accidentally.  But they also had sheet metal courses there which I might have taken.  They had woodworking courses at my junior high school [Patrick T. Campbell Junior High School, Roxbury, Massachusetts] as a matter of fact but the emphasis was on science and mathematics.
Speaker 1: Now being at Technical High School or even at the Campbell Junior High, did you have any notion or inklings about what you wanted to be as an adult?  What you wanted to do? Did you have your eyes set on doing anything at that point in life?
Speaker 2: Well, I got my first exposure to economics at Boston Tech.  There was one elective course called economics and I took it and I enjoyed it, and I later majored in economics in college when I went to--when I went to Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts], but I did not really consider public service as, as I can remember when I was in high school.  John D. O'Bryant, who was my guidance counselor at Boston Tech, he was also a drill instructor, but he was one of the few African Americans on, on the faculty and I was one of the few black students in the school (laughter) so somehow we got together. And he was a tremendous help to me.  He got me involved with the Upward Bound Program which was a college enrichment program for African American students from around the country.  I was able to spend a couple of summers at Tufts when I was a junior and senior at Boston Tech.
Speaker 1: And this was through the Upward Bound experience?
Speaker 2: Through the Upward Bound Program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I later applied to Tufts and was accepted and I, I spent four years there after I graduated from Boston Tech.  But that was really because of the help I received and the mentorship that was provided by John D. O'Bryant.
Speaker 1: You know, I believe at that time, John was maybe one of six African American educators in the Boston school system.
Speaker 2: That's amazing.
Speaker 1: But it was a fairly small--
Speaker 2: And I was lucky enough to have had the opportunity to--to be taken under his wings.
Story_ID: 128597
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Boston Technical High School [now, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts] in?
Speaker 2: 1966.
Speaker 1: And you went where from there?
Speaker 2: From there I went again not too far from home, I went to Tufts University, which is located in Medford, Massachusetts.  They also have a campus in Boston but for their medical and dental schools which I did not get involved with.  And it was an interesting time.  I recall my freshman year, I was just the most patriotic person in the world (laughter).  I mean you could have given me a--a flag and I would have waved it everywhere.  There was a--I had tremendous sense of hope and optimism, not just for myself but for the country as a whole, even though three years earlier we suffered the assassination of [President] John F. Kennedy, and I dreaded the prospect of this guy named Lyndon Baines Johnson from Texas, and the all-white primaries. I'm becoming, at that stage in high school, becoming a little bit more politically conscious. And I remember when, when Kennedy was assassinated in November of 1963, I was, must have been in my freshman year at Boston Tech, and it was just gloom and doom but, you know, we survived those three years okay and Johnson seemed to be doing the right things in the area of civil rights.  And I was accepted to Tufts University. I was staying on campus.  I was going away from home for the first time, aside from a couple of trips when I was president of my junior achievement company at, at Boston Tech.  So I was just looking forward to a great four years.  But then 1966 turned into 1967 and we had tremendous uprisings all around the country where the African American community was challenging the racial norms and they were fighting for, not just integration of schools which is what we were fighting in Boston [Massachusetts], but also wanted to have a police force that was respectful of their community and wanted to have decent housing and decent education and decent jobs and, and business opportunities, and even a presence in the media that was, that was lacking.  So, in the summer of '67 [1967], even though we had some, some incidents in '66 [1966], it was 1967 that we had problems in Newark, New Jersey and Detroit [Michigan], even the Watts [Riots, Los Angeles, California] had erupted previously in 1965.  We still had the lingering effects of that.  And we saw on television police and, and soldiers--
Story_ID: 128700
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --At Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] you began to observe--
Speaker 2: I began to observe all of the disturbances around, around the country.  Again I started out as a very bubbly person, a very enthusiastic, very optimistic, very patriotic, this is the best country in the world but after my freshman year I began to become a little bit more radicalized in terms of what was really happening, not only around the country but even within our own city.  So, and with the backdrop of these major confrontations all over the country where there were riots and rebellions breaking out, where people of color were challenging the racial status quo, right here in Boston [Massachusetts] in 1967 there was a major confrontation between the Boston Police Department and welfare mothers in Grove Hall.
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: The demonstration in front of the welfare department was basically just for some bare necessities so that the, the mothers can have a few extra dollars to buy clothing and food for their children, and they staged a sit-in of some type that was brutally ended by the police, where the, the police were, were physically attacking the women.  And that created a great deal of hostility, of course, there were some storefronts that were burnt out, there were some cars that were overturned.  It was a major confrontation.  It was really the first in Boston that I was aware of.  The second, of course, came a year later in April of 1968 after the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.  I was at that point a sophomore at Tufts University.  I was totally enraged with the knowledge that you had a prince of peace [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] who was cut down so, so violently, and I was very angry about it.  Even though the year leading up to it many people, including myself, saw Dr. King's message as becoming less and less relevant in, in the, in light of the very hostile treatment people of color were receiving at the hands of police departments all around the country.  It was also during the time when there, when the rise of the Black Panther Party was coming to fore and they had the free--the freedom schools and the freedom breakfasts and other activities and I tried to be supportive of that actually.  But in the, in the light of Dr. King's message of peace and his message of justice, in the sense that all he really wanted was fair play for everyone, for him to be cut down as violently as he was, created a, a sense of rage on the part of a lot of people including myself.  So I, after his assassination we had some rallies on the campus of Tufts University but I also went back home which was not that far away even though I lived on campus in Medford.  I did go home and I walked up the streets of Blue Hill Avenue, the streets of my youth, where, where I worked at Drake's Bakery and I worked at the drugstore, and I went to the various variety stores and the fish and chip places. All these places were erupting in flames and I will never forget the sound of explode, exploding plate glass all around me and the chaotic environment that was created 'cause people were expressing their rage by destroying any symbol of outside political and economic forces.  So that was Boston in 1968. Perhaps similar to other cities around the country--
Story_ID: 128701
Speaker 1: --Great deal of rage--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--How did you respond in terms of action?  What did you get involved with at that point?
Speaker 1: Well, actually, I was instrumental in working with the very few African Americans on campus at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts] in organizing the Afro-American Society with a fellow student named Charley Jordan [Charles N. Jordan, Jr.], worked with me and a few other students to create this organization.
Speaker 2: How many students, black students were there at Tufts in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968], my guess is that there were probably about twenty out of more than 3,000 (laughter).  And most of those were actually Africans, not African Americans.  There were more African students on campus than African American students.  But working primarily with the African American students we formed the Afro-American Society, and that we began actually in 1967.  It was fairly well established by 1968 but it grew tremendously.  We organized, not only the African American students but we had a real presence on campus so that other organizations, white student organizations, would negotiate with us for joint ventures, et cetera.  So that was in place but after the King assassination [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] we would organize a number of, of rallies that did attract a great deal of white students.  And we did manage to, to have a strong presence on campus which led to a series of demands over the next year or so to increase the diversity on campus in terms of student body, in terms of the employment of our people of color on campus, as well as in several construction projects that Tufts University was involved with.  So that by 19, if I can fast forward to 1969. I'm now a, a junior on campus, actually a senior, the latter part of '69 [1969], having many of our demands unmet in terms of increasing the recruitment of students of color on campus and ensuring that we had a fair proportion of the job--the construction jobs from several dormitories that were going up, and a major development in downtown Boston [Massachusetts] for Tufts University's Medical Center, we decided to hold a demonstration in front of one of those construction sites in November of 1969.  It was a fateful decision because what it meant is to physically, not only put your academic career on the line, but you put your life on the line, because students in other parts of the country doing similar things were actually killed by the local police.  Orangeburg, South Carolina--Jackson, Mississippi, just to name a few.
Story_ID: 128702
Speaker 1: And this coincided with a largely white student movement, anti-war movement, against the Vietnam War [1955-1975].  So we combined forces at Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] in 19-- in November of 1969, we said okay, the black students are gonna move on this construction site, and we had a great deal of help from [HM Melvin] Mel King, from Leo Fletcher, from the United Community Construction Workers [UCCW], and Mel King was working with the new Urban League at that time, along with a, a very strong and positive person, Marty Gopin [ph.], and we got the community support from, from, Roxbury [Massachusetts] primarily but also we got support from the white students on campus because we, as leaders of the Afro-American Society and George Cox at that, at that time was a very strong and active member strategist for us. He was also a student on the, at Tufts University at the time.  So we had the black students occupy the site but we asked the progressive white student organizations to form a buffer (laughter) between the black students on the site and the angry construction workers and the Boston Tactical Police Force [TPF], even though this was Medford [Massachusetts], it was the Boston Tactical Police Force that was sent to the campus with their dogs and rifles and all, you know, an intimidating force.  But we went ahead and we executed and we shut down that construction site for several days.  It spread and we ended up occupying the administration building at Tufts University. We essentially shut down the entire campus.  But something else interesting happened when that was going on.  We were approached by a very radical national organization called the Weathermen [also known as The Weather Underground], which was bent on destroying the United States of America and--and had produced plans to us, as leaders of the Afro-American Society where they showed us the basic infrastructure for the campus at Tufts University and they told us where they were gonna plant bombs on campus.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: And we did not intend to destroy Tufts University so we essentially kicked the Weathermen off campus and we were very aggressive about it.  Said we don't want you to get involved.  We kicked them off, you know, go back to Columbia [University, New York, New York] where ever it is you came from.  And we were successful in, in preventing a lot of damage to the university infrastructure, while at the same time maintaining discipline and negotiating with the president [Burton Crosby Hallowell].  And virtually every one of our demands were met on the campus of Tufts University.  And we had meetings in the president's house where he signed a memorandum of agreement that was signed and it was written verbatim by us.  In fact, we regretted that we didn't ask for more.  But we did ask for a, a clerk of the works on the construction site to make sure that we had people of color and women employed on that site.  We did play a role in the recruitment of staff in other aspects of the university.  We did organize the committees which included, and which focused on recruiting of students of color.  So we went from maybe a half dozen African American students to, in 1970 we had four hundred.  It was that dramatic.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And we were very, very successful in that effort.
Speaker 2: And you had your bachelor's degree in economics too?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: It didn't suffer or--
Speaker 1: It was difficult.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean I found myself writing a lot of papers till 3 o'clock in the morning but, but I got 'em all in and I did in fact get my degree from Tufts University.
Speaker 2: Were you father [Howell Yancey, Sr.] and mother [Alice White Yancey] living at the time?  Your mother was--
Speaker 1: Yes both, both, both parents were--
Speaker 2: Living at the time--
Speaker 1: --Living at the time.  Again, I was the first member of my immediate family to graduate from college even though I was number six.  I did have an uncle who graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] back in 1950. I, I think it was 1951 because he came up to Boston [Massachusetts] for his fiftieth reunion and, and when I was president of the Boston City Council in 2001.
Speaker 2: And his name?
Speaker 1: Victor Yancey.  He was my father's youngest brother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 128601
Speaker 1: Councilman [Charles] Yancey, we were discussing your involvement at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --During the middle of the peak of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the, the fact that you were directly involved with the establishment of the Afro-American Society at Tufts University, The African American Cultural Center and also the Tufts Summer Institute.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I don't think we got to learn about the Tufts Summer Institute.  What was that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: How was that related to the other activities?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first entered Tufts University in the, in the fall of 1966, I had the opportunity to get accustomed to the Medford campus and to work with some of my classmates on a project that was started by the Junior League of Boston which provided tutorial services to young people.  Out of that grew the Our Young Peoples Program which was a part of what was then the Junior League of Boston efforts but I expanded it, so it included West Medford [Massachusetts], Columbia Point [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts], as well as Grove Hall and the Roxbury, Dorchester section of--of Boston.  So the Summer Institute actually began the summer of 1968 but it's a great, a direct outgrowth of the Our Young Peoples Program which, which I created a year earlier.  And basically it required that the young people from, from those three areas work with Tufts students as we took them on field trips throughout the greater Boston area and sometimes even beyond.  To expose our young people to college life, we would actually have the young people spend some time on campus during the summer and the effort again was to demystify college life for the young, primarily people of color, children of color of Roxbury, Dorchester and West Medford.
Speaker 1: Just another example of your intensive interests and abilities around education of our young people.
Speaker 2: Well, it really was essential.  And I benefited tremendously from my, my mother's [Alice White Yancey] commitment to education as well as my father's [Howell Theodore Yancey, Sr.].  I just wanted to pass it on.  And I probably got more out of those efforts than the young people themselves. Although it's, it's fairly common these days for me to run into some of those young people, here we are forty years later and many of them not only with children but I found a couple who actually have grandchildren now.  So--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --It's a, it was a great experience.  It did provide students from Tufts, multiracial students from Tufts, to, to have the opportunity to serve these young people in the community as a whole and I think that had its own reward.
Speaker 1: Well, you certainly gave a lot to Tufts University during your four years there as an undergraduate.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Story_ID: 128602
Speaker 1: And you took a lot of things away.  In addition to your bachelor's degree in economics, what else did you take away that you then transferred and translated into your future work?
Speaker 2: Well, I took a number of things away from Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  In addition to my degree in economics as you mentioned, I actually took a sense of rage.  I know it's kind of strange but in 1968 almost four--a little more than forty years ago to the day, of course, we lost [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.  And as I described in our earlier interview, it was a, a surreal experience for the whole country and certainly for me to come back to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], the evening of April 4, 1968 to see this great outburst of confrontation and rage along Blue Hill Avenue and Grove Hall, and to be really in a, a confused state in a way because Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was called the Prince of Peace.  He advocated nonviolence, and many of us as young people couldn't understand why he would be targeted.  We could almost understand though, not, not support the idea of others in the human rights and Civil Rights Movement being so targeted but Dr. King tried to teach all of us a nonviolent direct action to challenge the racism and the, the poverty within our society and he was cut down on April 4, 1968.  And that led to a great deal of organizing, both on campus and off campus.  It evolved into a major confrontation between the students at, at Tufts University with the administration of Tufts University as I described earlier, where we were fighting to improve opportunities for people of color to get decent jobs on campus, on, on construction jobs as well as participate in other aspects of life at Tufts University.  So by the time I graduated in 1970, I had a great deal of rage but then I returned to the optimism that I began my, my career at Tufts.  Rage because I was sensitized to the inequalities within society, certainly the, the assassination of Dr. King, the many rebellions that took place throughout the United States of America where the various police departments were actually very hostile--towards the aspirations--of African American families.  And the fact that I learned that I lived in a society that at its core, was very, very racist.  It's not the same level of consciousness I had as a freshman at Tufts but certainly when I graduated I did feel that.  But I also had a sense of optimism because the demonstrations we had on campus led to a sense of power almost--a sense of efficacy that we could in fact challenge these institutions.  And there was nothing more powerful in the life of a college student than the institution of the university--where he or she may attend.  And we successfully challenged policies and forced a change and we saw direct results of that activity.  So I got a sense that the people who have been struggling for basic justice do have tools once they become organized and clear about their goals and objectives to bring about some positive changes.  Changes which they may not personally benefit from but certainly others coming behind them.  So that by the time I graduated from Tufts University the entering class jumped from say five in my freshman year to hundreds by the, by 1971.  And that was a direct result of the organizing effort of the students at Tufts University.  And I was very proud to be a part of that, working with people like George Cox who I mentioned before. [Melvin] Mel King and Leo Fletcher came to work with us, and even [HM] Chuck Turner who is now my colleague on the Boston City Council, he came almost twenty years after I was elected but it's great to have him because it was a reunion of sorts because he was working with African American construction workers and we were fighting to get them the jobs at Tufts University and we were successful there as well as at the [Tufts] Medical Center in downtown Boston.  So--
Speaker 1: He talks about that in his interview that I did--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's interesting I thought he may have forgotten about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, he, he covered everything, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Story_ID: 128603
Speaker 1: Well, you came back to your community [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] not only with a degree but you came back to your home community, and in 1970, I believe, you were a cofounder of the Community for Human Rights?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were dealing with a great deal of hostility in the streets of, of Boston [Massachusetts] on the part of--allegedly a part--on the part of some whites attacking people in the communities of color.  So, over the next couple of years working with a number of community residents we organized the Community for Human Rights and we organized various committees but the primary purpose of it was to, was to protect the community from some racial onslaughts that were threatened from time to time.  And it certainly did come to a head in 1974 when the city was forced to integrate its schools.  For people who longed for the good old days, the so called good old days, I call them bad old days, call it busing, forced busing, but it was, it was a desegregation effort ordered by Judge [Wendell Arthur] Garrity [Jr.].  We always had busing in Boston as I mentioned earlier in our previous interview. I went to Boston Technical High school [Boston, Massachusetts] which is in the heart of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and the vast majority of my classmates, more than ninety percent of my classmates were white being bused in from outside of our community.  And it was--
Speaker 1: You know, January of 1970, I became the director of METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At my very first board meeting, you know, what I said at the board meeting, I said, "We're gonna stop using the term busing"--
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: --"And we're gonna stop calling METCO an integration program."
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: It's about desegregation.  Integration that's not what it's about.  It's not about busing and so I said, "Let's not use those terms any more."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And that was 1970--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --You know.
Speaker 2: Well, we're on the same wave length.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And it so, as I moved back into the community, I--1970 was a pivotal year for me because I got married in 19, in January of 1970, a few months later we, we were blessed with our first child.  We began so many efforts and my work with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston was very enjoyable.  What I did there was to prepare business plans--
Story_ID: 128604
Speaker 1: Well tell us about that position.  That was your first really professional position--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--
Speaker 1: --After college [at Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  What was that position?
Speaker 2: I was with the Urban Finance Division of the Federal Reserve Bank.  It was really an experimental short-term effort on the part of Federal Reserve Bank to strive, to strive for some form of, of economic equity and to help create new businesses, owned and controlled by entrepreneurs of color.  So I, my job was to prepare the cash flow projections, put the financial statements together, prepare the marketing plan and management plans as well as the finance plan for these businesses, and then take the entrepreneur, I was holding their hands--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Into the various private banks around the city of Boston [Massachusetts], give the, the loan officer my business card which said Federal Reserve Bank of Boston on it (laughter) and introduce them to the entrepreneur and also to work with the bank and the [U.S.] Small Business Administration to see if we could arrange the necessary capital for those businesses to be established and hope--and hopefully to prosper.  So it was a very good program.  I, I thought that we achieved some success stories in terms of establishing some new businesses.  We worked with an organization called Circle Power Demolition Corporation to help get financing for, for them.  Also for D & B Cleaners, commercial cleaners, that is still around today under a different name.  And what we really wanted to do, is to close the gap, the economic gap that existed between the, within, between the communities of color and, and the white community in terms of owning and controlling businesses and institutions that could lead to the employment of a lot of people who have been locked out of our economy for so many years.
Speaker 1: So you found that rewarding?  This, this first job.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  And while I was there, I met individuals who were organizing the Circle Venture Capital Fund which was at that time was a Title VII office of economic opportunity grant program, which provided equity for many of these same businesses, so it was a nice transition for me to go to the Circle Venture Capital Fund.
Speaker 1: Who were the people who were organizing this capital fund?  Who was it?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of what was happening in, in Boston--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was, [HM] Willard Johnson of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], hopefully he, he will be interviewed.
Speaker 1: He's a HistoryMaker.  He's been interviewed, yeah.
Speaker 2: He's, he's always been a inspiration to me and one of my mentors, and many other community residents including, I believe--I'm not sure if Hubert ["Hubie"] Jones was involved in the Circle Venture Capital Fund but he certainly was involved around the same time building the Roxbury Multi-Service Center.  [HM] Chuck Turner, (laughter) again--we worked together.  He was a member of the board of the Circle Venture Capital Fund, the Circle Incorporated, later the Greater Roxbury Development Corporation.  Donald Sneed, the founder of Unity Bank & Trust which was the predecessor to the Bank of [Boston] Commerce and now predecessor to, I think, Unity One which with United One [sic., OneUnited Bank] which is the largest bank owned by an African American in the city, in the United States of America.  And so it was, it was a great experience.  In fact, one of my projects there was to arrange the, the financing to, to develop a two story office building that stands today (laughter), which is the headquarters for the Urban League of Eastern Mass[achusetts] today but when I developed that, that project it was meant to house the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company [NETC], a name that you haven't heard in about twenty or thirty years.  But we wanted to reverse the flow of cash 'cause typically money flows out of our community into the pockets of the telephone company, so I negotiated a net-net lease. It was a twenty year net-net lease with the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company. They were responsible for paying the taxes, of course, paying the mortgage back to us and maintaining the property.  So it was very interesting twenty years later, I was elected to the Boston City Council and I had a representative from what was then called NYNEX telling me that they were not going to renew their twenty year lease.  Of course, the representative had no idea that I was the one that negotiated that lease.  It was a courtesy call since I was the elected official, so I gave him a little bit of the history.  But it, it was a great experience.  And then after my service with the Circle Venture Capital Fund, we had gone over many other projects as well, economic development projects. And I was asked to go to Durham, North Carolina--
Story_ID: 128605
Speaker 1: And who asked you to go there [Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Willie Mayfield [ph.] who lives in Mattapan [Massachusetts], he lives, and he still lives in Mattapan, had a consulting assignment and he needed some help.  So he asked if I would be willing to work with him on some projects in Durham [North Carolina].  It was, it was ideal for me because I had actually began to run for the United States Congress that same year in 19, actually it was 1976, didn't work out very well because I never made it on the ballot.  I was gonna run against a Congressman [John] Joseph Moakley (laughter).
Speaker 1: --Moakley.
Speaker 2: Who was very popular back then as well and his popularity grew with the many years he served in Congress.  But I thought it was very important for the African American community to have a voice in Congress so I circulated papers.  I was given the bad news by the election department that I did not have enough signatures.  I was a bit astounded to learn that because we collected close to five thousand signatures--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --And I think the requirement was about fifteen hundred.
Speaker 1: Didn't Hubie [Hubert] Jones and Mel Miller run for Congress?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  And I actually worked on their campaigns.
Speaker 1: They ran before--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: '76 [1976]? For the same seat?
Speaker 2: For the same seat, pretty much.  In 1970, David Nelson ran for the United States Congress and, you know, obviously he was not successful.  And then two years later in 1972, Mel Miller ran along with, no maybe it was '74 [1974], I have to check on that, but Mel Miller and Hubie Jones ran the same year.
Speaker 1: It was '72 [1972] because this was Hubie's project at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Urban Fellows Program.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they kind of put that together over there.
Speaker 2: It was 1972.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And Louise Day Hicks was a candidate at that time as--as well.  Mel Miller got involved in the race and he was a bit concerned that Hubie Jones didn't actually live in the community and that created some ill will, I think along the lines.  But it was 1976 I, I attempted to run since I had actually supported, I believe Hubie Jones' campaign in '72 [1972] and '70 [1970], 1970 I, I supported David Nelson's--
Speaker 1: Nelson.
Speaker 2: --Effort.  So I ran and I was shocked to learn that my name would not be on the ballot. It was my first try at, at elective office.  And I discovered that there were many names of individuals who were legitimately signers of my petitions whose names were scratched out, including Bill Owens who I believe was the State Rep at the time, my great aunt, Amy, who had been voting for about fifty years, and many others.  And it was many, many years later I learned that there was a deliberate effort on the part of people in, in the Democratic machine, to keep me off the ballot.  Chances are Moakley would have been easily reelected, like I would not have said so then, but, you know, I, I thought that the, the offer made by my friend Willie Mayfield to work with him in North Carolina came at a good moment for me--
Story_ID: 128606
Speaker 1: Now, did you move to North Carolina?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --Did you still live here [Boston, Massachusetts] and commute?
Speaker 2: I still maintained this home. My wife [Marzetta Yancey] stayed here with, with our two little boys at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I commuted every other weekend--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --Back home.  But it was a great experience down in, in Durham [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: How long were you--
Speaker 2: I was there for about a year [working at UDI Community Development Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And during that period of time I arranged the financing for a ninety-one acre industrial park that is still functioning today.  I did similar work there as I did when I was with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston as well as the Circle Venture Capital Fund.  Helped arrange financing for small businesses, including in a plastic injection molding company and a automotive remanufacturing company called Community Products Incorporated.  It was a great experience.  In fact, my wife will tell you that she fell in love with the place.  Of course, I brought her down with me a few times and we actually picked out a home.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --Were you attracted to stay there?  'Cause I love Durham and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And always have.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In fact, my daughter went to Duke Medical School [Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I did some other work down there, history work, and I think that industrial park, it may have been the one that I drove through.  I remember seeing a large industrial park when I was there.
Speaker 2: Well, this was not the large one, this was a small one--
Speaker 1: Oh, a small one.
Speaker 2: --It was a satellite of the Research Triangle Park but it was not the Research Triangle Park--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was not quite that ambitious.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was a great experience for me, I learned a lot.  Got a lot more done in a shorter period of time in Durham, than I, than I have been able to get done in Boston [Massachusetts], even though, you know, I have some successful projects that are still standing as I mentioned but things came a lot easier there.  And so my wife and I picked out a beautiful home in the Hope Valley section of Durham.  Nice little stream in the back.  We had all but signed the papers when I said I thought about it, I said, "Listen, Boston's my home."
Speaker 1: You can't leave here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I love the City of Boston.
Speaker 1: You couldn't leave here, yeah.
Story_ID: 128607
Speaker 1: And I did not want to give up the, the fight for economic and racial justice and, and let Boston [Massachusetts] maintain the negative image that it had.  So I decided to come back and I, in 1979, or I actually returned in 1977 to work with the State but I did run for [Boston] City Council for the first time in 1979.  And I made it through the preliminary.  At that time it was a city wide election nine, nine positions on the Boston City Council and you needed to finish in the top eighteen to go on to the general election in November.  So my very first time out, I was successful in actually winning in the preliminary race but ultimately I lost in the, in the general election in 1979.  So I dusted myself off in 1981, two years later, and I ran city wide again, and I did a lot better. I won in the preliminary but I lost by only two percent of the vote city wide.  But fortunately I was also a chief spokesperson for a new campaign. It was called the Campaign for District Representation.  And it was April 4, 1981 that we announced that we were going to launch this campaign to change the manner in which we elected members of the city council and the school committee.  And that campaign proved to be very successful.  We built coalitions with our communities, throughout the entire city of Boston and was in, even won the support of the downtown business community.  So we, while I lost that year for city council, and there was a, a downtown business coalition put together that supported other candidates for city council calling them the fresh faces and that included Bruce Bolling who, who won by one half of one percent, the same election I lost by two percent.  But it was a great experience.
Speaker 2: During the time that, after you left Durham [North Carolina] and came back and you were getting involved in these political activities-
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --And running for office--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --How were you supporting you and your family occupationally?
Speaker 1: I was working.  I was working with the Executive Office of Communities and Development [now, Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development].  And the--
Speaker 2: That was at the state level?
Speaker 1: That was at the state level.  And I also worked at a regional level after I left the, the state, I worked with the Metropolitan Area Planning Council [MAPC] where I was responsible for basically the administrative work.  I would process the grants, and it was while I was there, that I was introduced to the, what was called the Central Artery Project (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Because one of the divisions under me was the CTPS, the Central Transportation Planning Service, which actually began the process of mapping out what later we know, we came to know as the Big Dig.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big Dig.
Speaker 1: And at that time, [Thomas Phillip] Tip O'Neill--
Speaker 2: Now that was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: --Was fighting very hard to get some federal dollars for this project and people thought he was crazy because the, the price tag was two billion dollars back in 1978.  Well, of course, the rest is history.  He was successful in getting the dollars and [President] Ronald Reagan actually helped finance that.  And here we are and more than twenty years later, with a, a price tag of fifteen billion dollars for that same project.  So it was interesting that I was in, involved in that project from the very beginning and was able to follow it and even process some of the early paper work along that.  But that was, in the early '80s [1980s] now, and I did, you know, as, as I mentioned we were very successful with the Campaign for District Representation. The city was divided into nine districts for the 1983 election and something strange happened.  The proponents of district representation did not like the lines as they were drawn, in part because they didn't use up-to-date population data, but also the lines did not pull together the critical mass where we could elect more than one person of color to the, to the city council, so we were concerned about it.  So I, I was also in 1982, I was elected president of the Black Political Task Force and we had a very successful campaign that year.  Every candidate we endorsed won in every precinct that we covered that year.  But we also took up the issue of district representation as we moved into the, into 1983.  So I was part of the plaintiffs suing the city on the redrawn lines.  But then in 1983 while this was going on, we still had an election.  The election was delayed and we were successful in having some of the lines redrawn but there was still some other issues which had to be resolved.  But even though I had eight opponents, I won in 1983 (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The suit was still pending when I took my oath of office so I was in this strange position of being both a plaintiff and defendant on the district representation case.  So I won--
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: --And I lost (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 128608
Speaker 1: You were thirty-five years old when you were elected--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --To the [Boston] City Council.  And I guess currently you are the longest serving elected official in the history of Boston [Massachusetts] politics, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Longest serving African American on the Boston City Council or any municipal office, yes. There is another of my colleagues in government who actually served a few months longer than I in office and that was Byron Rushing. Who, who is a state rep and he was elected in 1982.  So he has me by, by a year.  But in terms of city government, no one has served longer than I.
Speaker 1: Yeah, city government, okay.  What were the, the immediate challenges that you faced as a new city councilor, what were some of the issues that you began to work on and what was it like moving on to the council at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a, really a great experience.  I felt almost like my first days at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts] when I arrived on the city council, full of optimism.  I knew I was gonna change the world just like that and everything was gonna go smoothly.  But reality struck very quickly and I found myself in the midst of city councilors who did not share my world view.  You know, I believe in the politics of inclusion.  I don't, I never participated in those smoke filled rooms. And so that, I was sort of a novelty on the city council.  Even my colleague, Councilor [Bruce] Bolling, who had been elected two years before me, was far more comfortable in that environment than I was because he had actually been employed by city government long before he was elected to office.  So he was pretty much a part, part of the club there and which is fine.  I, we worked very closely together.  My perspective was even different from his in that I believe that there was a role for direct action even though I was, (laughter) even though I was now on the inside--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --As an elected official.  So I wanted to just change everything, you know. I, I did not like the fact that people of color were not represented in the higher level positions and were not represented in significant enough numbers in most of the seventy different departments that we had in city government.  So I immediately embarked upon a program to pressure department heads to diversify their offices, and an effort that I continue to this day.  But I also had something--two other items on my agenda that I wanted to--some immediate action on.  As I mentioned I was president of the Black Political Task Force but I was also a member of TransAfrica.  TransAfrica of Boston which is founded by Willard Johnson again.  And I worked with him, and so when I was elected to the city council, one of the first pieces of legislation I offered was something novel for cities, and that was a divestment bill for the City of Boston.  I learned after doing some research that some of the businesses that the City of Boston invested some of its pension funds in and some of the banks that we held our deposits with, were actually supporting the apartheid regime in South Africa.
Story_ID: 128609
Speaker 1: So it was a moment in time when there was a lot of activity around the world with people fighting for the rights of the residents of South Africa.  Nelson Mandela had been imprisoned and very few people on the [Boston] City Council thought it was an issue worthy of any attention at all. In fact, many, even some of my constituents, challenged me on, on the whole issue and we had so many other problems in the City of Boston [Massachusetts], which, of course, I was addressing as well, but I thought it was very important for Boston to make a strong statement against the Nazi like racist apartheid regime in South Africa.  I also thought it would help improve the, the local, national, international image of the city of Boston for us to take a leadership role on that issue.  So it was 1984, I actually visited the United Nations, my first and only time there really, where I addressed an assembly out of the United Nations during a, during the antiapartheid conference where I was elected vice president.  And I talked about what we're trying to do in Boston.  In fact, one of the reasons I was elected was because I told those gathered that if you vote for me for that will improve the chances of getting this divestment legislation passed in the city of Boston.
Speaker 2: How did you get in front of the United Nations?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I mean, did you ask to come or did somebody invite you?
Speaker 1: No, I was--
Speaker 2: What were the politics to get in?
Speaker 1: I was active with a local coalition, again that involved TransAfrica and, and many other organizations including some labor organization that also was fighting against apartheid in South Africa.  And I learned that this conference was, was taking place at the United Nations. They learned of my interest in, in this legislation which we had just drafted and it was just, just a very nice marriage and we went there and met with many of the leaders of African nations who were also involved in the effort and it was, it was a very uplifting conscious raising activity.  So when we, when I proposed that in, in June, I believe, of 1984, I did not imagine that we would be able to pass it as quickly as we did.  Because I believe we actually passed it in July or August of 1984.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And also that year, 1984, was a presidential election year and the city council had passed the ordinance and the Harmoo [ph.] Petition but the mayor was sort of dragging his feet on signing it.  We were blessed with having George Russell as the treasurer for the city of Boston.  He was the first black treasurer for the city of Boston, and he was left with the burden of saying yes or no on the divestment legislation in terms of the financial impact it may have on the city, he signed off on it.  So during the democratic convention in San Francisco in 1984, I flew out there not just to participate in the activities but also to challenge Mayor [Raymond] Flynn on the divestment legislation. He actually signed it into law in San Francisco, and I told him I wanted him to do that and also talk to the mayors of other cities and other political leaders to see if they can do the same all across the country, which he did.  He actually went to the head without me knowing it, to talk about the divestment (laughter) legislation.  So he took credit for it.
Speaker 2: I guess he did.
Speaker 1: He did not write one word (laughter) or make one change in the legislation but he took credit for it, which was fine. The important thing is that Boston took the lead and, and I was very, very proud of my colleagues.
Speaker 2: Well, you took the lead.
Speaker 1: Well I couldn't do it without my colleagues on the City Council.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know but--
Story_ID: 128610
Speaker 1: Another piece of legislation that I was actively involved with is antismoking legislation.  You know, you may recall prior to 1984 we used to have very attractive young ladies in miniskirts passing out free cigarette samples in the Boston Common and elsewhere to get young people hooked on smoking.  I thought that was wrong.  So I filed legislation, again, working with others, an organization operating out of Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] and elsewhere, a lot of anti-tobacco activists worked with me in drafting legislation which we passed on the [Boston] city council. It was a tough battle.  I had two pieces of legislation, relative legislation, concerning smoking.  One was to ban the free cigarette samples, the other was this revolutionary idea in 1980s of creating nonsmoking areas in restaurants (laughter) in 1984.  So I was approached by lobbyists, both from Boston [Massachusetts] and from North Carolina, a friend of mine who I met when I was in Durham, North Carolina, flew up to Boston to lobby against the legislation that I had filed.  As, you know, North Carolina is a tobacco state, and so in particularly Durham.  So it was not that, I was not totally surprised to be visited by one of my former friends down there.  But the legislation banning the distribution of cigarettes, it did pass and was put into law.  The legislation creating nonsmoking areas did not pass.  And at that time I was able to get my colleague, [Thomas] Tom Menino, who was elected to the city council the same time I was, to sign on both pieces.  He actually voted against the legislation which would have created the nonsmoking areas in, in restaurants.  So he's been totally transformed because he became a very strong advocate of not only banning smoking in the workplace, part of my legislative initiative as well, but also banning smoking even in bars.  So I give him credit for his convergence but back then he actually voted against it.  So, those were the two issues that people paid some attention to but my primary concern was, was still the operation of city government.  And how can, how we could use the institution of city government to improve the quality of life for everyone.  So it can be in the area of education, it could be public safety, transportation, public works, the gamut.  And what I learned is that if you don't focus the attention of city government on solving the problem, more often than not, the problem just gets worse because, for lack of attention.  So I have committed my life on the city council to fighting for the issue of economic justice, to fighting for our young people so they can get a decent education, to make sure that there are proper role models for those young people but also to make sure that the, the dollars spent for salaries and contracts found their way into communities of color as well as the rest of the City of Boston.
Story_ID: 128611
Speaker 1: That's an ongoing struggle.
Speaker 2: Have you been able to achieve some of the changes in the public schools that were your objectives?  Have things changed enough for you in public education?  Have you--
Speaker 1: Not at all, it's, it's a source of frustration.  And my, my wife, Marzetta [Yancey], and I are the proud parents of four children, all of whom have now graduated from the Boston Public Schools [BPS].  And we, both of us spent an enormous amount of time in, in the schools that each of our children attended for a couple of reasons, first of all, we wanted to see what was going on.  We wanted to let the teachers and administrators know that we're paying attention and that we're doing the same thing that our parents did when we were going through, through the school system--although my wife went to schools in Mississippi, my mother and father spent most of their time in the Boston Public School system with their children.  And I felt, I thought that parental involvement was, was key.  But no I'm deeply disappointed with the performance of the Boston Public School system because I know that our children are smart enough to learn and that over time their intellectual curiosity is damaged in some way and their--their sense of self-esteem and self-worth is actually hurt because they're attending the Boston Public Schools and the level of expectations for African American students verses other students is relatively low.  And that's a serious problem.  It's a serious opportunity cost for us, not only the City of Boston [Massachusetts] but to, for the whole world because we can produce people out of our school system who can solve many of the most perplexing problems that we face in, in this country and in this world.  And I know that to be the case.  And I also know that if, if we have teachers with a higher level of expectations, if we have a political system that nurtured education rather than discourage it, which it, I believe is what we're really doing today we can make far more progress because--
Speaker 2: I think, I think expectations is the critical factor.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Really the critical factor.
Speaker 1: And look at Boston, you know, we have an embarrassment of riches right here in the city of Boston.  We have the most prestigious educational, medical institutions in the world, right here but yet somehow, they manage to ignore, by and large, what's happening in the school system.  And that's a crime.  So that's, that remains a source of frustration.  I believe that Dr. Lois Harrison-Jones, who was the first female African American Superintendent of the Boston Public Schools, had it right.  She reached out to the community, she worked to raise the level of expectation of administrators and teachers, and she was willing even to stand up to the mayor of Boston to fight for resources for the schools.  We haven't had anyone since who came even close to her level of advocacy for the schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 128612
Speaker 1: You've mentioned human rights, public education, economic development.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know that you've addressed the issues of public safety.
Speaker 2: Public safety is key.
Speaker 1: And would you tell us about some of the legislation, ordinances--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And your accomplishment in getting a police station here in your neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Of Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is all public safety.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, first of all, one of the reasons I ran for the Boston City Council for the first time in 1979 was because I witnessed the lack of concern on the part of city officials for the deaths that were taking place in the African American community, particularly in 1979 we had a series of homicides seemingly focusing on African American females, and those crimes were never really solved.  So I would agitate and organize to put pressure on the city to provide public safety services to, to our community.  I also witnessed something else that concerned me.  That the, the treatment of, of our young people, young people of color in the city of Boston, as well as others even prominent individuals like Jean McGuire who served on the school committee, they were treated very, with great contempt and disdain on the, by police officers who are supposed to be public servants.  So my concern was the, the level of protection and the quality of protection.  I wanted to see more police but I wanted those police to be accountable to the community and to have a level of empathy with, with the community and, and really be a part of it.  So those challenges are still with me today.  We've made some modest progress in that regard.  But when I was first elected to the city council, we had a trailer on the corner of Blue Hill Avenue and Morton Street, and that trailer housed one or two police officers and that was the city's presence in terms of providing protection to our community.  So all the police cars had to be dispatched from other areas outside of Mattapan and Dorchester [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts] and I didn't think that was right.  So the very first budget that I had to deal with was the fiscal year 1985 budget.  I was elected in 1983, I began my service at the midpoint of the fiscal year 1984, so I told Mayor [Raymond] Flynn that he would get my vote on the budget if he supports a loan order which, which I vote requiring the city to construct a new police station in the Mattapan area of Boston, initially he said no.  So I got together with my colleagues and they agreed with me that we would attach a little amendment to the budget requiring the reopening of police stations which were closed down because of Prop 2 1/2, which was an effort to decrease the level of taxation but also have the impact of decreasing level of service.  That took place in 1981.  So we were successful in attaching that and I was successful in persuading my colleagues to vote a loan order of $3.7 million for the purposes of constructing that police station.  I also filed legislation requiring the police department to provide crime statistics and police deployment statistics so we can evaluate what the city's response is to the level of violence taking place everywhere in the city of Boston.  And, and those statistics are, are very useful in refocusing the attention of city government because if you have one area of the city with sixty percent of the homicides and only fifteen percent of the police, we know that there's a problem there and puts pressure--internal pressure on the police department to redeploy its police.  I've also filed civilian legislation for the creation of civilian review boards for the last twenty years. They haven't passed yet but I'm optimistic that one day, (laughter) we will have a civilian review board in the city of Boston, not to, you know, criticize the police department with any type of broad brush but to tell the regular citizen that if he or she disagrees with how they've been handled by police officers there will be an independent board that will review that.  I don't believe that the police can effectively police themselves.  And we've had many horrific situations in the city of Boston.  Early on, I learned of the James Bowden case, where this young man one Sunday afternoon was visiting his mother in the Mission Hill section of Boston and at the same time there was a hold up of a variety store in Cambridge.  So Boston police thought that James Bowden was the person who committed that crime. They got into some type of confrontation, he was shot by the police and killed.  It was later learned that a throw away gun was used by the police to justify the homicide because he was unarmed.  It took many years but we did in fact persuade the city to, to give close to a million dollars to the widow of James Bowden in that case.  But it still raised the, the awful specter of police abusing their powers, and in fact, committing the worst crimes possible.  So I'm still pushing for the civilian review board.  I also believe that the police department must be much more reflective of the demographic makeup of the city of Boston, and today we have some major problems.  Many of the department heads or division heads within the police department, do not even live in the city of Boston. They don't reflect the fact that Boston is more than fifty percent people of color.  We have some areas where only fifteen percent of the people in those divisions happen to be people of color and as far as detective sergeants for example, only seven percent of people of color in a city that's as diverse as Boston.  So we still have many challenges but every year, every department head knows that when they come before Councilor Yancey on the Ways and Means Committee, they have to respond to the issue of diversity in terms of their internal personnel, as well as the level of contractual activity.  And simply by raising those questions at the budget session, we get their attention and there is some effort, or at least they pretend like they care about the makeup of their departments.
Story_ID: 128613
Speaker 1: What are some of the major committee chairmanships that you've held being on the [Boston City] Council [Boston, Massachusetts]?  I know you've served on a lot of 'em--
Speaker 2: I, I have.
Speaker 1: --But what were some of them?
Speaker 2: I've chaired as chairman of the Public Safety Committee, chairman of the Education Committee, been chair of the Housing Committee.  I've been chair of the Post Audit and Oversight Committee.  I've been chair of the Human Rights Committee.  I've chaired the Neighborhood Services Committee.  I think I've chaired--
Speaker 1: Done 'em all.
Speaker 2: --Most of 'em, not all.  I, I haven't, I, I, I've been, I served as vice chair of the Ways and Means Committee for about four or five years.  I never chaired it.  And I've never actually voted for the president of the city council during those periods of time, with the exception of my vote for Bruce Bolling as president of the city council in 1985 and '86 [1986].  But because philosophically, I'm at odds with most of my colleagues on many of these issues, it's very rare that, that I have actually voted for them for president, particularly during that seven year stretch of time when [James] Jimmy Kelly served as president of city council.  And ironically, when he was not able to get seven votes to get reelected to the city council in 2001, Jimmy Kelly threw his support behind me.  And that's how I became president of the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we get--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --To your presidency--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Of the city council in 2001, in 1999 you were elected president of the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials [NBC-LEO].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the history leading up to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --That national position.
Speaker 2: Yes, I've been active with the National League of Cities and the National Black Caucus of the, of Local Elected Officials since I was elected to the city council in 1983.  And I, you know, attended conferences, I worked with my colleagues all around the country even on the issue of divestment, was able to help other cities and towns come up with their divestment legislation, their antismoking legislation et cetera.  So when I, and that activism led to my being nominated to serve on the board of directors of the National League of Cities, as well as on the board of directors of the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials.  It's the largest organization of black elected officials in the country, if not in the world.  We have more than four thousand elected officials at the, at the municipal level.  So it was quite an honor in 1999 when I was elected to serve as, as president of that organization.
Speaker 1: Were black mayors across the country--
Speaker 2: Yes, black mayors--
Speaker 1: --Members?
Speaker 2: --And black city councilors from around the country.  So but the, but the unfortunate thing is, in that organization, you can only serve for one year (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: And what did you accomplish in that year?  Tell me what that was like for you?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well I knew I only had one year to serve and my objective was to work on the digital divide but also to build bridges between African American elected officials and African elected officials.  So I led a delegation of sixty-five African American elected officials from the United States to Ghana in 1999 to begin working on that relationship and it very successful.  I was actually installed as a chief during that visit when we went to the center of Ghana to, just a few miles northeast of Kumasi, which is in the Ashanti area of Ghana, and I was installed as a chief in Mampong.  And what that basically meant is that I had to accept some responsibilities for the people in that, in that village.  And it was quite an honor, I had my kente cloth and I went through the whole ceremony.  They had about twenty thousand people from their community--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --Participating in that event.  But I also took a side trip to the part of Ghana, the western region where Kwame Nkrumah was actually born and raised.  And we established a sister city relationship between Sekondi-Takoradi [Ghana] and the City of Boston [Massachusetts].  Up to that point, Boston had sister city relationships on every continent except Africa.  And I, one of my objectives while I was president and beyond was to change that, and we did.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you how that happened--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --So now you've told me--
Story_ID: 128614
Speaker 1: Let's look at your [Boston City] Council presidency--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --In 2001.  How did that happen and how did that tenure go for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to understand the City of Boston [Massachusetts] has a city council made up of thirteen members.  Very few of those members happen to be people from the communities of color.  In fact, in 1999 there were just two of us (laughter).  I mean, I'm sorry 2001. It was just Chuck Turner and myself.  So to win the position of president of the city council you need at least seven votes, and as I mentioned to you by and large the majority of my colleagues do not see eye to eye with me on a vast array of issues because I believe in the politics of inclusion and of change, and almost by definition the city council represents the status quo, so there's that inertia there.  But something strange happened during, leading up to 2001. There was a major conflict and schism between the seven year president, again we elected every year--[James] Jimmy Kelly, who in, in view of many is perhaps one of the most conservative members of the city council but also very, very close to the Mayor of Boston [Thomas Menino] philosophically as well.
Speaker 1: And what part of the city did he represent?
Speaker 2: He represents South Boston. And his history was well known before he was elected.  He was one of the primary opponents of the integration or desegregation of the Boston Public Schools [BPS].  He, he fought against affirmative action through his entire career.  He also opposed me when I was the spokesperson for the Campaign for District Representation.  He wanted to maintain the city wide system but I said no, we need to have the districts created so that every neighborhood in the city of Boston will at least have the opportunity for a voice on the city's legislative branch of government, being the city council.  So he fought me on that.  Now he tells me it's the best thing that happened to him (laughter) 'cause he was elected to the city council the same year I was.  But there was a conflict between the mayor of Boston, [Thomas] Tom Menino, and Jimmy Kelly.  They were both best of friends up until a major dispute concerning some development in South Boston and how the community benefits package would be used.  The mayor, according to Jimmy Kelly, lied and betrayed him around that issue.  The mayor for his part worked very hard to influence some of my colleagues on the city council to vote for Brian McLaughlin out of Allston [neighborhood, Boston, Massachusetts], but a very nice guy, one of my colleagues, but also someone very loyal to the mayor.  And from time to time I think the city council should serve as a check and balance on the mayor so I've challenged the mayor repeatedly on many issues.  So this tension was building up between Jimmy Kelly, who again has served as president for seven years, and the mayor of Boston who was mayor for seven years at the time.  So Jimmy saw the writing on the wall. He asked me to vote for him. I told him, no I could not vote for him. I mean, we had a great personal working relationship but philosophically we're miles apart. I couldn't vote for him.  Jimmy on the other hand, was a bit concerned with the prospect of having someone handpicked by, by the person who at that time was his arch enemy, (laughter) Mayor Tom Menino.  They have since kissed and made-up fortunately or unfortunately depending upon how you look at it.  But the result was that Jimmy Kelly had six votes that he could rely on, Brian McLaughlin had six votes that he could rely on including Chuck Turner's and I made a commitment to neither individual.  In fact, Jimmy Kelly approached me, he, he asked me to vote for myself.  I said yes, I could certainly vote for myself, particularly if there were six votes before it came to me.  One of the benefits of--you know, I have to thank my grandparents, great-grandparents--one of the benefits of having the "Y" as your last, beginning of your last name, is that you're the last one to vote on the city council.  So I told Jimmy Kelly that if he failed to support me he's going to have Brian McLaughlin as president.  I said I'm not gonna vote for you but I want you to vote for me and I guarantee that the city council will be a far more independent body.  So on the day of the vote the, the first Monday in January of 2001, as the roll call went, I actually had seven votes before he came to me because a person who was committed to Brian McLaughlin saw the writing on the wall and he wanted to be on good terms with the new president--President Yancey at that point.  So I did win with eight, eight of the votes.  Unfortunately the antagonism between the mayor and (laughter) and Jimmy Kelly lasted only a relatively short period of time, so when it came up for reelection, then they selected someone else from South Boston.  But in terms of what, were, were, my mission was that year.  I fully recognized that the dynamics and the numbers on the city council--I wanted us to strengthen the city council as a more independent body.  I wanted us to improve the central staff in terms of legislative staff and budget staff.  I also wanted us to consummate that deal that I began in 1999 and have that sister city relationship between Boston and Sekondi-Takoradi, and I accomplished all of those things.  It was not easy.  We had to, for the very first time in the history of Boston, at least during my tenure on the city council for now twenty-three years on the city council, we actually defunded one agency as, to serve more as a negotiating chip than anything else.  So when the mayor refused to cooperate with me on funding of those positions in central staff, we defunded the law department.  Zeroed it out.  Not because we expected that to, you know, city to operate without a law department but to send a message to the mayor that he has to negotiate with us in good faith.  We did work out a deal, we got the funding for those positions, every position we asked for we got funding for.  And we later on signed the sister city relationship with Sekondi-Takoradi [Ghana].
Story_ID: 128615
Speaker 1: Councilman Yancey, between 1983 when you entered the [Boston City] Council and here we are 2006, how has the community that you represent and have represented all this time, changed?
Speaker 2: There has been a dramatic transformation of my district.  I represent sixty-five thousand people in the Dorchester, Mattapan section of Boston [Massachusetts], which is sort of south central Boston.  It's the district that has the largest proportion of people of color.  It's the district with the, with the largest proportion of immigrants, and that is really the key to the transformation.  Boston has changed demographically in large measure because of the influx of people from, from Africa, from Asian, from Latin America but most particularly from the Caribbean.  And most of that change has taken place right in the heart of my district, so it's not unusual for me to participate in the annual Caribbean Carnival the last Saturday of every August, where we have five hundred thousand people crowded right into the, the narrow spine between Warren, Warren and Martin Luther King Boulevard up to Franklin Park, about a two or three mile stretch, with five hundred thousand people there celebrating their Caribbean heritage with all sorts of floats and, of course, the politicians come to wave but people don't come to see us.  But the diversity in Boston has really changed in large measure because of the influx of immigrants.  And right now there's a, we have a 140 different languages spoken in the city of Boston and I think half of those are in my district.  So that's been one change.  But the other change has been the fact that the largest number of new housing in the city of Boston has actually been created in my district.  The largest amount of capital dollars from the city of Boston, of all nine districts, most of those dollars are the--are for District 4 which is Dorchester, Mattapan, has received more capital dollars than any of the other eight districts, even though some will argue I'm not necessarily favored by the mayor who's, who's in the office now [Mayor Thomas Menino] and even his predecessor [Mayor Raymond Flynn].  'Cause again, my philosophy is that the status quo is not acceptable and when you challenge the status quo you antag--you antagonize the people in power both publically and, and privately.  And I've been able somehow to survive, challenging the mayor and yet getting more resources in my district than my counterparts in other parts of, of the city and other city councilors, who have much a more positive working relationship with, with the mayor.  So it's sort of ironic that--
Story_ID: 128616
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) going back to the dramatic demographic changes--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Across the City [of Boston, Massachusetts] and particularly in the districts and neighborhoods you represent, how have those demographic changes, what kind of new challenges have, have come to you as, as, as the representative of these people, what are the new challenges you've had to face?
Speaker 1: Well, part of it--
Speaker 2: And new issues.
Speaker 1: Yeah, part of the frustration is that the City of Boston doesn't have any real jurisdiction on immigration laws, as, you know, that's a federal issue.  But what we've tried to do is to work with, with the, the new immigrants and make sure that their children get into, to the proper schools and get support from the police department, get support from all the departments in city government, make sure that the services are, in fact, being delivered fairly, and just being an advocate.  You know, there are many social events that take place and because of a, a cultural divide and, and some miscommunications, more often than not, the city would say no to granting permits to different folks, at least early on.  That has changed in large measure because of the very aggressive way my office advocates for the Haitian community as well as for others in the Caribbean community.  And that has made it--that has made a difference.
Speaker 2: From what parts of the Caribbean world, specifically, have these newcomers come from, where--what part of the islands--
Speaker 1: Well, I'm sure I'm gonna leave some countries out so if my constituents watch this--
Speaker 2: Why don't you give the majority, the majority.
Speaker 1: The majority I would say Jamaica, Trinidad, Tobago, Montserrat, you know, particularly after the volcano, and most particularly, Haiti.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But the Dominican Republic as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There's a growing proportion of Puerto Ricans in, in my district--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --But by far it's the Haitian and, and other Africans from African Americans from the Caribbean that make up most of the changes within Mattapan and Dorchester [neighborhoods, Boston, Massachusetts].  And it has actually improved life in the district.  It, it has made it much more vibrant 'cause many of the new businesses opening up in Dorchester, Mattapan are actually owned and operated by many of our immigrant groups and quite frankly, were it not for them, many of these stores would remain vacant.  And that would have really been a drag on the city's economy.  The vast majority of immigrants in District 4 are hardworking people.  They, their children excel in schools even much greater than the native born African Americans, and they place a high value on education.  And I think the balance has been, have been very positive.  I mean we've had some issues with some immigrants back in the late '80s [1980s] when some of the gangs from out of New York and Jamaica were active in Boston and I think that led to a spike in the homicide rate but with, we're working to get that under control.  Today quite frankly we have an increasing proportion of people coming from Cape Verde Islands and other African nations.  They're not as large as the immigrants from, from the Caribbean but it's a very significant proportion of my district.
Story_ID: 128617
Speaker 1: Well, I think we've come to what we call the wrap up questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --For The HistoryMakers interview.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: And I'm going to open it up to you now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Are there any things that you'd like to add to your HistoryMakers interview--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --That I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: Well, there is one thing.  Back in 1987 my, my wife, Marzetta [Yancey], and my sister, Linda, who, who has passed on, and other family members and my staff decided we wanted to give back to the community because it was quite an honor for me, at least, for them to express their confidence in me by electing me to the [Boston] city council.  So in, in February of 1987 we hosted our very first Charles C. Yancey Book Fair, and it was a very straight forward affair.  All we wanted to do was to encourage people from the community to donate books, new or used books, which we would then distribute to young people at the Codman Square Library [Boston, Massachusetts] which is in my district, and, and encourage our young people to develop a love of reading, to build their personal libraries for the first time.  And we did it in February in 1987 and really enjoyed it because of the excitement from the young people who was really looking forward to taking home their own books.  So we did it again in 1988 and we did it again in '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: And now it's become an institution.
Speaker 2: And this past March 4, 2006 was actually our twentieth annual book fair.  We distributed more than thirty-one thousand brand new books.  We're no longer--
Speaker 1: Thirty-one thousand?
Speaker 2: Thirty-one thousand. We no longer accept used books and if we do, we don't distribute them at the, at the book fair.  So it was a, a great, been a great effort on the part of my staff, I just lend my name to the effort, but really it was my wife, Marzetta who played a key role in keeping it together and keeping it organized, even though my staff at the city council serve as coordinator--my chief of staff serves as coordinator and the rest of my staff participates in the effort.  Most if not every member of the city council makes some contribution to the book fair.  The mayor with the exception of one year, has participated in every one of our book fairs, Congressman [Michael] Capuano also has participated in it.  And a big it's a, it's a, it's a marvelous community effort.  And today we've contributed more than, donated more than 250 thousand books to our young people.  And I still see some of the children who participated in the very first one, who, who tell me that they remember it very well.
Speaker 1: How many youngsters, young people have attended over the years?  How many did you have this March 4?
Speaker 2: This, this March we had roughly seven or eight hundred young people but if you add their parents we had about eleven hundred participants.  And the books are distributed to people of all ages including adults.  We have, we, we have book bags, and this year we put more than thirty books in most of those bags, so, (laughter) and they were brand new.  We actually raised more than sixty thousand books so we have a surplus of--of twenty thousand books that we will be distributing throughout the year.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: For example, in September some of the, some of our neighborhood groups organized events for kindergartens and we gave them those big books that you may have seen in one of the photos.  I also contribute books to day care centers and senior centers and schools, and even when I host our community meetings we distribute a lot of brand new books.  So that's just a, a modest effort on our part to give something back and to give our young people an opportunity to take some responsibility for their own education.
Speaker 1: You've outgrown the library I take it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --After all these years.
Speaker 2: Yes, we outgrew it pretty quickly actually.  The library accommodates only about a 150 people. We had that number and more during our very first book fair and then it doubled the next year to about three hundred and then the next year we were up to four or five hundred and people were literally fainting. So my staff persuaded me to pull it out of the library.  I, even though I prefer the library setting for obvious reasons, I want our young people to get used to going to libraries but right now for the last six years or so we've been hosting it at Prince Hall, which is the largest facility within the, my district of Mattapan and Dorchester [neighborhoods, Boston, Massachusetts] and we've, we're bursting at the seams now.  It's a great event.  And I wanna thank you, [Robert] Bob Hayden, for contributing books to most of the book fairs that we've had and, you know, your book on African American scientists and inventors really were best sellers at our (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: --Book fair, so--
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: --Wanna thank you for that contribution.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, you may recall, I think it was 1988, that you spoke to a group of the young people.
Speaker 1: Oh, I remember speaking at the Codman Square Library.
Speaker 2: The Codman Square Library, yes, yes, and here we are twenty years later.
Speaker 1: Hopefully next year I'll be, be around to attend.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 128618
Speaker 1: But I also wanted to note that I am the product of the City of Boston [Massachusetts].  I love this city.  I've been blessed with caring parents. My mother [Alice Yancey] and father [Howell Yancey, Sr.] were married for more than fifty years.  One of nine children--I was number six--so I had free reign by the time I came along  as I mentioned some time ago. After five boys I came along and I'm sure my older brothers exhausted my parents but I had a, a great deal of independence coming up and I was, with that comes a certain responsibility.  I have three younger siblings.  I was blessed with a beautiful and devoted wife [Marzetta Yancey] of now more than thirty-six years.  I'm blessed with four beautiful children, all doing well in their individual lives and all of them are out of the house (laughter) so you're looking at one of the empty nesters now, which is a, a strange experience.  But through it all, I know that the city of my birth, Boston, has yet to reach its potential just as I have yet to reach my potential.  Boston is, has been blessed with a, a myriad of resources as I mentioned.  It's very historic.  Bostonians have always fought for justice and for human rights, even before the abolition of slavery.  But we have been schizophrenic because there are also a strain in Boston that's ultraconservative and racist that we have to address.  Perhaps not uniquely so--perhaps the same problems occur in every other major city but the level of expectation for Boston is so much higher because it's, it's viewed to be the cradle of liberty, you know, this is where the so called patriots organized and challenged the British.  So we have a great legacy and we have to make sure that we live up to the best of Boston's legacy.  And again, it's a relatively small city, less than six hundred thousand people.  Relatively wealthy in terms of the city's budget as well as the median income of its people.  We spend more than two billion dollars a year on the city's budget that I vote on every year in the city council.  We employ more than eighteen thousand people, yet we have these nagging problems particularly in the area of education. But I know that we can do better by our children and I know our children can do better.  We do have a problem with crime and violence that seems to impact the communities of color disproportionately.  We have to change the manner in which we offer opportunities to young people because in some cases more than seventy percent of our young people have some negative interaction with the criminal justice system which leaves them with a record, which limits their life's opportunities in terms of further education or employment.  We have to change that.  But most of all we have to send a message that Boston stands for the best that that we, that humans have to offer.  That we can achieve higher heights and we can tell that young person who may be in a large family of nine, growing up in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], going to the Boston Public Schools [BPS] that you can amount to something if you work hard and apply yourself.
Story_ID: 128619
Speaker 1: You're proof of that. How do you feel about the way you've led your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I can say honestly I've never had a boring day in my life. I've had many frustrating days.  But I, I'm certainly not, not perfect and I don't hold myself up to be a paragon but I have been someone who benefited from tremendous blessings.  You know, I was not responsible for my parents [Alice Yancey and Howell Yancey, Sr.]. You know, God intervened there.  And God has intervened to give me a beautiful wife [Marzetta Yancey] and, and we have beautiful children.  I even have a granddaughter.  I've just tried to give back because I've been given so much.  You know, when, when I was growing up I thought my family was very wealthy, you know, we owned our own home. I can't recall one day in my entire life where I wanted for anything.  It was only later on in life I realized how much of a struggle it was for my parents, who worked two and three jobs a piece raising nine children, owning a home, putting the children through the Boston Public Schools [BPS], dealing with violence in the streets, dealing with so many other challenges, yet, creating a, a strong work ethic in each and every one of their nine children.  And we've benefited tremendously.  So I've been given much.  I just wanna give back a little to make this place better, a, a better city, a better state, and a better country, a better world than what it was when I was born in 1948.
Speaker 1: Looking beyond your career and particularly your career as an elected or political leader in the city of Boston [Massachusetts], what would you still want to do that you haven't been able to do for yourself, or--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --Or for others?
Speaker 2: --I, I enjoyed teaching.  There was, I didn't mention this during the interview but I did spend a year at the Bunker Hill Community College [Charlestown, Massachusetts] where I taught government and politics, and I enjoyed it.  I, it was really a thrill being in the classroom and, and impacting the lives of, you know, a few dozen in, individuals.  It also gave me an opportunity to reflect upon what was going on at that point in time and what we can look forward to in the future.  So I think I would be interested in perhaps following your lead, [HM] Mr. [Robert] Hayden, and, and trying to be a, an educator at some point.  But right now I'm too busy being the activist but I, I would like to settle down and just be an educator, I suppose.
Story_ID: 128620
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today at large, and communities, I really prefer to say communities because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --We have many communities.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, I have several.  First of all, I, I will love to see the day when all people of all races can share somewhat equally in the power, in the burdens, and the responsibilities of our society.  Today the power, even in 2006, the vast majority of the political and economic power are concentrated in the hands of European American males.  And I think that has to change because this can be stifling because we're not providing people who have so many skills and talents that can offer to society as a whole, to solve many of the most perplexing problems and issues and illnesses that that we have today. So I want to see our society open up to everyone so that every individual can achieve his or her potential.  And that's particularly so within the communities of color that are struggling against poverty, struggling against so many barriers to entry into, in terms of business, in terms of jobs, in terms of the boardrooms in downtown Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: You are, are making and have made today a major contribution to our history through your interview.  Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that if you don't know where you've been, you won't know where you're going.  And when I was in Ghana back in 1999, I later went back again in 2002, I became familiar with this symbol in Ghana. It's called a sankofa bird.  Sankofa bird is a bird that actually looks backwards before it moves forward.  And I think any thinking human being will have to understand that he or she will have to know what preceded him or her before they can achieve anything in the future. So history is very important.
Story_ID: 128621
Speaker 1: One last question, how do you wanna be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Ah, I really don't have a good answer for that.  I, you know, during this, this interview is taking place the same day we laid to rest my oldest living relative, Elizabeth Benjamin [ph.].  And I'm sure that during the service I reflected upon all the positive things that she has done and in fact the positive things that my parents have done.  You know, I love my mother [Alice White Yancey] and father [Howell Theodore Yancey, Sr.] dearly, and they, they loved me and all my brother and sisters, and their legacy had very little to do with their resumes.  My folks did not have college degrees, even though my Uncle Victor who was, who I saw earlier today, did obtain his degree from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, University], and my step-grandfather [James Wolfe] received his degree from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  What I remember most about those individuals who influenced my life was not, again not their degrees or, or any material thing but the fact that they had a sense of commitment to others.  That they had a, a sense of commitment to their children but each of them went beyond even their own families to, to strive to improve the quality of life for others of many different races, not just African Americans.  So, you know, since you've posed that question to me, which I should have given much more thought to, I think I would like to be remembered for someone who tried to improve the quality of life of not just myself, my family, or even my community but I like to say I had a small impact on improving the quality of life to everybody in this world, since it is so small.
Story_ID: 128622
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents' [Alice White Yancey and Howell Theodore Yancey, Sr.] wedding that took place September 24, 1937.  It was taken in the home of my grandmother's, I believe in Allston, Massachusetts.  A beautiful young couple.  Six years after this picture was taken they had their first child, the first of nine children.  But as you can see, they made a very beautiful couple and they were married, Alice and Howell Yancey were married for more than fifty years.  By the time of their passing, they had generated not just nine children but thirty-seven grandchildren.  And dozens and dozens of great grands.  This picture was, was-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it, hold it one second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I need to adjust it.  Now the pictures are--some of the pictures are shot horizontally because of their, their size.
Speaker 1: I see.  I see.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So--
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  --Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Now this picture was taken on June 16, 1963.  It was taken in the basement of St. Mark's Congregational Church [Roxbury, Massachusetts] on the occasion of my second oldest brother's wedding.  That's Fred [Frederick Howell Yancey II], he's, he's in the, in the rear.  He's second from the left.  He was married that day but he's standing with his brothers and sisters and this is one of the few pictures where we're all together.  I was I believe fourteen years old at the time.  And the, going from left to right, the first person is, with the glasses in the rear that's my brother, Howell [Theodore Yancey, Jr.], he's the oldest and next to him is my brother, Fred.  We've lost both Howell and Fred. They're deceased.  And then there's Terrence [Leslie Yancey] and after Terence came Robert [Richard Yancey] or bobby as we call him, Ronald [Yancey] or Ronnie is next.  He was born in January of 1948 and I was born December of that same year and I'm next.  I don't know why I'm smiling (laughter) so, so broadly.  Looks like I'm missing a tooth there.  And then next to me is my youngest brother, Vincent [Gerald Yancey], he was the seventh son, and we're all arranged chronologically.  And after he was born three years later my sister, Linda [Eleanor Yancey], who is standing next to, next to dad with her hands on his shoulders and she passed away at a very young age.  She passed away at 41 but she, she gave birth to four children.  And then next to her, of course, is my dad, Howell, updated picture from their wedding picture as you, as you will note.  And my mother, Alice Yancey, and leaning on her is our baby sister, Eleanor [Richards Yancey], who's now a teacher in the Boston Public School [BPS] system and a mother and grandmother. This picture of my family includes our four children.  It was taken, I believe in November of 1987.  My wife, Marzetta [Yancey], and I very proudly stand behind our four children.  And this picture is actually in chronological order but from the, from right to left.  Charles, Jr. was born in June of 1970.  He's a little more than seventeen years old in this picture.  And then there's Derrick who was born in October, October 20 of 1972.  And five years later we were blessed with the birth of Sharif Demone [ph.] Yancey, who was born on November 14, 1977.  So this picture was taken 10 years after Sharif was born.  And now we have Ashley in Derrick's lap.  She was just a few months old when this picture was taken and now she is a freshman at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] as we speak.  As mentioned in the interview, every year my office hosts a book fair, and this is not the book fair, but throughout the year I work with teachers and with day care centers and preschoolers and try to spread the books around, so this is one of those many occasions outside the book fair where we gave, gave away books to the young people.  These happen to be people, young people who are just beginning their educational careers. They're prekindergarten students.  And we had an event earlier in the summer of 2005 where we encouraged businesses in, in my district to make little donations to the, to the children that would help them get their start as they began school.  This picture was actually taken in August but they're preparing for their first days in Boston Public Schools.  All right.  This picture looks like it was taken in the early 1980s.  It's in the governor's office, Michael Dukakis was governor at the time.  As many of you may know, he ran for President of the United States but he was ultimately defeated by George Bush.  George Bush the first (laughter).  This was celebration of a ceremony involving the environment.  I was a member of the board of directors of the Coastal Resources Advisory Board and this is the occasion of the signing of some important environmental legislation that maintains that the coast of Massachusetts shall forever be accessible to the general public.  Okay, most of you recognize the guy on the left. The guy on the right is President of the United States at the time, this is, of course, Bill Clinton.  I don't know why I have such a big smile on my face. That was the day after I lost my campaign for the United States Congress.  I ran for Congress twice.  I ran first in 1992 when the district lines for the 8th Congressional District were redrawn.  I faced a person by the name of Joseph Kennedy. He beat me pretty handily that year, but this particular picture was taken in 1998 the day after the primary election and I had just lost the race for the United States Congress for the second time but there was a Democratic Unity Rally at the Park Plaza Hotel in downtown Boston and that's when that picture was taken with President Clinton.
