Story_ID: 654406
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ivan Gregory Yaeger [HistoryMaker Ivan Yaeger].  That's I-V-A-N, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, Y-A-E-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 7th, 1967, Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the chief executive officer of The Yaeger Companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are an inventor, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, inventor and entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: And you've invented--I just want to highlight this before we get started.  You invented--not to talk about it in detail--but you invented some artificial limbs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were groundbreaking at the time, right?
Speaker 2: My prosthetic arm was my first patent, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  Now, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Well, currently, we're involved in everything from product manufacturing, do a lot of educational curricula for schools, real estate, medicine, healthcare, so we're pretty diverse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what location are we at (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, location, oh, we are sitting in The Yaeger Clinic building [The Yaeger Clinic, Inc., Miami, Florida].  And it's a historic site, one of the oldest African American owned healthcare facilities in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, established in--I think it's important, established in fifty--
Speaker 2: This location was established in 1958, but the Yaeger Clinic was originally founded by my [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.] in 1926 in Long Island, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is March 9, 2017 [sic. March 10, 2017].
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 654407
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm really a foodie, but I would say that one of my favorites would be lobster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Palm Beach, Florida.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I really like Reverend Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--what he said, "If your mind can conceive it and your heart can believe it, then you can achieve it."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654408
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ollie Sharpe Yaeger, O-L-L-I-E, S-H-A-R-P-E, Y-A-E-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 2, 1930, Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were their occupations or the stories about them?
Speaker 2: Can trace them back to the 1800s, and they were a long line of educators.  I have great-great aunts and uncles who were teachers, principals, and also ministers as well.  And so, my mother was also an educator, a career educator, so she inherited that passion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was Jacksonville like when she was growing up?  Did she share that with you?
Speaker 2: She was there for a, a short period of time.  Her family was mostly from Georgia, so I hear more stories about Georgia, and also about Miami [Florida] because a lot of the family moved to Miami and South Florida from Georgia back in the early 20th century.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up here in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, then, the question is, like what was, what were things like in Miami when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: It was very segregated, but very tight knit, the community, it in, in South Florida and Miami.  Overtown [Miami, Florida] was the colored town.  And it was a self sufficient neighborhood where you had people of all income levels, various professions, all living together and, and having a fully functioning economy.  And they used to hear a lot of great stories about life in Overtown and, and how it was such a strong community.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did your mother--she's a teacher, so she went to college, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did she go?
Speaker 2: Undergrad, Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], and a graduate degree from the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 654409
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Carl Elliott Yaeger, Jr. [Carl Yaeger, Jr.], C-A-R-L, E-L-L-I-O-T-T, Y-A-E-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 22, 1923, Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: All right.  And once again, what are the family stories on that side?  How far back can you trace them and, you know?
Speaker 2: We can trace that back to the mid-1800s.  The family had a long history in, in, starting with my great-great-grandfather [Elliott Yaeger, Sr.] who was from Germany.  He was an attorney and a violinist, and he married a woman who was a member of a wealthy free black family in New York.  And it was the beginning of the Yaegers as we are today.  His, his son [Elliott Yaeger, Jr.] was a real estate developer in New Jersey, and where he established our real estate tradition.  And then, my grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.] and father were both physicians and so that brought in our healthcare side of our family.  And so, it's been a long story of professionals in commerce and in health.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about your--I mean, did they--any stories passed down the family about your great-great-great-grandfather [sic.]?  His marriage--I take it, it was a white German, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --coming to the United States?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And married a black woman--had to make things difficult for him if not her too, you know?
Speaker 2: There were, there were challenges.  One thing, though, was his, his wealth made--and prominence made it a little bit more easy for him to, to, to avoid some, some of the, the issues, and for them to have a pretty comfortable life.  But you can imagine in the 1800s, there, there were a number of challenges.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there are no particular stories that come down about--
Speaker 2: None from them, but more of the stories came from my father and grandfather about being doctors in the northern states in the first part of the 20th century, and the amount of opposition that they would face from a lot of the racists in various towns, Boston [Massachusetts], New York [New York], and other cities who because they were so successful.  There were a lot of people trying to impede their process, threaten their lives because they didn't want them to live in that town.  And they didn't like, you know, see rich black men be so respected, so they tried to run them out of town.  And very often, they did have to leave town because their, their wives were threatened, their children were threatened.
Speaker 1: So, now, in terms of your great-grandfather [sic. grandfather], where did he go to medical school?
Speaker 2: It was in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and he graduated in 1923, the year my father was born.
Speaker 1: But you're not sure what school it was or--
Speaker 2: I can't recall the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father, he--
Speaker 2: He went to school at USC, the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] in the 1940s, 1950s, Central States College of Physiatrics [Eaton, Ohio], so he got his degrees in California primarily, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, physiatrics is different from having an M.D., right?
Speaker 2: There was--the naturopathic medicine was really with the most commonly known terminology.  And it, today we, we see the integrative medicine becoming really very popular with proper nutrition, and trying to avoid surgery and medications unless absolutely necessary.  And he, he was a very big advocate, as was my grandfather, of natural solutions first before you move to surgery and to medications.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, neither, was either one an M.D. as such?
Speaker 2: N.D.
Speaker 1: N.D., okay--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a doctor of naturopathy, they call it here, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I know there's a--what do they call it--osteopathic medicine, too, and it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it's the n- the doctors of naturopathy that have, that had, who suffered the most scrutiny.  And, you know, there's sometimes the insurance companies don't trust their judgment and that sort of thing, you know, but it's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a different, yeah, and you're, you're right, people starting to recognize preventive things now--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --more so than ever before.
Story_ID: 654410
Speaker 1: Your father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] went to school at UCLA, right? You said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: USC?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, USC.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, there is.  My mother and father, both previously married, had just been recently divorced.  And my mother was teaching at a local school, Holmes Elementary School [Miami, Florida].  And my father was taking one of his sons, my brothers [Eric Yaeger and Neal Yaeger], to register him for school for the first day.  I think, maybe first or second grade, and he was looking for the classroom.  And he passed the class and looked in, and saw this woman teaching, and he thought she was just absolutely stunning.  And he decided, well, maybe I'll ask to see if my son's in her class, hopefully so.  So, he goes in and asks.  It's not the right teacher--turns out that this woman who--Ollie Sharpe [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger] would become my mother.  He met her and they would have conversations every time he'd bring his son to school.  And, eventually, they, they started dating and, and were married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they got married in what, 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965], all right, okay.
Story_ID: 654411
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, the- their sense of humor, their talents, their, what they look like, how they walked and talked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I see traits from both.  Most often, people say they see my father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.].  Our voices were exactly the same.  So often, we'd be out, answer a telephone and would confuse the two of us.  And my mother [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger] would say, "You have that same shape of your head, the way you hold your head, your father and your [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.]."  So, I think that is what people most commonly see is, is me being so much like my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654412
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your siblings.  Now, you have a sister [Gail Yaeger Alexander], I know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Any--anyone else?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I also have brothers, and they're all older siblings and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you name them in their birth order, and tell us a little bit about them.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Eric [Eric Yaeger] is the brother who is older than my sister and my other brother, Neal [Neal Yaeger].  And he's a computer engineer and, in fact, he was on a team that developed the laptop computer, and a lot of other groundbreaking types of things in computers in the 1970s, retired young, and lives overseas.  My, the youngest, next youngest brother, Neal, a musician and corporate manager.  He's also retired and living on the West Coast.  My sister, who is in age between Eric and Neal, she is a retired educator.  She was a graphic arts magnet program director, and now she's a glass artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She works in glass, yeah. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 654413
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in Miami [Florida], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well can you tell us--we always ask people to tell us about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  So, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, and, and when I tell people this, they find it hard to believe.  But I, I remember being an infant in the crib and, and seeing people standing over me and, and looking at me and, you know, hearing sounds, so I have very early memories.  But some of the strong memories I have as a little bit older child was as a, as a--it's still as a toddler going on to medical conventions with my [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.] and father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.].  I was taking road trips with the family and going to different cities, and hear my grandfather speak to, to groups.
Story_ID: 654414
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  What was your household like and what was around you?
Speaker 2: I would say it was a very happy childhood. Close family, lots of music, classical music being played.  My father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] played classical piano, and my mother [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger] and father both sang.  And so, we'd hear them sing and, and play music.  Lots of literature, my [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.] would read literature to me when I was, before I could even understand what it was.  I just remember Miami [Florida] being a place, it was a lot quieter, a lot slower.  I remember the sounds, the smells of the beach and, and the fact that it was, it was a more of a resort town, less hustle and bustle than it is today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654415
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Where did I start school? I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I--here in Miami [Florida], went to a Montessori school as, at the beginning of my educational career, and really spent my entire educational career here in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you tell us you went to Miami Shores--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Elementary School?
Speaker 2: --Miami Shores Elementary School [Miami Shores, Florida], yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  And, okay, so is this in, is this in the Overtown [Miami, Florida] area, or was it in another part--
Speaker 2: No, this was in a, upper class, predominantly white neighborhood--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Miami Shores Elementary, and that whole Miami Shores [Florida] area.  And so, I have a lot of great memories.  It, it was a time where it seemed that a lot of the students--it was before anyone really had an awareness of differences in race, so I didn't feel any of the racism from my fellow students.  We were all just kids and just were friends, so it was, it was a very enjoyable time in, in the 1970s.
Speaker 1: It must been after racism, not before (laughter), because racism started, you know, when we were enslaved so--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, but it--
Speaker 1: --it couldn't have been before it (laughter).
Speaker 2: I felt it more in middle school when, when that's when kids come of age and start to realize that, you know, I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  But you said in your life, you didn't feel it until, you know, middle school.
Speaker 2: I didn't, well, I didn't really feel it strongly as a student at Miami Shores Elementary.  It, I felt it, you know, every once in a while, of course, you feel a little twinge of something from someone.  But overall, I think that most of the, the kids just saw each other as kids.  But once we got into seventh grade, it started to change, and that's when you started to really feel the differences and the--
Speaker 1: So, most of the children in Miami Shores, were they white or black?
Speaker 2: Mostly white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, what would you think the percentage would be of black students?  I mean, for instance, would you be the only black student in class, or would there be others?
Speaker 2: One or two, so maybe there, maybe about 2 or 3 percent black students at the school--
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right.
Speaker 2: --if that much.
Speaker 1: And what about high school?
Speaker 2: High school, that was Miami Central Senior High School [Miami, Florida], predominantly black.  I would say we'll probably at that point about 70 percent at Miami Central.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said that's when racism really started up?
Speaker 2: Well, middle school was where I felt it.
Speaker 1: Middle school, okay.
Speaker 2: Seventh grade through ninth grade.
Speaker 1: All right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And I attended schools where, again, the demographic was, a majority of the students were white students, very few black students, and I would say that maybe, maybe 1 or 2 percent.  Once again, I was in a class in the seventh grade, I would say, eighth grade maybe, two black students in my class, including me.  And that's where I would encounter students who would tell me things about their grandfather's Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] robe in his closet.  And, you know, they, they would be those, a lot of tense conversations and a lot of stereotypical things that were being thrown out.  And the whole kind of thing of, "Well, you know, I never knew there were black people like you," you know, that, "I, you know, I, I've been told these terrible things, but you know, you are none of the things I've been hearing."  So if I think it was an education for a lot of them to, to see there's a more of a balance in our community than just what the stereotype would tell them.
Story_ID: 654416
Speaker 1: I think I asked you when you came in, what--you know, you became quite an inventor.  And I, I wanted to know, like who your inspiration was?  You said it was really, basically, your father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about that relationship.
Speaker 2: My father and I had a fantastic relationship.  He was a mentor.  He was a confidante.  He was my business partner.  And he was a man that always wanted me to pursue my passions and, and explore things that I really had interest in.  He didn't try to steer me into his profession or any other particular profession.  He was one who would like to challenge my interest in creating things, building things, and would build things with me, show me how to use tools.  And he was quite handy.  He was very inventive himself and so, he, he allowed me to explore those talents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you think of what you, the first thing you ever built?
Speaker 2: I loved building model cars.  And so, the, I used to love trips to the, the local hobby shop and, and buy me model cars.  And my father sitting down with me and helping me build cars, and learning how to put things together, and how to take things apart.
Story_ID: 654417
Speaker 1: Now, you said the, the grade school [Miami Shores Elementary School, Miami Shores, Florida] I mean, it was lightly integrated, but what about your neighborhood?  Was it the same that there was only a couple of black families around?
Speaker 2: My neighborhood actually, it started out as a neighborhood that was predominantly a white neighborhood.  And, eventually, it became the--became a mecca for the black upper class in Miami [Florida].  And so, a lot of the white families then moved, moved out, so then it became a shift from the well to do whites to more well to do blacks.  And, in fact, there's an interesting story about my family acquiring the property that my, my parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.] built their house on.  My father saw the land.  He was looking at different places in the late '60s [1960s] to build.  And he found this spot on the lake, and he thought it was a beautiful neighborhood, and he decided to purchase the land.  And he had a call from the owner and said--and his attorney was on the phone.  And he said, "Well, you know, we're looking forward to buying this land." And, and she said, "Oh, yeah, well, I'm looking forward to selling it to you, you know.  Dr. Yaeger, it's, it's so good that a medical man, a well to do man like yourself, and keep some of these niggers out of here and, you know, we'll, you know, we want us to, you'll see, we have to work together on this."  So, my father knew who he was dealing with, and his attorney was white.  He said, well, you know, he's going to be my front man.  He's going to do all the negotiations.  They're never going to see me.  And so, the, the woman never knew he was African American until the deal was already done.  This property was sold and, yeah, her son tried to come and burn down the site at one point.  But by that time, it was too late.  We were there and we weren't going anywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the owner's son tried to come and burn down the actual (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, when the house was being built, yes.
Speaker 1: This is a story--I mean, how, I mean, did somebody catch him?  There's a story here somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yes he--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --he, people saw him and he, saw him casing out the, the construction site and then, he was seen making a getaway.  And so, it was a little bit of a story in the neighborhood.  And it, we prevailed and, eventually, the neighborhood became what she didn't want it to be--a neighborhood of, of educated, prosperous blacks, and building nice houses, which I'm sure was, was a good feeling for my father.  He always used to smile about that victory in the end.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how old were you when your family moved to that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I--we moved in on my fifth birthday.
Speaker 1: So, it's called Miami Shores [Florida] neighborhood and they would--
Speaker 2: This is, was on a lake called Cravero Lake.  It's a lake that feeds into the bay, Biscayne Bay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell Cravero?
Speaker 2: C-R-A-V-E-R-O.
Story_ID: 654418
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I typically was.  I, I was especially strong in science and language arts.  Math was not my best subject, but as years went on, I learned how to, to make it a better subject but, typically, I, I was an A student, A and B student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what kind of--were there any special teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of great teachers and, and fortunate to--my parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.] were very closely involved with the schools and, and with the teachers and so, there was that partnership.  And so, I had a lot of, some of the old school teachers who really cared about challenging the students, finding those talents and, and giving opportunities to take leadership positions.  And when I did something that wasn't right, call my house, and tell my parents so, you know, I couldn't get away with a whole lot.  So, I as very, very fortunate that I had those extra eyes looking at me at school, as well as at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your favorite subject?  You said it was not math, right--
Speaker 2: Right, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --which is surprising, you know, for someone involved in scientific kind of things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --but what, what was it?
Speaker 2: I really loved science.  I liked, I loved writing, and so, language arts were very strong for me as well.
Story_ID: 654419
Speaker 1: Now did you--so, you, you had like science at home and at school, right--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --with your father.  Now, what kind of activities did your father do with you at home?
Speaker 2: We liked to go outside and look at nature, capture, you know, insects or lizards or things, and observe them, and then let them go or, and observe them in their habitat, do a lot of stargazing, telescopes.  And we'd always look at the stars and the eclipse.  We would go and look at that.  So, even when I was an adult, he'd call me up and say, "There's going to be an eclipse tonight, you want, you should take a look at it."  This is all when he, when he was in his eighties, he would call me up.  And so, we, we did a lot of that exploration, nature around us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about like lawn mower repair, car repair, that- radios, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, a lot of little things around the house.  He liked doing household projects, building things, and I remember helping him with things.  There's a picture that we all laugh about of when I was in diapers, and standing behind the car, putting on a license plate.  And my, the story my sister [Gail Yaeger Alexander] tells me is that he was outside putting the plate on, and I was standing there.  And I started picking up things and so, next thing you know, I have a screwdriver in my hand, and he says, "Get the camera, quick."  And so, I'm--can't even talk, and I'm using the screwdriver, putting the screws in, and I just learned just by watching him.  And so it, from a very early age, it just began, sitting there watching him and learning.
Speaker 1: Now, that, now, there is something.  So, okay, so you learned how to use tools at an early age?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now, what about electricity? 'Cause a lot of what you do requires circuitry and that sort of thing.  When did you start, you know, learning how to--I guess, design electric circuits and, or understand, I mean?
Speaker 2: That was a--let's see, elementary school [Miami Shores Elementary School, Miami Shores, Florida], sixth grade, started getting into, involved with some electronics kits that my parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.] bought for me, and learning how to put a radio, build a radio, and to build simple circuits and things like that, and just progressed from there.
Speaker 1: Did you like build a crystal radio or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --build your own electric motor and little things like that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 654420
Speaker 1: What were your science projects like?
Speaker 2: A lot of them were health related. Had a science project about the effects of noise pollution on the human body.  It had others on the solar system and the, the effect of different types of chemicals on food, and how it affects the body.  And so, but I, as over the years, I, the interest in the prosthetics and bionics took over, and that became a recurring subject for me of science or projects for middle school [North Miami Junior High School; North Miami Middle School, North Miami, Florida] all through high school [Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what sparked your interest in prosthetics?
Speaker 2: It started with an assignment in seventh grade for us to do a science fair project.  And I was very much a fan of 'The Six Million Dollar Man' television show.  And I always watched the show and thought that it was the most fascinating technology, and wondered if it was really real or if it was science fiction, and thought that'd be a great subject for a science project.  And, fortunately, my teacher was able to--forward thinking enough to say, "Well, let me see you do it.  It's not on the list, but I'll allow you to, to do a project on it."  And I told him I was going to build an arm as the experiment, a bionic arm.  And he said, "Well, I really want to see that."  So, that launched my career as an inventor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654421
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever read 'Iron Man'?
Speaker 2: No. Matter of fact, I--in fact, I think I saw a few 'Iron Man' shows, yeah, car- cartoons and, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Popular, yeah, popular comic book in those days.  And I was, but his whole, he has a suit of armor that's all like, you know, mechanically enhanced--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where he can, you know, lift heavy things.  He can fly, and do all that, but he's all, he's the only inventor of the super- you know, he's an inventor who invents his own--
Speaker 2: Power suits, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Power suit, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't, you weren't listening.  You weren't watching or reading 'Iron Man' in those days, huh?
Speaker 2: Didn't watch or, or read too much about the 'Iron Man.'  It was, it was Steve Austin, 'The Six Million Dollar Man,' that was--my, my friends and I were always so into every week of what happened at the next episode.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you remember a show called 'Watch Mr. Wizard'?  Did you ever see that on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Did you ever watch that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about--I mean, did you like a nature program and all, on Disney and the other--
Speaker 2: Yes, used to remember, the guy's name was Perkins [Marlin Perkins], 'Wild Kingdom'.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Mutual of Omaha'--
Speaker 2: 'Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom'
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: --used to watch that every Sunday and--
Speaker 1: Marlin Perkins--
Speaker 2: Marlin Perkins--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yes, yes.  So, watched a lot of the, the nature shows, the science shows, and a lot--loved PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  That was a very popular channel when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, was Bill Nye on when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not yet.  He came later but I, I, actually have watched his show a few times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Bill Nye, the Science Guy,' yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 654422
Speaker 1: Here you are, you're eleven years old when you decide that you're going to build a prosthetic arm.  Now, how--so what was your--was your plan to make an arm that actually moved--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on its own?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I had so many remote control cars and other electronic toys and things that I figured I could take parts out of.  So, I thought I was, you know, pretty well set to start experimenting and make this arm actually have articulated joints and operate electrically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you come up with?  What, what was it like?
Speaker 2: This was an arm that had an electric elbow and hand, powered by batteries.  And it had the grasping motion and the elbow flexion.  And so, it was the basic movements of the, of the human arm, built with a lot of erector set parts, remote control car parts, and some things that were taken out of household appliances, and things that are around the house that I could get my hands on.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you have to replace those things at some point?
Speaker 2: There was that time of them coming over and finding out that something was taken apart.  It was actually working before they left the room.  So, I had, I had some moments of being in trouble, but after a while, they said, "We'll make a deal.  We'll give you all the things that have broken.  When they break, we'll give them to you, and you get some tools and you can, you can experiment."  So, I, I was fortunate to end up with a box full of parts after a while that I was able to play around with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654423
Speaker 1: Could someone actually wear this arm?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The, the arm was designed to be a wearable prosthetic; and the prosthesis products that we've built since actually are worn on the body, and they're controlled with neuromuscular impulses.  So, a person flexes his muscle, and the computers inside the arm detect the electric current in the muscles and operate the arm's joints.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm, so was the one you built when you were eleven that sophisticated?
Speaker 2: No, I, I was hoping it would be.  I was trying for that but, no, it was a little bit more simple with switches that I would, toggle switches I would use to operate it and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yes, yeah, but it demonstrated the principles.
Speaker 1: So, somebody had it, and they had to toggle switches in the other arm--other hand, rather--they could operate this, right, theoretically--
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact--
Speaker 1: --to grab things and--
Speaker 2: --the prosthetics--so, in the, in the '50s [1950s], there were some developments of having switches in someone's shoe where they could use their toes to operate the arm, so that was the early stages of prosthetics.  And at the time I started my experimenting, the technology was just getting into the MyRO electric muscle impulse controls [MyRO Electronic Control Devices, Inc.].  So, I started just at that time when it was moving to the next stage of control systems.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any other youth working on these kind of things when you were going to science fairs?
Speaker 2: No one that I ever saw.  There was the robotics projects, but there was nothing that I ever saw was a prosthetic project.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And how did you do in the science fair?
Speaker 2: My first attempt, which was the seventh grade entry, was a third grade--I'm sorry, a third place ribbon, which I was extremely disappointed with.  And I, I was really discouraged and, and wanted to just put the arm in the closet, and forget about it.  But my parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.] told me, "Well, if this is your dream, you just don't, you can't put it down.  Find out how you could have improved your project.  Did you talk to the teachers who judged the fair?"  And, and with that advice, I said, you know, I'm going to go tomorrow and find out why my project is a third place project.  And that launched me in the road of improving, and upgrading, and continuing to work on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you start thinking at that point, like how are you going to make it work on somebody's body?
Speaker 2: In fact, from the very beginning design, I was thinking about how it would be worn, how it would be controlled.  And I knew at some point that new MyRO electric system, I wanted to get a chance to try to interface it to the arm.  That wouldn't come until much later once I received the patent, then we began to build them for actual patients.
Speaker 1: So, up to this time when you--up until 1981, no African American had ever won a patent for a medical device is what I'm reading here.  Now, it's Patricia Bath [HistoryMaker Dr. Patricia Bath] for her laserphaco probe, you know, back in 1991, but so, as you're growing up, you're continually working--are you working on other things, too, as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, in fact, we are always in development of new technologies and not just medical, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I mean, back then when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: --from back then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what else were you working on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.  I, it, I was working on other projects.  I was building a laser at one point, building robots.  I was doing a lot of different kinds of experiments, but the arm was my passion.  And that's what I would keep, continuously default to, how can I improve it the next year, and bring another improved version to a, the science fair.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 654424
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?  This is?
Speaker 2: Miami Central Senior High School [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what was the demographic there?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Predominantly African American--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --student body.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it was interesting because my, my sister [Gail Yaeger Alexander] and brother attended in the 1960s.  They were among the first black students at the school.  At that point, it was almost all white.  So, they helped to integrate the school, and then in the '80s [1980s] by that time, it was mostly an African American school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. In high school, you participated in the NAACP ACT-SO program [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And how did that go?  Tell us about--
Speaker 2: Fantastic experience, some incredible competitors.  I, I realized in being in ACT-SO for four years that the level of competition was stiffer than any other competition that I was in, in science.  I was competing in oratory as well and, eventually, was a medalist.  I had a silver medal in electronics, and a bronze medal in oratory in the national competitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is four years in national competition?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in it every year?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, what was your theme for your oratorical win?
Speaker 2: I believe that the speech was the four keys to success.  It was a speech that I originally created for the Future Business Leaders of America competitions in oratory, and I modified it and made it apply more specifically to African American students and aspiring professionals.  And it was basically keys to become successful in, in business, as well as life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did they have Junior Achievement in high school, too, here?
Speaker 2: They did.  I wasn't involved in it, but there, there were a few chapters around in the city [Miami, Florida], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were there any special teachers or mentors in high school?
Speaker 2: I look back at how some teachers really were very encouraging to me about leadership.  I had a teacher--it was a business, typing teacher, Ms. Cumjin [ph.], who encouraged me to join FBLA, Future Business Leaders, and to enter the competition for speaking.  I'd never entered any oratory competition before, but she pushed me and said, "You'd be a great speaker.  You should give it a shot." And that led to me being a competitor, nationally, and, and to being a professional motivational speaker.  So, that was one example of, of a teacher kind of corralling me, and seeing talent in an area I didn't even know I had talent.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Any other groups in high school?
Speaker 2: Was involved in JETS, the Junior Engineering Technological Society [sic. Junior Engineering Technical Society], the National Honor Society.  I'd say my, my strongest involvement was probably with, with FBLA.  I was in a--held office in the organization as well as competing in, in competition and--
Speaker 1: Now, what was that--FBL--?
Speaker 2: FBLA, Future Business Leaders of America (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, oh, that's Future Business--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Leaders of America, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 654425
Speaker 1: When you were--and your grades are good, I take it, in high school [Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was number six in a class of almost four hundred students.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And wh- what kind of counseling did you get about college?
Speaker 2: I was focused on a career in medicine.  And so, and that was something that I, entering the, my high school career, I, I've since stated I wanted to do.  So, my classwork geared toward that, and my counselors were, were focused on finding opportunities for me to, to take research classes with local hospitals where I could work, go after school and, and study, and do some in the field research, and so, they were always very supportive of my aspirations.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so did you, I mean, did you choose a college to attend while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, I had a short list.  Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] was one of the choices; University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida]; Florida Atlantic University [Boca Raton, Florida], so there were several.  And I ended up selecting the University of Miami.  One of the reasons was because I received a really good scholarship, the Golden Drum Scholarship, based on my achievements with the bionic arm, and my other competition and leadership opportunities.  It was a full four year scholarship.  And also, because my mother [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger] was a graduate of the University of Miami, so I'd always grown up hearing about UM, so it was kind of in the blood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother as well was a student at the University of Miami.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were the graduation keynote speaker, right? I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were the student speaker.  Does that mean valedictorian, I guess, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they, they had a selection committee of faculty, administration, and, and student votes.  And I was on a short list and there were the valedictorian and some other students, and they selected me as the graduation keynote speaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your speech?
Speaker 2: It was about the future and where we go from here, and how we translate that we've done and learned in the past and make it apply to the, the days ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 654426
Speaker 1: When you graduated, now you, you're going to University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's where you're going, all right.  So, did you work during the summer before you started school?
Speaker 2: Before I started school, I took classes and every, every summer, I would take classes.  What I actually ended up doing my freshman year during the summer is I worked for a robotics company.  And I was in charge of their design and, and production of entertainment robots, so I designed and built robots for at least two or three summers while I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had you ever--so did you learn how to build robots on the job?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, what I learned from the prosthetic arm--because by that time, I'd received the patent on the arm, and I was developing other products--so what I learned from, from those experiences translated into their robotics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your first patent was achieved in 1985, right, am I right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were eighteen years old.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And it was for the artificial arm which you called--
Speaker 2: A Yaeger Arm, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (laughter), yes.  And so, you start working on this design, the same design you started working on it at age eleven.  And in what ways had it been improved in 1985?
Speaker 2: The--one of the biggest improvements was the addition of the electric rotating wrist.  Didn't realize at the time that no one had one that for a prosthetic before, so it was a, a groundbreaking feature.  Also in addition to the wrist was the modular construction.  I designed the arm, so that it could be used with other prosthetics.  You could mix and match my hand with someone else's forearm and, and elbow assembly, or use our elbow assembly with someone else's hand assembly, or if someone needed just a hand, they could just use the hand.  If they needed an elbow, and, and forearm, but not upper arm, they could use that, so it would be adaptable to the person.  It could be adjusted to grow with the person, so it could be made in different links and adjusted to fit the patient.  So, that, as well as some of the other ways that we have the, the configuration of the hand, and elbow and wrist motors made it a more balanced prosthetic easier to wear long, for long periods of time without fatiguing the user.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How was the prosthetic arm attached?
Speaker 2: It's a socket that is molded out of thermoplastic and for a person with an amputation that is below the shoulder, it, it is molded to fit on to the residual stump, what we call of the upper limb.  So, it slips on and there's a series of straps that hold the, the prosthetic in place, so it's not a surgical attachment.  It's an attachment they can allow the arm to be removed for bathing, for recharging, for sleeping.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in terms of moving the arm, like how is the arm connected to, to the body?  How does, how does that work?
Speaker 2: Well, the controls are, are configured with electrodes that are molded into the socket.  And they're over the muscles in the forearm and shoulder portion, for a person that has the residual stump.  So, it's not an actual surgical connection, but it's a skin and contact connection that sensors can pick up the muscle electricity through the skin.  For someone who has no upper limb or residual portion, then we have a harness that has censors in the chest and back portion.  So, the person is trained to flex chest and back muscles to generate the signal.  And this is all contained in the housing of the, the harness the prosthetic is, is built into.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who were you competing with in those days in terms a design for a mechanical prosthetic arm?
Speaker 2: Some of the bigger names in the, at the time, there was the Boston Arm [Boston Digital Arm System].  There was Ottobock, which is a big German manufacturer.  And there's a Utah Arm [Motion Control, Inc.] at the time which was that, in the '80s [1980s] was the state of the art prosthetic limb.  University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] developed it.  And so, those were, I'd say, three of the, the leading manufacturers in the '80s [1980s], and '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] of, of electrically powdered prosthetics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654427
Speaker 1: Now did the patent like, reap some rewards right away, or did it take a while?
Speaker 2: It--for the prosthetic arm, it took a while.  Our other consumer products became the revenue generators of my company, and much easier and cheaper to manufacture and sell.  The arms eventually kicked in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have a company going in 1985?
Speaker 2: I started my company in '86 [1986], Yaeger Innovative Products Corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, the acronym, Y.I.P., I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you had like, a couple of the items, right, you know, at least?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or how, how many did you have?
Speaker 2: We started out with the three patented products.  The other two was, there was a DeskMaster, a portable clamp on bookstand.  This was a stand that will allow a student to--it had a clip on book holder that you could take to class and clamp on to those little chair desks that don't have enough room for you to put textbooks on, and allowed you to see the book in an upright or, or flat position without taking up your desktop.  So, we manufactured those and sold them to school districts, bookstores, college campuses.  The other product was the CassetteLok, which was a lock that you could lock onto a videocassette.  If you wanted to childproof a video, it prevents, prevents one from recording over your videotape or tampering with it.  This was the product that allowed that and so, we manufactured those solely to Blockbuster [Blockbuster Entertainment, Inc.; Blockbuster LLC] video stores, and other video chains around the nationwide.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know on a VHS tape and a cassette or a Beta [Betamax], if you knock out that little plastic plugs in the back, it can't be erased or recorded over.  But how did you fix it so that it couldn't be watched?
Speaker 2: Well, this was a, a middle band that, that wrapped around the cassette body itself, interlocked with the reel, and it had a lock on the front.  So, it made it so the tape could not be inserted into any video equipment, couldn't be disassembled.  And if someone put a little piece of tape over that, that plug, that prevents recording, it wouldn't matter because they couldn't put into a machine because it's easy to defeat that, that knockout plug with a piece of tape.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true, okay.  All right, so how did that sell?  Did you--were you able to sell that to any of the major chains?
Speaker 2: Blockbuster Video.
Speaker 1: Blockbuster, okay.
Speaker 2: We sold them on television.  We'd dial 1-800 and order.
Speaker 1: Well, Blockbuster was the major chain.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so you're selling them to Blockbuster, you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did you get rich really quick at eighteen (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a six million dollar man at twenty (laughter).  I became the six million dollar man at twenty so, so it was, it was a very, a very exciting entrepreneurial time and became to develop this portfolio of patents and which had such a high value.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--how long did it take you to design the track clip, for instance?
Speaker 2: The DeskMaster bookstand?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, not that, but the, the--what did you call one with the videotape?
Speaker 2: Oh, CassetteLok.
Speaker 1: CassetteLok, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  That was inspired by a dream.  I woke up one morning in college [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida] in my dorm room, and I had dreamt that I'd made a lock to get--childproof videocassettes with.  And so, from that dream I went to, I had a prototype.  It was probably about a couple of weeks and then, with, from that stage to the patent process, I was going to get a patent on that in about a year, which was really unheard of amount of time.  Usually, it's two years or more.  And then, we were on, on the market with a product, I'd say in about two years.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you started in high school [Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida] really on this, right?
Speaker 2: I started freshman and sophomore year of college.  In fact, my business plan was a senior year management project paper, so I was able to have my business plan reviewed and critiqued by my professors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as I said before, this is that age of the videocassette and Block- I mean video stores were setting up. Ma and pa video stores, Blockbuster.  They had some called Hollywood Video [Hollywood Entertainment Corporation].  Every major shopping strip had one of them.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, you know, sales were brisk on the weekends.
Speaker 2: It was the place to go, was the video stores so.
Speaker 1: Right, for especially, for families.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, all right.  You had something called the Electrassage, too.  What was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  This is a device that I co-invented with another inventor that is a treatment device for primarily carpal tunnel syndrome, but also it treats really any kinds of issues with hands and wrists, muscle fatigue, has electric, electrical stimulation therapy.  It has heat and cold therapy, as well as massage therapy, all in one unit.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, how did that one do?
Speaker 2: That's a technology that we are going to be bringing to market, we have the patent on it--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's not out yet?
Speaker 2: Right, it's not currently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  It's in the wrong place on the outline--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause I'm looking at 1986.
Story_ID: 654428
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, let me just ask another question then like, what else were you doing in 1986?  Did you have any other major projects you were working on?  And I guess in the late '80s [1980s]? 'Cause this is--now, are you, I mean, are you going to school at the same time you're doing this?
Speaker 2: For the development of those pro- products, yes.  I was, I was still a student, (unclear) the development of my company [Yaeger Innovative Products Corporation], I was a student.
Speaker 1: You're still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, soon as I graduated--
Speaker 1: --so it's really developing these in California, in Los Angeles [California] then, right? Or--
Speaker 2: No, everything was being done here in Miami [Florida]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --while I was an UM [University of Miami] student.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, U- oh, U- I'm sorry, I'm sorry, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, once I graduated from college, I went directly into running my business full time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you came out of college in '88 [1988] then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your degree was a business management degree?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, they don't, they don't have a degree in inventing, do they (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, they, no, they don't.  They, they, they're getting, catching up now, and having some courses that deal with, with some inventing and, and intellectual property, but there's no major for it so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, engineering, I guess, would be the closest thing to--I mean, the, some, one level of engineering or another.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you consider becoming an engineer?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I did.  I had a partial scholarship to the University of Miami engineering college [University of Miami College of Engineering, Coral Gables, Florida].  And so, it was a tossup between that and going into biology premed, I chose biology premed, and used my other scholarship, the full four-year scholarship.  But after my freshman year, receiving my patent, and having the other inventions, and, and deciding to start a company, I decided I would be wise to look into business, so I ended up changing majors, and going into business management and organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any other special instructors in the business department that you, that you felt close to, or that you really learned a lot from?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was.  I had a business law professor, and she gave me such a great foundation in business law, be able to review contracts, write contracts, negotiate things.  It was an amazing, almost, you know, a one-stop shopping kind of course; and I have used the textbook, even until recent years to, to answer questions.
Story_ID: 654429
Speaker 1: When you graduated, you were, you'd already started a business [Yaeger Innovative Products Corporation], and just rolled right into it, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is 1988.  So, okay, so (pause) so you're, you're making a million dollars already in 19--when did you make your first million dollars?
Speaker 2: I'd say, I, I'd say by eighty- '88 [1988], '89 [1989], I was a multimillionaire with my patent portfolio.
Speaker 1: And it was mainly from the video lock that--
Speaker 2: The CassetteLok and the DeskMaster, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) CassetteLok, okay.  Now, what's, did you describe the DeskMaster?  Yeah, describe that for us.  What was that?
Speaker 2: That was the bookstand that students carry with them to class.  And it clips onto the desk and holds any size textbook in front of them, so it frees the desktop for them to write notes.  And it's almost like an extra desk in your backpack, you can just attach.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yes, so this is in the '88 [1988] that the book support is made?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, so where was your office located?
Speaker 2: Right here in Miami [Florida].  In fact, my first office was here at the Yaeger Clinic [The Yaeger Clinic, Inc., Miami, Florida] building on the second floor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I had offices in North Miami Beach [Florida].  That office is downtown Miami, so we've been in several locations since then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I just wondered, so your offices weren't affected by the riots or anything in '89 [1989]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact, this, this building is, is a fixture in the community to the degree that the residents of the neighborhood look out for the building.  And throughout the unrest that's taken place, the neighborhood has watched out over the building and made sure nothing happened to it.  So, it's been that, that sense of family, that my [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.] and father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] built with the residents of the community that has, has been a very positive thing for our family.
Speaker 1: Okay, especially over that, a longer period of time, I guess?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 654430
Speaker 1: Now, in 1991--and tell me if I'm skipping past something I need to talk about.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You started working with the Miami-Dade public schools [Miami-Dade County Public Schools]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I have a note here about something called the AESOP Program.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now what is that?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was an acronym for Afrocentric Enhancement, Self-Esteem Opportunity Program.  And this was an innovative program designed to reach at risk students in inner city schools, particularly young boys, age third grade through fifth grade, and to try to have positive mentoring by having people advocates, which professional men coming and work with them on a regular basis on reading skills, on African American history, African history, teaching them about the diaspora of African people, and trying to get their focus on positive imaging and, and focusing on how they can plan for a successful future.  And so, I was very, very fortunate to be one of the initial people with that program to build it and to grow in the school district.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what particular role did you play in that in terms of--
Speaker 2: I was a pe- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) being an inventor?
Speaker 2: I was a people advocate.  I had a center in one inner city school not far from, from this location, and I would work with the kids and mentor them.  I helped students create science fair projects, and to have them reading on a regular basis about black inventors and understanding that we are a people of innovation, that we've, our people have held patents since the 1800s, even when it was a lot of restrictions against us to be able to do that.  And so, I have a lot, that several students actually have worked for me after they graduated from high school and college, who have gone on to become successful.  And I'm very happy I was able to help to shape their, their future path.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any particular students come to mind?
Speaker 2: One gentleman by the name of Darreo, Darreo Steven [ph.].  He was--I was a mentor to him.  He was in my program for about three years, and he is a college graduate.  He is a culi- culinary artist, an executive chef.  He is actually now working with Miami-Dade County [Florida] schools managing and directing one of their culinary arts programs, so he's come full circle now.  He's helping other students from the community to find their professional path.  And he's come back and worked for me during the summer, just doing our technology leaders' initiative, working with kids creating inventions, and starting simulated businesses.
Story_ID: 654431
Speaker 1: Now, you founded the Yaeger Foundation [The Yaeger Foundation, Inc.] in 1995?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Yaeger Foundation and what, what you do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Yaeger Foundation was created to channel my family's philanthropic interests and coordinate- coordinate some of these things that we really are interested in--healthcare, economic development, and development of the next generation of innovators, helping people with patents, trademarks, and copyrights.  And so, it's been, been something that's allowed us to create educational programs that are used in schools, competitions that--our bionic/robotic hand competition [Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit Competition] where kids build our hand, and then reengineer it and create their own custom prosthetic, and compete for prizes.
Story_ID: 654432
Speaker 1: Now, you got married at some point--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in these early days, right?  What about, when was it?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, it was 2003, so it was--
Speaker 1: So it's not yet, we're not there yet, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You got a young looking marriage picture so I thought it happened sooner, but, you know, so all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't come until later (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now tell us about--here's an interesting, I couldn't place this in terms of the flow, but you took a position at INROADS, Inc.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a human relations consultant, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, well, how did this come about and, I mean, why would you be tapped as a human relations consultant when you're--I see you as an inventor, like what (unclear).  That's why I said, what?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, what ended up with my career is that I just, I became a consultant, and I, I became a person that people in other kinds of industries would go to, the assistant to build their programs, particularly in youth development.  That's how I got involved with AESOP [Afrocentric Enhancement, Self-Esteem Opportunity Program].  I was tapped to, by one of these superintendents down at the school district to be a part of her program, AESOP, and bring the expertise of, from the inventor entrepreneur to the students.  The same with INROADS. A colleague was taking over as a director of, of that office, and wanted someone to help him build it and, and grow it.  And our focus was getting minority students involved in careers in Fortune 500 and engineering or business management.  So they felt that I, having both of those levels of expertise, would be a good candidate, and since I worked with students already that it would be a good fit.  And so, it was an exciting opportunity to work with CEOs of major corporations and, and help them build programs to get minority students into Corporate America onto a management track.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you know a Frank Carr [Frank C. Carr], the founder or, or was he before your time?
Speaker 2: He was before my time, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --read a lot of great things about him.
Story_ID: 654433
Speaker 1: Yeah, we, when we stopped, we were in 1996.  You were, we were talking about the position as a human relations consultant at INROADS [INROADS, Inc.].  And so, this is--well, and you were telling us about it, basically, what you did, but any stories out of that, out of INROADS, that period of time you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I had a lot of things that have kept coming around again because a lot of the students I, I worked with, and helped them to get into internships into corporations, and later, once they were seniors in college, helped negotiate their first employment offer with the company.  And as the years have gone on, there was a couple of students--one who was an engineering major--he ended up getting a job with his company, Cordis corporation.  And always had a affinity for Cordis, they gave me one of my first engineering awards for the bionic arm when I was in the tenth grade [at Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  And they were local, had a local operation here in Miami [Florida], one of the major biotech companies.  And, eventually, after he graduated, he did very well there, and we got back in contact together.  And he volunteered to judge at our bionic hand competitions.  And so, it was great to see a student who we were able to help to get into his career, giving something back, and bringing that same experience to young students who are trying to get involved in the bio-, biotechnology for the first time.  And that several students, who was in finance, have come back and been judges for some of our competitions with technology leaders because the students have to create a business and a business plan, along with an invention.  So, being able to come back, and that student was able to share experiences and, and bring that knowledge to some of the middle school and high school students, elementary school students we work with.  So, it's been a lot of full circle stories of being able to tap some young talent, and then them being aware enough to want to come back and, and give something back and make a difference.
Story_ID: 654434
Speaker 1: Do you have an invention process?  I was just, the last, this morning I was talking to an author.  And I always ask authors what their process is.  When do they get up in the morning?  Do they think the book through ahead of time from beginning to end, or do you discover something in every step of the way?  And some authors just say the characters talk to them, you know, as they're writing, you know.  So, what's your process as an inventor?  Do you envision something--I'm going to make one of these, and then figure out how to do it, or do you know how to do something, and try to figure out how to apply it to a problem that already exists?
Speaker 2: It comes to me a lot of different ways.  I'm a, a picture type of thinker.  I can see things in their final form.  And then, I can fill in the road to how to get to that destination.  So, very often, it'll be encountering a problem and, and thinking, well, there's a way to solve it, and then figuring out the technology path to making that device work.  And a lot of the things, it's a, it's a very natural organic process.  People say, "Well, you just sit down and invent."  No, it doesn't come like that.  It's something that comes when you're not really thinking about it when you're just going through everyday life.  But for me, it's something, it's either a dream or something I've, I've encountered.  And I say, there is a better way to do so, or is it improving to something I already owned, or someone else manufactured and created?  So, it, it's, it's, a lot of inspiration just comes from just letting the thoughts just flow, and seeing the big picture, fill them in.  And I found, very interestingly enough, that a lot of times when I'm stuck on a solution in a technology project, in church, I'll have an inspiration.  And I'll, I'll be sitting there, and then suddenly a picture appears, and I'll just start writing on a church bulletin, you know, drawing pictures and making diagrams.  It turns out to be the solution to what we've been working on for, for weeks without, without a resolution.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I had a good question here.  I can't even think, what is it is. Left me (laughter), but it's about the creative process so, just can't think of what it was. (Pause) So, oh, it's about sleep, yeah, as you, lot of sleep studies today talk about how important sleep is, in terms of how your brain functions.  And, and when you're asleep--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your mind kind of re- makes sense out of nonsense, or of things, everything that's hit you during the day to try, and put it in some kind of order.  I mean, your brain tries to.  And I've heard so many people say that they think of new ways to do things when they're asleep or in their sleep.  They dream about them when they, so does this happen to you a lot or--?
Speaker 2: Quite a bit.  And, in fact, that's the CassetteLok story.  It was a dream.  And so, the lot that goes on, I'm a vivid dreamer, and I wake up with things that are so vivid.  It's almost like I saw, you know, a picture of it somewhere, or saw it on television.  And so, a lot of times I'll get up, and I'll draw or write what I saw in the dream.  And so, yes, it is definitely a, a moment where the brain has the chance to free itself of other influences, and you just get this free flow of, of imagery.
Story_ID: 654435
Speaker 1: Now back to INROADS [INROADS, Inc.], you were working with Charles Storey [Charles M. Storey].  Is that?
Speaker 2: He was the CEO (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well at least the director at the time, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, you worked closely with him when you worked for--
Speaker 2: When I was in Miami [Florida], the South Florida office, and he was in headquarters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was, oh--
Speaker 2: --so had a chance to meet him a few times, but didn't have the opportunity to really work with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '97 [1997], you started something called the Technology Leaders Initiative, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was an outgrowth of my experience with inventing and entrepreneurship from being a student.  I decided to create a curriculum that would allow a student to create inventions, to learn about to building technology, learn about material science, and also learn about how technology interfaces with commerce.  So, the creating of a business plan, forming a team that is working as a company in the classroom, and the team's mission is to create invention as their start up project, and actually create a prototype.  And so, it became, it started because I would go to school, setting up to speak.  I'd bring my inventions and the students would always ask questions, "Well, how do we do what you do?  Is there a class we could take?  Can you come out and teach us how to do this?"  And so, I, I saw a need, and from working with INROADS and AESOP [Afrocentric Enhancement, Self-Esteem Opportunity Program], working with students, seeing that there was that need of getting students early to be engaged in, in commerce and technology, and learning how those two worlds interface.  And I decided, well, I'm going to create a curriculum that will allow any classroom to integrate this experience for students in third through twelfth grade, so we created this series of lessons.  There are ten workshops, and the students worked together, and they're responsible for their own learning.  They are--assign each other roles in their company.  Each one has to be responsible for that, that position as if they were in an actual firm.  And the teacher becomes a consultant in the classroom because the students are driving the process.  We have the content.  Typically, we had our own facilitators going to schools and directly, and leave the workshops, give the students the content area.  The students would work on their own, but we, we converted over in 2015 to what we call our virtual classroom format.  It's all by streaming video, so now, any classroom in the world can subscribe to our program.  And the teacher can put the videos on, watch our facilitators give the content, and let their students develop their projects on their own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And does that work as well as hands on?
Speaker 2: Well, it's totally hands on.  It's, it's the students who are actually doing the building in class.  And so, it's been phenomenal in terms of test score improvement, the career aspiration, improvement in classroom grades.  We've had a lot of, positive reports have been written in, up in some major educational journals about the achievements in the classroom of students who've had our program.  And actually, parents call us up and say, "Well, my daughter is now graduating from engineering school at FIU [Florida International University, Miami, Florida] (unclear) because she was in your program three summers ago.  And she was inspired by it." And so, we're seeing the, the result of, of that hands-on cooperative learning with inventing entrepreneurship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you did something about creating a bridge between ACT-SO [NAACP Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] and INROADS, right?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: What we've done is create, there's a bridge with ACT-SO and our bionic/robotic hand, and technology leaders' activities, which is something that we've been doing the past year.  We've been working with students and developing projects with, with them, using the bionic/robotic hand as a basis of, of computer coding and other kinds of technology projects that they can use in ACT-SO.
Story_ID: 654436
Speaker 1: Now, when you--there's another question about inventing that--you mentioned material science.  Do you--now you are not part of something like Bell Laboratories [AT&T Bell Laboratories, Inc.; Nokia Bell Labs] or everybody's walking--I mean, the scientists will walk around.  They talk to each other in an atmosphere where there's a lot of creativity and innovation in certain materials, like in material science, or some electrical engineering, or some, some other facet.  So how, do you consult with engineers and chemists and other people to, and material scientists, to find out what materials are available that could help you build what you envision.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We have been very fortunate to tap into, not just having our own team of people, but also partnerships with Florida International University engineering college [Florida International University College of Engineering and Computing, Miami, Florida] where we've had an ongoing, it's about a seventeen year collaboration where we've been able to work with their people as well and, and develop curriculum in products and, and have access to some of their resources.  And we've been working most recently with Oracle Corporation and being able to tap in with some of their people, Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.], Cordis.  And so, we've been able to broaden the scope of knowledge base by tapping into various industries, both in the educational sector and corporate sector.
Story_ID: 654437
Speaker 1: Now, you founded The Yaeger Companies in 2000, right, as an attempt to consolidate the different facets of what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was really pulling together the family's business interests since we are involved in just a variety of, of areas--real estate, health care, educational products, and consulting, the manufacturing.  And so, to try to, to crea- and there's a synergy between so many of these things because we deal with things that there's a connectivity in a lot of our products, in a lot of our services, so wanted to make a lean and efficient organization, so that we could best take advantage of opportunities for all the three entities that we, that we have under our umbrella.
Story_ID: 654438
Speaker 1: Now, one project that reti- received national attention was in 2001.  Oh, did you--before we get to that, I want to ask you what you thought about--they, what do they call that in--Y2K in 2000 (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we're at 2000.  What were your thoughts about that?  Were you afraid that--
Speaker 2: I was slightly concerned.  I knew there was a potential of being some issues since we were such a digital age already.  And so, I, I admit that I, I took some preventative measures.  There were, there were some things I did at the bank to make sure that we'd have access to our, our accounts, and in case the computers all went haywire and some other things.  We did our personal, our systems in the office, and all my personal systems, but I, I didn't think it would be a major collapse that a lot of people thought.  I just thought it would be some, some issues and, fortunately, it weren't--it wasn't as bad as it was predicted.
Story_ID: 654439
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001], you were involved in a, a nationally highlighted project for--you created arms for a girl that was born without any arms.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Diamond Excell, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--was she from here in Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was from Miami--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and was a project that came about through my membership in the Rotary club [Rotary International], and it was an amazing project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, tell us about it.  Now, she was, was she born without arms, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct--nothing from the shoulders down, and she learned to do everything with her feet.  And she'd write with her feet, brush her teeth with a toothbrush.  She did everything with her feet, but she had a dream of having arms, and there was dead end roads her family was facing going to hospitals and doctors and other organizations. And everyone said it's impossible.  It's going to be too expensive.  You can't afford it, or because of a birth defect, it's not feasible.  And they were at a real point of giving up on this.  And I found out at a Rotary Club meeting about this project, and they were trying to figure out what to do to try to help this little girl.  And I said, "Well, you know what, I'll volunteer my companies and myself to make this dream become a reality."  And working together, we, we made this a gift for her, so it was no cost to the family.  It was about eighty thousand dollars, it was eighty thousand dollars in costs for the technology.  We arranged for that, the training, everything else she would need.  And in about a year's time, we'd actually built these two arms based on the Yaeger Arm patent.  It had electric wrists, elbows, hands, shoulders, all power-, controlled by the nerve impulses in her back and chest.
Speaker 1: At this stage, were there other robotic arms, you know, out here with--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were prosthetic arms, and because of the nature of, of her body structure, we looked at other technology, and weight was an issue.  Balance was an issue.  She didn't have the, the same upper body to, to tolerate a standard limb.  So, the technology of, of my arm was conducive to her being able to wear these comfortably for a longer period of time, and also they could grow.  And if you adjust it to grow with her, so it wouldn't, be something that had to be re- a new one had to be fitted every year or so as she grew.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, how much did, say, an individual arm weigh?
Speaker 2: I think we're at about one and a half to two pounds for the size that she was using.
Speaker 1: So, it was light, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) to the light.  And what functions were she able to accomplish with these two arms?
Speaker 2: Full range of hand grasping, lifting objects, lowering objects, so anything that required orientation of objects with rotating wrists.  So, she had those, those key functions of the, of the human arm.
Story_ID: 654440
Speaker 1: And what kind of grip can, can you get out of your arm, as opposed to, like a regular human arm?
Speaker 2: Prosthetic arms are not as (clears throat)--a lot of people don't realize that the limbs aren't as powerful as the actual human arm.
Speaker 1: What do you mean?  You can't crush them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can't crush things.  You can't, you can't lift up a truck or anything like that.
Speaker 1: I'm sure people are thinking (unclear).  I get these arms, I can--
Speaker 2: Right.  They're thinking of Steve Austin.  That's one thing I learned in the process.  The first thing I learned was that these things don't make you super strong.  And I had friends say, "Oh, we're going to jump over there and break our legs, get bionic legs on everybody."  And I said, "Well, let me do my project first 'cause I don't know if it's real," and, actually, it's not.  But she's able to, anyone who wears these, these prosthetic limbs can pick up a glass of water, drink water, can pick up objects.  I would say that, you know, five, ten pounds is probably a pretty good average weight, support maybe twenty to thirty pounds of weight.  So, they allow you to do everyday functions around the house, at school, at work, but you're not going to win any weightlifting contests.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is it possible to make, like very, very strong robotic arms for a human being to wear on a normal everyday basis?
Speaker 2: There have been attempts to do that.  Some of the issues are connecting the limb to the body and, and something doesn't slip or and, and move around because it's done with a harness and a socket system.  If there's too much weight being lifted, even if the arms can, can accomplish that, you run the risk of the arm slipping out of place on the sockets.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then the contact on the sensors moves, so now, the arm is not--you'll able to move a different direction because you've lost the control of them.  So, that's been, that's been an issue.  There have been attempts to design exoskeletons for military use.  We could wear this, you know, it's like an Iron Man suit and you could, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --bend the iron girders and things like that.  So, there's, there's experiments on, on doing that.  But really, most of the focus is on fine motor controls, opposed to overall strength to be able to manipulate objects to take pressure and temperature.  That's where more of the usability for prosthetic is, is, as opposed to sheer strength.
Speaker 1: In terms of that, have you built an arm where, you know, temperature can be detected, or if there's the person can actually feel what they're handling?
Speaker 2: We haven't.  There are other research teams that have created that, and are testing these sensor systems that allow for the pressure and temperature, that allow you to get a feedback of electric current.  So, if you are moving the hand quickly, you get a tingling sensation that gets stronger the faster you move the hand in your skin.  So, it's almost like it's a reverse of picking up the signal from the muscle to control it.  Now, you're sending a signal back to the skin to feel what you're doing. And also temperature as well, being able to give us a, a tingling sensation, or other sensations in another skin location to know, you know.  It's a really hot object you're about to touch, or, you know, you're picking up an egg.  So, you know, don't, don't tingle too hard, don't squeeze too hard, you'll break it.  So, that is the next level of, of prosthetics.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you work on any other limbs other than arms?
Speaker 2: We've done upper limb.  We haven't done anything with lower limbs, so I'm focused on, on arm and hand.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Have you invented an artificial hand, just a hand only?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, we, one of our most popular products is a bionic/robotic hand kit that isn't used by patients, but it's an educational kit that schools worldwide use to teach bionic technology and robotics.  And it has all the parts and tools and instructions to build a replica of The Yaeger Arm's prosthetic hand, and it has the grip capability that, of The Yaeger Arm, hand, hand assembly.  So, that's been a really exciting outgrowth from the, the prosthetics.
Story_ID: 654441
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about the, Diamond [Diamond Excell], you know, what, what actually happened and how did it really change her, her pro- prospects?
Speaker 2: It, it, to kind of--to give a little background of what happened to--when she received her arms, one of the things that she said when I asked her, "Well, what's the first thing you're going to do when you get your arms?"  She said, "I'm going to hug my mom [Dalia Excell] for the first time with my own arms."  And that was something that really drove us and inspired us, so we had a big celebration.  It was her birthday, and the arms were her birthday present.  She was going to go to seventh grade the following year.  And so, reporters from around the world were there to watch this moment of what was considered impossible become possible.  And over a hundred news outlets covered it.  And whether she walked out and went to the, front of the, the room to the stage, and hugged her mom with her arms the first time.  And so, that was an exciting moment.  It was inspiration for both of us who worked on the project.  It was seeing her face when that dream became reality.  And, and for her to have a chance to know what it would be like to have upper limbs, which is something that we all take for granted.
Story_ID: 654442
Speaker 1: In 2005, you established something called the rob- the, it was, see, some, sort of a video contest featuring your robotic hand, right?
Speaker 2: That was a, an outgrowth of our Bionic/Robotic Hand competition [Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit Competition].  And that's the, the competition is for the biotic, robotic hand is the bigger event that we began in 2002.  And that's where the students in schools received the bionic hand kit [Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit], and they build it according to the instructions.  Then, they go back and re-engineer it, so they add their own mechanical enhancements, their own cosmetic enhancements.  They try to make it as realistic and as advanced a prosthetic as possible, within in a budget constraint.  And we have a team of judges, typically from health care, from biotechnology, engineering fields, judge the entries.  And the students will do a presentation as if they're a biotech start up, they'll discuss what they did to modify the hand and to make it a better prosthetic.  And then, they actually have an object handling challenge where we have a table of objects they have to pick up with the hand and stack.  They have to pour water from a cup into a bottle, see how much they can transfer with the hand without using their human hand.  And then, we have a weight channel where they hold the cup, we pour water in, and see just how much water the hand will be able to hold before it drops the cup.  And so, we're able to tabulate that data and, and determine who the winner is, what team has the most advanced prosthetic, the most effective prosthetic.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this has been going on since 2002?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, it's still going on today?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's an annual competition--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we have our, in fact, our next competition for Broward County schools [Broward County Public Schools] is next Saturday.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, is the hand kit, does the hand kit change periodically when the technology gets better?
Speaker 2: We release a different version--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: --typically, year to year, so we make some changes.  But the basic configuration of the hand stays the same, and that way, you have a baseline the students can build from.  And we have--so it's a level playing field that the students can improve year to year from so, but we do add little, little tweaks as we go along.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now in 2006, you filed for a patent for a mechanical hand kit with a remote control system.  Now, how does this work?
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, that was key to the Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit, and it was designed for the training, and experimenting, and development market, so students in biotechnology could build a hand, and then have a control system that would allow them to wear the hand and simulate having a prosthetic--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as opposed to holding the hand in one hand, and working switches in the other.
Story_ID: 654443
Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006], you also received the Icon Award here in Miami [Florida].  Now, what--what's the Icon Award?
Speaker 2: It's awarded by the City of Miami commissioners and mayor, and it identifies achievers in the African American community in a variety of fields, medicine being one of those fields.  And I was fortunate enough to be selected one year.  Several years later, my father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] received this same award so we, it was very exciting for both of us.
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], you all started working on the Yaeger Plaza [Miami, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now where is the Yeager Plaza?  Is it where we are?  I mean near where we are now?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, we're sitting at the, the heart of the site of the plaza.  It's, it's going to be a mixed use facility that over a hundred thousand square feet that is going to encompass medical offices.  There's going to be housing for senior citizens.  There's an educational section for training health care professionals, and there's a commerce and office center for small and medium and large organizations to have office space and also retail space, a cafe, and, and some other retail space in the building.  And the idea is that we're, we're bringing in a, a variety of services into one location, so the residents of the building can get their, all their health care needs met and, and could have access to other services.  So, the community at large can have access to centralized medical facilities, and also bringing in commerce and career development so that residents in the area can be trained in the health care fields and be able to work in the community and, and be able to, you know, reinvest in the area and help those who live around them--something that we want to do, not just in this area, but replicate in other cities as well.
Story_ID: 654444
Speaker 1: Now, do you have partnerships with, or, or what, I guess, spe- particular medical facilities do you have partnerships with, like here in Miami [Florida], or around the country?
Speaker 2: It kind of varies, depending on with prosthetics, we collaborate with some prosthetic manufacturers, such as Liberating Technologies [Liberating Technologies, Inc.] has been a partner with us, one of the major manufacturers.  And for health care, we, we worked with independent practitioners and physician groups.  And one of the next venture areas for us is the collaborations with hospitals.  And so, that's the next level for the plaza [Yaeger Plaza, Miami, Florida] is to work with local hospitals in providing services and also training opportunities for health care professionals.
Speaker 1: So, do you have to attend, say, like the National Medical Association or American Medical Association with a display, or something about how the prosthetic limb works and that sort of thing or--
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of it is reaching out and making contact, and in establishing relationships.  For instance, from National Medical Association, since we're creating a museum that will commemorate the achievements of African American health care innovators.  It'll be in the plaza.  We are, have had conversations of developing jointly with the NMA, having access to some of their archival information and, and some of their display, so that it will be a museum that we'll jointly be able to create.  So, it, it's been a lot of collaborating.  It's, and it's what we really do a lot of is in all of our areas is we collaborate with entities and universities and corporations.
Story_ID: 654445
Speaker 1: And where is the state of this technology now?  I know Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] and there are other universities working on artificial limbs, where are you in this race today?  Are you, are you still in it?  I mean, competitive in this now, are you, or have you decided to, you know, are you branching out in other things?  You're doing, you know, motivational speaking and other things.  I don't know if you're still, like at the cutting edge of this or not, or I mean, so are you?  I mean--
Speaker 2: The prosthetics development is not the--the biggest focus area for us. It's one, one of the things on our plate.  We have so many other things we're involved in.  We're very involved in, in STEM education, science, technology education, engineering and math, so creating of products and curricula for the development of the next generation of talent who will create these new technologies.  It's really what my biggest focus area has been for the past few years, but we're still involved.  We still have designs on the drawing board that we are working on as future developments, so we definitely have an interest, particularly now that the industry, there, there are two different schools of thought.  One is transplants, developing the ability to transplant limbs just like any other organ, to a--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --from a donor to someone who needs the limb, as opposed to a mechanical device.  But then also, there's still the need of developing effective mechanical devices for prosthetics.  So, I would, I think that I, the side I would focus on would be seeing how far we can take the mechanical side as an alternative, if it, for the transplant side of prosthetics.
Speaker 1: Now, have you thought about using the prosthetic side in terms of just general robotic development, development in robotic--I mean, human-like robots and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, as a matter of fact, and that was some of the, the impetus for the Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit, and why it was Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit, and the name is as if it has those dual functions.  So, we, we see the application on both sides, whether it be creating robots, cyborg, some sort of device that's human-like that can accomplish tasks, or whether it be an industrial hand that can perform tasks in place of a human being doing it where it's just the limb doing it, as opposed to an entire being of some sort.  We had even the federal government has purchased our hand kit. The Center for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], has used our hand in their labs to manipulate, hazardous samples, so they've taken the kit and modified it.  So, it, it has, it has been used in industry and it, and so, we would like to do more of those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 654446
Speaker 1: So, do you visit these laboratories where they're developing their robotics and, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and these new biological ways to replace limbs?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Take visits to everything from the development of the, of new technology all the way to going to hospitals to visit the robotic surgery labs and seeing how the robotic surgery devices are operating, and actually operating, do simulations with them to, to see how that is becoming the new generation of robotics interfacing with biomedicine.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think they're trying to work on regenerating parts now, too, on some levels--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --stem cells and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --so forth and, you know, all this is, so what do you see is the future of the robotic hand business at this point?
Speaker 2: I see it as, there seems to--there's going to be an ongoing need.  There's, unfortunately, so the amputations will take place because of the land mines and other things that have been, AIDs [sic. improvised explosive device, IED], other terrorist devices.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, there are a lot of children, a lot of people of all ages that lose limbs because of these things.  So, some, some of it is in need.  Industrial accidents are not as, as frequent as they had been in the past, but should have these other military uses there create a need.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Sorry about that.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, there's still going to be a need for some kind of robotic device to, you know, take the place of a limb that's been blown off and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that sort of thing. And in terms of affordability, can they--I mean, is it, is the device affordable, I guess?  That's what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that's, it's all relative--
Speaker 1: It's kind of--
Speaker 2: --because (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but as you get into these electronic devices, these electronic hands and arms that are MyRO electrically controlled [MyRO Electronic Control Devices, Inc.], and now we're getting into the nerve impulse connections where they're experimenting now.  We'll trying to connect it to the brain, so the brain itself is controlling the limb, as opposed to going through muscle, and then controlling the limb.  So, the costs are high, but on the flip side, you're now seeing a lot of things with 3D printing where a lot of components are being able to be made, not with expensive casting and machining processes, but you can do it at home on a machine, and build a hand for a few hundred dollars, as opposed to, you know, ten thousand.  So, there is the change in some of the economies of, of creating prosthetics where it is being able to reach more end users who aren't able to afford a ten thousand dollar hand or a forty thousand dollar arm, so I think that's a very good development that's going to really affect a lot of lives internationally.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.  Now, do you, in speaking of internationally, do you do a significant amount of travel to countries where they're, you know, for instance in Iraq and Iran and Syria, and other places where people are losing their limbs, you know, to these explosive devices on a regular basis, to war zones?
Speaker 2: No, in fact, that's something I have not had the opportunity to do.  But it's something that's on my, my to do list, especially as we go more into the next level of prosthetics that we want to develop in the future.
Speaker 1: Have you ever run across a situation that you really couldn't do anything about?  You couldn't, you couldn't really help?
Speaker 2: We've had some calls come in.  And, and people describe the situation or send some, some information or records over, and it's something that's going beyond the scope of what a prosthetic can do, and sometimes it's beyond (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So, sometimes, you meet a situation that's beyond the realm of what you can do, you were saying?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  There, there are definitely some cases that there's really not a prosthetic solution for, much like any other medical device unfortunately.
Story_ID: 654447
Speaker 1: What role has your family played in your business [The Yeager Companies]?  That, 'cause it's Yaeger--now, let's see, it's Yaeger, this, the whole family now, right, involved in what you're doing, I guess?
Speaker 2: Currently, I, I'm the, the one running everything at this point in time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and my, my father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] was the one who ran the healthcare and the real estate side of our businesses.   And I've taken over those roles since his passing in 2010, so the, I'm, I'm involved in a variety of different fields now.  My siblings are all retired.  They're older than I am, and so, I'm now the, the head of, of the corporate entities.  And, and so, this is my, my day to day life is--and my sister [Gail Yaeger Alexander] gets involved in some things since in, in the educational side, in the artistic side, it's with the plaza [Yaeger Plaza, Miami, Florida], as we start developing and designing things, she'll be doing quite a number of things on that end.
Story_ID: 654448
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would go back and do over or redo?
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting question.  I would say that as I look back on my life, I'm, I'm very satisfied with the road I've taken, and the experiences I've had in various portions of my life.  And they're not any areas of regret that I have because even the things that did not work out the way I originally envisioned, they were always learning experience.  And I've had to learn that there's a time and seasons for everything.  Sometimes you want to see things, and move forward in a certain way at, at a pace you want to set yourself, but the world is not ready for that.  The environment is not ready for that.  Maybe you aren't even ready for that.  You think you are, but you're not.  And so, if I, if I had those thoughts, it would be, I would be more in the line of thinking of a regret.  And so far, I'm, I'm very blessed with the way things have progressed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Likewise, when you look over what you've done to this point, what are you the most proud of?
Speaker 2: I would say I'm, one of the things I'm most proud of is the impact I've been able to have on, on others in a positive way, to be able to see, particularly young people find a career path, and tell me that they were inspired by me, that I opened up a door to something they didn't know they even wanted to do.  But now, they see this is where they want to focus their, their energies, and be able to see them take it to becoming a c- in a career in that area.  That's been very exciting.  Another part is the fact I've been able to consolidate so much of my family legacy.  The, the industries that we've been involved in are professions we've been involved in for five generations to be able to consolidate them, and move them forward, and be able to work with my, my parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.], while they were still alive, in developing what we'll be doing for the next future generations.  I'm very blessed that we were able to do, and I was able to do that.
Story_ID: 654449
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think that the loss of hope in a lot of communities is very troubling, that there are a lot of young people that don't feel that they can be a part of the economy in legitimate fashion, that they don't feel that they can be a part of the, any career path.  That's very troubling 'cause when you lose hope, then you, you've really lost the drive, the drive to move forward, and to progress, and be successful.  And you are susceptible to taking shortcuts that are destructive, and turning destructive activities inward and, and outward into your community.  So, that's one of the big areas that, that concern me.  I want to see more young people feel that there's a place for them in society where their talents, their creativity can be channeled positively.  And I, and I want to see more of a continued political and economic involvement within our communities and, and not to feeling that, you know, what can I do, you know, I'm not going to be able to achieve this, or I'm not to be allowed to do what I'd like to achieve.  But the feeling of empowerment that we had, particularly when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected as president, to feel that anything is possible and to, to regain that, that feeling of, you know, it's a matter of us just refocusing, and we believe strongly enough that anything can be done.
Speaker 1: Okay. As a motivational speaker, and you're a popular one, I hear.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: So, have you ever thought about political office yourself?
Speaker 2: It's crossed my mind.  I, at one time, had some aspirations of running for the [U.S.] Senate.  In recent years, I've been so focused with my business and civic activities that I've kind of put that on a back burner, but one never knows.
Story_ID: 654450
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Your, you said your parents [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger and Carl Yaeger, Jr.] have passed, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were, how did they feel about your inventions and--
Speaker 2: They were very excited.  I was just so blessed to have parents that were plugged into every step of my development, professionally and personally, and to see their faces when they would see me receive an award, or they would see a project where students were involved in what my programs were doing, or the prosthetic arms were being fitted to the, to the little girl [Diamond Excell], or all of these things, having them being able, be witness to these things.  They, they always told me how proud they were of me, and that I had, you know, done a tremendous amount to move the, continue to move the family name forward.  So, it was, I was always very happy that they were able to see the results of a lot of those efforts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: Not yet.
Speaker 1: Not, okay, all right. All right.  And you were married for a while, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were married for a period of time, yeah, okay.  Who, today, would you consider to be your family, I guess, your brothers and sisters and your--
Speaker 2: Brother and sisters, I have, like the team that works with me in my companies is like an extended family.  And also, the, the youth that we work with.  It, it's, it's been a, you know, working with the, the community.  It's like an extended family as well, so I've been very blessed to have an actual family related by blood that I'm very close to, as well as people who have shown a lot of love and support, and who I've been, come close to.
Story_ID: 654451
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question?  Anything, is there anything, that's been omitted that stands out like a sore thumb or?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, and I don't know if it's going to be contained in your last question, but I would say that one thing that in my life that I've realized is one of my purposes is in, in the world is to defy expectations.  And I think that, as an African American in, in this world, we're faced with a lot of pre-conceived expectations very oftentimes lower than what we are able to achieve, and sometimes imposed by those who look like us, and those, oftentimes, those who don't look like us.  It's, it's unfortunate, it comes from both sides.  And I think that what I've been able to do is surprise a lot of people about the things that can be achieved, not just by an African American, but by someone who is a younger person, you know, being able to start at, in the seventh grade creating something that could turn into something that changes lives, and being able to inspire young people with that, and then, people of all ages with that.  It's something my family has been defining expectations, you know, going back five generations and, and being able to present this to the world that African Americans aren't all this monolithic group, that we're not all, you know, living in, in dire situations, that we're not all impoverished.  We don't all start with nothing, that there is generational wealth in the black community, that there are families that've passed legacies and wealth and businesses down from generation to generation.  And to be in a family like that, and being able to have people say, "I didn't know that existed." You know, being in college [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida], having some students remember, one of my dorm mates, a white student, said to me--you know, 'The Cosby Show' had just come on television.  He said, "You know, I saw 'The Cosby Show,' and I thought that was all a myth.  I didn't know any black people living like that, but I meet you, and you're just like one of us."  And, and I thought, that's interesting, you know, you're, you're--he's gotten a real world education without even realizing it, that there's more to the face of the black community than just what's portrayed in just one media channel that's negative.
Speaker 1: In respect to race, have you found in, in your business of inventing, especially in trying to convince medical science that you have a product, you, have you found, you know, has there been a lot of opposition to you that wouldn't be there if you had not been black?
Speaker 2: I think there's some, there's a resistance, an initial resistance.  And, you know, sometimes you can, we have a meeting set, and particularly, because my name is not what--was more of a European name.  And people are on the phone with me, and they make the assumption that I'm, I must be a white gentleman.  And then, when I come into a meeting, and that first impression when they first see me, "Oh, you're Mr. Yaeger [HistoryMaker Ivan Yaeger]? Oh," you know, it's just it.  So, there's that, there's that kind of, there's a little bit of, it's a glass wall that you sometimes run against.  But what I've always been taught is that you overcome that with excellence, and by bringing something to the table that that someone can't obtain from anyone else.  And, and I found that time after time, once it's, we've gotten past that first contact, and that first resistance to think, uh-oh, he can't know what he thi- what he says, he knows.  He can't be doing what he says he's doing.  Once they start to actually have a conversation and start to look at it, they begin to realize that they've made a mistake in their judgment.  They start to view the ideas on their own merits and, and look past who's delivering the idea because the end of the day, I found that most people in business are driven by green--not by black or white.  And if you have something that makes bottom line sense to them, and puts them in a different level than they were before you walked in the door, they begin to start to ignore some of the skin color, and start talking more of the money color issues.  So, it's just a matter of being able to hold your guns and, and pressure point until the, the point becomes the major thing that they're seeing.
Story_ID: 654452
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone that made the world a better place than, than what it was before he entered it, someone who changed lives positively, and someone who allowed others to see what is possible, and inspired them to not be hindered or deterred by obstacles.
Speaker 1: All right, and thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.  I appreciate it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 654453
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the, the family estate in New Jersey.  This was a house that was built by my great-grandfather, Elliott Carl Yaeger, Jr. [Elliott Yaeger, Jr.], back in the late 1800s, early 1900s.  And in the picture, which is from the 1970s, probably the early mid-1970s, I was a small child and my, so my family members are there.  And the picture of my mother [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger], uncle, and some others are there.  My father [Carl Yaeger, Jr.] was taking the picture.  And this house was, in fact, became a very interesting focal point of a lot of the African American jazz entertainers in the 1920s.  They operated from the house a tea room where a lot of the performers, because they couldn't have any meals, or can socialize in the white hotels and, and other concert halls, would come to this location, and it wasn't far from Atlantic City [New Jersey].  They would come, and they would socialize, and they would play some music, and they would have tea.  And so, it became very popular as one of those refuge places for, for some of the jazz stars at the time.
Speaker 2: Tea house?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: From the 1920s (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah we know what that means. Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture from when I was in middle school [North Miami Junior High School; North Miami Middle School, North Miami, Florida].  And it's my mother and father, and it's probably one of the--us dressed up to go to one of the many events we would go together.  And this was something we did on a regular basis, attended a lot of events, and we did a lot of fun things together.
Speaker 2: This is a more recent photograph, probably from about three or four years ago.  It's my sister, Gail [Gail Yaeger Alexander], the glass artist.  We were at a gallery showing of some of her pieces.  And this is one of the glass pieces she made, called 'Blue-Eyed Brother' and this is made out of, all of glass that she crafts and she's done pieces for Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], she--P. Diddy Combs [P. Diddy] auctioned off one of her pieces for charity, so she's been quite an innovator in that arena of art.
Speaker 1: Is her last name Yaeger, too?
Speaker 2: Alexander.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Gail Alexander.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's her married name.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my parents--looks to be a photo from the late 1970s.  My parents, and with my [paternal] grandfather, were very instrumental integrating a lot of the hotels, and country clubs, and other restaurants in Miami [Florida], Miami Beach [Florida], that were restricted during the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  And they would attend medical conventions, and the manager would try to restrict them from coming in, and their, their colleagues, the other doctors would say, "Well, if they can't come in, we'll not coming in."  So, they were very much in the forefront of integration.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me from my high school [Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida] graduation in 1984, just completing my commencement speech, and a very exciting time for me to be selected to speak by my faculty and fellow students.
Speaker 2: And this is young Ivan [HistoryMaker Ivan Yaeger], the future inventor (laughter).  This must be, age may be two, and I'm very much dressed in one of the period outfits (laughter), the early 1970s (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ivan, the terrible.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  This is a picture from elementary school [Miami Shores Elementary School, Miami Shores, Florida] at a science fair, and this is one of the projects I did.  It's probably a third or fourth grade.  I'm thinking a fourth-grade picture when I was in the, at the Glenn Curtiss Gifted Center [ph.], and we did a lot of science projects at the time.
Speaker 1: Glenn Curtiss of Curtiss-Wright [Curtiss-Wright Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In 2001, after the completion of a project, we built the prosthetic arms for a little girl named Diamond [Diamond Excell].  This was in the photograph that was in People magazine.  There was a really beautiful article done about the project and they did a very nice piece about my family and about me.  And this was a photograph taken of my mother and father, and me and my sister.
Speaker 1: Will you go from left to right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  The standing on the left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Oh, it's actually a--
Speaker 2: A caption?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cut caption.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: But I was right.  My sister is on the left.  My mother is seated.  I'm standing next to her.  And my father is seated on the right side of me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my graduation picture from college and from the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] in 1988.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  One of the many publications that featured my work with the prosthetic arms was the National Medical Association news.  And I was very excited about that, the article, 'Arms and the Man' [ph.] was the title of it, and it shows a picture from the actual event where we provided Diamond with her arms.  And it also shows me showing some of the technology that we were using for her prosthetics.
Speaker 2: This was another great honor, Black Enterprise magazine featured me as one of the top black designers in this feature, 'America's Top Black Designers,' and they pictured me with a Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit.  And this is the assembled version of the hand kit that we sell to schools internationally.  And it gives a little bit of a snapshot of some of the things that we do, and my design work in industrial designs with creating products.
Speaker 1: This historical photo is of my grandfather, Dr. Carl Yaeger, Sr.  He's standing in front of one of the Yaeger Clinic [The Yaeger Clinic, Inc.] locations.  This is in 1943, I believe.  He operated clinics in various cities from Boston [Massachusetts] to New York [New York] to Texas, and several other cities, as well as Los Angeles [California] before coming to South Florida.  And this is a picture--standing in the middle is my, his sister, my great aunt, and on the other side is a nurse at the Yaeger Clinic.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Do you remember your great aunt's name?
Speaker 1: Yes, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Yaeger].  She was a, a great musician.  She played piano, and taught a lot of students how to play classical, classical piano in New Jersey.
Speaker 2: This is taken at the 1984 International Science and Engineering Fair [INTEL International Science and Engineering Fair], where I was a competitor.  This was my senior year of high school, and I represented the, not just Miami, Florida, but also United States of America in that international competition.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And--
Speaker 2: And I won third place in, in the world in engineering that year.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, who's on the left, and my grandfather on the right.  This is shortly after they moved to Miami [Florida], and opened the Yaeger Clinic here.  And the middle is one of their nurses, and a very nice picture of them attending a medical convention.
Speaker 2: This is a fast forward to the current era.  Some of the things that we're doing with education, these are students who have built our Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit.  These are middle and high school students who created their own prosthetics using our hand kit, and they actually--on the bottom picture is a student competing.  She's handling water, pouring water from one bottle to another, trying to see if the hand can accomplish that task without spilling the water.
Speaker 1: One of the things that I remember very fondly as a child is the times with my parents traveling.  We traveled many places.  And one of these, the location was Washington, D.C., as a class trip, we all went to Washington, and toured all the great sites of the capitol.  And this is a picture of my mother and I'm standing next to her.  This had to around 1976.
Speaker 2: And from the same trip, a picture of me and my father.  I think we're outside the gates of the White House [Washington, D.C.] on that day.
Speaker 1: And I always enjoy this picture, and everyone who sees it does as well.  This is me as a infant on the phone and it's a funny thing.  A girlfriend once saw, said, saw the picture and said to me, "You're a little CEO, even at that age, like you're on the phone saying, 'Get back to work,'" so I always like showing this.  People get a laugh at it (laughter).
Speaker 2: It was (unclear), it shows some great dexterity at that age (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, be able to hold up the telephone (unclear).
Speaker 1: I was a hands on kid.  I (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me working with Diamond.  We're programming the sensors that control her arm.  And I'm standing here while she's just doing testing, wearing the newly created prosthetics.
Story_ID: 654454
Speaker 1: Another article was featured in Jet magazine.  And it featured the prosthetics that we built, and it was another very exciting article that came out in 2001.
Speaker 2: And the article itself, here's the, the arms being worn by Diamond [Diamond Excell], and there's another picture of us in the lab doing the control testing.
Speaker 1: Here's another family historic photo, this is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The white border, okay, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: This historic family photo is a picture of my [paternal] great-grandmother, Laura Yaeger, and this was taken in the late 1800s.  And she was the wife of Elliott Carl, Jr. [Elliott Yaeger, Jr.], who was the real estate developer.  It's a picture taken probably in New Jersey at that, that point in time.
Speaker 2: This is a People magazine article, and this was another--well, the very moving articles that were published in 2001 after the project with Diamond.  This is, you'll probably recognize the guy behind her--it's me with her, and her new arms.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is the--
Speaker 2: This is, it's another article that was published in (unclear) Newsweek concerning our technology leaders' initiative, and our bionic/robotic hand competitions [Bionic/Robotic Hand Kit Competition], showing some of the things that I've been able to bring to students in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and math.
Speaker 1: And this is a little snapshot of the Technology Leaders Initiative, TLI program, invention and entrepreneurship curriculum.
Speaker 2: And this is my father, Dr. Carl Yaeger, Jr., and this is in front of the clinic.  This is circa, I'd say, 1990.
Speaker 1: Some other family photos--it's my father, my sister [Gail Yaeger Alexander] in the middle, and me, and this is probably around 2001.
Speaker 2: And the picture below is my mother [Ollie Sharpe Yaeger] and my sister, when my sister was probably no more than two or three years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's not one--is that one?
Speaker 1: No.  I think my father was involved in it, but it isn't, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What about Dexter Gordon?  What, what is--
Speaker 2: My, my father, he's a friend of my father's--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and we would, we would see some of his concerts when he'd come down, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: And this is an article that was featuring the dedication of this building that we're sitting in, the Yaeger Clinic building [The Yaeger Clinic, Inc., Miami, Florida] in 1958--my father and [paternal] grandfather [Carl Yaeger, Sr.], and it's a picture of both of them.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is a, an article from the Miami Herald and around 1990.  Once I received patents on my three inventions, then we were manufacturing and marketing them.  And, our--in fact, this article led to my consulting career in helping other inventors and companies develop and patent their products, and a flood calls that came in when this was published.  And we have since then developed over a hundred different products in, in a variety of industries.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: And this is the People magazine issue, 2001, that featured the prosthetic arms and we did for the little girl who received them and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, all this is real.  This is a lot better than the copy.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is the first page off what was a multipage spread about that project and about me and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: There's a day in the life photos.  This is what she was doing using her feet to manipulate objects prior to receiving the prosthetics.  And then, the next picture, she's actually wearing the prosthetics.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How long at that did (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Those are two pictures.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's a better version of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  And these are the two pictures--one of me at the international science fair [Intel International Science and Engineering Fair] with the original arm prototype, and my senior year of high school [Miami Central Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  And then, the picture of my sister on the left; my mother seated; me; and my father on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  And there's a couple of other family photos.  It's my brother, Neal [Neal Yaeger], with my mother and father, and this is in California.  This was in the 1990s, and the picture on the bottom is his son, my nephew, Steven II [ph.], and with my mother and father.
