Story_ID: 73953
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Florida Alice Jackson Yeldell.  Florida is spelled the same as the state, F-L-O-R-I-D-A; Alice, A-L-I-C-E, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, Yeldell, Y-E-L-D-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you... where does Yeldell come from?  I thought I'd ask you.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My husband told me it was an English name.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Can you give us your place of birth, and date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 2, 1915 in Georgetown, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a teacher.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And a learner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 5, 2003 [sic, 2002].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: North Myrtle Beach [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 73954
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions we are compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first is... and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, Ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Um, I like food, period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It has changed.  For a long time green was my favorite color.  And now it seems that pink is becoming my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall.  Spring with the flowers and vegetation coming out.  And fall with the change of leaf color and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Every place that I've ever been has something special for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I would not limit--
Story_ID: 73955
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ma'am do you know much about your family history, where your family comes from?
Speaker 2: Not a great deal, not a great deal.  My father's father's father was sold to this section [South Carolina] out of Virginia.  And there are no Jackson families as such that I know of, except our branch of the Jacksons.  But it's not one of the old line... old families.  And so, it's--I don't think Jackson is a plantation name peculiar to this section--possibly to Virginia. And I had the very strange and interesting experience on one occasion coming home from school, coming from New York.  And the train passed through Virginia.  And this little man got on the train, and he looked identically like my father [Robert James Jackson].  If I did not know that my father was home in South Carolina, I would have... exactly like him--the height, the skin color, expression on the face, the carriage.  And I have often wished that I had spoken to him and asked him who he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you can kind of trace your family, at least on your father's side, back to your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And do you know what his name was?
Speaker 2: Alonzo Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was born during slavery, you said?
Speaker 2: And his son, my father's father, was a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a slave on the Hagley plantation.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: H-A-G-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's in Georgetown County [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Georgetown County.
Speaker 1: Alright.  What kind of work did they do on that plantation?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Rice.  Rice was the, they raised rice in that section.  But he, he was not a field worker.  He drove the carriage and tended to the horses.
Speaker 1: Now, from what I've read and seen--I mean, not seen--but they did have a, the National Park Service had a site set up for one of the rice plantations in Georgia.  And they said, part of the message was that rice was the most intense crop to try to grow, and the rice growers would plan to lose a slave in five years.  They figured they were just--the way they'd make out their plan, they figured they'd use them up in about five years and have to get another one, because it was so hot and so bad.  Did you have any--did he ever talk about how bad that was?  I know he didn't work in the field himself, but--
Speaker 2: uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the truth of the matter is that there were some things common to rice growing, and there were some that were peculiar and distinctive of certain plantations and certain sections.  I don't think that that was the prevailing philosophy here, because they recognized that the experienced slave, who was really working, was priceless.
Story_ID: 73956
Speaker 1: So, so, is that about--do you remember anything else about your family history?  Any stories passed down by your grandfather or great-grandfather about life on the [Hagley] plantation, or the place where they worked?  No stories about what they had to do, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's [Janie Anderson Jackson] grandfather was a driver on the plantation that he grew up on, that he worked on.  And I think it was the Friendfield plantation.  Now, the driver was the Negro who assigned the task of the day to each of the slaves, and who sort of supervised that.  But that's the only thing that I know about him.  My grandmother was trained as a seamstress, and she was a very fine seamstress.  I... that's the only thing I know about my mother's family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were from Georgetown County [South Carolina] as well?
Speaker 2: In Georgetown County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, they... no songs or stories or anything that come down from that period?  Old songs?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there are songs that belong to that period, but not to my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I think they kind of belong to all of us if they come from that period, you know.  They certainly... I mean certainly, certain families don't claim songs as such, but they're out of a collective experience, you know.  But, so, none of those?  You don't remember any of those songs?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Story_ID: 73957
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Can you give us the names of your parents, and spell them for us, please?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Robert James Jackson, R-O-B-E-R-T, J-A-M-E-S, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And when was he born, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Georgetown [South Carolina].  I don't remember the date.  He was 89 when he passed, and I have forgotten when he passed.  My mother's name was Janie Alizabeth Anderson Jackson, J-A-N-I-E, A-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was she born?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  My mother died in, let's see, I think my mother... my mother died very young.  She was thirty when she died.  She died in childbirth.  My youngest sister was born in 1920.  She was five when my mother died.  So, Mama probably died about 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us what kind of person your mother was?  And what did she do, and you know--
Speaker 2: She was a housewife, teacher.  She had taught as a younger woman.  But after marriage and the children, I don't think she taught.  She was very correct and proper, very loving.  And I'm sure she was exasperated.  There were four of us, four girls.  And we came one right after the other, with the exception of the last sister.  I think there were two years between her birth and the sister ahead of her.  And I remember I was always asking, "Why, why, why?"  And at times she would become very exasperated, but she always tried to answer my questions.  She tried very hard, she and my father, to instill in us a sense of independence and self-reliance.
Story_ID: 73958
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your father?  What was he like, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father [Robert James Jackson] was a letter carrier.  But he grew up... when he was growing up his father ran the livery stable in Georgetown [South Carolina], and he and his brother worked there.  And when the decision came that one of the brothers would have to forego school and the other would go and work with the father, the older brother worked with his father.  And my father did go on and graduate from the school in Georgetown at that time.  And he was supposedly a good student, and for a short time was elected as principal of the school, a very short time.  And then he went to Salters, South Carolina to take up the blacksmith trade, because he felt that blacksmithing would bring more money for family support than school teaching at that particular time.  And the men that he worked with, the Mims family in Salters, had a reputation of being excellent blacksmiths.  But then the examination for letter carrier was posted in Georgetown, and he took the examination.  And he and Mr. Robert Anderson made the two highest scores, and they were hired as the first letter carriers in Georgetown.  Mr. Robert Anderson was the son of Robert Anderson, who at one time was the postmaster in Georgetown.  And he carried mail for thirty years.  But he had a brilliant mind, and I have often felt that if he had had the opportunity to go on for education, he would have a very different... very different kind of life.  He was very intellectual, always surrounded us with books, always surrounded us with newspapers and magazines, and made many sacrifices for his children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story that has passed down to you about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, so they got married around what time?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know the date.  I'll check the date and put it in this--
Speaker 1: Well, you have some idea of the time period, I guess?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You may not know the exact date, but--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I've never questioned.
Speaker 1: You were born in 1915.
Speaker 2: Nineteen Fifteen [1915].
Speaker 1: And you were the, were you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I guess we could say somewhere between 1900 and 1915, I guess, I suppose.
Story_ID: 73959
Speaker 1: But I want you to reflect back and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood that you grew up in, and the surroundings of your childhood.
Speaker 2: I was born on Wood Street in Georgetown [South Carolina], less than one block over from the main street.  I had two sisters that were also born on Wood Street, and I had a cousin who lived near.  And I remember our playing hide-and-go seek.  I remember that Mr. Mims, one of the men from whom Papa [Robert James Jackson] took blacksmithing, lived with us.  And he had a blacksmith shop in Georgetown, but he lived with us.  And every Sunday, every Sunday morning he would give us a bag of crackers, each of us.  So, when Sundays came, we were almost at Mr. Mims' door waiting for those crackers.  And they were the best tasting crackers in the world; crackers have never tasted as good.  He had a bag for each of us.  I remember it seems...  And Mama [Janie Anderson Jackson] would put us to bed in the middle of the day.  And I remember the room in which she would put us to bed.  And I remember I didn't want to waste any time sleeping.  And it was the hardest thing in the world for me to go to sleep.  I remember church from that time.  I remember my Sunday school teacher.  And then I remember that we moved from that place to the site that had been the Jackson homestead on Highmarket Street.  I remember while the men were building the house, that Papa would sometimes take us in the afternoon as he walked around to look to see what was happening.  And there was a large mulberry tree in that yard.  And one afternoon when we went there, one of the men filled his hat with mulberries and gave them to us.  They were the most delicious berries I have ever tasted.  I don't even see mulberries anymore.
Story_ID: 73960
Speaker 1: Now, the site on Highmarket Street [Georgetown, South Carolina] was next door to the Duncan Memorial [United] Methodist Church.  That was the large white church.  And ours was the only house... we were the only Negroes in the neighborhood.  And I don't know that at first it was particularly disturbing to us, because we had each other to play with.  But as we got to know the children in the neighborhood, we played with them.  And on the steps of the church, in the early years, we would play house.  Each group of steps was a house, and we would play house.  And I remember on one occasion, one of the children said something about a nigger... "Nigger?"  So, I asked my mother, "Mama, what is a nigger?"  She [Janie Anderson Jackson] said, "A nigger is a mean, hateful, ugly person who's little and vindictive."  "What is vindictive?"  And she said, "There are people like that, and they are not peculiar to any one group.  Anybody can be a nigger.  Is that the kind of person you are?"  "Oh, no, Mama."  And "nigger" and being called nigger, has never disturbed me.  Because from that time... "No, Mama."  But after that, Mama quietly moved to see that we did not play with those children as much.  We were very close at first.  But as we grew older, the division developed. And living next door to us later on was a family with children.  Now, most of the people around us were upper-middle class, except for the house right next door to us.  That was a rented house, and a poor group of whites usually rented that house.  We had an extremely large pecan tree in our backyard.  It was the largest pecan tree I have ever seen.  And it hung over in that yard the next door.  And of course the pecans that fell there, they took, and that was to be expected.  But on one occasion... for some reason we would go to the fence and talk with each other--the children of us.  We were not allowed to go into their yard, and I don't think they were allowed to come into our yard.  But we would talk over the fence.  And on one occasion, one of the girls called me to the fence.  And I went to the fence, and she threw pecans in my face.  Well, my next sister--several days after that when she met her on the corner down the street--threw pecans in her face.  And her mother was as mad as a wet hen.  She came over and reported it to my mother.  And when my father [Robert James Jackson] came home that afternoon, she was still very angry.  And she told him, "When my husband comes home this afternoon, he's going to shoot your damn head off."  And Papa was always a gentleman.  And I remember he had his postman's cap on.  And he took it off, and tipped it to her.  He said, "There'll be two of us at that, Madam."  And it seemed that she had not thought about that.  But after that, we were never permitted to play with them.
Story_ID: 73961
Speaker 1: And they grew up, and we grew up...  And it was always amusing to me after we really grew up and had been away to school and to work, when we would come back and see some of those same children.  They would act as though they did not know us, for which I do not blame them, because neither did I act as though I knew them.  And so, it was, it was both of us.  And I have wished since then that I had spoken, and in many ways attempted to sort of bridge the gap.  Our neighbors were good, but they went their way and we went our way.
Speaker 2: Now, this is, your situation seems peculiar in that... I mean in the South, you lived in an integrated neighborhood--at least you were the only black family in that--
Speaker 1: In that particular neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you all attended different schools, right?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 2: And, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes.  But that was something that could happen in different neighborhoods in Georgetown [South Carolina].  We did not have a section that was--
Speaker 2: There was no black section of town?
Speaker 1: There was a black section of town.  There was a section that was predominantly black, but blacks also lived all over town.  And that was because of the way the property was sold during the period of Reconstruction.
Story_ID: 73962
Speaker 1: Now you all had integrated neighborhoods often, but black people didn't have a--
Speaker 2: Not... integrated is not correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Black and white lived in the same neighborhood, and the degree of interaction between them was determined by those people.
Speaker 1: Okay, subjective, basically, based on what the people felt like they wanted to do?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But legally, at the time that you were coming along, black people didn't have the right to vote or hold public office and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was the postal force largely black, or was your father [Robert James Jackson] like one of--
Speaker 2: No, no.  Both of the letter carriers, the city letter carriers, were Negroes.  The rural carrier was a Negro.  They lived around the corner from us, and they also lived in a predominantly white neighborhood--the Kellys, Peter Kelly.  And the special delivery carrier, you had a special carrier for special deliveries.  He was also a Negro.  And during the period of Reconstruction and for a time thereafter, the postmaster was a Negro.  But in time, the postmaster and clerks in the office became white.  And the carriers remained predominantly Negro, though, in time there came to be some carriers that were white.  Papa carried for thirty years.
Story_ID: 73963
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about school.  What were your interests as a little girl?  And did you like school?  And...
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I loved the learning, I loved the association with other children.  We were only a few blocks from the Howard School.  And of course we were within walking distance of school.
Speaker 1: So it was called The Howard School [now Howard High School]?
Speaker 2: It was Howard School.
Speaker 1: Named after which Howard, would you know?
Speaker 2: O. O. [Oliver Otis Howard]
Speaker 1: O. O. Howard, same as Howard University [in Washington, D.C.], okay.
Speaker 2: It was the Howard School.  And we had an excellent school, an excellent dedicated principal, and dedicated teachers.  We had good teachers, very good teachers.
Speaker 1: What was the principal's name?
Speaker 2: The principal's name was J.B. Beck.
Speaker 1: B-E...
Speaker 2: B-E-C-K, J.B. Beck.  And my first teachers were all family relatives or family friends.  We had at that time the first grade.  And you went from the first grade to the advanced first grade.  And from the advanced first grade, to the second grade.  We had the hardest conceivable benches to sit on, very hard benches.  And I remember sitting on that bench and just bumping my feet against the bench, and the teacher told me not to.  Well, why would she tell me that, she was my cousin?  Why wouldn't she let me do that?  But she made me understand--then I came to know and understand that well, there were no special privileges.  And I didn't recognize that by implication I was expecting special privileges.  My first teachers were Janie Ward and a cousin of mine.  Um, why can't I think of her name?  But she was also a family member.  And my second grade teacher was Miss Lily Frazier [ph.], who was an excellent teacher.  And I remember her particularly teaching the Pilgrims; she made Pilgrim dolls out of clothespins and put them around them around in a sandbox.  And they made learning exciting and interesting.  And when I was in the third grade, my teacher was Miss Jamie Brockington.  But it was in that grade that... my mother died when I was in the third grade.  But I loved school, I enjoyed going to school.  And when I got to be the--let's see, the fourth grade, Miss Inez Anderson, who was the sister of Mr. Robert Anderson who was the other letter carrier.  And--
Speaker 1: You said his father had been the postmaster?
Speaker 2: Postmaster.
Speaker 1: Back during Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And in the fifth grade, that's when I got the first so-called out of town teachers.  All of my other teachers up to that time were hometown teachers.  But she was also an excellent teacher.  And I remember on one occasion during the chapel, the principal asked some student to get up and say what they had recently learned.  And though I was very timid, I was so excited about what we were studying about John Smith and Pocahontas that I got up and talked about John Smith and Pocahontas.  And, oh, he made me feel very good about that.  But from that moment on, I had chosen what I was interested in--history.  And after that, history remained the love of my life.
Story_ID: 73964
Speaker 1: I attended Howard School until I was in the tenth grade, I think.  And my stepmother and I did not see eye to eye; there was not a sweetness and light relationship.  So, Papa [Robert James Jackson] sent me to boarding school at Morris College in Sumter [South Carolina], and I loved that.  And I finished high school there.  The next year, he sent all of us away.  There were four girls.  He sent me and my next sister, whose name was Garna, to Morris College.
Speaker 2: Her name was what?
Speaker 1: Garna, G-A-R-N-A.
Speaker 2: Garna, okay.
Speaker 1: Garna.  And my two younger sisters, he sent to Mathis, M-A-T-H-I-S, the Mathis School in Buford [South Carolina].  And then the next year he sent us all to Morris College.
Speaker 2: So did you feel, I mean did you miss your sisters when you were sent away?
Speaker 1: I didn't miss my sisters.  I was caught up in the adventure of boarding school, of a new experience, of new people, of new learning.  I didn't miss my sisters.
Story_ID: 73965
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, well, how did you like... well, what happened at the new school [Morris College in Sumter, South Carolina]?  What kind of activities did you get involved in?  What people did you meet?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met a lot of people. I was interested in meeting people, always have been interested in meeting people.  The first year I roomed with a young lady I think who was a little older than I.  And I guess the Dean of Women purposely put me with her.  But for the years that I was at Morris College, I tried every year to have a different roommate so I could get to know different people.  And the sisters of us, though we were there, we never roomed with each other; we roomed with other people.  And at school, what did I... I...  What did I take?  I took music, and right now I laugh.  Because I took piano and voice, and I have always been tone-deaf, the original Johnny One Note.  I cannot sing.  And I remember the occasions when we would have the recital.  And I was not good with the piano, either, but I loved music, always have.  But I couldn't play and I couldn't sing.  I took typing and shorthand and sang in the choir.  I did not play basketball, because my father [Robert James Jackson] was old-fashioned.  The girls played basketball in bloomers in those days, and he said that was appearing publicly in your underwear, "No."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Basketball seemed very popular in the South in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of people--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: --I've interviewed played basketball.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of women played basketball.
Speaker 2: Of course, they didn't have my father; it had nothing to do with the popularity.  And we were not permitted to dance at Morris College.  And, but we danced, we danced every night.  We would have... after the supper meal, the Dean of Women would stay in the dining hall until the dining hall was... the dishes were cleaned and put away and everything was straight.  And then she would come back to the residence hall in which we lived.  And while she was seeing that the dishes were... while she was seeing that the dining hall was being put to rights, we would get in the reception room, and somebody would start playing and we would dance.  And that's where I learned to dance.  And then someone would stay at the door, "Here she comes, here she comes, here she comes."  And then by the time she came, we would just all be sitting around like little angels.  She knew we danced, she knew we danced.
Story_ID: 73966
Speaker 1: Another thing was that we had prayer meeting every Wednesday night, I think.  And it was required that everybody would go to prayer meeting.  But what we would do just for the heck of it was hide under the bed.  And when the other girls would go out for prayer meeting, we would hide under the bed.  She [the Dean of Women] knew that's what you did, so she checked under the beds before she marched the girls off to prayer meeting.  So, then you hid in the closet or hid wherever you could.  And then very frequently you could not... she would find you.  And so, you would come out very dog-tailed, going to prayer meeting with everybody else.  But it was just something you did for the fun of it, for the heck of it.
Speaker 2: Create a little excitement. (Laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 1: We were not allowed to play cards.  The girls would play cards.  But what they would do, they would take the knobs out of the door.  And if she came to a door and saw no knob there, she knew exactly what was going on.  So, she had a knob frequently that she could get in.  But while she was getting in, you were hiding the cards.  And when she came in, you were just--
Speaker 2: But she knew--
Speaker 1: She was a very... she knew it, she knew it.  She was a good woman.  And we gave her a fit, we gave her a fit.
Story_ID: 73967
Speaker 1: So, did you have any teachers in school that really inspired you, or took an interest in developing your interest in history?
Speaker 2: In college I had a very good English teacher.
Speaker 1: But no one in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I had excellent teachers.  Miss Bertha Sawyer, but she was primarily the English teacher.  Professor Howard, I remember, if I remember correctly, taught Ancient History, and I enjoyed that with him.  But in addition to the history, I also loved English; I loved the literature, I loved the poetry, the stories.  And we used to have what you call, you know, readers.  And sometimes I would sit in the class and read all the stories in the book.  And we had what we used to call a literature book.  And I would sit in class and read all of those.  And I remember on one occasion going through the book and came to this poem, just so beautiful.  "An angel robed in spotless white, bent down to kiss the sleeping night.  The night woke to blush.  The sprite had gone.  Man saw the blush, and called it dawn."  And then what surprised me, it was written by Paul Laurence Dunbar.  And see, we had been taught and had been presented Paul Laurence Dunbar as writing only in the different Negro dialects.  And it was just a wonderful experience to find that, and later on to learn that he wrote as much in standard English as he did in the dialect.  But it was just the dialect that he could sell.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dunbar was, he was multi-talented in terms of literature.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: He had a bifurcated mind like that, you know, he could do both so well.  Yeah, well, that's good to hear.
Story_ID: 73968
Speaker 1: But yeah, that's... so you had a chance to, you were exposed to black literature, I mean Negro literature at school?
Speaker 2: Let me say this, I was exposed to literature.  Thank God, I had a teacher who was an excellent English teacher.  She was the best English teacher in South Carolina, Bertha Sawyer.  We read everything.  And among the things that we read was what would be called "black literature."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She introduced us to many things.  She was an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: Do you think... I know you may not know, but do you think that other youth in South Carolina, I mean the white people in South Carolina, were exposed to black literature?
Speaker 2: I do not know.  I didn't ever come into contact with any of their schools, and I would not say no or yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't have any suspicions about it?
Speaker 2: I do not know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is my answer.
Speaker 1: I see, alright.
Speaker 2: I do not know.  See, literature is literature.  And incidentally, we classify it as having been written by whites and by Negroes, and we imply that there's certain kinds of things that Negroes write and there are certain kinds of things that whites write.  But that doesn't qualify as literature.  It's the style, it's the message that you look for in literature, not propaganda.  And we had a reader that we used to call the... not... we used to call... the name of it was, "The Upward Path" or "The Upward Way," a little blue book.  And in that book, there were a number of stories about Negroes.  But then we also had at time as children--and we remember them by color--a big red book that we called "the literature book."  I don't remember the name, but I'm ashamed to say I don't.  And it is there that we learned the different forms of literature--prose and poetry, and the different kinds of poetry, and learned the figures of speech.  We didn't teach literature in colors, we taught literature as a... literature was taught to us as a discipline, and I'm so glad.  We had excellent teachers.  Mrs. Sawyer was an excellent teacher.  I don't remember a single racist thing she ever said or did, but she introduced us to certain things.  I remember it was in her class that I learned about the Haitian Revolution.  She didn't teach it as the Haitian Revolution, she taught it as... she taught it as literature.  And I don't remember what we read that she taught as literature...  Henri Christophe and--
Speaker 1: Toussaint L'Ouverture.
Speaker 2: Toussaint L'Ouverture.
Speaker 1: Toussaint--
Speaker 2: She gave... yes, [Jean-Jacques] Dessalines, that's right, that's right.  And I didn't hear about them again until I went to Howard University [in Washington, D.C.]  and took a course from Dr. Rayford Logan, and that was one of his areas of specialization.  And then I learned the difference between [Alexandre] Petion, Dessalines, Henri Christophe, and Toussaint L'Ouverture.  And what a brilliant man he was.
Speaker 1: Now, I would suspect that that kind of education was special, and probably--
Speaker 2: I don't think we realized how special it was.  I don't think we realized until we were grown, what she gave us.
Story_ID: 73969
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were...  Now, what were your social activities like in high school?  Now, you were at an all girls' school [Morris College in Sumter, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to an all girls' school.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a, it was a--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: For boys and girls?
Speaker 2: It was co-educational.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to an all girls' school.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, that's my fault.  I assumed--
Speaker 2: No, that's alright.
Speaker 1: But, well, what was social life like at the school?  Did you... you know, did the students socialize?
Speaker 2: We had social, we had regular socials.  I don't remember whether they were every week or every month.  And you just sat and talked.  You'd go over to the chapel and the girls would come in, then later the boys would come in, and you'd play games.  And then on the special occasions, we'd have a grand march.  We did not dance.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  But you could march.
Speaker 2: You could march, we had a grand march.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for the graduating classes, you'd have a banquet.
Story_ID: 73970
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, when you were on the verge of graduation [from Morris College in Sumter South Carolina], did you know what you were going to do next?  Did you have an idea of whether you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew what I wanted to do next.  I wasn't going to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was going to be a journalist.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I was going to be a foreign correspondent for The New York Times.  My father [Robert James Jackson] looked at me...  Well, I was not going to major in education.  He said, "Well, why don't we do this?  Why don't we take the education courses enough to major in education, and then you can get a job and earn money and hopefully go on."  That made sense.  So, I majored in English.  I loved... from Miss [Bertha] Sawyer's classes... all forms of literature, and I graduated with a major in English.  My first job was in Andrews, South Carolina, about twenty-something miles from Georgetown [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: I just want to backtrack for a second about the journalist piece.  And I just want to know, were you inspired by any particular journalist, to... I mean was there some model you looked at?
Speaker 2: I wanted to write, I wanted to write.
Speaker 1: Because there were very few, even women, reporters.
Speaker 2: I know that.
Speaker 1: Yet alone, black women.
Speaker 2: I know that.  I wanted to write.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to write.  I was fascinated by words and by stories.
Speaker 1: There was a famous... there was one woman, Nellie Bly, I think it was, who wrote for The New York Times.
[VIDEOGRAPHER]:  Ida Tarbell.
Speaker 1: Ida Tarbell.  Okay, I just got another one, Ida Tarbell.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But did you read about them at all?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: During that period?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  That's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I wanted to do.  Now, before then we had a, I had a good English teacher in Morris College [Sumter South, Carolina].  And then we had a young woman who graduated from Emerson, from Philadelphia [Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts?], Grace Meara Postels, who came to this section to teach.  And she taught at South Carolina State [University in Orangeburg] at first.  And she flunked so many students, they let her go.  And then she came to Morris College as a kind of visiting teacher.  And I learned from her, it was from her that I first learned of Negro writers--of Phillis Wheatley, of (unclear).  And I came to love the literature, but she did not stay at Morris College; she left Morris.  I think she was more of just a visiting teacher.  But no, I did not know any journalists.  I wanted to be a journalist.  I could travel, I could go places to cover the news.  And I laugh now and say "thank God for parents."  Poor, country, unexposed, vulnerable, impressionable, country girl... I wouldn't have lasted two minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause right here and change the tape.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't have lasted.  It shows the kind of stuff that dreams are made of.  But it also shows the kind of stuff that parents are made of.
Story_ID: 73971
Speaker 1: So, at Morris College [in Sumter, South Carolina] you were exposed to black literature, you say, for the first time?
Speaker 2: No, not black literature for the first time.  But--
Speaker 1: Negro writers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Negro writers, as such.
Speaker 1: As such, okay.
Speaker 2: And I won't say for the first time.  But I was exposed in-depth because...  No, at Howard [School in Georgetown, South Carolina. Now Howard High School] we had had exposure.
Speaker 1: And so you decided you wanted to be a journalist, but you were kind of deferred by your parents, kind of deflected away from that?
Speaker 2: My father [Robert James Jackson] had no money to send me to journalism school.  But it was an idea that I kept before me, because I taught in Andrews [South Carolina] for two years--the fifth and sixth grade--and thoroughly enjoyed it.  But then I went to Washington [D.C.] to visit my aunt.  I had graduated from Morris in '36' [1936], and this would be '38' [1938].  And they had the NYA scholarships then, and I made application at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] for an NYA scholarship.  This was--
Speaker 1: The National Youth Administration?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Under [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And I received a scholarship and enrolled in Howard to major in History, because in getting the information from Columbia University [New York City, New York], the School of Journalism there, they suggested that I major in either History or Government.  And so, I chose History, and I changed from English to History.  And when I went to Howard to register, the girl, the woman in the registrar's office looked at me, "Hmm. Morris College?  That's not even a decent high school."  And she had married a young man from Sumter [South Carolina].  So, she had been in and out of Sumter, and I guess perhaps she worked at Howard University and really looked down her nose at Morris College.  But I did not recognize it when I told other people when I went back home what she had said--that they would react against her the way that they did if I would not have mentioned that she had said that.  But I was admitted, but I was given provisional admission.  I would have to show that I could do the work first.  I did not have the necessary courses in history to pursue a major in history, so I would have to take undergraduate courses to qualify as a history major.  And then on that, I could build a master's in history.  So, instead of getting the degree in one year, I got it in two years at Howard; I graduated in 1941.
Story_ID: 73972
Speaker 1: But after the first examination in the class, I got full admission to the graduate school because--I shall always remember it.  This was a class in the French Revolution, and I did not have any money to buy books.  So, what I would do, I would go to the congressional library [Library of Congress] and spend all day Saturday in the congressional library, go back again on Sunday and spend all day in the congressional library.  And of course, that to me was exciting and fun, the congressional library.  I didn't, I mean it didn't--it didn't even faze me that I didn't have books.  They had everything, and I could read whatever I wanted to read there, in addition to the fact that Howard University [Washington, D.C.] had a good library, and during the week, I would use the library at Howard University.  But that examination, the first examination in the class, when the professors gave our papers back, and this was in Dr. Logan's class, Dr. Rayford Logan's class, he taught that, the best mark in the class.  And he, from that moment I think he was impressed with me as a student.  And I don't know how my husband came.  I don't know whether Dr. Logan said I had the best mark in the class, or whether John sat next to me and saw that he'd written it, "The best mark in the class.  I've never had a woman to make a higher grade than I did in class."  I didn't say anything.  It wasn't necessary to say anything.  And he looked at me, and I looked at him.  And years later, we were married.  And years later, we were divorced.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: But that's how I, that's how I met John; I met John in the French Revolution.  But after that, I received a letter from the registrar's office saying that I had been given full admission to the graduate program at Howard.
Story_ID: 73973
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this.  Now, this is Howard.  During that time period, a lot of-
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: Dr. Rayford W. Logan was quite a person.  He was one of the, I guess mainstays of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [now called The Association for the Study of African American Life and History].
Speaker 2: I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Charles Wesley, Dr. Charles Wesley.  He was.
Speaker 2: He was?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Dr., well, Professor William Leo Hansberry was there, too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of these people, and what they were like?
Speaker 2: They were wonderful historians, that's one thing.  And I pinched myself daily, that I was there taking courses from them.  Dr. Hansberry was much admired and much respected, because he was one of the first Negroes to major in African History.  And I remember they used to always say he had done, gone to school in England.  But he was working towards a doctorate.  And the students kept saying that nobody knew enough to examine him.  And he was in a field all by himself, and he truly was.  He was a very modest man, very quiet, very easy to talk to--every inch a gentleman.  Dr. Logan was... oh Gosh, French and European History and International Relations.  Those things I learned to love and admire.  And he was an excellent historian.  Dr. Wesley... in American History.  So, each was in a different area.  And American History, I wasn't interested in American History.  I was interested in World History, I was interested in European History; I was interested in what went on around the world.  I felt it was a mistake to limit yourself to Negro History.  That was a mistake; that is not where you would learn.  You must look at all of mankind.  And it is only then that you can see the whole.  And I laugh at myself, now that I'm here with David Drayton, teaching this course in the History of the Negro in Georgetown County.  Because when I came back and they asked me to teach that, I didn't know it.  I knew history, but I did not know the specifics.  And David... so I told them that I would if David Drayton could teach it with me.  Because they have a group here that had been organized for the preservation of Negro History.  And David was the chairman of that board, and he was holding that group together, and they had been doing research.  So, that would really be his area.  We could integrate it, and that is what we have done.  But the reason that I even took it was because of my father [Robert James Jackson].  Because I remember my father always said, "Oh, if I were a young man," or "If I were a teacher, I would concentrate on the history of the Negro in this section.  It is so rich, and so un-told."  And it is; it truly, truly is.  But my interest was somewhere else.
Story_ID: 73974
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of the highlights of this history, of black people in Georgetown [South Carolina]?  What should we know about it?
Speaker 2: There is a great deal.  As slaves, they introduced the technology of rice planting.  The Europeans had not planted rice.  And when they were given rice to plant in this section, it was the Negroes who had had experience in planting rice for hundreds of years.  They had lived in fluvial societies near Senegal, and Gambia, and the Niger.  And they had been planting rice; they knew how to plant it.  They knew how to plant it in connection with irrigation, and they also knew how to plant--they also knew dry rice planting.  But what came to be predominant in Georgetown County was the rice planting that was adaptable to the rivers that are peculiar to this section.  We are at a, sort of a confluence of five rivers.  And those, the tides that go in and out, up and down the rivers, bring in fresh water.  And it was possible to use that fresh water for irrigating the rice.  They knew how to clear the swamps.  They knew how to build the dikes.  They knew when and how to irrigate.
Story_ID: 73975
Speaker 1: And Dr. [Charles] Joyner, who is perhaps the--I started to say quintessential historian of this section--and he's written a great deal about it.  He says that the contribution made by the Negroes to rice planting in this section was tantamount to the contribution made by the slaves that built the pyramids.  The planters came to know and understand that slaves from certain sections of Africa that knew about rice planting were very valuable to them.  So, then they asked the traders to bring the slaves from Senegal and Gambia; to bring the slaves from Libya and from Angola... to bring the slaves from Angola... because those people knew rice planting.  Now some will give the impression that all the slaves here were from those places.  They were not; they were just the preferred slaves.  And when they got here, they treated them as though they were valuable.  And the system of slavery was different from that in other sections.  In other sections, slaves would go out to work in gangs.  They didn't work in gangs in the rice fields.  They had what they called the task system.  And each slave was assigned a task, a task for that day.  And if you finished your task early, that was good.  Then the rest of the time, you could do what you wanted to do.  And in many instances, what they did they planted gardens; they raised animals.  And in some instances, the slave owners came to purchase the animals and certain vegetables and things that the slaves raised, from them.  But notice what that does.  It gives a sense of independence, a sense of self-reliance, a sense of self-respect and pride that you perhaps don't find in many sections where there was slavery.  And that exists until today, that special sense of self-worth.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So is that essentially the message of, you know, the history of, the African-American history of Georgetown?
Speaker 1: I won't say that is essentially the message; that is a part of the history.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: That is a part of the history.  That is one of the things that is distinctive.  Because, see, this county, Georgetown County--and you are not in Georgetown County, you are in Horry County [South Carolina] here.  But in Georgetown County, where there was a great deal of rice grown, it was different; it was very different.
Story_ID: 73976
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened in Georgetown County [South Carolina] during Reconstruction?  Were there any, I mean what were there?
Speaker 2: Many things happened in Georgetown.  First, the large plantations required large numbers of people to work on them.  And slave owners owned slaves from one to more than a thousand slaves.  Some slave owners owned more than one plantation.  Consequently, the population ratio in Georgetown was nine to one.  There were nine Negroes to every one white--very...  And recognized then that in group control, the people in charge of government would have to always make sure that they controlled in the subtle ways in which they did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What methods did they used to control?  The population was like ten times larger, nine times larger than theirs.
Speaker 2: I was reading a letter that one of the plantation owners wrote to other plantation owners.  I'm told it was very easy.  All you had to do was pit one group against the other group.  All you had to do was sow distrust of Negroes to distrust a Negro.  And that took care of it.  And of course, that's very easily done in a section where one of the most important things is class, whether you are white, black, blue or pink.  And in the South, class is the thing.  You belong to a particular class, so that makes you better than other people.  That makes you superior to other people.  But... divide.
Speaker 1: Basically, you're saying through psychological means rather than, I mean, physical means?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now not... don't oversimplify it, though.  I think sometimes we tend to oversimplify.  That's one of the things that Dr. [Rayford W.] Logan used to always say to us, "Do not oversimplify.  And don't make a generalization where there is not a generalization."  But don't oversimplify.  Because in the end, the fabric of history is complicated--very.
Story_ID: 73977
Speaker 1: Now, you left Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].  When you left Howard where did, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: When I left Howard, I worked in the government; that was the war years.  I worked for the Office of Dependency Benefits, and that agency moved... in the War Department... and that agency moved to Newark [New Jersey].  So, I went to Newark.  And I was married in New Jersey.  And we lived in Montclair at first, and lived in Jersey City, Mayor [Frank] Hague's town.  And I stopped working after my son was born.  And then when I went back to work, John and I were offered work at Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina].  And we went to Morris College, and he did not have a master's degree at that time.  So we went back to Washington [D.C.], and Dr. [Rayford W.] Logan gave me a position as a lecturer in History.  And at first I taught part-time.  And then the second semester, I taught full-time.  And John got his master's degree in Political Science.  And after getting his master's degree in Political Science, we did not go back to Morris College; he went to New York.  He was always interested in labor, and he worked for the Political Actions Committee of the CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations].  And we went our separate ways; I wasn't interested in labor.  But more importantly than that, he was traveling all over the country meeting these fascinating women... and da, da, da, da, da... and we were divorced.  And after we were divorced, that's when I went to NYU [New York University], because I had to decide how I was going to support my son.  And I felt that the community of a life that I knew was that of living in boarding schools, and that I would prepare myself for college teaching and hopefully work toward a doctorate in History.  I worked in the Bursar's Collection Office at NYU, and they had a program of tuition remission at NYU.  If you were an employee of the University, you could take two courses free.
Story_ID: 73978
Speaker 1: So, I worked in the Bursar's Office [at New York University] from nine to five, and went to school from six to ten.  And I enjoyed it, it was fun.  But I was deeply concerned, because I was separated from my son; he was at home with my family during that time.  Fortunately, I lived at the Judson.  The Judson was a residence hall for students at NYU, and it was right there at Washington Square.  And one night when I came home from class, I had a telegram from an ex-classmate of mine at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] offering me a job as Dean of Women and teacher of Social Science.  And I got in touch with my father [Robert James Jackson].  I didn't, I was just, you know, making enough money to keep myself going.  And he sent me money to go from New York to Texas, to Butler College [Tyler, Texas].  And my aunt had a friend who worked at the airport, so I got a reduced ticket on his pass and flew out of New York on a night flight and got to Dallas, Texas early in the morning.  And they met me in Dallas and drove me from Dallas to Tyler, Texas, where I was to teach.
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 1: That's one of the things I was forgetting, the years.  Butler, 1952.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I stayed at Butler from 1952 to 1954.  And then I resigned, because I was not in a situation there to which I could take my son, and I came home to get him.  And I taught English a year at the Howard High School in Georgetown [South Carolina].  And then I got another telegram from Texas offering me a position at Jarvis Christian College in Hawkins, Texas as Director of Student Life and instructor in Social Science.  And I took that, because instruction and Social Science would include the History.  And I taught there on, let's see... I taught at Jarvis from 1955 to 1958.  And the latter part of teaching at Jarvis Christian College, I had given up being Director of Student Life because I only really wanted to teach.  And in 1958, I moved from Jarvis Christian College to Texas College in Tyler, to teach History.  And I stayed there from '58' [1958] to 1963.  And in 1963, I went to Prairie View A and M, that was at that time Prairie View A and M College [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College in Prairie View, Texas], and later became Prairie View A and M University.  But I stayed there until I retired in 1979.  So, you see, I was really in Texas from 1952 until 1988.  I retired from Prairie View in '79' [1979], but I stayed in Texas.  And I taught for a time at the Houston Community College after retirement.  And then in 1988, I came back to South Carolina.
Story_ID: 73979
Speaker 1: So, what are the highlights of your teaching career?  Do you have any... is there anything that really sticks out?  Any--?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed teaching, because I was always learning.  I enjoyed teaching because it brought me in contact with people, and I learned people.  And I think I grew up in teaching.  And I am very grateful that my father [Robert James Jackson] made the suggestion that he did, and very grateful that I did not have the opportunities to become the foreign correspondent for The New York Times; it could not have been as exciting as teaching.  I've enjoyed everywhere that I have lived.  I've met wonderful people, and in some instances have made very good friends.  The course...  I've taught... I laugh and say I grew up in a time when having a master's degree--at first for employment--the only thing they looked at was that you had the degree, and I did not always teach in my field.  I remember when I went to Butler College [Tyler, Texas], on one occasion... what did I teach?  Public speaking.  What did I know about public speaking?  And I remember when I went to Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College in Prairie View, Texas] to teach--it was either Prairie View or Butler.  They wanted to give me Statistics.  No way.  Now that's when I really put my foot down.  Now, government, I didn't mind.  There was enough relationship between government and History to...  And I welcomed those experiences, because for me they became learning experiences.  But the only thing that I ever really refused to teach was Statistics.  I... no, no.  No, no.  But I've taught English, History... and while I was at Prairie View, I went back to school at California State University when I was fifty-eight, and earned a master's degree in Geography.  I love geography, because I always felt that you could never teach history without geography.  The setting and time and the place to a considerable extent, determine what happens there.  But the course that I enjoyed the most teaching was World History.  And I feel it's unfortunate that we do not teach more of that.  And I realize there's a great deal of research that needs to be done there, and I just wish I could live long enough to work at that.  That is really the love of my life.  All over the world man is intelligent, and has built civilizations, wherever he is, that reflect his geography, reflect what he comes to know.  And that is just a part of the history of mankind.  But we need to know the whole of the history of mankind before we can come to live in peace and with respect and appreciation for each other.  What we are taught, and how we are taught are very important.  And if we limit and continuously limit, we become smaller and smaller, and we need to become larger and larger.  And I would make World History one of the required courses in the general education of all students.  And I know they'd want to shoot me.
Speaker 1: Why would they want to shoot you?
Speaker 2: Students frequently don't like history.  And sometimes they don't because we have taught dates.  And dates are important, but they're only relatively important; it's the incidence and the quality of what is at a place, or what happens at a place that is important.
Story_ID: 73980
Speaker 1: Well, who are some of your favorite historical figures or, what do you... what people do you think are really... or what movements had made a dramatic impact?
Speaker 2: For the United States, I think [President] Thomas Jefferson, he was truly a thinker.  He has given us much and left us much as an American people.  I... the same thing with [President] Woodrow Wilson, his espousal of the League of Nations, reaching out and recognizing that we must come to know and live with respect for each other.  And Roosevelt.  I like [President] Lyndon Johnson.  I lived in Texas... and the growth and the development on his part, and what he contributed to American history when he became President.  On the American scene [sic, international], John Locke, for what he gave and contributed to the American thought.  It's strange you should ask me that question.
Speaker 1: I think your answers are interesting inasmuch as, say, a man like Wilson who had this broad global view.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, installed "black" and "white" signs over fountains and restrooms in the White House.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And the--
Speaker 2: That didn't detract from what he did.  That did not detract--
Speaker 1: The [Klu Klux] Klan rose to its greatest height under the presidency of Woodrow Wilson.
Speaker 2: It still did not take a thing away from what he gave that was positive and constructive.  And it shows another thing, I think that is so important.  As individuals, we have the limitation of being human.  No single individual is the whole and total, but it is as we come together that we make a whole, and that we perfect a whole.  And there are others who would say, "Why Thomas Jefferson... don't you remember Sally Hemings?"  Yes.  That didn't have a thing to do with the quality of what he made for America, not a thing.
Speaker 1: Some would argue otherwise.
Speaker 2: Well, that's their point of view, they won't change me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's their point of view.
Story_ID: 73981
Speaker 1: You see, I think the unfortunate thing with us sometimes... I think it's so unfortunate that Negroes think so negatively, and think only of what they see is being done to them.  They don't turn around and look and examine the societies and the civilization that came to be in Africa, and notice the shortcomings there.  They are no more perfect than any other men.  And they've been no better to themselves and to other men than other men have been to them and to themselves.  We're all made of the same human stuff.  We all react the same way under the same circumstances and conditions.  And we all have the same challenge, to perfect our humanness, and to develop our spirituality.  But as long as we can... "Look what they did to me, look what they took from me."  Nobody ever took anything from you that had that had.  They can't.
Speaker 2: Why would you say that black people look at the world negatively?
Speaker 1: No, I said it's unfortunate that Negroes, some Negroes--and let me very clearly say some are very negative in their thinking.  Every time you evaluate something, you evaluate it in relationship to what happened, or did not happen to Negroes at that time.  A man with a thought and with a vision that [President Woodrow] Wilson had...  And you say "the Ku Klux Klan thrived under him."  Why... I mean why would you use that to evaluate when you're thinking in terms of the League of Nations, when you're coming to the point that you realize that if you're going to establish world peace then you must include all men?  And then as you attempt to include all men, you find sometimes you're not big enough yet to include all men; you don't know enough yet to include all men.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would agree that he probably didn't know enough to include all men.
Speaker 1: That he didn't know enough?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He couldn't include them here.  I mean that would be my point of view.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: Not just mine, a lot of people would conclude that, I think.  But do you think it's wrong for black people to have, to look at history through their own eyes?
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean when you say "their own eyes?"  What are their own eyes?
Speaker 2: Well, through their own experience.
Speaker 1: What is their own experience?
Speaker 2: A few minutes ago you said that you think it's wrong for Negroes, as you say, to judge the world through their experiences.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't quite say it like that.  I said to have such negative expressions, as though the perfection must come from somebody else in relationship to them.  We have as much responsibility to perfect as the other person has.  Do you know how we got here?  Because Negroes sold us as slaves.  The Negroes--
Speaker 2: Doesn't conference require two people?  You have to have a seller and a buyer.
Speaker 1: But see how you quibble when you get on, when you get to certain questions.  Yes--
Speaker 2: Were they first for sale, or did someone come looking for them?  Were there signs up in Africa that advertised slaves for sale?
Speaker 1: In an illiterate culture, would you ask such a question?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were some that could write.  There were libraries at Timbuktu, and Mali, and other--
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: And in what language?
Speaker 2: From the tenth century on, and they were written in classical Arabic.
Speaker 1: I know that.  But the question again is when, and in what language in classical Arabic?  Who's coming in impacting them?  Who's... when we... the slavery, we're thinking about--the European-speaking people.  But then you forget to add that the great slave traders in Africa were the Muslims, the Arabic.  We don't, we don't... we act like that doesn't even exist.  We've got responsibility, too.
Speaker 2: Are we the... are you saying that we're the Muslims, too?  Are we, which ones are we?
Speaker 1: We are... we were, we were sinned against by the Muslims. They conquered Africa, as you know, particularly North Africa, and imposed upon them their language and their culture.
Story_ID: 73982
Speaker 1: And then when we speak of highly developed cultures, the base in many instances is Islamic.  And many of the slaves who came here were... had been converted to the Muslim religion, to the Islamic religion, many of them.  We don't... we know in pieces.  We don't have a whole cloth.  We don't go to the Arabic and read what they said.
Speaker 2: Well, some don't, some do.
Speaker 1: Who...  But... who do?
Speaker 2: There are many who do, but they're not written by those you do, you know.
Speaker 1: Not that many, though.  See, they don't become a part of the fabric of our education.  And I'm speaking of education in the United States.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not... well, all I'm saying is that there are men as you well know, like William Leo Hansberry, who read enough African history to be able to give us, you know, information.  I mean not just--
Speaker 1: An introduction--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --Crowe.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Not in-depth.  He didn't live long enough to know all that needs to be known and presented about Africa.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that about any one person, but he and others have--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --done enough for us to know some things that are--you know, in terms of-- he certainly read the English translations, and perhaps even the French translations.
Speaker 1: English translations.  Much is lost in translations.
Speaker 2: The Arabic works of the, you know, from the 10th through the, you know, 19th century.
Speaker 1: Much is lost in translation.
Speaker 2: Well, that's all... you know, that can be said for anything.
Speaker 1: That is true.  That is very true.  That is very true.  But don't always present ourselves as being sinned against by everybody else.  That's not true.
Speaker 2: But we should never point out the sins of those who--?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, I didn't say that.  I did not say that.  Wrong is wrong, wrong is wrong.  And we do as much wrong as others.
Speaker 2: Well, shouldn't we look at the sins of a man like [President Woodrow] Wilson or [President Thomas] Jefferson?
Speaker 1: The sins of a man are the misunderstanding of the inadequate education.  And then we're coming back and using the same kind of argument that you use; you can find that true of everybody.
Speaker 2: Perhaps.
Speaker 1: No one man is that perfect.
Speaker 2: I don't think anybody told you that you couldn't, but I--
Speaker 1: I didn't say you would not look at what the--no, no, I never said that.  What I'm looking at is that which is positive, and that which is good, and that which has contributed to making us what we are.
Speaker 2: What 'we' are?
Speaker 1: The American people is the 'we' I'm referring to, the American people.
Speaker 2: Which includes us.
Speaker 1: Would you exclude us, could you?
Speaker 2: Others have.
Speaker 1: I didn't say that.  I'm not responsible for others.  I'm asking you, would you exclude us?
Speaker 2: I don't have the power to exclude us.
Speaker 1: Would you exclude us?
Speaker 2: I'm saying--
Speaker 1: We are, we are, we are also the American people; that which is distinctly American is also us.
Speaker 2: But not always not full participants, would you agree with that?
Speaker 1: Is there any society in which everyone is a full participant?  I think if you look at any, at any group, you see the many fragments and the many different positions and--
Speaker 2: Well, those who are architects of those societies make sure that certain people are the full participants.  Would you agree with that?
Speaker 1: No, I don't agree with you.
Speaker 2: So, you don't agree that--
Speaker 1: I don't agree with you.
Speaker 2: A man like Jefferson was probably making sure that this world was democratic for some, and not everyone.  Or, that a man like Wilson was saving the world for democracy for certain people and not all people.
Speaker 1: No, I'm not going to say that.  I'm not going to say that.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm just asking.
Speaker 1: I'm not going to say that.  I'm not going to say that.
Story_ID: 73983
Speaker 1: So, when you look back on your career as a history teacher and what you tried to do, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope I taught history objectively; that I think it's inexcusable not to teach history objectively.  I don't think it should ever be taught subjectively.  I think the position, the place of each group must be included.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I think what you want to present is the whole, the whole of what mankind is at a particular time and a particular place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father [Robert James Jackson] get a chance to see you become a successful history teacher?  And--
Speaker 2: My father, when my father died, I was teaching at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College in Prairie View, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he happy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  You would have to know my father.  Was he happy?  I don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He wanted us to be independent, self-sufficient.  And I remember when my husband and I separated, and I was living in New Jersey.  And I wrote and told Papa.  You know what his advice to me was?  He said, "Be a woman.  I reared all of my daughters to be ladies."  In other words, "That is something you will have to work out for yourself.  But however you work it out, remember I reared you to be a lady, and I expect you to be womanly."  I didn't go crying home to my father.  He didn't beat up on my husband.  He remained friends with him for as long as he lived.
Story_ID: 73984
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a question that's slightly different from legacy.  But how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: However people see me.  You don't decide how you're going to be remembered, none of us do.  You really don't know what people think of you.  That has been such a surprising thing to me.  As students have come back and have taught what they have remembered and what they have taken, is not what I thought in many instances that I was giving or sharing.  And you will be remembered as people perceive you, only as people perceive you, and you don't determine that; you really don't.  So, however they see me, however they perceive me, that will be how they remember me.  I'm not making a pitch for a certain kind of representation.  The only thing that I say is history must be objectively taught, and it must be taught of all men under all circumstances and conditions.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome very much.
Story_ID: 73985
Speaker 1: Okay, that is my son and my granddaughter.  We are at Carolina Coastal University [Conway, South Carolina] attending a reception given for Bishop Tutu.  Where's Sallie?  Sallie, when was that?  I don't remember the year.
Speaker 2: Do you know the approximate year, the decade?
Speaker 1: I think it was 2000.
Speaker 2: Does that sound right, 2000?
Speaker 1: I think so, I think so.
Speaker 2: Great, next photo please.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Robert James Jackson.
Speaker 2: Would you be able to venture a date for this, or an approximate date?
Speaker 1: No, I won't, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That's alright.  I appreciate that you only want to be accurate.  Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: Now, that is when Carolina Coastal University honored me and the mother of the young man who's on this end as educators, and planted a tree on the campus of Carolina Coastal for each of us.  Now, that is my son to my right.
Speaker 2: Go from left to right.
Speaker 1: My son, and then the next is me.  The next is Dr. Stacy Cretzmeyer, who spearheaded the program.  And the next is Mrs. Forsythe's son.
Speaker 2: Accepting on her behalf?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right, accepting on her behalf.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And can we tax you to give us the spelling for Cretzmeyer?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  We'll give you the spelling.
Speaker 2: Okay, can you do that now on tape?  We--
Speaker 1: Oh, you want it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll extract it now.
Speaker 1: Cretzmeyer, C-R-E-T-Z-M-E-Y-E-R.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.  Next, thank you.
Speaker 1: And that is the same occasion.  I'm standing speaking after he--may I see that other one?  There's another picture you've got there.  Yeah, this one.  Well, this is the president of the University.  And Sallie, please spell his name for them.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Dr. Ron Ingle, I-N-G-L-E, president of Coastal Carolina University.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What date this take place, if you recall?
Speaker 1: Please pass me that blue folder that I have.  I have a letter in there.  March 27, 2001.
Speaker 2: Excellent, okay.
Speaker 1: I was just speaking to a group on Gullah, the distinctive culture in this section, that's all.  Now, that's enough pictures, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Well, it could be, I guess, I don't know. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, very good, next.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was an interview that was done by Chip Smith, isn't it?  Right there, the by-line.
Speaker 1: I don't see it up here.
Speaker 2: You don't--
Speaker 1: Chip Smith is, yeah, the photo is by Chip Smith.
Speaker 2: Well, that's Chip Smith.  It's just a, just an interview done by Chip Smith.
Speaker 1: Alright, we've got it.  That's it.
Speaker 2: That's--Thank you.
