Story_ID: 228553
Speaker 1: Today we're privileged to have the opportunity to interview [HistoryMaker] Ambassador Andrew Young.  Today's date, of course is--well, I'll ask the mayor to give, the ambassador to give us the date, but letting you know who's in the room.  My name is Ed Anderson.  I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is our videographer.  Also accompanying us in the room is Larry Crowe, also an interviewer.  Adrian Jackson is with us.  He's a videographer, and Janelle Jennings is with us as well.  She's with the Atlanta [Georgia] office of [The] HistoryMakers.  Mayor Young, for the record, I just would like, if you would, to restate your entire name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Andrew Jackson Young, Jr., A-N-D-R-E-W, capital J-A-C-K-S-O-N, capital Y-O-U-N-G.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is March 12th, 1932.
Speaker 1: State today's date and our present location, please?
Speaker 2: Well, we're at 515 Auburn Avenue, which is right down, next door to where [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was born.  And I think it's August the 26th--19--I mean 2005 [sic. August 27, 2005].
Speaker 1: I think you're right.  I couldn't think of the date a second ago when I asked.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 228554
Speaker 1: We'll start by talking about family history, starting with your mom and her side of the family, then your dad [Andrew Young, Sr.] and his side of the family.  Would you state your mother's name, her date of birth and place of birth, please?
Speaker 2: My mother was Daisy Valentina Fuller, and she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], May 29, I think 1904.  And she was one of about eleven children.  She was the youngest.  My grandmother, Louisa Valentina Fuller, really was born of a slave in New Orleans.  And her maiden name was Czarnowski.  And evidently, there was a Polish captain of a ship that fathered my grandmother and set her mother free, and actually left them some significant property around New Orleans which was taken from them because they didn't recognize slaves' right to property, even ex-slaves had a hard time holding onto their property rights.  I don't know much about my grandfather [Joseph Fuller] because he was, well, he was a sort of a rounder that--a rolling stone that probably was involved in gambling and illicit activities that were not discussed around children.  But he and my grandmother had six children.  But my grandmother took in five more children that were not hers.  And so my mother was part of a very big family that survived essentially by being very close.  And my Uncle Walter, who was the brother just next to my mother, Walter Fuller, left school in the fourth grade to work in order that my mother might stay in school and go on and eventually get a teacher's certificate at Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Very well, sir.  Could you spell the name of your grandmother, Czarnowski, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was C-Z-A-R-N-O-W-S-K-I.
Speaker 1: And her place of birth, and tell us a little more?
Speaker 2: All of them were from New Orleans.
Speaker 1: All from New Orleans.
Speaker 2: All of my mother's side was right there in New Orleans, and, of course, the New Orleans culture was very complex.  It was both cosmopolitan and segregated.  I didn't know this then, but I learned later on that around the time of the Battle of New Orleans, [President] Andrew Jackson assembled an army of slaves, Native Americans, indentured white servants and anybody that would be willing to fight to defend New Orleans, and guaranteed them property after the war.  And that was the way that my father's side, I think, achieved some property in Franklin, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 228555
Speaker 1: Your mom's [Daisy Fuller Young] first name was Daisy.
Speaker 2: My mother's first name was Daisy.
Speaker 1: Wanna ensure that we have the correct spelling on that.
Speaker 2: D-A-I-S-Y.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit more about her as a person, her influence on your life, as well as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she was from a big family that--and actually, she and my grandmother [Louisa Fuller] together and all of my aunts and uncles--I was very fortunate in some ways in that none of them hardly had young children when I was growing up.  So I was raised by a village.  My aunt, my Aunt Emma [ph.] had one child, but he was grown.  My Aunt Mae [ph.] had no children.  My Aunt Teenie, Floristine [ph.] who was an adopted aunt, had no children.  My Aunt Norma [ph.] eventually had children, but when I was growing up, she was, no children.  And my Uncle Johnny [Fuller] had no children.  My Uncle Walter [Fuller] had no children.  So all of that attention and affection was focused on me, and I was probably spoiled rotten.  But I don't--as my wife [Carolyn Watson] says, I was spoiled, but never selfish, that where my parents grew up was right in the heart of-- where I was born was right in the heart of New Orleans [Louisiana].  And it was where, not far from where my mother was born, Cleveland Avenue near Galvez [Street].  And it was quite a mixed neighborhood.  It was, there was an Irish grocery store on one corner, an Italian bar on another corner, the German American Bund on the third corner, and the back of a Chevrolet dealership on the fourth corner.  And I was born right in the middle.  There were other black families in that neighborhood, but not many black children.  And it was where my mother grew up also.  And my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] practiced dentistry, and his office was right there in the middle of that neighborhood--
Story_ID: 228556
Speaker 1: Did you personally get to know your mother's [Daisy Fuller Young] mother and father?
Speaker 2: I knew my mother's mother, and my mother's mother lived with us until I was fourteen.  And she was Louisa Valentine Fuller [sic. Louisa Valentina Fuller].
Speaker 1: In your conservations with her, could you relate some stories she may have related to you or some of the principles that she may help instill in you?
Speaker 2: Well, she was, she began losing her sight when she was about seventy-five, about the time I was born.  And she lived until she was eighty-eight.  And during those years--well, she was always a very hard worker.  I mean she had to keep everything clean.  If, when she finished cleaning the house, she cleaned the house and she swept the street in the front and, I mean everything was spotless.  And as she began to lose her sight, it was my job to read the Bible and the newspaper to her.  So I got a kind of a running commentary on everything that was going on.  Her view was a very religious view of life, and she felt that she was getting old.  She didn't wanna be a burden, and she almost every day fussed with God about leaving her here as a burden on these children.  And she was ready to go on home to claim her reward because she had been, she'd been faithful.  She had a reputation of never turning anybody away.  I was born right on the end of the [Great] Depression.  And we were about four or five--four, four blocks from the railroad track.  And in those days we had hobos riding the rails.  Well, they would evidently tell each other because there was always somebody coming by our house asking for something to eat.  And she never turned anybody away.  One of the stories I remember was that we always had these long loaves of French bread.  And we had, one day we had nothing but green beans.  And so my grandmother slices a pretty good sized loaf and filled it full of green beans.  And the guy was saying, "Rich folks like y'all have meat every day.  How come you don't give me some meat?" (Laughter)  And she said, "No, we're not rich.  We give you what we eat, and if you don't want it, you don't have to come back."  But there was always a welcome to anybody.  Nobody was ever turned away.  And whatever we had, we shared.
Speaker 1: So God called Grandma Louisa home at age eighty-eight.  Do you recall what year that was?
Speaker 2: It was about 1946 if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: So you had several years with her before her passing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And I got--well, one thing, she wouldn't let my daddy [Andrew Young, Sr.] whip me.  So he would, that was a great--'cause he had a razor strap, and my brother [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] and I never were that bad, but we always ended up fussing and fighting over who was gonna wash the dishes, who was gonna clean the yard, who was gonna--you know, over chores.  And it--I had a permanent ally in her.  And, but she didn't let us, she wouldn't protect us in the street.  If we got in any trouble in the street, particularly in a neighborhood where we were the only white--only black children, if somebody called you a nigger, you had to fight.  If somebody picked on my little brother, I had to fight.  And it didn't matter whether you won or not, but you had to fight.  And don't come in here crying 'cause if you come in here crying, I'm gonna beat you.  So it was one of those tough love kinda upbringings.
Story_ID: 228557
Speaker 1: And fortunately--but when it came to dealing with racism, and that was probably more my father [Andrew Young, Sr.], but the German American Bund on the corner was Heiling [Adolf] Hitler.  I mean there were swastikas that I--there was no air conditioning, so everybody had to keep the windows open.  So--and I had an aunt that lived two years beyond the German American Bund, and coming from her house on a Saturday evening, we'd hear these folks singing, "Deutschland uber alles" and "Heil Hitler" and I guess at four--three or four, five years old, I--my parents had to explain what--racism to me.  And my father was very, always very rational and he, his view was that these were sick people, and you don't get angry with sick people.  His advice all the time was, "Don't get mad, get smart."
Speaker 2: "Don't get mad, get smart."
Speaker 1: Yeah, if you're in a fight and lose your temper, you're gonna lose the fight.
Speaker 2: I think you have a chapter in your book entitled "Don't get mad, get smart."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Advice that you've adhered to all your life.
Speaker 1: Pretty much, and my grandmother [Louisa Fuller] was always--how blessed we were.  And "To them to whom much has been given, of them will much be required." [Luke 12:48]  And even though by any objective standard, we were poor and there was no money, she always sat on the front porch and greeted everybody.  She always put a nickel or a dime on the lottery, and every now and then if she won, immediately, she'd divide up the money with me and my brother and tell us we had to save.  So we had lessons in hard work and pride and self-respect.
Story_ID: 228558
Speaker 1: You mentioned that her [Young's grandmother, Louisa Fuller] husband was a businessman of sorts.  What was his name and tell us a little bit more about him if you would?
Speaker 2: His name was Joseph Fuller.  And I don't know much about him.  As I said, they never talked about him very much because he was--well, he, I guess he was dead by the time I was born.  But he didn't contribute much to the family.  And it was my grandmother's organizing my Uncle Walter [Fuller] and my Uncle Johnny [Fuller], and putting them to work as children, ten, twelve years old, that they found ways to support the family.  She had been a property owner though, and I never got the impression that--I never got the impression that she ever felt that she was deprived or poor.  Evidently, in losing--as a child she evidently knew of the property that had been left to her mother and understood that the lawyers had beat her mother out of that property.  It's property right up in the middle of New Orleans [Louisiana] now, in the Garden District around Robert E. Lee Circle and St. Charles Avenue.  And when we would ride up that way--I went to high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] up that way.  She would tell me that that was all our property before they took it from her mother, I guess it was.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother, again, was the daughter of a person whose last name was Czarnowski, who I think you describe in your book as a Polish person?
Speaker 2: I just assumed it was Polish because that's a Polish-sounding name.  He was in the shipping business, and whether he was a captain of a ship or a owner of a shipping line or something, but he was evidently very good to my great-grandmother.  And, that was a custom in those days.  The--in those days, the men who came to New Orleans from Europe usually picked wives from amongst the orphans in the Catholic church, and it was--well, you still see the Pontalba Apartments [Pontalba Buildings, New Orleans, Louisiana] around Jackson Square in New Orleans where these were apartments that were set up for the New World wives and families of men who, businessmen, who came from Europe.  So that would make my mother's [Daisy Fuller Young] side of the family Creole.  She had long, I mean her hair was all the way down below her--I mean she sat on her hair, and she always attributed that to some Indian [Native American] background.  But I never knew--she looked Native American.  But I never knew the details of that, and--except that later on in reading, I realized that in New Orleans particularly, and around New Orleans, one of the places that the slaves escaped to was to the Indian villages.  And they integrated into the Indian tribes to escape slavery.  And so there was a lot of mixing of traditions and cultures.  New Orleans was one of the places that never lost its African voodoo heritage.  So I heard a lot of folklore.  But my parents and even my grandmother considered all of that ignorance.  And they didn't talk about that too much.  That was something--well, I guess it was my mother and father [Andrew Young, Sr.] who never, never allowed any of their aunts and uncles to pass on any of that so-called superstition to us.
Story_ID: 228559
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear your grandmother [Louisa Fuller] talk much about her personal interaction with her father?
Speaker 2: No, and I don't think that she really knew her father.  I think that she, I think she was born and lived with her mother who evidently had enough money to care for her.  But she never had--she worked around the home.  She never worked for white people.  And they would, they were protected from the harshness of domestic service and had a great appreciation for education.  She'd been born a Catholic, but when the Congregational church organized a school, she became a member of the Congregational church.  This was a New England church that after the Civil War, established a number of schools and colleges, Howard University [Washington, D.C,], Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was Straight College in New Orleans [Louisiana], which is now Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And there were--Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and she became a member of the Congregational church because she wanted her children to go to school.  And my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] was the only one really to get an opportunity to go to school, though the others were all--the other thing about my mother's side of the family, most of the children that she adopted ended up passing for white.  And they couldn't get jobs as blacks or as Creoles.  They didn't have a lot of education, but they were bright kids and worked hard, and I can remember as a teenager going into Rubenstein Brothers store [Rubensteins, New Orleans, Louisiana], and my mother telling me we shouldn't go in there because one of her brothers was in there passing and had become an assistant manager or manager of the store.  But we had nothing--he might speak to my mother if she were alone or to my, one of my other aunts.  But when I was around, that made it obviously--well, almost everybody in my family but me on my mother's side, could--was very fair skinned and could get by, passing for white if they had to.
Story_ID: 228560
Speaker 1: On my father's [Andrew Young, Sr.] side, he was born in Franklin, Louisiana.  And--
Speaker 2: And in what year was that, sir, approximately?
Speaker 1: He was born in 1896.
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-six [1896], all right.
Speaker 1: And March 24th.  And his father [Frank Young] was a very interesting fellow whom I knew but never talked to very much.  But the [HistoryMaker] Reverend Gardner Taylor, when I met him as a new member of [U.S.] Congress, he said something very interesting to me.  He said, "You Frank Young's grandson?"  And I said, "Yeah, that's right."  And he said, "Well, you still got to go some to catch up with your granddaddy."  He said, "'Cause he did more with nothing."  And what it was I--I never have tracked him down or sit him down to talk in detail.  But he was preaching in a little Baptist church near where my grandfather was.  And my grandfather had a reputation for being an honest businessman.  And he was the treasurer for four different burial societies and Masonic lodges and all of this kind of stuff.  He kept everybody's money so that he had millions of dollars on account in a bank in Franklin, Louisiana.  And one of the stories I heard was that why my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] never suffered any indignities that, he had some trouble with a sheriff one time.  And instead of complaining, and he just went to the bank and told the banker that he wanted to move his account, transfer his account to New Orleans [Louisiana].  Well, he was probably the largest, had probably the largest account in the bank in that little town.  He was one of these Reconstruction postmasters.  He lived right by the railroad track.  He had to get the mail as the train passed, and see to it that it went to the post office and was delivered.  But, and he had been educated in a little Methodist mission and had been a teacher.  But in addition to these businesses, he had these bank accounts.  He had a grocery store and a pool hall, and was quite an entrepreneur evidently.
Speaker 2: Apparently, a negotiator as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 228561
Speaker 1: I'm really not sure when my [paternal] grandfather was born.  I would estimate, though, that he was probably a mature, thirty to forty year old when he married.  And if my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] was born in 1896, he was probably born around the time of the Civil War, in the 1860s.  I don't know anything about his father.  His name was--my grandfather was Frank Smith Young.  And he had some education, and one of the stories I used to hear about him also was with Huey Long, when there were no black nurses when they built the Charity Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And my grandfather and a delegation of black citizens went to visit Governor Long.  And he promised them that he would have black nurses in that hospital with thirty days.  And they thought he was pulling their leg, and, but the next day he got up in the legislature and started talking about the southern white woman is the fairest flower on God's earth.  And it grieved him to no end that these wonderful white women had to take care of these big, black burly niggers in the Charity Hospital.  And he needed money immediately to produce, to get some Negro women to take care of these big, black bucks, which I gather was around the time of the First World War [World War I, WWI].  And that would have been 1914 [sic.], but that was the way things operated.  And they were survivors.  They were educated.  They were cool under pressure.  I remember my father being stopped by a policeman for running a stop sign.  And the policeman did everything he could to make him lie or get upset.  And my father said, "No, I shifted from third to second, and I really should have come to a full stop."  And when he saw his license and it said, Dr. Young, he said, "Are you on the way to make a house call or to the hospital?"  He said, "No, I'm taking my family to a movie."  And my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] was nervous about him not wanting to get a ticket, 'cause she was the one that counted the pennies in the family.  But my father wouldn't stretch the truth, wouldn't take any way out.  And he said, "The only thing you have is your self-respect.  And you can't put a price on that.  And if I have to pay a ticket for that or even go to jail, so be it."  He was really a stickler for that kind of morality and truth telling.  I got the wrong change one time in the drugs- in the grocery store.  And it was about four blocks away.  And I came back bragging that I had given the guy five dollars and he gave me back change for a ten.  And my daddy started taking off his belt and said, "You got five minutes to get back there and apologize."  So I said, "It was his mistake."  He said, "Yeah, but you, you knew it, and you did not point it out, see."  And as he was taking off his belt, he looked at his watch, and he meant for me to run, not take my time.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And, that was the rigid--it was the only thing he was rigid about was being truthful and being honest and maintaining your integrity as a human being.  And no matter what price you had to pay, there were no shortcuts in that.
Story_ID: 228562
Speaker 1: Throughout your book, you refer to your father [Andrew Young, Sr.], as do most southern black men of your generation and mine, as "Daddy."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, obviously, you learned many lessons from him, and it appears from your [paternal] grandfather [Frank Smith Young] as well.  First share with us your grandfather's wife's name, and tell us a little bit more about the lessons you learned from "daddy" and granddaddy.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was married to a Miss Hattie Epps.  She was from Georgia, from Athens, Georgia.  And he met her here in Atlanta [Georgia].  They were in the funeral business.  And her family was, and he came to Atlanta on business and met this girl and immediately asked to marry her and took her back to Louisiana.  And that's why I think he was probably, you know, in his thirties when he married, 'cause he was already pretty well established and pretty--an undertaker in Georgia would not let his daughter go all the way to Louisiana with somebody who wasn't pretty well-respected and secure.  She died in childbirth.  My father had three sisters.  He was the oldest, but she died in childbirth with the last child, and so I didn't really ever know her.  But her sister came to help him take care of the children, and he ended up marrying the sister which I--and we always called her Aunt Mag [Maggie Epps Young].  But there was never--well, I don't know.  I think that she was never fully accepted as a replacement.  And even as adults, I remember my aunts kind of feeling like she pressured him to marry.  But on her side, that she was a single women, there in the house taking care of his children.  And this was not appropriate behavior.  So they married.  And I knew her fairly well, but I was never quite as close to her.  She lived in Beaumont, Texas with my father's sister and in Lake Charles, Louisiana.  We had--my mother's [Daisy Fuller Young] family all stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana], but my father's family was in Franklin, Louisiana, Lake Charles, Louisiana and Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 1: Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 2: And all of his sisters married guys that went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] with him.  And they were, they went to Howard--one was a pharmacist and two were dentists.  And they went to Howard almost as a team, and were called, they said, the Louisiana gang, one of the few pictures I have of them.  And they would--the way they made their money was playing baseball.  And they played baseball in the Catskills [Catskill Mountains, New York] and waited tables.  And my father used to talk about, if you were hitting and your team was winning, you got the good stations.  If you went into a slump, either batting or made errors, they put you in the kitchen.  But they evidently made enough money in the summertime, playing baseball and waiting tables to pay their way through Howard University.
Story_ID: 228563
Speaker 1: How did your mom [Daisy Fuller Young] and dad [Andrew Young, Sr.] meet?
Speaker 2: When he came, when my father came back to New Orleans [Louisiana]--I think he was the Class of 1921 at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He came back to New Orleans and met my mother who was a student at Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And she, and I don't know whether you've interviewed [HistoryMaker Bishop] John [Hurst] Adams, Dolly--Bishop John Adams.  His wife's [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] mother [Thelma Desselle Smith] and my mother were inseparable, and they met at Straight College, where my father, who was a practicing dentist--but in the [Great] Depression, that was a struggle, would hang around the campus and enjoyed the presence of the pretty girls.  My mother though started teaching.  And in those days, teachers couldn't get married.  And when you--and my father wasn't making enough money to support a wife.  So they went together for six years.  And she used to swear to me that she was a virgin when she married and that she would not compromise on the morality of the times.  So, in those times, it would have been pretty much understood.  To this day, people would laugh at that.  But for them it was a pretty strong commitment.  And they went together until his practice was strong enough so that they could--he could support a family.  But I think my Uncle Walter [Fuller], who was working as a waiter at the Roosevelt Hotel [The Roosevelt New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], helped them buy a house so that it was always a very close--but my grandfather [Frank Smith Young] wouldn't help.  My grandfather had a notion that if you work and pay your own way through school, you do better than if you--and it wasn't that he didn't have money.  When he would give money, he was very generous.  But he would not pay my father's way to college or to dental school.  He took care of him through high school, but when he, I guess, reached about eighteen, if he wanted to go on and study further, he had to do it on his own.
Speaker 1: So your dad went to the Straight College, now Dillard University--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then on to Howard dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: He's back in New Orleans.  He's met and married your mom.  Then you came along.  What year was that, sir, again?
Speaker 2: I was born in 1932.
Story_ID: 228564
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds of your early childhood [in New Orleans, Louisiana]?  Your first memories even?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the first memories, are memories of things I was told, that living in the neighborhood I had to decide--one of my first lessons was who was white and who was colored.  And there were white children there, and we had--and they would come to our yard and play, but my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] would never let me go to their house to play.  And my uncle would see to it that almost any--well, like we had, we built a basketball goal in my backyard.  And we had the baseball bat and the ball.  And there was a vacant lot.  And Galvez Street had a neutral ground that we played ball, football, and I never played much baseball.  We played football and basketball.  And it really upset my daddy 'cause he would do his best to make a baseball player outta me.  And he always felt that he was, that it was only segregation that kept any of them out of the major leagues.  So my earliest recollection was out in the front of the house, playing pitch and catch with him.  And we'd do this for hours on end.  And he'd throw ground balls, throw the ball on the ground and bounce it.  He'd throw it up in the air or he'd just throw it back.  But I was being groomed to be a baseball player, which you can't play baseball in the cities.  You did have enough grass to play football, and we had a basketball.  You could--but almost nobody played baseball in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: What street were you living on at that time?
Speaker 2: I was living on Cleveland Avenue--
Story_ID: 228565
Speaker 1: The other thing he [Young's father, Andrew Young, Sr.] did was to explain Nazism to me and to refute white supremacy.  He took me to a segregated theater.  He didn't like to take us to segregated theaters.  In fact, he wouldn't go, but we went to the Orpheum Theater [New Orleans, Louisiana] and climbed up in the balcony because he felt it was important for me to see Jesse Owens in the 1936 [Summer] Olympics [Berlin, Germany].  And Jesse Owens, for me, it was a refutation of white supremacy.  And also it was the refutation of Adolf Hitler and he also--we lived not far from a gymnasium.  And we went to the prize fights all the time.  And because he was a fight fan, and that was right in Joe Louis' day, I never saw Joe Louis fight.  But almost every other fighter of that time, Sugar Ray Robinson, Willie Pep, black and white, I went to the fights.  And when the fighters would get their teeth knocked out, he'd usually fix 'em free.  But the tradeoff was that they had to take me and my brother to the gym, and teach us to fight.  And so I grew up as a kind of a gym rat around the boxing arena, and figured that if Jesse Owens could outrun everybody, I could outrun anybody.  If Joe Louis could beat everybody, I could beat everybody.  So it was--well, it was a great confidence builder.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The thing was though, we would look in the paper, and we were--we would look in the paper when we were ten and eleven years old and we'd see the white kids swimming and their track meets.  We'd ride our bicycles out to City Park [New Orleans, Louisiana], and they wouldn't let us in the park.  But we could see the track meets there.  And we would read the times that the white boys were running and getting trophies for.  And then we'd come back to our neighborhood and we'd race and make sure we were running better times.  And it was--it wasn't with any bitterness that we felt that we were locked out.  But it allowed us to maintain our self-confidence in spite of segregation.  We were--and my daddy used to say, not only, "Don't get mad, get smart."  "You can't be just as good."  If you and the white boy are just as good, he's gon' get the job.  You gotta be so much better that there's no question that nobody can do the job as well as you can.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And so when you do, when you take on a task, you know, do it right.
Story_ID: 228566
Speaker 1: You mentioned a brother [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young].  What was his name, and were there other siblings in the Young household?
Speaker 2: No, the--there was just the two of us, Walter Fuller Young.  And he is now a dentist here in Atlanta [Georgia].  He was a little closer to my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] because he suffered from asthma, and, and spent quite a bit of time going back and forth to the doctor.  But he ended up being the dentist.  My father [Andrew Young, Sr.] was very disappointed in me when I wouldn't be a dentist.  In fact, the only time I think he really got angry with me was when I told him I wasn't going to dental school.  I wanted to be a minister.
Speaker 1: Sure.  That comes a couple chapters over in your book, and I could postpone that just a little, and talk a little bit more about your formative years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: First of all, was your brother Walter there when you watched Jesse [Owens], and I believe you mentioned you watched Joe Louis as well and it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We always, we'd go to see the Joe Louis fights, but we--you know, we watched them on the radio (laughter).  I mean these, these big spherical radios.  And I'd look into that radio, and I could see the fights.  And it, but we did--he was a little young.  In fact, he's two years, two and a half years younger than me.  So he probably did not get that same lesson from the Olympics that I got in the '36 [1936 Summer] Olympics [Berlin, Germany].  But the message was part of our household folklore.  And--well, we went to a nursery school that was run by Central Congregational Church [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And our life was the church.  My father was a deacon in the church and was probably one of the largest givers in the church, and the minister was always coming by the house.  And, but the minister was a graduate of Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] and was very much the intellectual and the philosopher preacher.  And I had no interest in him or the church whatsoever at that point. But we had to go to Sunday school 'cause my mother was a Sunday school superintendent.  But what I got in Sunday school was something I didn't get in public school.
Story_ID: 228567
Speaker 1: Well, that Sunday school and the church [Central Congregational Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] ran a nursery school.  It was a daycare center, the Isabella Hume Community Center [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And I went there, I guess at three.  And they [Young's parents, Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] put me in first grade because I could read and write and knew my colors and stuff like that.  So I got pushed.  That was an era of the so-called child prodigies.  Philippa Schuyler was a concert pianist at six years old and all that kind of stuff.  And so black parents, black middle-class parents tended to try to push their children to genius.  And I would have nothing to do with that.  They tried to make me play the piano.  But I'd get sick at the stomach rather than play.  I did, I sort of--Louis Armstrong was one of my father's patients.  And he came by the dental office, which was in our house.  And there were a lot of the blues musicians, the old-fashioned, New Orleans [Louisiana] blues musicians that came.  There was a piano in the office, and so whenever they'd come, while they were waiting, they would play the piano and sing and entertain the other patients.  So I grew up in a music environment.  My father and this group of guys from Louisiana had a, this--had a quartet or quintet.  And they would sing all the time.  So I came up in a musical family and always appreciated music but never had the discipline or the commitment to master an instrument.  I did play the trumpet.  After Louis Armstrong came and played the trumpet, I got a trumpet and played in the band at Valena C. Jones [Elementary] School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and later at Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana].  But I was never much of a musician.
Story_ID: 228568
Speaker 1: So you attended elementary school at Valena C. Jones [Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: I attended--
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your elementary school experiences and the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, because I had such a good foundation from this daycare center, they put me in the third grade when I went public school, even though I was just six years old.  In fact, I don't think I had quite turned six.  And most of the kids were nine and ten years old.  So I was always younger and smaller, and always struggling to keep up or compete.  And that was the story, sort of the story of my life.  I don't know whether that was good or bad, but that's the way--I mean it meant that I finished high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] at fifteen, the very year that most of the [U.S.] Army guys were coming back from the Army.  So the guys I was running with in college were two of my best buddies, were 29 and 31.  I'm 15.  The advantage of that is that I was exposed but protected.  I never drank, but since you could drive at fifteen, I was always the one that stayed sober and drove everybody home.  But it got me into parties that I never could have gotten into.  But going back to Valena C. Jones, the same thing was true there.  I was younger, smaller.  It was a pretty rough environment, and where I felt very confident that I could beat all the white kids in the neighborhood, it was a different story being the middle-class kid in a poor neighborhood.  But I think that when I went to the all-black school, I guess I'd pretty much, by that time, developed some of my diplomatic skills.  And to keep people from taking my lunch money, when they didn't have any money, I'd usually, by fourth grade anyway, organize everybody so that we would all put in our money into one pile--and most of it was mine.  But then we'd go across the street to the grocery store, and buy a loaf of bread, which was eleven cents, buy ten cents' worth of lunch meat, and a couple of RC Colas.
Speaker 1: So your first experience as a facilitator and negotiator, apparently started in elementary school.
Speaker 2: In elementary school, to survive.
Speaker 1: To survive.  We'll explore--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The manual training teacher was a good friend of my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young].  And he would let me come to the shop, and I could get some of the buddy, my buddies who got tired of school, I could get them to come down to the shop.  And in those days, we were making baseball bats out of lathe.  We had to make model airplanes because that was the beginning of the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  And it was fun in the shop, and the shop kinda kept me in school.  But it also gave me a lot of bargaining power with the young hoodlums, and I could run with 'em.  But I never--well, I can remember third grade, people talking about marijuana.
Story_ID: 228569
Speaker 1: Now, New Orleans [Louisiana] was a seaport town.  So kids were exposed to everything, and I can remember my first experience being aware of what marijuana was, smoking weed in the third grade [at Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  In fact, I got put out of school in third grade.  And it was one of the things that probably changed my life.  I was playing in the back of the room with an icepick with another little boy, Lincoln Brown [ph.], I think his name was.  But Lincoln--I don't know whether it was my icepick or his, but we were playing mumblety-peg and the classes were so big and so crowded that we were in the back of the room.  Well, Miss Sarah [N.] Vanquelin sent us both to the office and Miss Fannie C. Williams, who was a member of our church [Central Congregational Church, New Orleans, Louisiana], said that we had to go home.  We had to--couldn't come back till we could bring our parents.  Well, I went right across the street to the drugstore and called my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young].  And my mother came--I didn't even go home.  She came immediately.  I lived about two miles from Valena C. Jones School.  And I had to either ride the bus or I rode with the manual training instructor, Mack McCann.  And, but my mother came and immediately got me back in school.  The other fellow, I mean I lost touch with him.  But I had made a friend of him because he was one of the bigger boys in the class, and he was one of the tougher kids in the class.  And because we became friends, nobody messed with me.  And, but I didn't see him anymore, and didn't think about him anymore until I was in my--between my junior and senior year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I was lifeguarding at the swimming pool there in that neighborhood, and he came in and almost drowned.  He had been playing with drugs even as a little boy, and well, we pulled him out and sobered him up.  I mean there were needle tracks in his arms and in his legs, even in his neck.  I mean he was a serious addict, but he remembered and reminded me that we had been put out of school together and that he had not been able to go back to school a single day since then, that he'd been in and out of reform schools.  He'd been in every penitentiary in Louisiana.  And I was about to drop out of Howard.  I really felt like I was wasting my time.  I knew I didn't wanna be a dentist, and I didn't know what I wanted to be.  And I was thinking about joining the [U.S.] Army.  I had--well, those days Special Services were big, and I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and I had this notion that I could go to the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and run on the track team (laughter), 'cause I, in one of the track meets, we went--we were running against Quantico Marines [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia], and I broke the record for the 220 [yard dash] at the Marine base.  And the Marines were treated pretty good, the athletes (laughter).  Whether I could have made it or not, but I was thinking about dropping out of school, and he--I really wasn't doing well.  But he sobered up and told me what he'd been through.  And it was obvious that he was as smart as I was.  He was far more experienced.  By that time, I was, oh, just turned eighteen.  And he said I had to go back to school because I had to do, I had to learn something to figure out how to make it better for people like him.  I mean it--he all but spelled it out for me that--I mean I went back to school, and he went to jail basically because of an act of birth.  And his mother was a domestic worker who made a dollar a day, plus carfare.  And he had five brothers and sisters.  And she couldn't take a day off to see about him.
Speaker 2: To see about him.
Speaker 1: And so he had survived by his wits, and, but was very bright and spent that whole afternoon telling me that I had to go back and finish school.
Story_ID: 228570
Speaker 1: That was what Valena C. Jones [Elementary] School [New Orleans, Louisiana] did for me.  It put me in touch with the real world.  And again, I was six years old (laughter).  And six, seven, eight, I had to get along in this school, which was nicknamed the bucket of blood, because there was a whole lot of fighting and cutting going on around there.  Then I had to go back about two and a half miles or so, to where I grew up in an integrated neighborhood.  So the trip back and forth from segregation to integration and having to cope with both race and class, before I was ten years old.  Really, when people say, "Where did you study to be an ambassador?"  I say Valena C. Jones School (laughter), 'cause I wouldn't have been able to make it in my neighborhood, and I wouldn't have made it, been able to make it in that school if I hadn't learned to think my way through problems.  And also to anticipate problems and head them off.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You can always tell when somebody's getting ready to fight.  And when people started fighting in those days, you had to be on one side or the other.  And we did a lot of fighting and there were no guns and there were-- but everybody carried a knife or an icepick.  I mean you had some kind of, you know, weapon that could get you in trouble.  And I don't know when I got my first switchblade, but I had one.  But I was scared to death that I'd have to use it.  And so I would find a way to talk my way out of a situation or prevent a situation, you know, so that you could avoid violence.
Story_ID: 228571
Speaker 1: Were there any experiences in high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] that served to continue to develop you to become the person that you are today?
Speaker 2: Well, only that my mother [Daisy Fuller Young]--I mean I went to high school at eleven, and my mother sent me to high school in short pants.  And one of the first days I was there, somebody, you know, one of the bigger boys was feeling on my legs, see, and I had to fight.  And I grabbed a bottle from the Coke [Coca-Cola] machine and went after him, and one of the big guys on the football team grabbed me and said, "Don't mess with him.  Leave him alone."  And there again, then there was--well, there was a gang culture in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And by virtue of this fellow who was the biggest guy on the football team, they kept their little zip guns and their knives and their paraphernalia in my locker, figuring that my locker wouldn't get searched.  And it never did.  But I was always on the fringe of the reality of life.  But I was never deeply involved, and I never got sucked into it.  But I understood it and that it gave me a good education.  I spent most of my time in the summers at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]--
Speaker 1: YMCA.
Speaker 2: --where I was either working as a counselor with younger kids or learning to perfect the skills.  I always say that one of the things that helped us most in the Civil Rights Movement was that both [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and I grew up in the YMCA.  So if we went in a pool hall, we could hold our own on a pool table.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Or if you were on a street corner, basketball pickup game, you could, I mean you could handle a ball and conduct yourself respectably, that the Y [YMCA] gave us an opportunity to have a kind of protected exposure to the harshness of life.  It didn't protect us from it, but it let us deal with it under rather controlled--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Controlled conditions, yes.
Speaker 2: --conditions.  And it's one of the battles I have with people now that put their kids in private schools (laughter) and that try to protect their children when they're young.  It means that they grow up as adults unable to cope with reality.  And it's much better to expose your children while they're very young when, you know, there are far fewer consequences to having a fight at six or seven or eight than there are at twenty-one or twenty-five.
Story_ID: 228572
Speaker 1: Any other sights, sounds and smells from your early childhood [in New Orleans, Louisiana] that you would like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I loved my childhood.  I mean I got to do almost everything I wanted to do, except ride a rollercoaster.  And we used to have to ride by the amusement park and see all the white kids on the rollercoaster, you know, and we couldn't do that.  And I think I was fifty years old before I got over my fixation with roller coasters.  It might have been even closer to sixty.  But every--after integration, any time I went to a park, I had to ride the rollercoaster and--'cause that was the one thing I felt deprived of.  We would go down to the segregated part of the beach and swim.  And there was a very good swimming pool across from where we swam in the lake, and we couldn't go in the swimming pool because the swimming pool was for German war prisoners.  And blacks could not swim in that swimming pool.  Later on, when I became ambassador to the United Nations [UN], the [West] German ambassador [Baron Rudiger von Wechmar] had been stationed at that Camp Plauche [Camp Harahan, Louisiana] during the war [World War II, WWII], spoke perfect English.  And he and I--he remembered the contradiction that he saw the black folk out there in the water and them having, as German war prisoners, having a first-rate swimming pool.  And we became very good friends out of part of that shared experience.  And we worked together on the independence of Namibia.  So almost everything that happened in my childhood, I've used.  The secretary of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and my eighth grade teacher, math teacher, were both photographers.  And my aunt had a photographic studio on Rampart Street.  And so my first job was in a photography studio which I quit because (laughter), they--I was there for two weeks, and I taught a young lady how to do everything, and then when we got paid at the end of two weeks, she had only worked half a week.  And she got fourteen dollars, and I was training her, and they gave me five dollars.
Speaker 1: How did this happen?
Speaker 2: Well, it was my aunt.  But they didn't explain it to me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And she had to pay this woman who was, you know, supporting a family--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: --a reasonable wage.  And she was just giving me some money.  But I felt that that was a grave injustice.  So I quit and got a job at the hospital as an orderly where they paid me regular wages, but I didn't do anything but empty bedpans and mop floors.  But I always had some kind of job.  We, picked the--we had peach trees and fig trees in our backyard, and we'd, you know, pick the peaches and pick the figs and then go sell 'em to our neighbors and stuff.  But the only time I got in a little trouble, I decided that shining shoes was a good job.  And I made myself a shoebox and I went out on the street to shine shoes.  And my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] caught me, and he didn't want--he didn't want me shining shoes.  That was too subservient a position.  But I can shine--I had to shine his shoes.
Story_ID: 228573
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Were you well-mannered, rambunctious, mischievous?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I think all of the above.  I could very polite and very mature, particularly when I had to go downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana] for my father [Andrew Young, Sr.].  And that, I didn't like that, but he had to go to the dental supply place.  And it meant getting on a streetcar and riding downtown, Canal Street and going into an office building where everybody was white.  And the thing I didn't like about it was, when I went downtown, my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] insisted that I put on a shirt and tie and that that was--they said, "If you're just walking downtown in a T-shirt and walk in a store, they gonna accuse you of stealing, whether you're stealing or not."  So I had to be very polite.  I had to be very well-mannered.  I had to be very mature because they wouldn't write down instructions for me.  I mean they never gave me notes.  My father would say, "Now, listen, this is what I want you to bring back, and I'm going to tell you once (laughter)."  And that was that, see.  And, and then I had to go downtown and come back.  And I, that was--that meant that I was pretty secure, pretty mature and could handle myself on the streets.  And I was eight, ten years old.  I knew how to avoid trouble.  I knew when to run and when to fight and when to negotiate (laughter).  And I guess I ran a lot.  Lots of times I would save the fifteen cents carfare and run and buy hot tamales or something like that on the way back.
Story_ID: 228574
Speaker 1: Well, my uncle, my Uncle Walter [Fuller], worked at, was a room service waiter at night.  And he would almost, in the summertime, he'd come by two, three days a week and take us swimming.  And he couldn't swim himself, but he'd take us out to the lake and watch us.  And we'd stop by and maybe have--he'd take us by an oyster house so we'd have an oyster loaf or po' boy sandwich or something like that.  And he lived almost totally for us.  He was very generous.  He saved all of his dimes and at Christmastime, he bought toys for all of the poor kids in the neighborhood where he lived.  But one of 'em ended up on drugs and thought he was rich because he'd always been so generous, and came to demand money from him.  And when he didn't have any money, he beat him to death with a tire iron.  And this was one of the kids that he'd been buying Christmas presents for.
Speaker 2: My Lord.
Speaker 1: But it was, well, I don't know.  It was a tragic death, but we had been taught by my grandmother [Louisa Fuller] that death was not the end, that death was a passage that everyone had to make, and so we almost felt sorry for the kid, you know.  And when he had, unfortunately, killed somebody else over in Texas, and they sent him to Texas to be tried, and so we never had to be tried--we never had to be involved in--but I was exposed to all of life, but given a mandate to be cool, to be rational, to think your way through it.  And that's sort of, what I remember.  I remember, you know, kids, the white kids' parents sometimes paying, trying to pay them not to play with us, and then we would get together and share the money.  And they'd come and sneak in our backyard and play with us anyway.  I mean it was a neighborhood where there were, again, Irish, Italian, German, Polish, Creole, Cajun, black.  It was a mostly Catholic neighborhood.  And the first fight I had really that I remember was on the Lord's Prayer, that I said the Bible said the Lord's Prayer, "Thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, forever, Amen."  And the Catholic kid said, "That's not in the Bible."  And we got in a fight even though he was right.  I think I won the fight though.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 228575
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ambassador [Andrew] Young, did you have dreams and aspirations as a young person coming along?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dream was to go to the Olympics, to be another Jesse Owens.  I had so many role models.  My parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] belonged to a number of cultural and social clubs.  One, the B Sharp Music Club [New Orleans, Louisiana], and they used to bring concert artists to town.  So I heard Paul Robeson, and I heard Roland Hayes, and I heard Marian Anderson and Dorothy Maynor, and I was exposed to Langston Hughes' poetry at a concert reading by Langston Hughes.  And I knew Paul Laurence Dunbar's work.  I was encouraged in high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] and in elementary school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to memorize a lot of the black poetry, and I think all of that idealism was built into me that you can be the best.  But my daddy wanted me to be the best dentist (laughter), and, and that wasn't for me, and it was probably just at the end of my college career that nothing seemed to be working out.  And a young minister came, [Reverend Dr.] Nicholas Hood [Sr.], from Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut] to pastor at our church [Central Congregational Church, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And he was just about, he was not quite ten, maybe ten years older than me.  But he had to live at our house because the parsonage was not ready.  And I'd be coming in, you know, late at night, having been out most of the night, and he'd be up reading his Bible and singing and--I mean he seemed to have something that I didn't know about.  And so he entered my life just before my last year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  About the same time that this young man, Lincoln [Brown (ph.)], fell in the swimming pool.  So I had the, you know, the serious confrontation that there, but for the grace of God, go I, which challenged me to do something with my life.  And here was a young minister who was doing something with his life.  And he never tried to talk to me about it, but he invited me to drive with him to a conference.  But that was after college.
Story_ID: 228576
Speaker 1: All right, [HistoryMaker] Ambassador [Andrew] Young, you were speaking of a person who had a positive influence on your life, and there may be others.  Please share with us if you would, please.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd go back to my days at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  Elliott [James] Mason [Sr.] and Moses [ph.], can't remember Moses's name, but they were the counselors that--Elliott Mason's a pastor in Los Angeles [California], and I see him now.  Moses was a star quarter-miler of, for Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and was from New Jersey.  They, they were the young college students that I looked up to when I was in elementary school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And they taught us to--Joe Beslin [ph.] taught me to swim.  Aaron Dutton, I think gave me my first religious education, and he was a science teacher, science and math teacher.  And he started out the class saying, "If you went along a beach, and you saw rocks placed in different shapes, what would you assume?"  And everybody said that somebody put 'em there.  He said, "Now, you don't see anybody on this island, but you just see these rocks."  And then he pulled down a map of the solar system and said, "This is the solar system, revolving around the sun, and everything works regular, what do you assume?  Somebody put it there."  So that my belief in God, while I was doubting and questioning--they were trying to tell me that Elijah sent to heaven on a flaming chariot and that didn't make any sense.  But it was the science teacher that first gave me my solid religious education.  There was the coaches, Epps, Coach Leonidas [S.] Epps.  The reason I don't gamble to this day is, I was in the locker room and the guys were shooting dice, and I was just standing there watching.  And he came in and said, "You all wanna shoot dice, okay, come on.  Roll and let's see what--" and he made everybody roll and how many--whatever they got on the dice, that's how many licks they got with a big fraternity paddle.  And I said, "No, coach, I wasn't shooting dice."  He said, "Bend over, you gotta get one for watching."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Coach [Jesse] Blakely, I think, gave me a lot of confidence.  I mean I was, I was eleven to fifteen and he would come by to see me every--my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young], every summer before school opened to see if I'd grown because he saw me as a good athlete that was just too young.  But in the sandlot football games and in the races after school or on the basketball court, I was--I could hold my own, and I had good skills.  But I was just too little and too young.  And so, but the fact that he would come by and see how much I'd grown, but I don't think I weighed but 110 pounds when I finished high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 228577
Speaker 1: I didn't weigh but 140 when I finished college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and wrestled as a 125-pound wrestler.  It didn't make much difference as a swimmer. The swimming coach and the track coach were also good influences.  The track coach because he gave me a hard time.
Speaker 2: This is in college.
Speaker 1: In college, yeah.  Tom Hart [Thomas A. Hart, Sr.], and I--they were the only people who I knew well enough in college to recommend me to go to graduate school 'cause I just didn't, I didn't make any impression academically on anybody.  But I'd been on the wrestling team, and I was a 125-pound wrestler with a lot of mouth, and challenged a guy from the dorm who was bigger, and I pinned him.  And so he, Coach Hart took me, said, "You know, all you have to do is learn a few skills and you can letter in wrestling."  The only problem is I went to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and the guy who was on Virginia State's wrestling team was a [U.S.] Marine Corps veteran who had been the South Pacific champion in the Marine Corps wrestling.  And I was sixteen, and he turned me into a pretzel.  And so I gave--I said, "No, wrestling's not for me."  And so when I came out for the track team, Coach Hart said, "Nah, don't, you know, you're not gonna stick."  And he wouldn't even give me any shoes.  And so I had to borrow shoes to get in a time trial.  My younger brother [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] was down there, and he was running and keeping up and beating some of the guys at Howard.  He was on Princeton High School's [Princeton, New Jersey] track team.  And I always figured, he could never beat me--if he can keep up with the Howard team, I can be on the Howard team.  So I borrowed his shoes, and got in a time trial, and they took me down to the Quantico Marines [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia], and that's where, in my first race, I broke the Quantico Marine record which, on a dirt track, I lowered it from 21.7 [seconds] to 21.4 [seconds].  And I think that that's where I developed my sense of confidence in that if I put my mind to something, I can do it.  I had, I wanted to go to Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival].  I had never run a quarter mile, but you had to run a quarter mile.  So I asked to get in the time trial 'cause I wanted to go to the Penn Relays and he said, "You know, you just gonna get in the way.  Get out on the outside." (Laughter)  And he gave me a hard time.  And I still, you know, placed and qualified for the Penn Relays.
Speaker 2: Fantastic.
Speaker 1: But it was all the way through that way.
Story_ID: 228578
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about college at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  First, let me establish your date of graduation from high school and what high school and where was that?
Speaker 2: I finished high school at Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Dillard was right across the street.  My family moved from Cleveland Avenue out to Gentilly [New Orleans, Louisiana] and built a little brick, a brick house right across the street from Dillard University.  So I was really, literally one block from the college.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And since I had grown up on that campus with Tom Dent who's--he and I were the only two young--we were the youngest in the high school.  And his daddy was president of Dillard.  So everybody around Dillard knew us as kids, and I wanted to get away from Dillard.  I did okay at Dillard.  One thing though is, my daddy [Andrew Young, Sr.], because he had played baseball in New England, had a real respect for these Ivy League colleges and insisted that I apply.  And I went to take the SAT exam at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I was the only black person there.  And I had never seen a standardized test before.  And I took it but years later when I asked a friend who was head of the educational testing service, would he check to see--I said, "Do you keep scores back that long?"  He said, "Oh, yeah.  We have scores back from the beginning."  And he couldn't find my scores.  And I just joked and said, "They were so low they didn't even record 'em."  But by the time I got to Howard, I took, I had to take an exam to stay in school or to be drafted.  And out of a possible 150, I made 141.  And so I wasn't dumb, and, but it wasn't until this year when I got an honorary degree from Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  Dartmouth was one of those schools he had me apply to.  And I was telling the story, and it suddenly dawned on me that these white people at Tulane may not have even turned in my test, you know, because--test scores.  You know, they might have just thrown 'em in the trash can.  And, but whatever it was, I was, I think I got a good education at Dillard and at Howard.
Speaker 1: Were the same--were you involved in the same extracurricular activities in high school and Dillard and Howard?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  It was--I mean because I was young, because I was small, I had to establish my manhood.  That meant I spent a lot of time, you know, trying to find and to get a girlfriend.  It was, all the girls were four or five years older than me.  And so I ended up with a lot of friends.  I made all the parties.  I joined the fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, and the manhood ritual, the initiation, stuff like that, I used to joke and say that it prepared me for, for the Civil Rights Movement because getting beat up in St. Augustine [Florida] by the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] really wasn't any worse than, you know, being beat up on a fraternity line at Howard University in the '40s [1940s].  And, and what it taught me was that when you're being knocked around and beat up, you don't lose your temper, you don't lose your cool.  You--it was a, it gave me a chance to put into practice what my father had taught me.  I didn't, I did okay in school, but I didn't really apply myself, and I didn't have a single subject that I really loved.  And I ended up, you know, accidentally going to seminary [Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut].  What I say about Howard is that I learned to be a man, but--and I got a Ph.D. in "niggerology," there wasn't anything I couldn't cope with.
Story_ID: 228579
Speaker 1: --By the time I got through with Valena C. Jones [Elementary] School [New Orleans, Louisiana], Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana], Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I spent a summer in California.  I got a ride out to California with some friends who needed somebody to help 'em drive.  And so I spent a summer in California and I went to--my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] said I either had to get a job or go to school.  I thought I could be a lifeguard till I went out and saw the waves in the Pacific Ocean and then I decided I better go to school.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So I went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] for a summer and took botany.  And I did okay, but there, again, I was the only black student I saw on that campus in the '40s [1940s].  It was 1948.
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: And I went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] one summer and took physics and did all right.  Again, there were very few black students, even at Boston University.
Speaker 2: Sounds like you're math and science oriented--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What year did you graduate?
Speaker 1: --my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] was pushing me toward dentistry.  And I liked science, and I liked math.  And I liked to figure things out, but I didn't wanna be a dentist.
Speaker 2: I see.  What'd you major in?
Speaker 1: I majored in biology.
Speaker 2: In preparation for--
Speaker 1: In preparation for--
Speaker 2: --to fulfill your dad's goals for your life.
Speaker 1: --for daddy, yeah.  And I had a minor in psychology.
Speaker 2: What year did you graduate and when did you really decide on a life vocation?
Speaker 1: Well, the last year--I graduated in 1951--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --shortly after I turned nineteen.
Speaker 2: Nineteen.
Speaker 1: And I was, I used, I found that one of the nicest ways to impress a nice girl was to take her to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  That was a good, cheap date.  And I'd just go to the Library of Congress on weekends on dates, and while the girls were studying, I'd look up books and sit there and read.  And I never had a course where I had to read Plato.  But I started reading Plato and--I mean I started reading the Greek--I don't know how I got into that.  But partially, I think it was vocabulary that--my roommate who wanted very much to be a doctor felt that the best way to pass these tests and improve your test scores was to know the Greek and Latin derivatives of language.  And so I ended up, out of curiosity reading some of the Greek tragedies.  And I got interested in thinking about questions of life and death, and I think by the time I graduated, I'd, I was so confused.  If I had made one more D, I'd flunked out instead of graduating.  I graduated with 42 hours of D grades, and your maximum is 45 hours.  I had a few A's and Bs, but mostly Cs and Ds.  And, and I really felt miserable because I felt like I had wasted my time, my education.
Story_ID: 228580
Speaker 1: It was on the way back from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I did graduate.  And we stopped at a church conference in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Who is we, sir?
Speaker 1: Well, my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] drove up.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: I didn't want 'em to drive up because I thought they'd drive up and I might make that last D and flunk out instead of graduating, but they came up anyway.  And driving back, we stopped in North Carolina because our church [Central Congregational Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] had a conference center there at Kings Mountain [North Carolina].  And you couldn't stay in hotels.  So we arranged to spend a couple of days at the church conference.
Speaker 2: Blacks couldn't stay in hotels.  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Blacks could not stay in hotels.
Speaker 2: This is 1950--
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951], yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And we usually stopped in Atlanta [Georgia] where we stayed with friends or coming up through Virginia.  My father, as a dentist, had a lot of classmates from Howard, all around, so we'd usually do our traveling and visit, stop and visit with his classmates.  But this time, we stopped at Kings Mountain.  And I was, again, thinking about the Olympics and went out for a run rather than--my parents were in the worship services and the Bible studies and, and I went running up the mountain and had what I guess was my first religious experience, because I was really depressed, and I felt like I had wasted my life.  And I didn't know what I was gonna do.  I didn't wanna go to dental school.  And I was kind of halfway engaged.  I let a girl talk me outta my fraternity pin at our fraternity dance.  And I had no intention or desire or even ability to get married at nineteen, you know, even though she's a wonderful girl.  But running to the top of the mountain and really pushing myself to complete exhaustion, I got there.  And I was really wheezing and gasping for breath, and was wringing wet and, you know, took off my shirt and laid it on a rock to dry out, and looked out, and all of a sudden, everything made sense.  I mean it was like the world was so beautifully laid out that everything seemed to have a place and a purpose.  And it was, it just hit me that there has to be a purpose for me.  And I don't know what it is, but I would, you know, that was a moment of my awakening, that I couldn't just go through life stumbling and bumbling, that there was something that I was put on this earth for, and I had to find it.
Story_ID: 228581
Speaker 1: Well, that's when [Reverend Dr.] Nicholas Hood [Sr.] had just entered my life.  And so when I came back from Kings Mountain [North Carolina], he asked me to drive with him to Texas.  Well, I still wasn't quite converted, and my roommate was from San Antonio [Texas].  So I figured I would drive out there with Nick, drop him off at the church conference and go on to San Antonio and, you know, party with my roommate.  But we were near San Antonio, but it was about 150 miles more, and Nick Hood and I, two young, black men driving across Texas, and we had not seen anybody black since we left Dallas [Texas].  And this was up in the panhandle.  And there was nobody at the conference black.  And he said, "You not gonna leave me here by myself, are you?" (Laughter)  He said, "You really don't wanna get on that road by yourself and drive another 150 miles."  So I ended up staying there, and with daily worship services.  And we started every day with a Bible study which he led.  And it was though the Bible study was prepared for me--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --though he swears it was something that he had done.  I mean the verses, "You did not choose me, I chose you and appointed that you should go and bear fruit, and your fruit should abide." [John 15:16]  That was one.  "Consider the lilies of the field.  They toil not, neither do they spin.  Yet Solomon in all his glory is not arrayed like one of these.  If God so loves the lilies of the field and the birds of the air, how much more does your Heavenly Father love you?" [Matthew 6:28-30].  I mean it was the first time the Bible actually spoke directly to my condition.  And I left there feeling that there had to be a purpose in my life, and that it was probably a religious purpose.  Now, because there were no other blacks there, and this was a program hoping to involve young people to recommit their lives to Christ, they invited me to volunteer as a field worker, 'cause there were no black volunteers.  So I volunteered and they sent me to Camp [Alexander] Mack in [Milford] Indiana for training.  And at Camp Mack, which is a Church of the Brethren camp, I read--somebody gave me my first book on [Mohandas] Gandhi, and then I was sent to Connecticut where I was living on the Hartford [Theological] Seminary [Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut] campus and decided, since most of my work was with young people after school, and I had nothing much to do until three [o'clock] in the afternoon, I went into the dean and asked if I could audit some courses 'cause I didn't know anything about the Bible.  And he said, "Well, if you'd sign up for three, we can probably give you a scholarship.  There's a Rockefeller Brothers [Fund] grant for the Negro ministry, and it gives you a year to decide whether you're interested in the ministry or not.  And we could--if you'll take three courses, we can give you a scholarship."  So I took Old Testament, New Testament and philosophy of religion.
Speaker 2: And so after your mountaintop experience, a defining moment in your life, after your field work or your experience in Texas at the camp and after your field work at Camp Mack, Indiana and your exposure to Gandhi, and your experience taking the courses at Hartford, you felt that your life really had direction.
Speaker 1: It seemed to have a direction.
Story_ID: 228582
Speaker 1: Couple of things.  One, [Mohandas] Gandhi's favorite hymn was 'Lead, Kindly Light,' "Amid the encircling gloom, lead thou me on.  The path is dark, and I am far from home.  Guide thou my feet.  I do not ask to see the distant scene, one step enough for me."  Well, that was a message I needed to hear.  And then to go to this seminary [Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut] that I'd never even heard of before, to walk into the dean's office and have him offer me a scholarship, and it was '51 [1951].  And most of the guys coming back from seminary were veterans.  So there was nothing pious about the seminary.  I mean these were guys who'd been all over the world and were just regular guys.  And like I'd never--I didn't drink at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] because of track and swimming.  And they were upset with me because--and accused me of being a southern, religious Pietist because I wouldn't go out and drink beer with 'em.  But I'd never done that.  But it was a different kind of experience.  They had a basketball team which I played on, and it--and I had small classes where I got a chance to think about life.  And it seemed like that was--well, from the time I left that mountaintop [near Kings Mountain, North Carolina], everything in life seemed to fall in place.  I had, in addition to the scholarship, I worked in the kitchen.  I had a job in the bookstore.  I had a job as a janitor and an apartment.  And I had more money than I'd ever had before in my life, even though my daddy [Andrew Young, Sr.] got mad and said, "Well, if you're not gonna be a dentist, you're on your own."  So he no longer sent any money.  It wasn't bad though.  I decided I needed to catch up.  So I stayed in--I didn't go home for Thanksgiving.  I didn't go home for Christmas.  And I didn't go home till the summer and spent Christmas--my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] sent me a Smithfield ham.  And there were a couple of African students and myself.  We were the only ones in the dormitory.  And that's where I began to get interested in Africa and learn about Africa.  One was from Rhodesia [Zimbabwe] and one was from South Africa.  And because I had the ham, they'd gather in my room every day for a ham sandwich or so.  And it--life was working out.  I was enjoying it.
Story_ID: 228583
Speaker 1: I decided that this was to be because when the, after the dean gave me the scholarship [to Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut], he wrote Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for my transcript and, for references.  And when they came back, he sent for me and said, "You're fortunate that we met you first and were not introduced to you by your transcript, because we would not have been able to admit you." (Laughter)  But I, by that time I was doing very well in school.  And I liked it.  I had small classes.  I had teachers that encouraged you to think.  And I, and it was just--it was the right thing for me.  That summer I had planned to run with a Pioneer Track Club [New York Pioneer Club] because I still thought that I might be able to make the Olympics and, in New York.  And I had a job at a settlement house.  And my parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young], I think, and Nick Hood [Reverend Dr. Nicholas Hood, Sr.] interceded.  Since I hadn't been home, and my mother knew I was still kind of alienated from my father--though I didn't feel alienated.  I felt free, and I wrote home regularly.  And, but I felt like I was behind people.  Others who had majored in religion and philosophy, they'd read books that I had not read.  So the times that I spent there on my own, I spent basically reading and trying to catch up.  And it was a perfect environment for me because it's a--it was a totally international environment.  But my minister, the superintendent, conference superintendent asked me if I would go to pastor this little church in Marion, Alabama that had not had a minister.  And he felt that if he didn't get somebody there soon, the church would fall apart and would close down.  And I didn't wanna go, but I couldn't say, no, because by that time, I had developed the notion that the way I would decide what God wants me to do would be to do what nobody else wanted to do.  If there was nobody else to do it, then maybe I should do it, but I didn't need to do any--and I figured there were plenty of folk that were gonna run in the Olympics, and, you know, but nobody else was gonna go to this little country church.  Well, when I drove, I had bought a little English Ford, and I drove down, stopped off at North Carolina, again, where my parents came up to meet me.
Story_ID: 228584
Speaker 1: And then they assigned me to Marion, Alabama, and I drove down there by myself.  And the first family I went to visit, the Childs family, there was a Bible on the table that had been underlined.  And what was underlined was my, a lot of my favorite verses.  There was also a senior life saving certificate on the wall with the same name as the--and so I asked the lady of the house, you know, I said, "Who's the lifeguard?"  She said, "Oh, that's my baby daughter."  I said, "Is this her Bible too?"  And she said, "Yes, she's studying at Manchester College [Manchester University, Manchester, Indiana] in Indiana, and is over in Tuskegee [Alabama] with her brother whose wife is expecting a baby."  So I hung around that house.  That's where I was assigned to eat for the first week.  But everything I saw around the house, the books she'd been reading, the pictures of her as a child, I decided that the Lord had sent me to this little town in Alabama to find a wife.  And she was completely different from the girl I was going with at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], whose father was a doctor and she was one of the few people at Howard who had a car, had her own car.  It kind of made--by that time, I was kind of getting guilty because she went--for our [Alpha Phi Alpha] Fraternity dance, she went out on Connecticut Avenue and spent four hundred dollars for a dress and a hundred and some dollars for some shoes.  And I said, "Now, this is not the kind of wife I'm gonna be able to support.  It's not the kind of wife I want," whereas--and so we had sort of--what I had, was convinced that I was going back to the South as a preacher, she decided we oughta break up.  She never sent me my fraternity pin back or my letters or the sweaters, all of my athletic memorabilia, she's still got (laughter) after fifty years.  But I met Jean [Childs Young], and it was a totally different world.  When she came back, I went down to visit, and she was out in the backyard, barefooted in some cutoff blue jeans, and she was milking a cow.  And I always had a camera with me, and I made the mistake of taking out my camera to take a picture of her.  And so she was just furious that, you know, this city boy is coming down here making fun of me.  I had already decided that the Lord had sent me there to marry her.  But I made such a bad start that it took most of the summer for me to kind of establish a kind of relationship.  But there was never any doubt in my mind that we were gonna marry.  And she was thinking about transferring to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] 'cause she was the only black student on this campus.  And her old--two older sisters had graduated from there.  But now that since they left, she was the only one, the only black student.  And she was really tired of it.  And, but I convinced her to go back, mainly because I figured if she went to Fisk, she'd hook up with one of those doctors and forget about me.  And we wrote.  She was elected, selected May Queen, and I drove out there to be her escort.  And it was a bittersweet thing.  She said, you know, "Here they will vote me as May Queen, and I have to send all the way to Connecticut to have a date," see.  Her older sister had dated one of the young white fellows, and it caused a lot of turmoil, and they--so she was, she was not anxious to date anybody particularly.  But she was rather lonesome.  She was also asked to go to, invited to go to Europe for a work camp.
Speaker 2: And this is at the end of her third year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And your?
Speaker 1: And my first year.
Speaker 2: In seminary [Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut]?
Speaker 1: In seminary.
Story_ID: 228585
Speaker 1: So they gave her [Young's wife, Jean Childs Young] a full scholarship to go to Europe.  Well, because I had some extra jobs and had a little money, and it didn't cost but $240, I decided to sign up and go to Europe also.  And, but we went to different work camps, not because we didn't wanna be together, but because she felt that if they were paying her way to be a black representative, that we didn't need to go to the same camp.  I should go--so I worked in a refugee camp, building a community center, and she worked with children about forty miles away.  So we traveled around Europe together and hitchhiked some.  Her older sister was working in Berlin [Germany] for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And she joined us, and we spent the summer traveling around Europe and then came back--
Speaker 2: If I can interrupt.  Were you well received in Europe?  Did you feel (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were, we were extremely well received in Europe.
Speaker 2: Now, separate but equal is still the law of the land back here.  Draw some comparisons if you would?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the thing about Europe was that you were a curiosity, but you were appreciated.  I went in the barbershop, and they--to get my hair cut because it had grown out pretty big.  And everybody else stopped what they were doing and gathered around and watched.  And the guy who was cleaning up the hair, you know, went around giving everybody a little bit of my hair.  But it was the unknown.  People welcomed us.  We could go anywhere we could afford.  We could eat in any restaurant.  We hitchhiked some of the ways, and people picked us up and were very courteous.  We stayed in homes with--when we were traveling with the church group.  And it was altogether a very, very good experience for us.
Speaker 2: Now, this is about 1952.
Speaker 1: That was '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: And you were to return here to complete your--
Speaker 1: [Hartford Theological] Seminary [Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: --seminary experience, and her undergrad [Manchester College; Manchester University, Manchester, Indiana] experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What, what else would you share with us regarding that?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that my experience in Europe put a dent in my pacifism.  I talked to people who had been through [Adolf] Hitler and who--I watched how the soldiers were sort of insensitive, I heard stories, to the people, and I decided that they--I decided that you really had--in a time of war, you really couldn't be neutral.  You had to be on one side or the other, and that you--if you, you could fight to prevent war.  But once war occurred, you had to take a side.  And I decided that if I had been challenged again, that I probably would have volunteered for the service.  Even though I thought that [Mohandas] Gandhi was right and that if you were aggressive enough, you could prevent violence and warfare.  And I still believe that way, but once warfare breaks out, it's sort of like [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] would say about the riots, that you do everything you can to prevent a riot, but once a riot starts, somebody's gotta put it down.  You can't just let it run rampant, and war is that way.  So I think I got a more mature and less idealistic view of the world, and warfare, and that was, that was pretty much the prevailing view in the seminary because people were reading Reinhold Niebuhr, and Paul Tillich, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a Presbyterian reform preacher who was assassinated, who was hanged because he was accused of taking part in a plot to assassinate Hitler.  And I was reading his ethics and reading the struggles that people had with Hitler.  And it was, how do you cope with evil?  And you can overcome evil without violence, but you have to stay ahead of the game.  If you--if it once gets out of hand, then you have to stop it with more power.
Story_ID: 228586
Speaker 1: That led to an interesting experience because I graduated [from Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut] and Jean [Childs Young] graduated [from Manchester College; Manchester University, Manchester, Indiana] and we got married the next summer.  And we were assigned to a little church in Thomasville, Georgia.  She came back.  I had one more semester, and she came back to Hartford [Connecticut] with me and taught school in the public school system while I finished my seminary.  And then we went back to this little church in Georgia in 1954.
Speaker 2: And so you were married prior to your senior year in the seminary.  She graduated from college in 1954.
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: And you completed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we married--
Speaker 2: You married in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: And you completed seminary in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And '55 [1955] was also the beginning of the modern civil rights era.  It was a year after--you got married during the year of Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But tell us of your experience, your last year in seminary juxtaposed against those events that we talked about, not to mention the fact that the Cold War is ongoing, and this is just post-Korea [Korean War] as well.  That's a lot of things to throw at you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it was, this was Cold War and post-Korea.  But in seminary, I was developing a worldview, and there were students from about fifty different countries there.  So I was getting a view of the world from them in addition to my readings.  I had the best course I've ever had.  I got--my roommate was from--was white and from Guilford College in [Greensboro] North Carolina, Southern Baptist, very smart.  And we used to argue all the time with the philosophy professor and the anthropologist who was a kind of left-wing German who had escaped from the Holocaust and probably had been a Communist.  And so we ended up with a class that had three professors and three students.  And the third student was a black anthropology student from--working on his Ph.D. from South Africa, this white fellow from North Carolina, Southern Baptist, and me, a Louisiana Congregationalist.  The professor from philosophy was a liberal Christian, studied at [The] Edinburgh [University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland].  The theology professor was a Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut] Ph.D., and the anthropologist had studied in Germany.  But the six of us met for four hours once a week, and talked about whatever we wanted to talk about, and then they would recommend readings for us for the next week.  And so I really got a chance to develop my thinking about a lot of things and do it in a kind of ecumenical eclectic environment where it was more a Socratic method of teaching.  They didn't ever tell us what to do.  They would ask us questions.  They would try to get us discussing things with each other, which is the South African's point of view.  We were joined later on by a young Japanese fellow who had been a lieutenant in the Japanese Navy who was working on his master's [degree] in theology.  So we had Asia, Africa and two sides of the U.S., and in a classroom that turned out to be very exciting.
Story_ID: 228587
Speaker 1: And I went back then, went back to the same church I'd been at that summer in Thomasville, Georgia.  And Maynard Jackson's grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] was speaking at a voter registration rally--well, actually, I think it was a March of Dimes rally in Columbus [Georgia].  And I went up to hear him, and he asked me, in addition to working for the March of Dimes, he asked, would I be willing to lead a voter registration drive.  And I said, sure.  But the day I was supposed to--the weekend that I was supposed to lead the voter registration drive, we went up to Albany, Georgia and coming back on a back road, just as we turned around the curve at Doerun, Georgia, right outside of Moultrie [Georgia].  It looked like there were several hundred people with sheets on.  There was a gathering of a [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] rally.  Well, I slowed down and eased through the crowd, but my wife [Jean Childs Young] and my three-month old baby [Andrea Young] were in the back seat.  And on the way back, we were trying to decide, you know, we had not seen the Klan.  We hadn't had any trouble until we put up these signs announcing a voter registration drive.  So we figured they were coming to try to intimidate us about voter registration.  And there were two things happened that were formative in my life.  One, coming out of Hartford [Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut], and Jean was a good, country girl, and one of the things we used to do when we were courting was go back out in the woods with her .22 [rifle] and have a shooting contest.  And she could always, I mean we'd stopped off in Coney Island [New York, New York] and at a moving target, she hit sixteen out of twenty.  And everything we did was competitive.  I mean she'd--so, I mean she could handle a gun with no problem.  I said, "Look, if these people come here, you cannot sit here and let them burn down this house."  We were in an old house, not unlike this one except that it had not been repaired.  We had no carpets on the floor.  We were in the process of putting down some linoleum, and putting up sheetrock, and if somebody had thrown a match in there, it would have gone up in smoke.  And we were living on the second story.  So I said, "I'm gonna go outside and talk to 'em, but I want you to point the gun at the guy that I'm talking to just so we can talk on even terms."  This is my translation of Reinhold Niebuhr realpolitik, negotiating from a position of strength, see.  And she says, "I'm not gonna point any gun at a human being.  I don't care if he is a Klansman."  I said, "Woman, well, what do you want?  You want them to burn down our house or our baby, kill our three-month old baby?  I'm not afraid to die, but there's no need in us running this risk."  And she said, "If you don't believe the stuff you're preaching, we just as well fold up and go home.  And if you're not gonna trust God in this kind of thing, then you got nothing to preach about."  Well, that put me in my place.
Story_ID: 228588
Speaker 1: And at the same time, I went to see the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], only they didn't call it the NAACP.  It was the Thomas County [Business and] Civic League, and the principal--well, one of our friends was a insurance manager from African American Insurance [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  So they were sort of community leaders, and we went to see them.  They then went to see the mayor [of Thomasville, Georgia], who was the hardware store owner.  And he then called together the leaders from the Sunnyland Packing Company [Thomasville, Georgia] and Flowers Bakery [Flowers Foods, Thomasville, Georgia].  And the business community decided that they didn't want the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] in this town, that they couldn't stop 'em from having a meeting, but the business community informed the sheriff that he was to restrict the Klan meeting to the courthouse square, and that they were not allowed to go around the black community at all.  And so we ended up having a Klan rally where the black community came out and watched it.  But it was the business community that had interceded.  It was almost like it was in my grandfather's [Frank Smith Young] time.  And that lesson continued to follow me because in Birmingham [Alabama], again, later on, it--I went to the business community 'cause I knew the--they controlled the sheriff more than anybody else.  And in South Africa and everywhere else I've gone, here in Atlanta [Georgia], I have found that the business community is a strong ally in times of social change, not that they're better.  But they're more vulnerable.  It takes 50 percent shift in power to put a sheriff out of office, but if you cut the businessman's profits by 10 percent, you can put him out of business.  And because of that vulnerability, we found that business was a much stronger ally in social change than previously we had thought.
Story_ID: 228589
Speaker 1: And you pursued your voter registration project there in Thomasville [Georgia], and your ministry.  Your first child is born, and if you'll start by telling us your child's name and a little bit about the rest of your ministry and family there in Thomasville before moving to the next thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Thomasville, we had our first baby, Andrea Idell Young, and she was born August of 1955.  That means she turned fifty just last month--
Speaker 1: Amen, praise God.
Speaker 2: --just this month, but she was the one that we didn't know whether she'd, you know, whose life was at risk in the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK].  We had another child before we left there, Lisa [Young], Lisa Drew.  And we just got along well with people.  I think the almost three years that I spent in the rural South was where I developed a respect and appreciation for the strength of black people.  My church, my rural church in Beachton [Georgia], had been founded when the pastor had been run off of the plantation in Alabama because they found out that he was teaching people to read and write and count.  And they were keeping records of what they were spending on the plantation store.  And they gave him forty-eight hours to get out of town.  He came over to Georgia and founded a Congregational school in Beachton, Georgia, made arrangements on those plantations for the membership to come, and in the middle of the night, the whole church packed up and moved from Alabama to Georgia in order that their children might go to school.
Story_ID: 228590
Speaker 1: We're talking about a period in your life, 1955 through '58 [1958] in Thomasville [Georgia].  President [Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower is the president.  The Civil Rights Movement is in full force, and--
Speaker 2: Well, it really, the Civil Rights Movement really was just getting started.
Speaker 1: Just getting started.
Speaker 2: And a couple of things happened.  One, in '56 [1956] when Eisenhower was president, he visited Thomasville.  And most of my members worked on the plantation that he visited.  It was owned by the secretary treasurer.  Maynard Jackson's grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] also made an appeal for us to vote Republican because he said unless we have--he had just filed a suit with the Masonic lodge to end the Democratic white primary.  And Democrats didn't want us, and he said the only way we're gonna get anywhere is to have a two-party South.  So even though I had worked for Adlai Stevenson in Connecticut, when I came South, I voted for Eisenhower.  And that wasn't hard to do.  Eisenhower--well, that's another long story, but he ended up really appointing very good judges--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --and because we voted Republican and very few whites did, it was the black Republicans that recommended the judges that Eisenhower appointed.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And so within that period, most of the judges that were appointed by the Democrats were still very conservative because [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy appointed the judges that [Senator James O.] Eastland and [Senator Richard] Russell [Jr.] recommended, who were old South racists.
Story_ID: 228591
Speaker 1: The other thing that happened was that I went to Talladega [Alabama] to a religious emphasis week, and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was the other speaker.
Speaker 2: Was that the first time you met Dr. King?
Speaker 1: That was the first time we'd ever had a conversation.  I had been down to Tallahassee [Florida] to hear him speak at a church, but--and I had heard him speak in St. Louis [Missouri] with the [National] Council of [the] Churches [of Christ in the U.S.A. (NCC)].  And we had met, but we'd never--it was in a crowd.  This time we sat together in a forum for about ninety minutes.  And then he invited us to come home to his house and we realized that--and I guess we hadn't really focused on the fact that his wife [Coretta Scott King] and my wife [Jean Childs Young] were both from Marion, Alabama and had gone to school [Lincoln Normal School, Marion, Alabama] together.  Coretta was a little older.  Coretta was along with Jean's older sister, but both of us had new babies.  And so that was my first meeting with him, and we told him that we were gonna be in the North for no more than five years, and then we'd be coming back South, and in '60 [1960], when the sit-ins occurred, we decided it was time for us to come back South.  At the same time, he decided--I had written him some letters, and he--we had been communicating, and he asked Stanley Levison to interview me about coming back to work as his assistant because he needed somebody to help him keep up with his mail.  I was frankly overwhelmed by that possibility, didn't think I was ready to help him, but at the same time, I had talked about working with a citizenship education project, sponsored by The Field Foundation [of New York, New York, New York].  And it ended up going to the American Missionary Association, and they asked me to go back as the administrator.
Speaker 2: In New York [New York]?
Speaker 1: From New York back to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: But the time in New York gave me an exposure to big city life.  It gave me another couple of opportunities.  I went to Europe several other times, went to Latin America as a representative of church conferences.  I had the responsibility for a television program.  And I also ended up working with white young people, preparing them for desegregation so that when the Little Rock [Arkansas] situation broke out, I went to Little Rock, not to talk to the black students, but to talk with the white high school students and to try to get them to understand why this change was necessary.  So it gave me a lot of experience in--I mean I was already fairly comfortable in the white world.  This made me even more comfortable because I was with executives at CBS.  I was with national church leaders from other countries.  And, well, I don't know.  It prepared me for the South in a way that I could not have imagined--
Story_ID: 228592
Speaker 1: How did you see the hand of God working in your life and in the movement that you were becoming a part of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, again, it--everything seemed to be working out.  I went to Marion, Alabama, and I found a wife [Jean Childs Young] (laughter).  I ended up going to Thomasville, Georgia, and I find a community of people that loved me and built me up, taught me lots of things, and then when I was invited to go to New York [New York], I really went off in the woods and--by myself in a little log cabin and prayed and fasted for three days to decide whether or not I should leave.  I really didn't wanna leave, but then my superintendent called me up and said he had a young man who was graduating from seminary, who was ready to move in immediately.  And my wife was expecting our second baby [Lisa Young], and we weren't anxious to leave for a couple of months at least.  But Lisa was born in July, and we left the week after she was born because the other minister wanted to come in the first of August.  And, again, it bore out my philosophy that I couldn't stay there if there was somebody else that could do that.  But they were saying that there wasn't anybody that they could find that had experience in church youth work that I'd had, to move into this position as associate executive director of the Department of Youth Work for the National Council of [the] Churches [of Christ in the U.S.A. (NCC)].  And there was only one other black executive out of six hundred, and he was in charge of race relations.  And they were anxious to have more black staff.  It gave me a real education and I guess I should say too, it's popping up and becoming more relevant now, because most of the men working in the church conference were gay.  And I had never had that kind of experience of a gay culture of people that were acceptable and respected.  They were quite open about it, didn't bother me.  But they were very helpful to me and in opportunities where there would be things that would be obviously racist, and I would be ready to blow up, they said, "No, no, no.  You can't be the one to fight this battle.  You have to let us fight this battle."  And they would.  And they'd say matter-of-factly, "Maybe one day you'll have to fight our battles for us."
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: That hit me because just last month when the church came here to Atlanta [Georgia] for their general senate, they took a pastor resolution endorsing gay marriage.  And all the Atlanta press jumped on me to say whatever--see what I was gonna say.  And, you know, I put it in the context that the church has put it, that our church was the first church in the U.S. to ordain black clergy.  They were the first church to ordain women clergy.  They were the first to ordain gay clergy or lesbian clergy, and that it's the philosophy of the church, the theology of the church that God loves us just as we are.  And so we don't try to discriminate against the sinners one--you know, if we got rid of all the homosexuals, or do we get rid of all the adulterers and all the fornicators and masturbators (laughter), and pretty soon, there won't be anybody.  There--in fact, there won't be anybody left (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So we say, just as God accepts us all, and loves us and tries to help us live together, that's the role of our church.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But it goes back to that--those early experiences, you know, living in New York at a time when--even though, you know what, I wasn't naive.  The guard and the tackle on the football team at Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] were caught in a bed together (laughter).  So I knew that homosexuality existed, but it wasn't, it was not in this respectable context.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 228593
Speaker 1: In 1958, correct me if I'm wrong, you returned to the South.  What role did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, we left the South in '57 [1957], and we came back in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: In '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  New president, John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Now, the Civil Rights Movement is in full force--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you come to become a more active part with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] specifically, am I correct?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Share with us your experiences.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had just, I had met John Kennedy in Chicago [Illinois].  I was in Chicago when he was speaking at Lake Meadows [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois].  And I went to hear him, and I was very impressed.  And that was about the same time the sit-ins occurred.  And he had--
Speaker 1: At A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at North Carolina A&T.  And, and that's when we decided that it was time for us to come back to the South.  We came back to Atlanta [Georgia] to work with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  But I was still being paid by the Congregational church.  And I was administering a literacy program that used our training session centers at Dorchester Center [Midway, Georgia], some at Talladega [Alabama], some at Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] in South Carolina, and our model [in Citizenship Education Program] was to train grassroots leaders from all over the South.  And we said we were looking for people who had Ph.D. minds--
Speaker 1: Ph.D. minds.
Speaker 2: --who had never had a chance to get an education.  And that's how we found people like Fannie Lou Hamer and like [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson [Reagon] in Albany [Georgia], who eventually did go on and get her Ph.D.  When we met her, she was a country girl with a great voice, and had been put out of Albany State College [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] for taking part in a demonstration at the bus station.  But we went from town to town, Septima [Poinsette] Clark, Dorothy Cotton and myself.  And we were sort of the educational, preparatory arm of the movement.  And from 1961 to 1968, we trained over six thousand people, grassroots leaders from Virginia, all around to East Texas.  And we had some contact in just about every county in the South, and every county there was a black majority county.  We had organized and had trained people to run voter registration drives.  So we sort of laid the foundation for the political movement that was to come later.  And it was people from our citizenship schools that started the Selma movement, Miss Boynton [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson] and Reverend [Frederick D.] Reese.  [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was already there with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and we tried to give--what we did in these training sessions was show them a movie on [Mohandas] Gandhi and nonviolence.  We showed them the movie on the sit-ins--on Montgomery [Alabama] that the Quakers had done.  And we showed 'em a movie on the sit-ins that was an NBC special.  And, and those were the evening programs.  In the daytime, we taught them to teach people to read and write.  And we did it with a method that, we said, "Everybody can read.  And you don't have to teach people how to read.  You have to help them to understand that they already know how to read."  And they didn't know what you say, but you hold up a Coca-Cola sign and say, what is this?  Coca-Cola.  Well, is there anybody that doesn't know Coca-Cola when they see--and then we'd break down the syllables and teach them the phonetics of Coca-Cola.  Everybody can read the name of their town, even if it's complicated like Demopolis [Alabama].  When they see the sign, they know.  And so by teaching them the words that they know--everybody knows Budweiser (laughter), see.  And we just collected signs that people see all the time and showed them and then taught them to break it down phonetically so that when they see those words, those sounds in other places--and we used the voter registration applications.  We used drivers' license applications.  We used Social Security applications because we had to teach people to function in the mainstream of society--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --as well as to vote.
Story_ID: 228594
Speaker 1: And from the citizenship schools, where did you contribute next, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I left the citizenship school program [Citizenship Education Program] and became the executive vice president and executive director of Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  And that's when I went on the SCLC staff in about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the year was?
Speaker 2: Right after Selma [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, right after Selma.
Speaker 2: They gave me the title of executive director, but I didn't come off the [Congregational] church payroll till right after Selma largely because the church had no problem paying me.  They--but when we got involved with the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War], I didn't want it to spill over.  And I said, let me just sever my relationship with the church, and go on SCLC's payroll.
Speaker 1: And what was the agenda of SCLC at the time you made the complete switch?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time, we had been through the sit-ins, the Freedom Rides, voter registration across the South.  We had introduced Operation Breadbasket, an economic withdrawal program that we, we borrowed from Dr. Leon Sullivan in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I had--[Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] had won the Nobel [Peace] Prize and I had been involved with him in helping to visit, pull together some of the speeches and things like that, that he had to give.  And I don't know, we had just--by that time, we had a pretty cohesive team.
Speaker 1: What were some of the legislative and policy accomplishments during that period, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, we passed the 1964 Civil Rights Act as a result of Birmingham [Alabama].  And I really probably need to--I mean Birmingham could be an hour by itself because it's important enough--I mean it is the classic, nonviolent organization of a movement (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe just a few highlights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that we started helping people to define what they really wanted.  And they really had only four basic goals.  One was to take down the signs, black and colored--I mean black and white.  Two, was to have employment opportunities everywhere they shopped.  Three was, the right to vote without discrimination and four was, desegregation of schools so that their children could get a good education.  And we concentrated on the public accommodations, and we organized demonstrations every morning.  And in the afternoons, we went to the schools, and we tried to talk to people about nonviolence and we made the round of the pool halls at night.  And we had church meetings almost every night with some orientation on what was going on.
Story_ID: 228595
Speaker 1: Because I had been involved with the National Council of [the] Churches [of Christ in the U.S.A. (NCC)], it became my job to be the bridge to the white community.  So in addition to all of the organizing of the black community, I called up a young woman whom I met with the National Council of Churches, who was working with the Episcopal diocese in Birmingham [Alabama] and asked her to set up a meeting with me and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and the Bishop [Charles Carpenter, Sr.].  And she agreed to do it.  And that led to--we asked the bishop only to convene a meeting of the Birmingham business community and let us talk to them 'cause we didn't want them not to--we wanted them to understand why we were there and what we were doing.  He agreed, and so almost every day, at least every other day, after the demonstrations were over at twelve o'clock, and we had to be over at twelve o'clock because the reporters had to get on a plane to fly the film back to New York [New York] in time for the six o'clock news.  So we always did our demonstrations in the morning.  But we explained to the press early in the morning, what the demonstration was gonna be about, why we were doing it, where it was gonna be.  We did it, and then in the afternoon, I would usually end up going down to the Episcopal diocesan house to meet with business leaders.  And, you know, and they cussed us out, and they blamed us for all the problems.  "Birmingham was perfect until you all got here and stirred up trouble," and we didn't argue with them.  We let them ventilate [ph.], but we explained to them that we could no longer cooperate with segregation, that segregation existed because we've helped finance it and that we were going to withdraw our support.  And so we weren't going to do business with companies that segregated against us.  So we had almost a total boycott of the business community downtown.  And they were really feeling it, and it lasted for about ninety days.  And we said, "We're not gonna spend our money where we can't work," see.  "And we need your help in creating the climate where we can register to vote and where our children can become better educated."  And in time, we over--we won 'em over.  And they actually agreed to desegregate Birmingham and to take down all the signs to allow blacks to eat at the lunch counters, and to employ black people, even though all of that was against the Alabama law.  But when we stopped cooperating, they either had to change the law or go out of business.  So they agreed with us.  And we did a detailed, I mean we didn't force them.  One of the laws of [Mohandas] Gandhi was that you always give your opponent a face-saving way out.  So we didn't wanna brag that we won.  We said, "Okay, let's do this over a thirty-day period.  The first day, you can go take all those signs down tomorrow.  Nobody's gonna miss 'em.  You don't have to make any announcement.  Just take all the signs out of your stores.  So, okay.  Then within ten days you ought to be able to find somebody in your store, I guarantee you that the maids who are cleaning up the stores know more about the stockrooms and will be better--you can find some people already there that you can employ as clerks, see.  And that we'll wait for ten days before we start the lunch counters.  And we'll send one couple a day, see, for the first week.  And we'll call you up and let you know when they're coming so you can be prepared, see.  And if nothing happens, in the first week, then the next week, we might send couples at different times, two or three people at the different times of the day.  But we'll always let you know how many are coming, when they're coming."
Story_ID: 228596
Speaker 1: Do you feel that you were uniquely prepared to handle the negotiation as opposed to perhaps some of the others with their gifts?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as bad as folk talk, we saw that later on in Chicago [Illinois], that guys would be--who would be so militant in the street, would get in the room with white people and get intimidated.  And I was not intimidated, you know, and I didn't have to shout and I could listen and--I mean I, that was the training I had growing up, but it was also the training I had at the [National] Council of [the] Churches [of Christ in the U.S.A. (NCC)].  I had worked with whites in Marion, Alabama and also in Thomasville [Georgia] and Beachton, Georgia.  So I was very comfortable with, you know, rich or poor white folks.
Story_ID: 228597
ANNOUNCER:  Major funding for the following program was provided by Walmart Stores, Inc.  Additional funding was provided by [The] Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia], UPS and other participating sponsors.
Story_ID: 228598
ANNOUNCER:  Born on the rich soil of New Orleans [Louisiana], [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young rose to become one of the most influential men of our time.  A faithful servant of God, a courageous warrior in the struggle against injustice and a powerful political leader.  His legacy has been intertwined with the transformation of America.  We are proud to present to you, 'An Evening With Andrew Young.'  And now to our host, award-winning author and journalist, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault.
Story_ID: 228599
Speaker 1: Thank you and good evening.  It is such a pleasure for me to be here tonight.  When The HistoryMakers asked me to come from Johannesburg [South Africa] to do this, I didn't hesitate one minute because it is an honor for me to honor my friend, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young.  You know, Andrew was born in the rich soil of New Orleans [Louisiana], but it was segregated soil.  And yet, he rose to become one of the most influential leaders of our time.  And so tonight, I'm gonna ask you to join with me in looking at the life and inspiration of a man who's been an inspiration to all of us.
Speaker 2: (YOUNG MAN 1):  I was born at the beginning of an era of enormous change, change so great, it would be called the second American Revolution.
Speaker 1: (YOUNG MAN 2):  The modern world was in crisis, and with that crisis came the opportunity for my generation to change America in a way that was good news for all Americans.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  We would try to change the world morally.  We would redeem the soul of America.
Speaker 1: (YOUNG MAN 1):  I am Andrew Young.
Speaker 2: (YOUNG MAN 2):  I am Andrew Young.
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  I am Andrew Young.
Speaker 2: Please join me in welcoming Andrew Young.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: (Andrew Young comes to the stage and is seated.)
Speaker 1: Okay, ready to go.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Story_ID: 228600
Speaker 1: Once again, welcome, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].  It's such a pleasure for me to be here in our city, Atlanta [Georgia], a city I know that we both hold dear.  It's hard to think of Atlanta without thinking of Andy Young, and Andy Young without his Atlanta.  But you were actually, as I said earlier, born in New Orleans [Louisiana], March 12th, 1932.  What was it like for you growing up in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Actually, I enjoyed my childhood.  And I grew up in a neighborhood that was a little United Nations [UN].  There was an Irish grocery store on one corner, an Italian bar on the other.  The German American Bund was on the third corner.  And so even as a four or five-year-old, I was listening to people heil [Adolf] Hitler and sing, "Deutschland uber alles."  And my father [Andrew Young, Sr.], as a dentist, had a large connection with the Jewish community in the dental supply business.  And so I got a very significant political education very early.  We talked a lot about what was going on in Europe.
Speaker 1: And you understood it?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I understood it, but my father took me to see Jesse Owens in the movie theaters, win four Olympic gold medals and Hitler walk out without shaking his hand, refusing to meet him.  And he said, "See, that's a sickness.  That racism is a sickness.  You don't get angry with sick people.  You help 'em.  You heal 'em."  And he raised me, I think, you know, to "Don't get mad, get smart--"
Story_ID: 228601
Speaker 1: Well, you know, there's a wonderful scene in your autobiography, 'An Easy Burden: [The Civil Rights Movement and The Transformation of America,' Andrew Young], that is a very good reflection of that family you just described.  Let's look at it.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  I was born in March, 1932, in a New Orleans [Louisiana] shotgun style house to Andrew Young [Sr.], a dentist and Daisy Fuller Young, a former school teacher.  Within two years, my brother, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Walter [Young], was born, and we were virtually raised together.  We were treated as a pair by relatives.
(ALL):  Andrew and Walter.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  (Laughter) They'd say.  When we were old enough, we would sit in church or a good part of it, following Sunday school.  We used the Pilgrim hymnals which had both the English and the German hymns.
Speaker 1: (WOMAN PORTRAYING CHURCH MEMBER):  Oh yes, hallelujah!  Thank you, Jesus, amen, praise him loud, praise him.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  The congregation intensely disapproved of black praise songs and emotional outbreaks.  The only element of the service that reflected the particular culture of the congregation of the inclusion of the Negro spirituals.  The choir sang--
Speaker 1: (Choir singing 'Steal Away').
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  --'We Are Climbing Jacob's Ladder,' 'Lord, I Want To Be A Christian,' 'Steal Away,' and other songs of the African American tradition.  In those days of the Great Depression, Jim Crow was the law of the South.  In a polite society, we were known as colored people.  The attitude of my parents' generation, of our teachers, seemed to be that we should concentrate our efforts on improving the race, and not just improving the level of education, but improving moral behavior.  Daddy taught me, "Racism was not a problem with you." He told me, "It's a problem that they have."  Daddy had a genuine, turn-the-other check attitude, although he didn't believe in becoming a victim.  Now, ma and gran [Louisa Fuller] weren't quite so gentle.
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  "Gran," I said one night while reading her the Old Testament.  "There's these boys that come by calling us niggers."  Gran sat up straight.
Speaker 2: (WOMAN PORTRAYING LOUISA FULLER):  If they call you nigger, you got to fight 'em.  If you don't fight 'em when they call you nigger, and I find out about it, I'm gonna whip you myself.
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  And the next time those boys came on Cleveland Avenue, yelling, "Nigger, nigger, nigger," Walter and I lit out after them and surprise of all surprises, the boys ran.
Speaker 2: (BOYS PORTRAYING ANDREW YOUNG AND WALTER YOUNG):  Yes.  They were prepared to call us names, but they wasn't prepared to fight.
Story_ID: 228602
Speaker 1: I'm sure that brings back memories.  Your father, Andrew Jackson [Young] Sr., we just heard, a dentist.  Your mother, Daisy Fuller Young, a retired school teacher.  And, of course, your mother and your father believed in, I believe three things you wrote about, God, hard work and education.
Speaker 2: Well, they did.  And it was, that was the Congregational tradition.  The Congregational church really came south starting at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], then Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] or Straight College back in those days.  And Lincoln Normal [School, Marion, Alabama] in Alabama where my wife [Jean Childs Young] went to school and where her mother [Idella Childs] and father [Norman Childs] and Coretta [Scott King] got an education.
Speaker 1: The era that we grew up, everybody had something to do with trying to make you somebody.  And you had teachers that--one in particular, I believe, who tried to impress upon you the lessons of W.E.B. DuBois and the Talented Tenth.  Talk about that just a little bit.  And did it have any effect?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I always knew from Miss Fannie C. Williams in Valena C. Jones Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana] that, you know, same message, "For those to whom much has been given, of them will much be required." [Luke 12:48]  And it was very uncomfortable because the teachers and the principal expected me to be a leader in the class.
Speaker 1: You managed to graduate from Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] when you were just fifteen years old, and then you went to Dillard for a year, which was your father's alma mater.  What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was fun because I was fifteen, but the two guys I was running with were just back from the [U.S.] Army, and one was twenty-nine and the other was thirty-one.
Speaker 1: How'd you hook up with them?
Speaker 2: They sort of adopted me, made me sort of a mascot (laughter).  And, but I also had a car.  I mean I could use my parents' car.  You could drive in Louisiana at fifteen.  They wouldn't let me try to keep up, but I had to stay sober so if they got drunk, I could get them and the girls home.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, in the fall of 1948, still younger than most, you left New Orleans [Louisiana] and went to Washington, D.C. to Howard University.  What was it like for you leaving home for the first time at such a young age?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd been to California that summer.  And I went to summer school at University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  And I didn't like it 'cause I was the only black person on the campus.  So when I came back, I was glad to go to Howard, and I fell right in with the guys in the dormitory.  And it was the first time I had met some people who were very proud to be scholars.  That was a different world from where I'd been--
Story_ID: 228603
Speaker 1: You know, we have a scene from that different world of your years at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Let's take a look at it.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  My sophomore year, I transferred to Howard University.  I made the Howard track and swimming team, becoming in my senior year the number one dash man on the team, winning my events in several meets.  For some odd reason though I was never really accepted by the coach.  Coach [Thomas A.] Hart [Sr.] had his favorites, and it amuses me even to this day how he seemed to be so outdone that I outran his chosen few.  So outdone that he never gave me a pair of shoes.  Despite my love of sports and many other aspects of my time at Howard, I found the atmosphere on the campus to be imbued with a haughtiness and a pretense that I found unappealing.  This was the first place that I had ever been that people would walk by each other on campus and did not speak.  Girls were society conscious to an extreme.  Some of them wore high heels, cocktail dresses and fur coats to class, as if their sole purpose was to snare a future physician or attorney.  I found myself gravitating towards students (audience laughter) that had a sense of purpose that I lacked.  One student that I greatly admired was Emmanuel Latunde Odeku from Nigeria.  Odeku was brilliant, and he had a certain arrogance about black men that was typical of certain Nigerians.
Speaker 1: (MAN PORTRAYING LATUNDE ODEKU):  I shall sleep for two hours after dinner, then arise and study until three or four in the morning.  Then I shall sleep for two hours in the morning and take another nap for an hour after lunch.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Incredibly disciplined and organized, Odeku was a scholar, an athlete and a true, true gentleman.  He completed his studies at Howard in two and a half years, finishing summa cum laude.  I, on the other hand, graduated from Howard, not magna cum laude, but "Oh, thank you, Lordy."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  I now realize that my years spent at Howard were important to my personal development.  I learned that it was possible, even desirable, to have a black identity without being poor.  My parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] had shown me this.  Their friends had shown me this.  But it was only at Howard that I learned to accept this for myself.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 228604
Speaker 1: Even given all of the things you've talked about and your aptitudes in school, you still graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at nineteen years old in 1951.   This was a pivotal time for you.  Why was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I just kept drifting on (audience laughter), trying not to make my daddy [Andrew Young, Sr.] mad.
Speaker 1: He wanted you to be a dentist.
Speaker 2: He wanted me to be a dentist, and I knew I wasn't going to be a dentist.  But I didn't have enough nerve to tell him.  And it wasn't until after I graduated and had something of a religious experience on the way to Kings Mountain, at Kings Mountain, North Carolina in the sense--religious in the sense that I would--I realized that a college education is a tremendous opportunity and blessing.  And I had just about blown it.  And so I didn't go home for Thanksgiving.  I didn't go home for Christmas.  I didn't--I mean I, I--once I got into studies, that's all I did for a solid year, didn't date, didn't write.  I mean I just--I lived really an ascetic life practically.
Story_ID: 228605
Speaker 1: You went to a church as an assistant in Marion, Alabama and you--
Speaker 2: Well, I was the preacher at Marion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Alabama, and you spent that summer living with the Childs family.  Who else was in that family?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Ah (laughter).
Speaker 2: I wasn't really living there.  I did live there.  I mean I wasn't spending the night there, but (audience laughter)--
Speaker 1: Come on, [HistoryMaker] Andrew [Young].  Tell us who else was in the family?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a nice little lady by the name of Jean Childs who interestingly enough was in Manchester College [Manchester University, Manchester, Indiana], a school where they studied nonviolence.  It was the Church of the Brethren school.  I had by that time, started reading [Mohandas] Gandhi.  And Gandhi's simple life, the idea that you shouldn't, you know, have any wealth or property and that you should devote your life to helping other people, I mean, that's what put me in the clash with all of the girls I'd been around at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And Jean was totally different.  And she was from the country.  She and Coretta [Scott King] had gone to the same high school [Lincoln Normal School, Marion, Alabama], and had pretty much the same kind of upbringing.  It was a rough, kind of segregated town that was particularly hard on young, black women.  And so she had a maturity and a commitment about her to change the South that I had never seen in a woman.
Speaker 1: You received your bachelors of divinity degree [from Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut], bachelor of divinity, in January, '55 [1955], and then you began your first pastorates at Bethany Congregational Church in Thomasville [Georgia].
Story_ID: 228606
Speaker 1: And then Evergreen [Congregational] Church in Beachton [Georgia], and we have a scene from that.
Speaker 2: (Actors portraying members of Evergreen Congregational Church sing).
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Evergreen Church wants me right away to modify the laid back style of service that I had so carefully groomed at Hartford [Theological] Seminary [Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut].  My training at Hartford Seminary taught me to develop a simple, direct message with a tightly organized order of worship.  This approach never worked at Evergreen.  Anytime there was a lull in the service, the congregation automatically slipped into one of those old-time gospel hymns.  They'd get their rhythm going, clapping and tapping their feet, which left me to ask myself the one question, how could I regain control of the service without asking the congregation to be quiet?  After a few tries of delivering a sermon that would have been acceptable to my seminary professors, I was given this advice by the deacon of the congregation.
Speaker 2: (ACTOR PORTRAYING DEACON SPEARMAN):  Some of our folks don't trust a preacher with a whole lotta paper.  The Lord don't need that paper to make Himself heard.  They see a lot of paper, and they think the devil has gotten up in your preaching.
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG): The deacon's insistence that I preach from the heart and not from the paper turned out to be a real blessing.  It allowed me to grow more with them, and it also allowed me to enjoy the church's lovely, soft communal hums.  My youth drew a lot of attention.  Jean [Childs Young] was a Sunday school teacher.  She taught because she liked doing it.  And she never felt any other obligation to conform in any other ways.  After church on Sundays, we would play ball with the kids.  We would attend dances that were given by friends, and Jean wore shorts in our yard.  And not surprisingly, we were criticized for it.  In my concept of a nontraditional ministerial role, I know it made my marriage work.  As for Jean, she was very clear that she was not--
Speaker 2: (ACTRESS PORTRAYING JEAN YOUNG):  --going to be a typical minister's wife.
Speaker 1: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  As she told our friends in Thomasville [Georgia].
Speaker 2: (ACTRESS PORTRAYING JEAN YOUNG):  I don't sing.  I don't play the piano.  I can't direct the choir, and I'm not interested in being a social butterfly.
(CONGREGATION):  That's all right, sister.  That's all right.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  But the Evergreen congregation was so loving and accepting that I quickly learned to be comfortable with this new style.  No matter what I said, "Today, we're going to study," Deacon Spearman hummed, "well, praise the Lord."  And soon, they got their rhythm going, and then they pulled me into their rhythm, and before long, I found my own rhythm.  And I learned the old, old hymns and the ancient spirituals that are not written down, like--
Speaker 1: (Actors portraying members of Evergreen Congregational Church sing).
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Story_ID: 228607
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about those early years where you were finding your way as a preacher and as a young family man.  What was it like?
Speaker 2: I came to love and appreciate small-town life, and people, country people who still had, I think what I have now seen, is a closer link to our African heritage than we do in most cities.
Speaker 1: It was about this time too, I think around 1956 that you organized a voter education, voter registration rally in Thomasville [Georgia].  Were you having to consciously balance your activism at that point with your preaching and pastoring?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a balance.  It was all one ministry.  In fact, it was a Mother's Day.  And I was preaching about the Christian family and one of my deacons and one of the mothers in the church got in a fight.  And they were sitting in church with, I mean--he came home drunk.  And Miss Leola [ph.] didn't stand for that.  So she took an axe handle to him (audience laughter).  And in the process of taking the axe handle from him, I mean from her, she got hit upside the head.  He'd been hit upside the head.  But they were still right there in front.  And I'm supposed to be preaching about the Christian family (audience laughter).  And fortunately, I found out what happened.  And what happened was, he'd been the caretaker on one of these plantations down there.  And he'd been making seventy-five dollars a week, even though he'd been there for thirty years.  And then a young white man came, young white boy came, nineteen or twenty years old and was put in charge of him.  And he had to teach the white boy everything to do on the plantation.  And then he realized that the white boy got $140 and he didn't get but seventy-five dollars.  And he went out, not able to deal with that and got drunk.  Well, she didn't understand the background.  But fortunately, the other members in my church were very sensitive to that.  And they told me what happened.  So in my Mother's Day sermon, I had to make the leap from, it please God by the foolishness of preaching to save men's soul, to going to break down the dividing walls of hostility that separated Jews from Greeks in the New Testament, but in our time, separates black from white.  And the link to say, from preaching to ending segregation, came very, almost automatic.  Now, about the same time, Maynard's [Maynard Jackson] grandfather, John Wesley Dobbs, invited us up to Columbus [Georgia] for the Masonic lodge effort to have a statewide voter registration campaign.  And they asked if somebody would--would I be willing to try to lead a voter registration campaign in Thomasville?  And John Wesley Dobbs said he would be glad to come down to kick it off.  Well, I didn't think there was anything wrong with that.  I thought that was a wonderful opportunity, which it was.
Story_ID: 228608
Speaker 1: But was it dangerous?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know then, but coming back from Albany, Georgia, driving through Moultrie [Georgia], the backroads, we turned the corner in a place called Doerun, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Doerun?
Speaker 2: Doerun.   And there must have been four or five hundred people in sheets [Ku Klux Klan, KKK].
Speaker 1: Ooh.
Speaker 2: And I figured that they were coming to stop this voter registration drive.  We hadn't seen anything like that before.  And that's where I had my first marriage crisis, because even though I believed in nonviolence, I'd also read Reinhold Niebuhr, which said you're supposed to negotiate from a position of strength.  So I told Jean [Childs Young] that, you know, I said, "I'm going down there--if they come here, I'm going down to talk to 'em.  But I want you to point the rifle at the guy that I'm talking to.  And I just wanna let him know that if he messes with me, you're gonna take him out.  And then we can talk like, from an equal footing, see.  And I'll be negotiating from a position of strength."  And she said, "Are you crazy?"
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And I said, "Well, I might be, but we gonna have to do it."  She said, "No, you think I'm gonna point a gun at a human being?"  I said--you know, we used to shoot all the time.  That was one of the things you did in the country for recreation, put up a bunch of cans and, you know, knock the cans off the stump.
Speaker 1: And Jean could shoot?
Speaker 2: She could shoot.
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: She said no.  She said, "You don't believe this stuff you're preaching?"  I said, well, Andrea [Young]--I said, "We got a three-month old baby [Andrea Young] here.  This house would go up in smoke if they so much as throw a firebomb here."  And she said, "Well, you're preaching all this stuff about cross and resurrection.  If you don't believe it, you ought to quit."  I said, "Aw, what kind of fool did I marry?  This woman is crazy."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And fortunately, some of our members, the Glenns [ph.], called us.  They realized what was going on and invited us over to their house.  Well, that broke the stalemate.  But the other thing was that businessmen in the community and the black community had gotten together.  And Sunnyland Packing Company [Thomasville, Georgia] and Flowers Bakery [Flowers Foods, Thomasville, Georgia] were the two biggest employers.  And they went on their plant microphones and urged people not to involve in the Klan rally and said, "We have good race relations here.  Let's--we get along here.  Let's don't mess it up."  And the Klan had its rally on the courthouse steps.  But they didn't bother anybody in the black community.  John Wesley Dobbs came in that Sunday, and he preached a magnificent sermon.  And I'll never forget, the punch line was, "Stick with this blue-eyed boy, but watch him."
Story_ID: 228609
Speaker 1: And then a year later, about, you met a man you'd soon be working with, [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.].  What was your first impression of him?
Speaker 2: Well, my first impression of Martin Luther King was that he was so impressed with being a father, that he wasn't interested in--I mean I was trying to impress him with the fact, I knew he got his Ph.D. on Paul Tillich, and I had read Paul Tillich.  And I was trying to let him--he couldn't care less.  He was totally focused on Coretta [Scott King] and Yoki [Yolanda King], his baby.  I mean the high point in his life was that he had a new little girl.  And we never talked anything but baby talk (audience laughter) 'cause Andrea [Young] was about a year old.  And Yoki was three or four months.  And we ended up playing with our babies.
Speaker 1: In 1957, you also accepted a position in New York [New York] with the youth department of the National Council of [the] Churches [of Christ in the U.S.A. (NCC)].  And you had to leave Thomasville [Georgia].  Was that difficult?
Speaker 2: It was difficult to leave Thomasville, but we always said that the way I decided what I would do with my life was, do something that nobody else wanted to do.  And nobody else wanted to go to Thomasville.  Nobody else wanted to go to Marion [Alabama], and when I was offered the job at New York, there was no other black person that had any kind of experience in the Christian youth movement.  Jean [Childs Young] was expecting Lisa [Young].  And--
Speaker 1: Number two.
Speaker 2: And--she was number two.  And Reverend [J. Taylor] Stanley found another minister who was looking for a church, and he wanted to come the first of July.  We were basically being run out of town because there was another preacher who wanted to move in with his family.  There was nobody to do what they wanted me to do in New York, but we didn't--I mean Jean did not like New York.
Speaker 1: But you grew in New York.  You expanded.  Tell us just a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew because one of my first assignments was with CBS to sort of help produce a program for Christian young people called 'Look Up and Live.'  We had a half hour every Sunday morning, thirteen Sundays.  And I had to come up with a program and find ways to interpret the gospel to a new generation of young people.  And it's where I got to know people like Dave Brubeck and the Modern Jazz Quartet, all of the old blues and jazz people who were expressing the youth culture at that time.  We were able to get on the show and make, begin to make the connection between secular culture and what was happening in the jazz world, and blues and what the gospel said.
Speaker 1: You also began to make international connections.  You traveled internationally during that period.
Speaker 2: Well, Jean and I had gone to Europe in 1953.  And so I'd been abroad, and, but I went to a number of delegations with Christian youth folk, went to Latin America, went to, several times to Geneva, and it--I mean I became a pretty comfortable international traveler.
Story_ID: 228610
Speaker 1: And then there came a time when you decided to come back to the South.
Speaker 2: Well, we blame that on [HistoryMaker] John Lewis because we were watching the Nashville [Tennessee] sit-in story on television.  We'd bought a house in Long Island [New York], and Jean [Childs Young] was just about to complete her master's [degree], and she was expecting Paula [Young].  We saw the Nashville sit-in story, and we both said, you know, "It's time to go back home."  And we'd always said we weren't gonna stay in New York [New York] more than five years.  And this was coming on four years.  So it was complicated, but I quit my job, sold my house and was planning to come to work for Highlander Folk School [Highlander Research and Education Center, New Market, Tennessee] 'cause I wanted to write about the [Civil Rights] Movement.  I didn't wanna get involved in it.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: Because I figured that, what has happened, that other people would interpret our history and that I needed to be close--Highlander was where the students were trained for the sit-ins and where Rosa Parks went, and--but it wasn't in the middle of the movement.  It was sort of like in the eye of the storm.  It was quiet and peaceful up in the Tennessee mountains.
Speaker 1: It was religious.
Speaker 2: No, it was--well, they closed it down 'cause they said it was Communist.  But it was an old labor organizing center that was closed by the State of Tennessee.  And they accused Septima [Poinsette] Clark, who was a wonderful lady in her sixties, of carrying out twenty-six gallons of moonshine in two cases, two suitcases.  I mean, but they closed it down, and so I had sold my house.  I quit my job, and I had no place to go.
Speaker 1: And so, is that how you ended up at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 2: That's how I ended up at SCLC.  I went to the United Church of Christ Board for Homeland Ministries.  And I knew about Dorchester Center [Midway, Georgia] near Savannah [Georgia].  And I asked them, could we take the program that was at Highlander, a literacy program, teaching people to read and write in order to register to vote, could we move that to Dorchester Center.  And they said, "We'd be glad to move it.  And we can put some money to fix up the building too.  But we need you to go down to be the administrator."
Speaker 1: And you went?
Speaker 2: And we went.
Story_ID: 228611
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you began gradually working with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] during this time, and we have a scene that will tell us a little bit more about that.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Martin understood that the mantle of leadership had been thrust upon him.  However, I was determined to at least keep Martin from participating in demonstrations at night.  He would say:
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.):  Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], I have to do everything everybody else does.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  I would answer, "No, Martin, that's not true.  If you're out there, and they're shooting at you, they're liable to miss you and hit some of us.  If we stay here at the church, they won't do any shooting."  On this point, Martin reluctantly accepted my logic.  Martin was always philosophical about the internal tensions and about the violence that accompanied our efforts.
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.):  Andy, you are too rational.  If you had your way, we would never have a confrontation.  But you need confrontation to bring the horror and violence of racism to the surface where it can be exposed to truth and be healed.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Martin did have a side that wasn't so serious.  When Ralph Abernathy started complaining--
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING RALPH ABERNATHY):  I am never allowed to speak at the march.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Martin responded with--
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.):  Now, Ralph, you have to a head of an organization to speak.  Now what we need to do is find you an organization that you can be the head of so that on next march, you can have the right to speak.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  And everybody present agreed that the one organization that Ralph was unquestionably the president of was the--
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.):  The National Association for the Advancement of Eating Chicken.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Martin waxed eloquent, saying--
Speaker 1: (ACTOR PORTRAYING REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.):  No one can challenge your preeminence (laughter).  You would have no competition.
Speaker 2: (NARRATOR PORTRAYING THE HONORABLE ANDREW YOUNG):  Oh, we laughed, big, deep, belly laughs, releasing all the tensions of the day.  Martin could tease.  He could crack on you.  He could insult you until the whole room was laughing until they cried.  But it was never in anger, never in bitterness.  It was always in fun.  Martin didn't--never teased anyone that he didn't love.  Martin could relax this way only with the people that he trusted, his closest colleagues and his personal friends.  None of us were saints.  Saints could not have endured the rigors of the movement, could not have accomplished what we had accomplished in so short of a time.  We were flesh and blood human beings, men and women, flawed and imperfect, and we fell far short of the glory of God.  But we changed America.  And we did it without hurting anyone, except ourselves.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 228612
Speaker 1: (Applause)
Speaker 2: That was a pretty powerful scene.  I mean, you know, recalling how young people--'cause you were still young then, were agents of change, that we were all involved in something--we had this wonderful comradery, but we were also involved in something larger than ourselves.  How do you--now that that time is over, but how do you convey that to a younger generation and help them be prepared for challenges that they might confront?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  It's difficult, but nobody prepared us.  And when the time came, we just stood up and did what we had to do.  And I was saying that usually, we were staying up late at night, trying to make sure we knew what we were gon' do the next morning.  And we'd always go in with a long, serious battle plan, which [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Wyatt [Tee] Walker was great at, putting down plans on paper.  But once you got in a situation, nothing ever worked out like you thought it was.
Speaker 2: Is there any one moment that stands out in your life, either--in your mind, as a triumphant moment or the most challenging moment?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the moment that [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] took the leadership of the [Civil Rights] Movement.
Speaker 2: When was that?
Speaker 1: It was in Birmingham [Alabama], and I think that through the sit-ins and through the Freedom Rides, even Albany, Georgia, he was being pushed by other people.  And we didn't go in there prepared.  We were responding to other people's crises.  And that's what Martin was--they were talking about 'cause Hosea [Williams] was the same way.  [HistoryMaker Reverend James] Bevel was logical, but almost suicidal.  I mean he just thought you had to, you had to plan to get killed (audience laughter).  See, and he'd say things like, he said, "If you ask somebody to chop off an arm, they'd look at you like you're crazy."  He said, "But you ask 'em to give your life for something," he said, "the chances are they'll do it."  And sure enough, he was always putting us in the positions where other folk were risking their lives (laughter).  And I think the only time I got really cussed out by Martin was once when I agreed with him.
Speaker 2: With those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With, with--
Speaker 2: The younger (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, they weren't that much younger.  Hosea was older than me, but Hosea was in a foxhole in the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  It was a direct hit.  Everybody in the foxhole was killed but him.  And then he was in an ambulance and on the way back to the field hospital, the ambulance was hit.  And the ambulance driver was killed and he was still laying in the back.  Well, he spent eleven months in a hospital in England wondering why he was alive and everybody else had been killed.  And comes back in the bus station in Macon, Georgia, he tries to get a drink of water, in his [U.S.] Army uniform, on a cane, 40 percent disabled veteran.  And somebody roughs him up, trying to--not for drinking out of a fountain.  He bought a coffee cup, and they wouldn't sell him the cup.  They made him buy the coffee.  And he emptied the coffee and rinsed the coffee cup out and was drinking out of a cup.  And a bunch of folks, because the cup said--the fountain said "white only," a bunch of young kids roughed him up.  And he just decided that that's what the Lord saved him for, was to end segregation.  So he was anxious.  And he figured his life had been spared, and he was ready to give it every day.  Well, I just figured you needed to be a little careful.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 228613
Speaker 1: You started to tell us why you thought Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] taking over the [Civil Rights] Movement was probably the most triumphant moment for you.
Speaker 2: Well, because we had done everything that we thought we could do.  There were about three or four hundred kids in jail.  Old--I mean every--they said kids.  But the first demonstrator was seventy-eight years old in Birmingham [Alabama].  So we ran through all the old people.  We were down to the college students.  And the business leadership came to visit Dr. King and asked him, said, "You just need to know that you failed, that, you know, it's no fault.  Birmingham was just too much.  These people don't respond to nonviolence.  And we think you need to go leave and go around the country and preach and raise enough money to get these folk out of jail.  And then come back to Birmingham in another year or so."  And he sat there and listened to 'em.  And then he got up and went in the next room.  And when he came back, he had on his overalls.  And he said, "I'm sorry, gentlemen."  He said, "I--you probably are right."  He said, "But there's no way I can leave.  The only thing I can do is go to jail with them."
Speaker 1: And that was the turning point?
Speaker 2: And then, it was that--that was a Thursday.  That Sunday the preachers had the attack on the movement in the Sunday paper [The Birmingham News] that was calling, blaming us for stirring up all the trouble in Birmingham.  And he read that and wrote the 'Letter from Birmingham Jail.'  And he wrote it around the margins of The New York Times, on toilet tissue and it--and to show you how ignorant we were and how we didn't realize the significance of it, the young lady who was typing it, after we smuggled it out of the jail, she stayed up all night typing and was cussing and fussing, "Dr. King got a Ph.D.  He can preach, but he sure can't write.  Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], what is this word?"  You know, and when she finished, she'd curl up the paper and throw it in the trashcan.  And I didn't have sense enough to stop her.  And it wasn't until the letter got finished, and I think the Quakers published about a hundred thousand of 'em, of copies of it, and it went all over the world.  And that was the most--that was the turning point.
Story_ID: 228614
Speaker 1: You know, as rich and as rewarding, albeit as challenging, as dangerous as that period was for you, many things were accomplished through the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and your involvement with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and your other comrades.  But in 1971 you resigned to enter the political arena, which ushered in a new chapter of your life.  Let's take a look at that.
ANNOUNCER:  In 1970, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young resigned from his post at SCLC.  The political chapter of his life had begun, and in the years to come, he would influence communities, locally and across the globe.  On November 7, 1972, Young was elected as the first black representative from Georgia since Reconstruction.
Speaker 1: (Film clip of The Honorable Andrew Young):  "I'd like for us to remember what it was like back in March when we first began this campaign.  I'd like for us to remember that we were talking about a district that was on the verge of pulling apart.  We were talking about a political climate that said no decent man, a moderate or a liberal, could get elected, whether he was black or white.  I'd like for us to remember that everybody said that this campaign was impossible."
Speaker 2: (Film clip of The Honorable Andrew Young):  "I think I'll be the only congressman who happens to be black, who's from a majority white district.  And I think the fact that that district is a Deep South district, is very significant.  It means that we're beginning to do what I say we're going to have to do, that is, that the South is going to have to show the nation how we can live and work together as brothers."
ANNOUNCER:  Nineteen seventy-three [1973] proved to be an important year.  His son, Andrew Young, III, affectionately known as Beau, was born on February 13th, and Young was sworn into office where he served three terms.  In 1976, Young was appointed as United States ambassador to the United Nations [UN].  As ambassador, Young advocated from impoverished citizens around the globe.  His commitment and devotion rose above political agenda.  However, politics would have their way, forcing Young's resignation.
Speaker 2: (MALE SPEAKER):  "I'm with Andrew Young all the way.  I think he's the best thing to happen to America's foreign policy in a world that is replete with instances of injustice in a long, long time.  Now, the fact that he is not typical of diplomats in an arena which finds it very hard to deal with the truth and with candor, will create problems for him."
ANNOUNCER:  Undaunted, Young went on to serve as mayor of Atlanta [Georgia] for two terms.
Speaker 2: (Film clip of The Honorable Andrew Young):  "There's not a city in America where black people have made the strides that they have made in Atlanta.  You probably have more college graduates in Atlanta that are black.  You probably have more black business in Atlanta.  You probably have certainly more universities run by black people here.  You have better housing in Atlanta, and I dare say you have better secondary schools in Atlanta than most black people anywhere else in the world."
ANNOUNCER:  Under his leadership, millions of jobs were created and the City of Atlanta flourished.  Young brought worldwide attention to Atlanta when he successfully negotiated to have the 1996 [Summer] Olympics held in Atlanta.  On March 28th, 1996, Young would take Carolyn McClain as his bride in a private ceremony in South Africa where Bishop Desmond Tutu married the couple and [HistoryMaker] Ambassador James Joseph and his wife, Mary [Braxton-Joseph], were in attendance.  They have worked closely together in their company GoodWorks International [LLC, Atlanta, Georgia], which is devoted to fostering U.S. investment and generating jobs in South Africa and in the Caribbean.  Today, Andrew Young is one of our nation's most honored civic leaders, turned private citizen.  He continues to advocate staunchly for human rights and justice around the world, truly demonstrating a lifetime of civic and spiritual devotion.
Story_ID: 228615
Speaker 1: Tell us about your historic election on November 7th, 1972, as the first black U.S. representative from Georgia since Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: Well, basically, the community just pulled together behind me and everybody did.  And it poured down rain.  And people got out in the rain and voted.  I remember getting mad with Jesse Hill [Jr.] because he put it in the paper that I was behind by four percentage points.  And I said, "Jesse, what you wanna say that for?"  He said, "Just leave it alone, leave it alone.  I know what I'm doing." (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But did you feel the historic significance of this?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean I--you know, it, I didn't.  But what happened was when people felt that I was behind, if they felt that I was ahead, they might have said, "I don't have to go to vote in the rain."  But the fact that they thought I was behind, you know, really had people lined up in the rain.  It was almost like South Africa, you know, where they, they just got out and voted.  And that was--for me, that was a mandate from the South.  That was also the same election where [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon beat [Senator George] McGovern.  And so for me to get elected in a--when Georgia went overwhelmingly Republican, and for the South, the southern strategy to divide and conquer in the Republican Party was, we were running against that.  We were saying, "We can hold the South together, black and white together."  And Atlanta [Georgia] did that.  And I think that [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.] was elected in 1976 and in many ways, internationalized the nonviolence of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And for four years, in Panama, in Camp David [Catoctin Mountain Park, Maryland], in southern Africa, with the Russians, the Chinese and the Vietnamese came back into the UN [United Nations].  And we did everything America needed to do, and no American soldier got killed, and no American soldier killed anybody--
Story_ID: 228616
Speaker 1: As the United States ambassador to the United Nations [UN], what was your most significant accomplishment?
Speaker 2: I think that, well, I learned to appreciate Ralph Bunche.  And Ralph Bunche always said that there's no, you know, you don't want people to know what you're doing; said, if you stay behind the scenes, you can get a whole lot done.  And the less people know about what you're doing, the better off you are.  And I think most of the things that I've accomplished, nobody knows about.
Speaker 1: And what is--tell us one that we don't know about, that made you feel good.
Speaker 2: Well, no, I mean like, I was behind the scenes very much in the Panama Canal treaty [Torrijos-Carter Treaties].  In fact, I went down to Panama the year before [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.] was elected and kind of knew what the Panamanians wanted.  In Camp David [Catoctin Mountain Park, Maryland], that was very delicate negotiations where--I mean [Menachem] Begin and [Muhammad Anwar el-]Sadat wouldn't even talk to each other.  Jimmy Carter was running back and forth between the houses, but you had to keep the UN onboard.  And so I was making the rounds to all of the Arab ambassadors, the Israeli ambassador and keeping everybody informed so that they knew what we were trying to do.  And the same thing with southern Africa.  Normally, the Russians or the Chinese would not have let America take the leadership that we took in southern Africa.  And they did.
Speaker 1: And the result was?
Speaker 2: The result was independence in Namibia, independence of Zimbabwe and eventually, the liberation of South Africa.
Speaker 1: End of apartheid.
Speaker 2: End of apartheid--
Story_ID: 228617
Speaker 1: Now, that international stage that you worked on for so long, you then brought all of that experience back and served as mayor in Atlanta [Georgia] for eight years.  What in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the--
Speaker 1: --what inspired you to run for that office?
Speaker 2: When I came back to Atlanta, I really did not wanna go back in politics.  But Maynard [Jackson] set me up, and I told him I did not wanna be mayor.  And he said, "Well, just come to a meeting and help us figure out who ought to be mayor."  And when I got there, Miss Susie LaBord, who was head of the welfare rights movement and the senior citizens, got up with her cane, and she said, "Look here, boy."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: She said, "You wasn't nothing when you came here."  She said, "We made you somebody."  I said, "Well, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--."  She said, "We made him too."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And she said, "If you let us down now, we done wasted our time on you."
Speaker 1: That was it.
Speaker 2: I said, "Lord, have mercy."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: She had you.
Speaker 1: I mean, no way, and I said, "But I don't know."  I said, you know, "[President Ronald Wilson] Reagan is the president.  There's no money in Washington [D.C.].  They're not gonna help you at the [Georgia] State Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia]," and I said, "all of you all are gonna be out there picketing me when I have to cut back the budget and lay people off."  And she said, "Well?"
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: And I said, "But what am I gonna do?"  She said, "I don't know, but if you don't know, who else knows?"  Said, "That's what we want you to figure out."
Speaker 2: And you figured it out.  And what do you think was your greatest achievement as mayor of Atlanta?
Speaker 1: Bringing the money in.  We brought in seventy billion dollars' worth of private, direct investments.  And we brought in 1,100 companies in those eight years.
Story_ID: 228618
Speaker 1: Tell us about GoodWorks [International, LLC, Atlanta, Georgia] and Carolyn [McClain] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, after the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia], Carl Masters [Carlton A. Masters] and I--Carl was with the Toronto Olympic team, committee.  And we said, "You know, we've raised two and a half billion dollars here in Atlanta [Georgia] for a two-week track meet.  You know, and it was wonderful and everything, but why can't we do that for Africa?"
Speaker 1: So GoodWorks aims at doing what?
Speaker 2: Well GoodWorks aims at bringing private--see, what made Atlanta work was not government money.  We got no government money from Washington [D.C.] or from [Georgia] State Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia].  All this was private money, and we said, "We have to help Africans learn and people in the Caribbean learn that they've got to learn to work with the private sector."  It's the private sector that creates jobs.  It's the private sector that grows economies.  The private sector holds all the technology.  So we've been trying to relate African development to private sector, you know, corporations.
Speaker 1: I'm sure we could learn a lot about that, but in the few minutes we have left, you've devoted so much time to Africa.  Do you see that, somehow, that frontier as a logical extension of your civil rights work here in America?
Speaker 2: It's not only the logical extension of the Civil Rights Movement, but every time something happened here, something happened in South Africa.  And something happened--I mean it's just been--it is one world.  And things that reverberate, happen anywhere, reverberate all around the world.  Africa was the part of the world I knew, and where I knew people and where I felt a kinship.  I also felt that because white people had come from the North and come south and educated my grandparents, that we had a responsibility to pass that on.  It's--I don't like giving back.  See, I think you pass it on to the next generation and to other places.  And I thought Africa really is what's missing in the world, that all of the protectionism fights with Europe and Asia, if we were producing goods for Africa, Africa can absorb all that we can produce.  And they can pay for it.  And Africa can make the global economy work if people learn to work with Africa and respect Africa.  And we do.
Story_ID: 228619
Speaker 1: Finally, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, one remaining question.  And I ask this in light of your parents [Andrew Young, Sr. and Daisy Fuller Young] and your grandparents.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I--that I lived a long time and had a whole lotta fun doing it.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Great.
Story_ID: 228620
Speaker 1: What a remarkable life!  You agree?  I just want to thank [HistoryMaker] Ambassador Andrew Young for this wonderful, insightful and fun-filled evening.  Thank you for sharing your journey with us.  Ladies and gentlemen, Andrew Young.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: (Credits roll for 'An Evening With Andrew Young').
