Story_ID: 614007
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, it's Andrea Lynne Zopp [HistoryMaker Andrea Zopp], A-N-D-R-E-A, L-Y-N-N-E, Z as in zebra O-P-P as in Peter.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 25, 1957, Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm an attorney by education.  I'm currently the president and CEO of the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: January 18th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of the Chicago Urban League.
Story_ID: 614008
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, warm up questions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --we always ask--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like all things fried.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No favorite.  I like the mountains and the water.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's all about me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kind of joking, but-
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Story_ID: 614009
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --separately, and then we'll put 'em together.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Pearl Greta Hurst Davis, P-E-A-R-L, G-R-E-T-A, H-U-R-S-T, D-A-V-I-S [Pearl Hurst Davis].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 23, 1928, New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and well, tell us, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: To my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: William Hurst [William Hurst, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And now what did he do for a living and are there any stories about him?
Speaker 2: He, my great-grandfather, they lived in, he lived in Suffolk, Virginia.  And he owned a store, a general merchandise store that sold predominantly to African Americans in Suffolk.  He had ten children, and my mother, when--her father [Lemuel Hurst] died when she was sixteen, and she went to Virginia to live with my great-grandfather and so was raised--his ten kids were kind of spread out.  So his younger kids were kind of like her brothers, her older brothers.  They lived together.  She was very close to that--her great- her grandparents, my great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have any idea when your great-grandfather was born?
Speaker 2: I do, but I don't have it in my head right now.  So it would be some time in the 1880s.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any surviving memories of--
Speaker 2: Wait that can't be right.  It would have to be the 1870s [sic.].  Let's see my, right.  So my, mother was born in '28 [1928].  So her father, so she was born, her father was born like right around the turn of the century.  Yeah, so probably the--some time in the 1870s is probably closer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories in your family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I recall right now.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story about how your great-grandfather became the owner of the store, and, you know, because I always think it's important, you know, in those hard times, you know, to figure out how they--
Speaker 2: I know he was not born a slave, and I know, and I don't know--well, here's the answer.  I do know.  I actually wrote a paper on my great-grandfather when I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  But I did not read it in preparation for this interview.  So I don't, I don't have all the details.  But he, when he moved--he was born in Virginia, and he ran the store for as long as any--I, you know, anybody could really remember.  He didn't have any real recollection of doing anything other than running this business, so.  But I didn't get a lot of detail on his--I interviewed him when he was in his nineties, and I don't remember--he didn't get a lot of detail on the rest of it.  So the answer is, no, the short answer is, no, I'm the worst historian in my family.  So.
Speaker 1: So did his father own the store or some, is that how he got involved, do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, anything else about your mother's side?  What about your mother's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So my mother's grandmother was named Annie [Annie Amons Hurst].  And as I said, so they had ten kids.  My mother was very close to all of them, actually, because it's because of my uncles, my great uncles that we ended up in Rochester [New York], and I can tell you that story either now or later.  Her, my mother's mother, was Louise [Louise Hamilton Poindexter]--and I'm blanking on her maiden name, and then Hurst.  And then she remarried after--well, she separated from my grandfather.  She left my grandfather and she had--my mother has a sister.  And she left them before my grandfather died.  And then, and ultimately remarried.  And my parents, my mother and she reconnected.  She was born in New York.  My grandmother was half African American and half Italian.  And as I said, my mother spent her, 'til she was in her teens in New York with her grand- with her father.  And then her aunt, my great aunt, also came to New York to help my grandfather raise her after my grandmother left.
Story_ID: 614010
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] talk much about growing up in New York?  Do you have any stories about what life was like for her growing up in New York?
Speaker 2: No, she talked more about Virginia.  I think, you know, since she had a younger sister, I think she was very close to her father [Lemuel Hurst].  She loved her father very much.  And he got ill and died when he was in his thirties.  And so beyond that, she didn't talk much about New York.  She talked a lot about Virginia.  So she went to high school in Virginia, went to segregated high schools, but--and was, as you might imagine, my grand- her grandparents [Annie Amons Hurst and William Hurst, Sr.], my great-grandparents were fairly, not controlling, but, you know, she had a--she was, she wasn't free to roam where, as much as she wanted to.  Let's put it that way.  And then after she graduated from high school, she went to Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and she graduated from there in 1949.
Speaker 1: Now, what was her major?
Speaker 2: Biology.
Story_ID: 614011
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Reuben, R-E-U-B-E-N, Kenneth, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, Davis, D-A-V-I-S [Reuben K. Davis]
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 27, 1920, and he was born in Columbia, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me go back a second.  Do you know where in Virginia--oh, this is Suffolk, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Suffolk, Virginia is where my [maternal] great-grandfather [William Hurst, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your father comes from Columbia, Mississippi.  What do you know about his family?  How far can you trace them back and what did they do?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about his family.  My father really didn't tell us a lot about his family.  There were reasons why, it turns out, that he didn't.  But I didn't know that at the time.  He, his father [Reuben Davis, Sr.] had several brothers.  And at least one--and one younger sister.  And he, my father--and I have, one of them was named Mark, I know, because my, I have a brother [Mark Davis] who was named after one of my father's uncles [Mark A. Davis] [ph.].  And my--they were in Mississippi for a while, but like many people from Mississippi, they, several of them moved to, here to Chicago [Illinois].  My father actually ended up coming here to Chicago to go to high school, and he went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] here.  And my, he's related to, is a cousin to [HistoryMaker] Earl Strayhorn, who was a judge here in Chicago for many years.  They're cousins.  His, Earl's mother [Minnie Davis Strayhorn] is my father's cousin, and--first cousin.  And he had some other relatives here that he lived with.  And he had, my father had two sisters, Alice [Mirian Davis Miller] and Mary Ann and, or Marian [Marion Davis Tynes] and a brother [Malcom Davis].  Oh, I'm having a senior moment.  I'll get it in a minute, had a younger who--the brother was the youngest.  And his brother was a professor at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  His sisters Alice and Marion didn't work, but both married and had kids.
Story_ID: 614012
Speaker 1: So your father [Reuben K. Davis]--do you know how old he was when he came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He came here for high school so he must have been fourteen-ish.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did he have any stories he shared about growing up in Mississippi and the difference between Mississippi and Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, the only, one thing he said the reason he--two, he had two stories that he told me.  One, he came to Chicago because my father was really smart.  And the schools in Mississippi for blacks were horrible.  And so his parents, plus being a smart, black kid was not a good thing in Mississippi.  So he came here.  The other story he told me was about his father.  So he did tell me, so he's, his, my father's grandfather was emancipated when he was nine.  So he was born a slave and then was emancipated at, when he was nine.  His, my father's father [Reuben Davis, Sr.], the one story he told me was about his father, his father wanting to vote.  And what he told me was that his father, the one thing he--and actually, he told me this on the day that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, that his father had always wanted to vote.  And it was the one thing that he really wanted to do, and he couldn't vote in Mississippi because when he went to register to vote, they had the poll tax, and they would--in order to vote and register as African American, you had to recite the Bill of Rights to the [U.S.] Constitution by memory (laughter).  I don't know anybody who can do that.
Speaker 1: The Tea Party can't do it now.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I don't even--I can't even tell you how many, count, you know, how many amendments are in the Bill of Rights.  And I should know.  So, you know, as you might imagine, he was not super well educated and was never able to do it.  And it was one of his major tragedies in his life.  So he did tell me that.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  And I don't know that--I should know the answer to that, but I don't.  My grandfather died before I was born.  My grandmother's name was Leolo Davis [Leola Didhins Davis], and she died--well, she--my father told me that she died.  And my parents told me that she died when I was young, three.  But she didn't, she died, actually died in 1985, which I just found out relatively recently.
Story_ID: 614013
Speaker 1: When your father [Reuben K. Davis] went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], Englewood was integrated in those days anyway.  It was one of the better neighborhoods in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a great school.  It was really a good school, and he got a great education there.  And then he ended up going to Virginia State University [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] for college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a connection that he made with Virginia State with somebody in the family or is there a reason why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I don't know why he picked Virginia State.  So I know that he had to go--he was looking only at historically black colleges [HBCUs].  My guess is that he didn't--based on some other things he said, that he wasn't going back to Mississippi, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he served in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did he finish Virginia State first or did--
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I'm not sure if he finished and went back or if he went to World--was in the war and then came back and finished.  So I'm not sure of the answer to that 'cause I'm not sure what year he graduated. And I'm not sure what year he graduated from law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, did he share any stories about Virginia State with you?
Speaker 2: He had a good group of friends.  Actually, I have a picture of him.  He was not in a fraternity, but he liked it.  He liked college.  He was actually--he did theater.  He did some acting, which is, you'd have to know my dad to know how kind of totally amazing that is.  And he wasn't really into sports.  He didn't do a lot of sports there.  Or he didn't do any sports there.  So he was into theater, and I don't think he did debate.  And he did some intramural sports.  I know that.  So, and he had a good group of friends, and he loved it.  So that's about (laughter), that would be the extent of my knowledge.
Speaker 1: What was his major at Virginia State?
Speaker 2: I think his major was, it was a pre-law major, but I don't know what ultimately he came out with.
Speaker 1: Did he always wanna become a lawyer?
Speaker 2: He always wanted to become a lawyer.  He knew, but he knew when he was coming out of college that he was going to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so was he drafted during World War II?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know if he was drafted or he volunteered.  I don't know the answer to that.
Speaker 1: Did he serve overseas?
Speaker 2: He served overseas.  He was an officer.  So he must have--he was an officer.  So he must not have been drafted.  He must have enrolled.  But anyway, he was an officer.  He was a lieutenant, but he did administrative stuff, you know.  They weren't allowed to do any frontline fighting stuff in the time that he was there.  So he was like the supply guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was in Europe, somewhere in Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a--he didn't really share any stories about the war or did you get--
Speaker 2: He only, he told me, you know, getting information from my father was always very hard.  So, and really, he really only started talking about his life towards the end when I started pushing him a little bit.  He, the--he only told me a couple of things.  One, that he was in Europe, and that he was behind the scenes doing procurement work, that they would not let him--they wouldn't let the blacks fight.  And then he told me another story about when he came home, he was trying to be--he was being transported from--he was traveling from, to a base in Kansas, I think, or he was in Kansas.  Anyway, he was trying to get from one place to another, and he was waiting for a train, and the train came, and the--they only had one officers' car, and they didn't have an officers' car for black officers.  And so they told him that he couldn't sit.  So they didn't have a--and they didn't have a regular car for black soldiers.  So they told him that he could sit--he couldn't sit in the cars with the soldiers.  He had to sit in the car with the animals.  And he said, "Well, no, that's not gonna happen.  I'm not going."  And, which would have been--which meant that he wasn't gonna get to where he was supposed to be, and he would have been AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave].  But he said, "I'm not going."  And so then they relented and they let him sit in the officers' car with the people, as opposed to with the animals.  So, other than that, that was the only other story he told me about the [U.S.] Army or his [U.S.] military service.
Story_ID: 614014
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Pearl Hurst Davis and Reuben K. Davis] met that they tell?
Speaker 2: My parents, so my father went to Boston University law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].  And then he moved to New York.  And when he was in--New York City [New York, New York].  And when he was in New York City, he met my great uncle, my mother's uncle, whose name is Lloyd Hurst and my--and they became very good friends.  And he met my mother, who by then had moved to New York.  So she graduated from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], she moved to New York as well.  And he met my mother through my uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask this question.  It's probably not--I'm probably wrong, but is this the same Hurst that's, Peter Hurst [HistoryMaker Peter F. Hurst, Jr.] is related to, the, who, attorney who was out in Connecticut?
Speaker 2: No, they're not, they're not related.  It's a different Hurst.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Different branch of the Hurst family.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I knew, I know he's a lawyer and he was, yeah, okay.  All right, so he met your mother through Lloyd Hurst--
Speaker 2: Through my Uncle Lloyd.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, your uncle.  And did they talk about they, you know, what their first impressions of each were or--
Speaker 2: So, my dad was really into my mother.  And she thought he was cute, but my father was married at the time, which she didn't realize in the beginning.  So she didn't find that out 'til later.  So, but when she found out she was, he was married, she didn't, was really not interested in him anymore.  So, but he was really into her.  And so, so into her that was kind of stalking her, not in a bad way, but in a way that she didn't like.  So she moved, my other uncle, my Uncle Lloyd's brother, Nathaniel [Nathaniel Hurst], was a doctor.  And he was in Rochester [New York], going to medical school.  And so my mother moved to Rochester because he was there, and then her sister moved there.  And then my Uncle Lloyd moved there.  And then my dad got divorced, and he moved to Rochester.  So that's how we all ended up in Rochester.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did your dad get married?  Did he get married before the war [World War II, WWII] or--
Speaker 2: No, he got married after the war, when, after he--after law school, he moved to New York.  So he met his wife in New York.  His wife, his first wife was East, West Indian, you know, from the Caribbean somewhere.  And he met her in New York.  And so he met my mother in, some time in the early--in the '50s [1950s], late, mid-'50s [1950s], like '52 [1952], '53 [1953], maybe '54 [1954].  So I think he got married originally around the, like '52 [1952], '53 [1953], '54 [1954], something like that.  And he met my mother a couple years later.
Story_ID: 614015
Speaker 1: So everybody's in Rochester [New York] now, and let's see.  Can you describe your parents' personalities and maybe tell us who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: So my father [Reuben K. Davis] was, is very, generally, kind of quiet, kind of studious, intellectual; likes people but likes people and when he's engaged was very talkative.  But generally, you had to work at it to kind of bring him out.  My mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] was very gregarious, outgoing, loved, kind of loved large every--she did everything kind of big.  So she loved food.  She loved to cook.  She loved parties.  She loved people.  She was kind of a more, not even kind of, she was a more outgoing person, personality.  She had a big personality, a lot of friends, very kind.  People really connected with her, pretty much everywhere she went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father was just a more, much more reserved, really super smart.  And so I'm, from a personality perspective, I'm way more like my mother.  My mother was very emotional and outgoing, talked with her hands, the Italian thing.  But I'm also very analytical and thoughtful like my father.
Story_ID: 614016
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a younger brother, Mark Allen Davis [Mark Davis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's, he was born on November 24, 1961.  He just turned fifty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so in your household there in Rochester [New York], was your brother there?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was me, my mom [Pearl Hurst Davis], me and my brother.  So, and then, but, you know, because of all (laughter), 'cause my entire family relocated to Rochester, not everybody, but several.  So we had lots of cousins.
Speaker 1: Now, he was born in '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you said '51 [1951], it threw me--
Speaker 2: No, I meant '61 [1961].  He just turned fifty, 1961. He just turned fifty (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. All right. Okay, that's the, you know--
Speaker 2: Sorry. I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: He's younger.
Story_ID: 614017
Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: So, we had two, there were two major neighborhoods that I remember growing up.  And my parents [Pearl Hurst Davis and Reuben K. Davis] lived in three.  There was one before when I was really little.  The first was on the west side of Rochester [New York], Elm- the street was Elmdorf Avenue.  It was 135 Elmdorf.  And it was a, you know, residential, lots of trees, tree lined block.  It was--we moved from there when I was eleven.  So, and it was diverse, although I don't think it was super diverse when we first moved there.  So I don't know that we were the first black people on the block, but there weren't a lot of black people there.  Since then, the neighborhood's completely changed, but when I was growing up, it was, there were some black kids on the block, but it was mostly white kids.  So I played mostly with white kids.  It was, you know, we had a big--what I remember about that--I remember there were lots of trees.  I remember we had a big, giant, big--it seemed giant.  Probably today, it wouldn't look giant, but it was a big backyard.  So there was a big backyard.  Then there was like a second backyard to the first backyard.  We had a grapevine back there.  My mother grew rhubarb back there and there were hedges all around.  And we spent a lot of time in the yard, outside playing.  So I had a really good friend who was a little young, a little white guy that I played with all the time, whose name I don't remember, Tommie [ph.], I know that.  But I don't remember his last name.  He lived down the street.  And we used to sit up on the roof of the garage.  There was a cherry tree, and we would sit on the roof of the garage and eat cherries, like all summer.  And I remember that.  I remember, also on my block, the other kid across the street, it was the first time I ever was called nigger.  I didn't, and I was older.  I was eight or nine.  I was like, I remember the time I told my mother, like I said, "I think this kid just called me something.  I think it's bad, but I don't know."  My mother was like, "Yeah, it's bad."  And then she went across the street and proceeded to explain to his mother that that wouldn't happen again, as only my mother could (laughter).  And it never did (laughter).
Story_ID: 614018
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did--were the, was the black community in Rochester [New York], as it was, very much aware of Frederick Douglass' presence there, you know, back in the 19th century?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were.  I went, we went to a church, an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church that was a stop on the Underground Railroad.  So, you know, we were pretty familiar with it.  I mean, as kids, we were.  And we knew of Frederick Douglass, knew of his connection to Rochester.  I don't think we, you know, I understood at the time, the significance of it, right.  You know, it was like, it's just some guy that was kind of famous.  We knew what the Underground Railroad was and that kind of stuff.  I didn't, you know, my parents [Pearl Hurst Davis and Reuben K. Davis] were kind of that, traditional, first generation after the Civil Rights Movement.  You know, my dad was all about, you know, "We're buying, we're getting the American dream, and so are my kids."  And we lived in an integrated neighborhood.  The high school, the elementary school I went to, I went to private elementary school [Academy of the Sacred Heart, Rochester, New York] until sixth grade.  And then it was predominantly white.  I mean there were a few black kids, but predominantly white.  And, you know, so they were all about, you know, you're, we're (laughter) gonna integrate.  And mostly for me, it went fine.  You know, I didn't, you know, it was that kid--that was, I was nine.  It was the first time I'd ever heard the word.  You know, I never had any issues at school.  My best friends at school were white, never had any problems with them.  You know, and then I went--well, we moved.  So we moved.  So we lived on Elmdorf until I was in, through fifth grade.  And then we moved to the east side of Rochester, which was a little bit nicer.  So it was, Elmdorf Avenue was square in the city, residential neighborhood in the city, but in the city.  And then we moved to Highland Avenue, which was right on the border of the city in a suburb, a close in suburb, but a suburb.  So bigger houses, bigger, bigger lots, and, you know, fewer black people.  There were some.  My Uncle Lloyd [Zopp's maternal great uncle, Lloyd Hurst] lived like two blocks over.  My father's, one of his other law partners and closest friends, black guy, lived one block over.  So it was diverse, but not super diverse.  But even there, I went to, I went to public school [Martin B. Anderson School No. 1, Rochester, New York] there for like half a year 'cause the school was kind of behind the private school I'd been in.  So then I got into a program, so--in another public school.  So I did middle school, like sixth and seventh grade in public school.  And then I took the entrance exam--my mother was teaching at a Catholic high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], and I took the entrance exam there and got in.  So I skipped eighth grade.  And, but that was an all-white, almost, you know, entirely white.  Like me and my cousin were like--and one other girl, were like the only black people in the whole school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again, I wasn't really focused on it.
Story_ID: 614019
Speaker 1: Let's go to school and approach it a different way--
Speaker 2: Okay, sorry.
Speaker 1: --what was the first school that you attended?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: So the first school I attended was Sacred Heart Academy [Academy of the Sacred Heart, Rochester, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, it's a Catholic school, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was that for kindergarten and--
Speaker 2: Kindergarten and through fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And through fifth.  Now, what did--how did like Sacred Heart?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Sacred Heart.  I learned to read when I was in kindergarten.  The nuns were kind of creepy, but nice.  And, you know, I had a lot of good friends, and, you know, but it was like an old school Catholic school.  You know, they beat you if you were not--not beat you, but, you know--
Speaker 1: Smacked you with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, smack you with the ruler.  But it was all girls.  It was an all girl Catholic high school, and it was great.  You know, I loved it, learned well, liked the school, had friends.  I loved school.  I loved learning, did well.
Speaker 1: Now, what subject matter did you gravitate towards in those days?
Speaker 2: I don't think, when I was elementary school, I don't think I particularly gravitated towards anything.  I liked, I liked school.  I liked to read.  I've always loved to read since I read.  So I was a big reader.  I always have been, but I don't, I don't think any particular--I've never been great big on math.  But I don't, and when I was in elementary school, they were all kind of the same.  You know, I don't, I don't think I felt a big difference one way or the other.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite book?
Speaker 2: No, I liked all books.  I loved Winnie the Pooh books, and I loved fairytales and myth-myths.  But I liked pretty much everything.
Story_ID: 614020
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, was television and radio a big part of life or music or--
Speaker 2: You know, we had TV, but, you know, back in the day, we had three channels.  Actually, we had three and then the, you know, the UHF [ultra high frequency] channel, so the public television channel.  So there were, you know, some shows that you, that we liked.  There was, there was a public education show out of Boston [Massachusetts] that everybody used to watch, watched that a lot, watched--'Batman' was a big show on TV when I was growing up.  But we didn't watch that much TV, you know, because, you know, they only had so much to do.  So, and we listened to a lot of music on the record player.  You know, we had 45s [45 rpm record], and, you know, a lot of Motown [Motown Records], a lot of Jackson 5 [The Jackson 5], Stevie Wonder, you know, James Brown.  My father [Reuben K. Davis] was really, really into jazz, had an amazing jazz record collection.  So, but, you know, we played outside.  We listened to music.  And I read a lot (laughter).  I loved comic books.  I have a giant 'Archie' comic book collection.  But I also like the superhero comic books, had a huge comic book collection on which I could have sent my children to college, except my mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] threw it away.  So.  It was painful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a common story that I've been hearing, that people had a lot of these and somebody in their family throws 'em out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  So, you know, we were big into Barbies, played Barbies with my friends and my cousins.
Story_ID: 614021
Speaker 1: In the sixth grade you went to another school?
Speaker 2: Right, so we moved when I was at the end of my fifth grade year at Sacred Heart [Academy of the Sacred Heart, Rochester, New York].  And then, so we moved to Highland Avenue in Rochester [New York].  And then I went to public School No. 1, Cobb Hill [sic. Cobbs Hill].  It was the, big top of a big hill.  But the school was, it was just kind of behind.  I'll never forget sixth grade [at Martin B. Anderson School No. 1, Rochester, New York].  The sixth grade spelling book, you opened the spelling book, and like the first word in the first chapter of the spelling book was pig.  I was like whoa (laughter).  I went home like, "Mom. This is a problem (laughter).  (Unclear) I can't go here."  So it was clear that I was way ahead.  So she got me into a gifted program at another school on the other side where I would finish sixth grade and then did seventh grade.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: That would be a great question--that's a great question.  I don't remember 'cause I was only there for two years.  And then that school, for whatever reason, didn't have an eighth grade.  So it just was sixth and seventh grade.  And so I was gonna have to do eighth grade at a public high school.  And my mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] was like, oh, no, that's not gonna work.  So she was teaching at this high school, Mercy high school, Our Lady of Mercy high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], and she got the principal to let me take the entrance exam.  And I did fine, and so they admitted me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they admit you as a freshman?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have to take eighth grade?
Speaker 2: So I didn't--I just skipped eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Since you're ahead of the pace.  So, now, by that time, did you have a favorite subject or a subject that you gravitated towards?
Speaker 2: You know, in high school, I definitely moved towards the English and the history, although I lived, you know--I never liked math.  By the time I got to high school, I was kind of through with math.  I suffered through math, and I did fine, but I'm--you know, algebra and geometry.  I really liked biology a lot, and I liked--'cause I like how things work.  I like understanding how things work.  So I liked those sciences.  I really hated chemistry because it's kind of rote, and it has a lot of math (laughter).  And I liked, I loved English and writing.  And so, and music.  I liked music.  I was in the choir.  I took piano lessons and performing.  I did a lot of theater.
Story_ID: 614022
Speaker 1: My father [Reuben K. Davis] had his own law practice with my Uncle Lloyd [Zopp's maternal great uncle, Lloyd Hurst].  They practiced law together for many, many, many years.  And then I think when I was in high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], you know, you pay no attention to your parents, right, when you're growing up.  But you--it might have been right before I went to high school, when I was in like fifth or sixth, seventh grade, he took a job as an assistant general counsel at a company that built modular homes.  And he was there for a couple of years.  But then the company had these major issues, and everybody got indicted, like the CEO got indicted, the general--like everybody but my dad got indicted.  There was some huge, fraud thing going on.  And so then the company folded, and, but he was fine.  He testified, but he was probably the only person in the company who wasn't apparently engaging, at the senior level who wasn't engaging in crime.  So then he went back to private practice.  And then in '68 [1968], he ran for the bench, the state court bench in Rochester [New York].  And he lost to a guy who was like, you know, a guy who had been practicing law like two years.  It was a white guy.  And he would have been the first African American on the bench.  And so he lost, and I know he was devastated.  And the city was kind of embarrassed because he was super highly qualified, and the guy who beat him was not.  And so he ran again four years later in '72 [1972] or maybe '70 [1970] even.  It might have been two years later, he ran again--yeah, it must have been '70 [1970], '70 [1970], he ran again, unopposed.  So he was endorsed, when he ran the second time, he was endorsed by both parties and was elected to the city court bench.  And he was the first African American on the bench in Rochester, period.  And he sat on the city court, which is basically the trial court.  It's the equivalent of the Circuit Court of Cook County for many years.  And then in, when I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he ran for the appellate court, or no?  Is the appellate court appointed or elected?  I think it's appointed.  So he was appointed to the Appellate Division of the supreme, the supreme court [Appellate Division 4th Judicial Department, Supreme Court of the State of New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have here that in '67 [1967], he was appointed to the, as a circuit court judge, is that true?
Speaker 1: Okay, so that could be right.
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 1: So my time is off, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So that would be right.  So he must have run before then and then he would--you know what, I think he was appointed and then he ran, he had to run for the seat, and he lost.  That's what happened.  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's what happened.  So he was appointed, then he lost.  And then he was--then he ran again and won.  Then he ran unopposed.
Story_ID: 614023
Speaker 1: Do you remember the case with the thirteen Black Muslims that your father [Reuben K. Davis] tried?  Now, you were about maybe six--well, six or seven so you wouldn't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. No, I don't--
Speaker 1: It's '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, no.
Speaker 1: But he defended thirteen Black Muslims, and then in '64 [1964], the riots, right.  He participated in trying to cool down the riots.
Speaker 2: Right, so '64 [1964], here's what I remember about the riots.  They happened.  My parents were, "I think you should go to Virginia."  So they sent my brother [Mark Davis] and I to Virginia for the entire summer because the city was like blowing up.  And that happened actually again in '68 [1968] after--
Speaker 1: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: --Dr. King was killed.  So I remember they happened.  I don't remember my--his role in it.  But he was, my father, my Uncle Lloyd [Zopp's maternal great uncle, Lloyd Hurst], who were very prominent in the community generally, and certainly in the African American community.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a sense that your father's reputation as a civil rights attorney or--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, you know, I knew they were very involved with the Urban League [National Urban League].  They both were, you know, when King came to Rochester [New York] which he did, I know at least once, they both met with him, and were engaged in that.  So, you know, at the time, you know, I kind of knew it was--you know, I didn't really understand the significance of it at the time.  I knew they were busy (laughter).  By the time I got to high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York] and college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I knew that he was a civic leader and very much a leader in the African American community.
Story_ID: 614024
Speaker 1: Your mother [Pearl Hurst Davis], did she work, you know, when you were growing up (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother worked the entire time I was growing up.  In fact, when my mother--when we first moved to Rochester [New York], my mother was one of the first class of women police officers in Rochester.  She graduated from the police academy and she was a police officer for, I think that was like '60 [1960].  And she was a police officer for maybe a year, maybe two.  And then my father [Reuben K. Davis] was like, "Not working for me, you out in the streets with a gun at night.  It's just not happening."  So then she worked in a lab 'cause she was a biology major.  And then she taught at Mercy high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York] for several years.  And then she went to the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York] in the early '70s [1970s].  She went to the University of Rochester and got into HR [human resources], and she was in HR, professional at the University of Rochester for twenty, a little over twenty years until she retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, that's interesting, one of the first female police officers in Rochester.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a great picture of her in her uniform-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she really loved it, but my dad couldn't, my dad couldn't handle it.  So.  And that was the '60s [1960s] when apparently, he had something to say about it (laughter).
Story_ID: 614025
Speaker 1: High school, you're at Our Lady of Mercy High School [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York]?
Speaker 2: Our Lady of Mercy high school.
Speaker 1: All right, so.  Were there any special teachers or mentors that appear, even before then, you know, in your life, that you can talk about?
Speaker 2: Before Mercy, no, but at Mercy there were a couple.  Mrs. O'Brien [ph.] was a--English teacher, who really encouraged me.  You know, I was always a really good student, did well, but I don't think I ever really perceived of myself as smart.  I don't know why.  I just didn't, and she was the first person who was like, "Oh, no, you're really--," you know, who said, you know, "Mediocre work, you know, is not acceptable because you're capable of exceptional work."  And so, if I, so you'd send, you'd give something to her that you knew, if somebody else turned it in would be, you know, would a good grade.  And I'd get like Cs on it because she was like, "Yeah, no, not working for me," because, you know, so she was the first person to set a bar, that I remember saying, "Oh, no," you know, if you--, "I can tell when you're not putting in effort.  And if you're not gonna put in the effort, then I'm gonna grade--I'm gonna grade according to effort, not necessarily the quality of the work because for you, you know, the quality of the work, to get to the okay level is relatively--you don't even have to think about it."  So, and I consciously remember that, and thinking, oh, okay, busted (laughter).  So, I remember her in particular from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, anyone else?
Speaker 2: Not at school.  When I was in high school I got involved with a youth organization, and the--a not-for-profit, and--
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  That's what I'm thinking of.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a boys club or a girls club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America]?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a boys club.  It was like a, it was a youth run, focused program, and it was like, Youth Rochester or--it was the equivalent of--it's not, wasn't Christopher House [Chicago, Illinois].  But it was like Christopher House here, but they did programs for teens.  And I got on the board there, and I had a friend who was involved, and the executive director there whose name was Larry Weintraub [Lawrence Weintraub] was just a great, you know, was just a terrific mentor.  And that was, again, the first time that I had, you know, that I had really actively, became engaged in community service work.  And we did a number of things for, we did, we did leadership programs for teens.  We did, we did a big hike, Hike for Hope.  There used to be a hospital shift called hope and we did a big, twenty-five mile hike to raise money for that every year.  And it was all teen run, you know, the programs were all that we had a teen board, a youth board, and from kids from all over the city.  So that was the other thing.  So I was exposed to kids outside of my high school, and so it was very empowering and Larry, you know, basically, you guys can run the world, kind of guy.  And again, it was that, it was very similar to Mrs. O'Brien, somebody who sort of, all of a sudden the boundaries were off.  You know, here's where you're at, but really, you could be here.  You know, there were never--with Larry, if you had a, if the teens had a good idea, he would never, "Oh, you can't do that, you're just teenagers."  He'd be like, "Okay, you know, how are you gonna make that happen."  And it was very empowering.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you kind of had a green light to do things that you--
Speaker 2: Right, it was just the first time you, you know, you started to realize that you're not constrained by your parents, by your, you know--your constraint really is you and how far you'll push yourself.
Story_ID: 614026
Speaker 1: Your grades rose at Mercy, Our Lady of Mercy [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a, I was always a good student.  I was, you know, I continued to be a good student.  I was not a superstar student.  I was not a 4.0 student.  I was a, you know, three, at the time they didn't grade it that way.  You know, you just got A's and Bs.  So, but I was a, you know, a, you know, 3.8, 3.9, but never--and they didn't have AP [Advanced Placement] classes then and that kind of stuff.  I did okay on the SAT.  I mean I did well on the SAT, but I didn't, you know, score a perfect score or anything like that.  So I did well enough that lots of colleges sent stuff.  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] sent stuff, but they, you know, I didn't--I wasn't, it wasn't a shoe in, if you will, in terms of admissions.  So, but I was a very good student 'cause I liked to read, and I was, and generally, I was a hard worker.  I've always been a hard worker.  You know, so I didn't really have any problem putting in the time to do the work.  Sometimes I had a problem pushing myself until I ran into Mrs. O'Brien [ph.] (laughter).  So the only class I ever struggled with in high school was chemistry.  I hated chemistry.  And I really struggled in that class.  I, which we took in my senior year.  Fortunately, my senior year of high school, in New York, they had these exams.  At the end of every class, you had to take a state exam called the Regents Exam [Regents Examinations].  And you had to pass the exam and do well to pass the--that was really the finals, the Regents test.  And so I was passing chemistry, but barely, and I really didn't understand it, and probably would not have--and it was my senior year, you know.  So by then, you know, I'd been admitted to--you know, I knew I was going to college, blah, blah.  So, you know, I had senioritis so I wasn't, certainly not applying myself.  So if I had had to take the exam, I was not sure that I was going to do well.  But that year, we had a big scandal and--or I would have had to do a lot of work to pass it.  And somebody stole some of the Regents tests, so they were cancelling them, kind of the ones that they'd figured out.  But they would do like, every day they'd announce a test they've cancelled.  And I remember like that night before my chemistry final, they were like we're cancelling the chemistry Regents.  And I was like, "Yes," (laughter), "excellent.  No chemistry exam, thank you."  So, and I don't, you know, at the time, we, you know, they didn't--I don't think--if they did GPAs [grade point average] in high school, I don't remember it.  You know, I don't, I don't remember what it was.  I knew I was a good student.  I knew you sent your transcript, but I don't recall being as focused as kids are now on the GPA.
Story_ID: 614027
Speaker 1: What was your social life like in high school?  Did you--were you popular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, my social life was, I had a really good group of friends at Mercy [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], a group of girlfriends.  And we did a lot of stuff together.  I did some things through the teen youth group.  And then I did some things with my family.  So they were very segregated.  So my high school friends were all white.  The youth group was predominantly white.  There were a couple other black kids, but it was mostly white.  And the stuff with my family was all black.  So, I was in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], and, you know, there were some social things there.  I did not date in high school really until my senior year.  I dated a guy, but it, you know, but I, but we went out a lot, but I had friends.  I was happy.  I got a job when I was a sophomore or junior in high school.  I also, I was a figure--sorry, I don't know what that is--I was a figure skater.  So my, when we were growing up is when the Ice Capades were really big.  And my, we went--my mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] used to, my mother would take us to everything.  She took us to the movies, took us to the theater, New York [New York], she took us, Ice Capades.  So we went.  So we were at the Ice Capades, my brother [Mark Davis] and myself, and my brother was like, "I'm doing that."  And they had a skating club in Rochester [New York], so, you know, those were the days where it was like, "Well, if your brother's doing it, you're doing it," (laughter), "yeah, 'cause I'm not driving all over Rochester."  So we both skated.  He was very talented.  I was moderately talented, but I loved it.  So we skated a couple of nights a week and summer, there was a skating summer camp.  And so I did a lot of that.  And I can't think of what else I did in high school.  I did the volunteer thing.  I skated.  I worked, did a lot of babysitting, kind of traditional stuff.  So, and hung out with my friends.
Story_ID: 614028
Speaker 1: How did you make the connection with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I mean, what was, you just applied just because it was--
Speaker 2: So, you know, I--and you've probably heard this before.  So I, you know, I don't--today, you know, I laugh at how super engaged I have been in my kids' education as opposed to my parents' engagement in my education.  Right, my (laughter) it was basically, like okay, you know--I don't think they ever asked me about anything.  They'd just be like, "How's that report card look like?"  I mean I'm sure they helped, particularly, when I was younger.  But by the time I got to high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York], my parents [Pearl Hurst Davis and Reuben K. Davis] had no idea.  And they really didn't, you know, we didn't, we didn't really have guidance counselors the same kind of way.  So schools, I did--I didn't, I didn't like blow the SAT off the charts or the, you know, the test you take as a junior before that, but I was a National Merit Scholar.  And so I, a lot of schools sent me stuff.  And so Harvard sent stuff.  And for some reason that I do not know, I can't tell you this to this day, but I wanted to go to school in Massachusetts.  And it was in part because Massachusetts in my view was like the most liberal state in the country.  They had Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], I don't know if you remember Ed Brooke was the senator.  So there's a black, they had a black senator.  It was the only state in the union that voted for McGovern [George McGovern] in the '72 [1972]--that went for McGovern in the '72 [1972] election, and so I just thought like, you know, I wanted to go to school in Boston [Massachusetts] 'cause I thought Boston was like this liberal hotbed of, you know, right thinking Americans.  And so Harvard sent the stuff.  I got it.  I knew it was a good school.  I did not have any real comprehension of Harvard as Harvard at the time 'cause I was stupid, and I didn't have anybody to really tell me.  I didn't really understand the Ivies [Ivy League] versus the not.  So Harvard sent some stuff.  They had a four to one, male female ratio.  I had just spent four years in all-girls high school.  And I was like, "Ooh, four to one, sounds good."  And it was in Boston.  So I applied there.  I applied to Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  I applied to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  I applied to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  And Tufts, Harvard, Northwestern, University of Virginia, and I applied to a state school.  It was my safety.  I don't remember which one, University of New York, SUNY [State University of New York System].  I can't remember if it was Elmira [Elmira College, Elmira, New York] or Buffalo [State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York].  But I had a, it was, I had a state school that was my safety.
Speaker 1: So except for New York, these are places where your parents had gone to school in a lot of ways, I mean not the exact school, but Massachusetts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Northwestern was kind of out there, and I don't remember what I, why.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Virginia, my dad went to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], but Virginia, University of Virginia was in Virginia, so that was why, and then Tufts and Harvard were because they were in Boston.  And I had a friend, I had a really good friend in high school who was applying to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  And so, and I got in everywhere but Northwestern.  And, you know, by then, you know, I knew Harvard was the best of the schools.  So I went there, you know, I accepted there.  But I didn't really get it.  I didn't, you know, I didn't really--I knew it was a really good school.  I didn't really get it was, you know, the school until I got there.  And that was a whole--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1974?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1974, so. Yeah, and those were the days where you had to like type the thing on a typewriter and if you made mistakes, you had to like white it out.  Those were horrifying.
Story_ID: 614029
Speaker 1: This is a big deal that you're not even aware it is as big a deal when you're doing it, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I just didn't--'cause nobody, I didn't have anybody to, you know, tell me.  And I, and I'm confident that I got into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because while, I mean I--there was no question that I could do the work.  I was, you know, but I told everybody about Harvard and I tell kids this today when they're applying.  This is the way you gotta look at it.  They couldn't take every, they couldn't take all the applicants who are 4.0 [grade point average] and, you know, 1600 on their SATs if they wanted to.  And by the way, they don't want to.  You know, they have, you know, the question isn't--so that's why it's always so crazy to me when you hear people talk about merit, you know.  To me, the merit pool is basically that cut off where you go, these kids can do the work here.  And there's a range.  I was clearly in that range, probably wasn't on the top end of that range.  I was probably close to the middle.  And there were kids who were, you know, over here, and there's kids who were over here, and then, you know, and then--and 90 percent of the kids are in the middle.  And they pick from that middle based on diversity, you know, right?  East Coast, West Coast, you know.  That's kind of who they were looking at.  And they do, and they have, and they do alumni interviews.  Every kid who applies to Harvard gets interviewed.  So I had an interview in Rochester [New York] with a woman whose house was like across the street from Sacred Heart Academy [Academy of the Sacred Heart, Rochester, New York].  I remember that.  I do not remember the woman's name, but I had, you know, one of those, you know, spectacular interviews.  I don't even remember what the questions were, I don't remember (unclear), but I knew when I walked out that this woman was like, "Oh, my god, the second coming is leaving the house now."  I mean we just had a great--we completely connected, just happened.  So I knew, you know, I knew that I had smoked that.  And that was pretty rare for me 'cause I'm pretty, not very--it's not that I'm not confident, but I'm very, I'm always belittling my own accomplishments.  And so for me to come out going like, I, you know, (laughter), I blew the doors off that interview, I knew that.  Now, I didn't know how important it was, but that, I'm sure that that's why I got admitted because she must have been important enough that, you know, it elevated me.  You know, we--but you don't get it, they're not gonna admit people who are gonna fail.  It doesn't, it doesn't help them to admit--I don't care what color they are, it doesn't help them to admit people who aren't gonna perform well, period.  So that's ultimately how I got in.  So I knew it was a good school, and I knew it was the best of the schools.  I just didn't understand where it sit, like I said, I didn't understand about the Ivies [Ivy League].  I didn't understand where it sit in the universe, and I certainly didn't understand what the population would look like,  you know, I didn't understand the Kennedys and, you know, when I got there, you know, Yo-Yo Ma was two years ahead.  Benazir Bhutto was a senior when I (laughter), yes, exactly.  You know, the Kennedys were all over the place.  You were like, "What?"  So it was just--and Yo-Yo Ma clearly wasn't Yo-Yo Ma today, but he was still Yo-Yo Ma.  I mean like even then, people were like, "Oh, my god, this guy's unbelievable."  So I just didn't understand, you know.  And they were--I didn't know, you know, I got there.  One of my roommates had come, gone to a prep school.  I didn't know what a prep school was.  I'm like, "Well, what is that?"  It's like, "Well, you live there."  I'm like, "You live there," (laughter), "like away from your parents, really, and pay for that?"  So, you know, I just, I hadn't, and there were kids because of this whole prep school crowd, you know, there were kids who had applied to Harvard, didn't get in, took off a year off from college so they could reapply.  I was like, "Seriously?"  I mean if I hadn't gotten in, I was just gonna go somewhere else.  I didn't, I didn't, I just didn't get it.  I was an idiot.  I learned relatively quickly, but--and then, you know, you realize that like everybody, like everybody around you is like brilliant, right.  So Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] was in my class.  This is like my--Deval Patrick was in my class in college.  You know, that's--those are the kind of people you're surrounded by.
Story_ID: 614030
Speaker 1: You were discussing the atmosphere at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and some of the revelations of the former--your fellow students (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--right.  So, the, you know, I just didn't--it was just a whole awakening.  I just wasn't prepared.  Like, I knew it was a good school.  I just didn't understand how good.  I didn't understand the whole, you know, the level.  You know, it is literally the best and the brightest from all over the country.  And so, you know, you have, it really--it takes a minute--well, it took me a minute--maybe it didn't take anybody else a minute, but it takes a minute to kind of find your place there, 'cause even if you have some sense that you're smart, reasonably smart, which I did, I certainly didn't, you know, when you're surrounded by like super smart people all the time, it takes a minute to go like, "Okay, I can hang here."  So I struggled.  And then the other issue was, you know, Harvard had been--so I got there '74 [1974].  I think they had just moved women into the dorms in Harvard Yard like two years earlier.
Speaker 1: Yeah, before it was, it was all male.
Speaker 2: It was coed for, Harvard was coed for a long time.  But the way they did it was, they had Radcliffe College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And so the women were admitted to Radcliffe.  The men were admitted to Harvard.  And initially, they had separate classes.  And then, over time, they kind of merged the classes together, but they lived separately.  And they graduated separately.  The women graduated from Radcliffe and the men graduated from Harvard.  Then they, then they got--the women got Harvard.  They went to Radcliffe, but they got Harvard degrees.  And then, you know, they started merging more and more.  So in the '70s [1970s], I think it was '72 [1972], but it was not long before I got there they merged the dorms.  So, but that had just happened.  And then, you know, they were integrated, but, you know, not super integrated.  So I don't know.  We had sixteen hundred, maybe more than that, sixteen hundred--I think that's the law school.  So it was big, you know, I mean we had a big class, freshmen class, maybe sixteen hundred, something like that.  I don't--there were like a hundred black people.  So there weren't a lot.  I was the only black person who did not have another black roommate in the room.  You know, the rooms were typically three to four to six in a suite.  And so, and most of those--nobody, there were no all-black suites.  But everybody had at least one or two other black roommates.  That becomes significant because, you know, you hang with your roommates.  And so, and so, and you know, black people, for a whole host of reasons, were very tight with each other.  So, but I had grown up, you know, I'd just come from this lily white high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York].  So I'd had like a, basically, a lily white kind of experience growing, in high school, other than my family.  Most of the black people were having exactly the reverse, right.  So they were coming from completely segregated, their whole living world, from a black environment into an all-white environment.  I'd been in an all-white environment and had to figure out how to adjust with black people who weren't related to me.  And that was kind of traumatic.  And--
Speaker 1: Are there any stories you can tell about that?
Speaker 2: You know, so you go to the freshman, the cafeteria, I go with my white roommate.  You walk in, there's a black table.  Do you sit with your white roommate or do you go sit with the black people?  So just having to make that kind of decision every day was kind of exhausting.  So getting to know--and for me, getting to know black people who were not related to me was a challenge 'cause I just hadn't had that experience--I'd had a, I'd had a, I had, did not grow up in a predominantly black world other--unless I was with my family.  And so whereas, and that was just a challenge.  You know, let's face it.  I'm light-skinned, I got good hair, you know, I'm bougie, you know, my two professional parents [Pearl Hurst Davis and Reuben K. Davis].  So it took a minute.  There were some real challenges.  So what I did was, and it wasn't consciously to engage black people.  But it was consciously to find a place for myself.  I did two things.  I joined, both in the arts, I joined--there was a black theater group.  I joined the theater group, and I joined--there was a group of, a gospel choir called the the Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College], and I joined that.  And so I create, so I had an in to the black community on campus.  And that helped a lot.
Story_ID: 614031
Speaker 1: Who was director of the black theater?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  I don't, I don't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what did they do?  What are your recollections on what they did?
Speaker 2: Well, they put on, you know, black scene plays.  So we put on, I remember putting on 'Amen Corner' ['The Amen Corner,' James Baldwin].  And we might have--that might have been my sophomore year.  It might have been my sophomore year that I joined.  So, you know, so they, so they did productions that were, you know, focused on and featured black actors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did that, and then Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College] was, you know, the gospel choir.  And that was, ultimately, I ended up doing that.  I did a lot of theater generally, but I really, the Kuumba Singers really became kind of my second family.  And then, so it got easier, but my freshman year at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was brutal, so, on all levels, you know.  School was hard.  I was, I decided I was pre-med 'cause I was trying really hard not to be my father [Reuben K. Davis] 'cause, so I was like, I'm gonna do anything but be a lawyer.  So I wanna be--and I also, and I really liked biology.  So I was like, okay, I have to be pre-med.  There's a couple, a few little problems.  One, I didn't like math (laughter), so you had to take math, and as I found out, you know, two years, next year, I had to take chemistry, ew, ew, double ew.  So, but at that time, so my freshman year, I'm taking calculus.  I'm getting killed.  I'm you know, not--I'm trying to adjust to this world full of brilliant people, brilliant, rich people.  And I'm trying to find my place as a black person, and, oh, yeah, by the way, my view, my dream of Boston [Massachusetts] being the most liberal planet, city on the planet was rudely, (laughter) rudely awakened by, when they started busing kids right when I got there.  So it was the first year of forced integration of their schools, and they were busing black kids into white schools and literally, people in Boston were standing outside these buses of little black kids, heaving stones at them, yelling obscenities at them.  It was Selma [Alabama], except it was, you know, we were in Cambridge [Massachusetts], but this, across the river in Boston is what these people were doing.  I was like, oh, I'm like, oh, my god (laughter).  All the racists moved here.  It was crazy.  So you're in the middle, so what it turns out that not only is it not this liberal hotbed, it's like the most racist city on the planet.  Who knew?  So, you know, there's neighborhoods you couldn't go into.  You know, they're stoning buses.  It was a--and there was no black leadership.  It was a horrible, Boston's a horrible--was, I don't what it is today, it was a horrible city.  I don't know anybody who went to school there in the '70s [1970s] who was like, couldn't, was not like running and screaming.  Well, it started at Deval [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] who now runs it, but he ran.  He came back, but he ran.  It was a horrible place.  So I, freshman, my freshman year in college was rough.  Like everybody else who went to college, they gained weight.  I lost, I lost fifteen pounds.  I got mono [mononucleosis].  I survived it, but it was brutal.  It was really hard.  But it got better.  I made, you know, I made some friends.  I got comfortable with living in black world, white world, and, you know, I have ultimately, always my roommates throughout the time I was there were white, but I had, you know, I had a group of black friends.  And I figured, I figure out, you know, I had to figure out who I was as, you know, and I think that was really the point.  I had not developed an identity of myself as a black person 'cause you just, you know, for most black people, it just happens, right?  But if you're black, and you're growing up in a predominantly white environment--and my family, my--I've very light skinned.  My father is about my color.  My mother [Pearl Hurst Davis] was really, my mother was white.  You know, she could, was one of those people who could pass.  And so white people could forget that you were black, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, most of the time, I never--I just didn't have to deal with it growing up.  And so then I got to college, and I was like, whoa, I gotta figure out who I am as a black person.  I gotta decide, you know--first of all, I gotta, you gotta defend yourself, you with other black people.  You're like, okay, no, really, I am black enough.  But you have to know that.  So, but I did that.  So that's kind of--but it was hard.  And this is all kind of later.  At the time, I don't think I realized that I was doing it.  I don't, I don't think I was that introspective about it.  But subsequently, I was.
Story_ID: 614032
Speaker 1: Did the African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies], I think Ewart Guinier was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was awesome.  That's who I did my paper-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's why I did my paper with, on my grandfather, on my [maternal] great-grandfather [William Hurst, Sr.] with.  So, yeah, he was amazing.  He was just an amazing, you know, he was just--
Speaker 1: So you were glad they had a department, and he was doing--
Speaker 2: I took a class with him, and he was, he just was, you know, he was, first of all brilliant.  Second of all, he loved everybody, but he really loved black people.  And so, and he knew that it was, in many respects, a hostile environment.  And so he did whatever he could do to make it less hostile, you know, and to make you feel special and smart and accomplished, all at the same time, pushing you, you know, to do extra things.  So he was just, he was an amazing guy, really, just terrific.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other professors at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that really stand out now when you look back at it?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, you know, in retrospect, I'm sure there was, but he was really--he was the only one that I go like, okay, you know, he an influence, profound influence on my life.  So.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III] from admissions?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, Archie Epps and David, now, you know, David--
Speaker 1: Evans [David L. Evans]?
Speaker 2: --Evans, who, you know, I guess I didn't see them as, not as teachers, but as a, (unclear) friend.  In fact, I just saw David at the law school, black alumni thing, amazing, you know.  Again, you know, really focused on ensuring that the black people who were there stayed there and had a home.  And the other person was the director of the Kuumba choir [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College] who I'm having a--I don't remember his name which is terrible.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter]?
Speaker 2: Allen--
Speaker 1: Counter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't interact with him very much (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And Peter Gomes [Peter J. Gomes]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was also there.
Speaker 1: Any black women there that stand out?
Speaker 2: I don't remember there being any black women, I mean there were students, but I don't--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think, who was--
Speaker 2: --when I was there, I mean, I don't remember.  I was gonna say, I'm sure there were, but I don't, I don't--I'm confident that the school was not bereft of black women, but I don't remember any in a professor of the dean level.  So, no.  So I survived, you know, my first year there.  And then it got better.  You know, it moved (unclear), and every year, you know, I'd kind of find my place.  I started, I worked, I worked at the Harvard Student Agencies and that helped, that was great.  And, you know, you just found your niche.  I got comfortable with who I was and where I sat, and so it got better overall.  You know, I liked college.  I didn't love college, but I liked, survived Harvard.  That's what I tell people.  But it was really good because it got me ready for law school.  So by the time I got to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I was like, okay, fine (laughter) I'm good.  I know I'm smart.  I know I belong here, you know, and I didn't have--and I wasn't challenged by being surrounded by a billion people.  And a lot of people, all the people who came to the law school who didn't come from Harvard were going through what I went through as a freshman at Harvard.  At the law school, they were like, "Oh, my God, everybody here is brilliant."  I was like, "Yeah, I know."
Story_ID: 614033
Speaker 1: What was I gonna ask you?  Oh, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you pledge Delta?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], first of all, there were no sororities or fraternities, and there were (air quotes) eating clubs.  The eating clubs were all white, all male.  So there were no sororities or fraternities.  So, no, I pledged here as an alumnae when I was fifty (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, we can forget that.  So I just wanted to make--I didn't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  They didn't have any sororities or fraternities on campus.  And, as I said, the only thing they had were these eating clubs.  And they were not a place for black people.  So--
Speaker 1: Those were the elite, white males or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--and who knows.  They had names like the Frog or I--you know, they existed, but I didn't--the, my friends, white and black, really were not connected to that whole world.  You know, there was one right outside our dorm, the Bur- Lowell House.  I can't, I think it was called the Frog.  I don't even remember what they were called, but you know, they were the equivalent of fraternities.  They had a house.  You know, they had parties.  They had, you know, but who knew, you know, it was a whole 'nother universe.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the popular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People wanted to know, by the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, the popular culture perception of Harvard during the '70s [1970s] was fueled by these movies, you know, like 'National Lampoon,' and the magazine and then the--
Speaker 2: Right, well, there's a whole culture around the--there was a strong arts culture, and then there was a whole culture around the, what's the word I want, the comic writings of the Lampoon [The Harvard Lampoon] staff.  And that was its own little elite, not little, but it was its own elite kind of group, but more diverse actually.  So, but, you know, but they had their own kind of--they were more kind of intellectual snobs, you know, sort of like you had to be smart enough.  But there were a lot of really, really, really funny people there.  And then the, Hasty Pudding which was a, it's a men's club, but it's all, again, all guys.  So, and, and the Lampoon was not all guys, but it was almost all guys, right?  It wasn't, there weren't a lot of women.  You know, that's the whole other thing going on here.  You know, this was the '70s [1970s].  You know, women were still, you know, second class citizens to a large degree as well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --although I think, I know there were women at the Lampoon, but just, you know, but there were like a couple, you know.
Story_ID: 614034
Speaker 1: At some point, it says that you majored in the history of science.
Speaker 2: Right, so, all right, so I'm--I told you I was pre-med.  You know, I barely, you know, I did--I mean I did fine in college, and, but I, you know, I struggled with math.  So I, you know, and I'm (unclear), I don't even know what my major was when I started or what I thought it was gonna be.  But I was pre-med.  So, you know, I took biology my first year, and I'm fine.  And then my second year, I run into--no that's not true.  I took physics, which I loved, although physics is a lot of math, physics is basically about how stuff works.  And if you figure out, if you figure out like the fundamental four theorems, you can figure out everything else.  So I, I did really well in physics.  I did so well in physics, I actually taught physics, which is really frightening to everybody, including me.  So then I took--so after physics was chemistry.  So it was physics, chemistry and then biology.  And I hated, okay, capital H, hated chemistry.  I hated everything about it.  It was, you know.  Everything you needed to know in chemistry, you had to memorize, but you could get it in a book.  And I was like "Why I gotta memorize this because, you know, the chemists, they don't memorize it.  They look it up in the book."  But, and so, and I got--I hated it kind of like I hated it in high school [Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Rochester, New York].  And that was kind of when I kind of went, you know, all this chemistry math thing is not working for me.  I don't think I'm gonna be pre-med.  But I was also taking some history classes, and I was loving the history classes.  And so Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had this major called history of science--history and science, which was in the history of science department.  And, because I had these science credits, and I liked science to the extent it was talking about how things were created and made.  And, but I loved history.  And so I got into the history of--I had a history and science major in the history of science department.  And in essence, your focus was on science history, if you will.  And it was an honors major.  So, to get in, you knew you had to do a thesis, and you were gonna have to--you would graduate with honors to get out of the department.  But it was perfect for me because I had, I liked science.  I had these science credits, but I could really focus on, through the historical aspects of it which was really, to me, kind of perfect because I really loved history.
Speaker 1: What was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: My thesis was about psychology and the move from natural theories of psychosis to the more--and sort of biological theories to Freud [Sigmund Freud] and more scientific analytical theories of mental illness.  And there was like a doctor, whose name I don't remember, who was the subject of my thesis, who kind of epitomized that in his own thinking and writing.  I think his last name was Souter [ph.] or maybe--anyway, but it was about--I told that story based on, sort of from his perspective, basically using his life and his change in his thinking.  He was a psychiatrist and changed from sort of this, and it marked a sign of, sort of, kind of baby science into more analytical science at the turn of the century.  And that's kind of what I wrote about.
Story_ID: 614035
Speaker 1: When did you decide to go on and go to law school, despite your--
Speaker 2: So, so after my sophomore year was when I went, yeah, no, not going to medical school.  And then, but I didn't know what I was gonna do.  So my junior year, the summer after my junior year, I went to Washington [D.C.] and worked for my congressman whose name was Frank Horton. And--
Speaker 1: Who was it?  Frank?
Speaker 2: Frank Horton was his last name, H-O-R-T-O-N.  And he was on, that was the summer, so that was the summer of '73 [1973].  And we had a big energy crisis going on and, in the country, and so he was on--there was a joint committee, [U.S.] Congress and [U.S.] Senate, trying to deal with the energy crisis.  And I was one of his staff support on that and a couple other things.  And I learned a couple of things.  One, you know, nobody--particularly on complex issues, nobody understood what they were doing in Washington.  You know, the, on this committee, the, you know, when they were getting close to a bill, one day the--and I can't remember which party, whether Republicans or the Democrats, but whoever it was came up with a draft of the bill.  The bill was like this (gesture), you know, 'cause it covered all kinds of, it covered taxes and energy policy and healthcare.  I mean it really covered this broad range, and so it was like this.  You're like, "Seriously?"  And who knows, and they, ultimately, they passed it.  Half the staffers didn't understand the bill, much less the people.  And then we also, he also sat on the healthcare committee, and we were doing some, he was doing some hearings on healthcare and welfare.  And the point, what I realized when I was in Washington, 'cause I did, I went to Washington thinking that I could do government.  What I realized when I was in Washington was that, no--that the whole role of lawyers was to explain what these people in Washington were doing, to normal people because that, you needed somebody to interface between this stuff and human beings because nobody had a clue--and that's what lawyers do.  And I thought I would really like to do that, rather than be a politician.  And Washington is just, you know, it's the first time I had spent any time there, really, other than, you know, sort of sightseeing.  And it's just a really kind of fake place.  There's no roots.  Everybody there is from somewhere else.  Everybody there gets their self worth based on who they work for, not the value they add.  And I just, I really, really didn't like it as a place to live.  It was interesting.  So that--
Speaker 1: So this is nineteen seventy--
Speaker 2: Three [1973]. This was the summer of '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Now, that's before you go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], '73 [1973], right?
Speaker 2: I'm, it's before I started law school.  So I'm--I'm sorry.  Did I say '73 [1973]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I meant '76 [1976], '76 [1976], I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-six [1976], okay, all right, now, okay.
Speaker 2: That's a little better.  It might have even been the summer of '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there--
Speaker 1: You said your junior year, you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and so, and I had taken--so I had started thinking about law school 'cause I took, I had taken the LSAT 'cause I got, I remember getting my scores that summer.  But I hadn't really decided, but that was kind of the summer that decided it.  So I'm sorry, '76 [1976]-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or '77 [1977].  Seventy-seven [1977], it was the summer of '77 [1977], seventy (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 2: --the first summer I was home.  I must have been home the first two summers, and then I was in Washington, and then my--the summer of my senior year, I stayed in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that kind of clinched it.  And so I applied, I applied to BU [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], I know, and I applied to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I must have applied to a couple other places.  Those are the two I remember.  I got into BU and Harvard.  I had a, like a full ride to BU.  This is--'cause I had a big fight with my dad [Reuben K. Davis] 'cause my dad was like, "Well, you've got a full ride to BU."  I'm like, "I know, but I got into Harvard."  It was like this was a non-discussion.  And that conversation, that big fight ended up in me having to pay for law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it worked out.
Story_ID: 614036
Speaker 1: Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], nineteen seventy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is 1978.  So I graduated in '78 [1978], and I started law school in the fall of '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do they really start off by telling you to look to your left and right and whoever is sitting next to you is not gonna be there (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, it was, although, interestingly enough, you know, of course, everyone had to read 'One L' ['One L: The Turbulent True Story of a First Year at Harvard Law School,' Scott Turow] and, you know, it freaked everybody out.  So, you know, years later when I came to Chicago [Illinois], I worked at the U.S. attorney's office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of Illinois], Scott Turow's one of my first bosses.  I'd be like, you know, everybody--he's a, and he's now a fairly very good friend, and I'm like, "Dude, everybody hates you.  You just need to know that, so."  And he's like, "Yeah, I know.  It's from my art," so I'm like, 'cause he, you know, he made up most of that.  I mean it was something like, it was like, there were like little crumbs of truth, but the--buried in stuff he made up, you know.  So stuff would happen, then he would make it like a million times worse because that would make it dramatic.
Speaker 1: So he wrote 'The Paper Chase' [John Osborn, Jr.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wrote 'One L,' so 'Paper Chase'--
Speaker 1: 'One L.' Okay, 'One L.'
Speaker 2: So 'Paper Chase' was kind of the, you know, book, and then a TV show.  But he wrote, kind of the definitive book which is 'One L' which is sort of this memoir of his first year at Harvard, which was, according to 'One L,' horrible.  So, but everybody had to read it.  And we're like, I was--so I still give him grief about that 'cause it's kind of moved on.  So, yeah, so no, it's not.  I mean it, look, for me, 'cause I had survived Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so it was like--law school was gonna be, I was like I'm good.  I know I can do this.  I don't, I don't need to be on the law review [Harvard Law Review].  I don't care.  In fact, I'm not even gonna try to be on the law review, I know.  You know, by then, you know, I had some comfort in my competency.  I was very comfortable saying, you know, marking my achievement by the things I wanted to do and not by the things that other people said you have to mark your achievement by.  So, and I was very comfortable being around super smart people and not being the super smartest person in the room because I was kind of used to all of that (laughter) or been there, done that.  So, you know, so I got to law school, and I loved law school.  I loved everything, I loved the work.  I loved the, you know, I loved the thinking.  I loved the reading.  I just loved it.  The only thing I didn't like about Harvard Law School was just that it was, you know, it would be hard to be less diverse.  You know, there was one black guy on the faculty, Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] was on the faculty, but he left because it was such a horrible place for black people (laughter), "Oh, I can't stay here, this place is so bad I have to go."
Story_ID: 614037
Speaker 1: Did Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] leave while you were there?
Speaker 2: He left right after I graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right after you graduated, okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was not a happy camper when I was there.
Speaker 1: Right, I--
Speaker 2: Right.  Let's just say he spent a lot of time telling, you know.  He was--and it was a horrible--it was, it was, you know, I was fine, and, you know, we made it work.  But it was not, you know, it's like--I tell the kids who are there now, you know, who are in my view, are like skipping through law school, you know, like you have no idea.  You can't even envision the world that was Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It just is so far from your--and it's actually, it's actually a very interesting issue for us as a people because, because I think that their world is so--so much has improved which is fabulous.  But, and so, you know, they have no real sense because the kind of real issues are different and then now are impacting people, mostly people who don't have the wherewithal to deal with it.  The people who could help don't really understand how bad it still is.   So, you know, right, so they don't--because their world is, you know, at least, at least, we knew.  Like, when we came out of Harvard Law School, we were like, "Okay, we barely survived."  But we knew, you know, they weren't actively hating on you, although there were some people who were there, but you knew you came from a very hellish environment.  These kids, you know, they've got [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, they got David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], they got Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree].  You know, they're on their second woman dean, you know.  It's a fabulous place to go to school for anybody.  And so you come out of that environment, it's hard for you to really, you know, to see, you know, the ugliness that still exists in the world for people of color.  And I think that's just a challenge for us who came up seeing it and can see the incremental change, but are well aware of how far we are from where we need to be for those who sort of, whose world, who have had, been--had the opportunity to be in pockets of beauty, they don't really get that, you know, no, the real world ain't like that.  So, anyway, it was, but I loved law school, but in large part because I didn't let that stuff--I was, having survived college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that stuff just didn't faze me.  I was working, you know.  I liked, substantively, I liked the work.  I found some good professors that I could work with.  I got to work with Archibald Cox who was genius, he was Archibald Cox.
Speaker 1: Famous from the Watergate--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, the guy is amazing, just a brilliant, lovely, just a wonderful, brilliant guy.  I worked with a guy named Charlie Nesson [Charles Nesson], who was a criminal professor there, who was, still is, just a terrific guy.  So, you know, I found those pockets and I clearly was--it was clearly what I wanted, was meant to be doing.  So, you know, I did, you know, and then I did fun stuff.  I was in the theater.  We had a theater--we did a law school revue every year.  I did that for three years.
Story_ID: 614038
Speaker 1: What did you focus on in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  What area of law?
Speaker 2: Criminal law.  I really loved criminal law.  So--which I realized after I took my criminal law class.  And then I took a trial practice class, which I loved and got to try 'cause that's when I knew--I knew I was really interested in criminal law.  And I knew I wanted to try cases.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so are there any stories about law school that--what was the tough, the toughest part of it, if there was a tough part?
Speaker 2: You know, the first year, although, you know, I don't mean to belittle, I mean the first year, getting through and doing well.  The exams were, I mean I think once you got through first year, you're like, "Okay, I can do this."  For me, you know, I--there really was, there wasn't, it wasn't that--it wasn't that it wasn't hard.  It was that I knew I could do it.  And so I was confident, and I enjoyed it.  So, you know, made some really good friends, you know, had a core group of friends that I really was with and stayed with through law school.  And so the hardest part for me was accounting (laughter).  We had to take accounting, accounting and tax, 'cause I didn't really love tax.  And you had to take accounting, you had to take tax too, and you had to take accounting.  And it was pass fail.  And I barely, I was like, "Thank, god, this is pass fail."  I just could never get--which is kind of funny because I was, you know, I spent so much time in the corporate world.  You know, I try not to tell them that I almost flunked accounting.  But it was--and, you know, the, it was just a rich, this is true of the college as well.  And the thing about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that makes it special is, it's just a rich environment.  I mean you think you can do it or somebody is doing it or somebody's researching it.  Or if you wanna write on a topic, go write, you know, there's a, there's a journal.  And so, it's just this rich environment where people are thinking and doing and creating great thoughts.  And it's just a, it's very--and it is very, you know, it's not, it's, wasn't as diverse as it is now, but it was more diverse than a lot of other places.
Story_ID: 614039
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other graduates with you?  Now, you came out in '81 [1981], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, so, that's what I was trying to think who was in my--a couple of years ahead of me--one of the guys who I went to college with [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a guy named Paris Barclay, who was a, is a famous director now.  I actually acted in a--he directs, is a well known director.  Peter Sellars was there, also a famous director when I was in college.  In law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I'm trying to think.  There was a guy named Peter Lawson [Peter Lawson Jones] who was a couple years ahead of me, Julieanna Richardson was a year ahead of me or maybe two years ahead of me.  She might have been a three L.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she came out in '80 [1980], it says here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah, so she was a year ahead of me.  Elvin Charity [Elvin E. Charity] was two years ahead of me, Albert Mall [ph.] was in school with me.
Speaker 1: It says here, like Kathleen Sullivan--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kathleen Sullivan was with my class as dean.
Speaker 1: And Joseph Greenway [Joseph A. Greenaway, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Debra Martin Chase.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Debra (makes sound), duh, I'm an idiot, Debra, yeah, sure all the super famous people.  Yeah, Debra, I just saw her back up at the, at the reunion, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know Bemma Donkoh?
Speaker 2: No, I did not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay.  Did you have any real close friends in law school?
Speaker 2: I have two close friends, neither of them are African American.  One is, her name is Lorraine Lewis.  She's in Washington [D.C.].  She's currently the executive director of the United Mine Workers pension fund [United Mine Workers of America Health and Retirement Funds].  But she's a labor lawyer, has been her whole life.  And the other is a woman named Bonnie Litt and she works at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is there anything--
Speaker 2: Oh, and Sharon Jones [Sharon E. Jones] was in college and law school with me as well as Mercedes Lang [ph.].  I don't know if you knew her.  She passed away.  She didn't go to law school with us, but she went to college with us.  She passed away a couple of years ago.  But she's a good friend of Julieanna's and mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you graduated from law school--
Speaker 2: And Roxanne Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sorry, I'm sorry.  But you take me down that path.  Now, I can't, I can't pull up.
Speaker 1: Well, take your time.
Speaker 2: Okay, no, I'm good.
Story_ID: 614040
Speaker 1: You clerked for U.S. District Judge George Leighton [HistoryMaker George N. Leighton]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how did that come about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so I'm in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and a friend of my dad's son went to law school.  And at one point, I see him--I can't remember, in the summer I see him, and he's like, "You gotta clerk, you've gotta clerk.  It's the greatest job ever."  So when I was coming into my second year, I applied for clerkships.  I had been in cities on the East Coast for various things.  You know, I'd been, lived in Boston [Massachusetts], knew I wasn't staying there, lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], didn't love it.  I spent a summer in law school in Atlanta [Georgia], and liked it, had a great summer.  But, you know, Atlanta, just--you know, it was really segregated, you know.  And blacks live on one side, whites on the other, and the downtown, like at night, it just closed up.  So it just didn't seem to be a good place to be single.  So anyway, so I was looking for a place to live.  So I applied for clerkships in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and in Chicago.  I wanted to be in a city, and I wanted to stay, you know, west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River], or east of the Mississippi because that's where most of my family was.  So, and I got an interview, and I applied to, with black judges--I applied with other judges, but my first choice were black judges.  And Judge Leighton actually called first for an interview, and I came out here.  I'd never been to Chicago before.  That's by--and just to tell you like how completely secretive my dad [Reuben K. Davis] is, I find out that my dad lived here and went to high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] here as I'm getting on the plane.  He's like, "Oh, by the way, you have a cousin in Chicago.  His name's Earl.  He's gonna pick you up at the airport."  I'm like, "What?"  So I didn't even, you know, so that's--that's why I don't know anything about his family.  So I came, Earl picked me up at the airport, brought me to--
Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Earl Strayhorn?
Speaker 2: Earl Strayhorn, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a judge, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was a judge then.  He's my dad's cousin.  Apparently, they talked to each other, but I--you know, who knew?  So, and I came from the interview and got the job, and he gave me the job that day.  So, and that's why I came to Chicago.  And my theory was, it's a two year job.  If I don't like it, I'll leave, you know, and that was thirty-one years ago.  And Judge Leighton was, you know, clearly, that was God moving in my life, although I didn't know it at the time.  And, you know, if I'd sat down and said, "Gee, who would be like the baddest person on the planet for you to clerk," it would be Judge Leighton because he's just a giant.  And he's a, you know, a legal genius.  He loves the law, I mean loves it, you know, in a profound sort of, you know, somebody who truly respects it and knows what it can do and knows what it can do, good and bad.  He was a great teacher.  He was a great person to work for.  You know, he gave us a lot of leeway, and he supervised us, but as clerks, you know, we were responsible for the stuff we were responsible for. You're researching it, coming up with a proposal for him and justifying it to him.  So, you know, that's brilliant for a trial lawyer.  You know, here's your issue.  Go figure out what you should do, and then go argue it to the judge, you know, and support it with legal reasoning.  I mean that's basically, with being a--the only difference with being a trial lawyer is looking at the facts.  And you had that too on several issues.  So it was just a fabulous, fabulous start to my career.  And he was, he was and is, a mentor and just an amazing guy.  So, and so I did that for two years, and, you know, it was just great.  And I, you know, it was a great, you know, it was a relative--as jobs go, it's about as low stress as you can get.  You know, the judge kind of controls the schedule.  All you gotta do is keep up with the work.  And so you can, you know, you have a built in clerk community.  So you get to meet people in the legal community.  You get to see every lawyer, you know, in town, comes through the courtroom.  So you can see how they act and stuff.  So it was, you know, in terms of learning Chicago and meeting people, it was great.  And I loved, and I, you know, I love Chicago.  I love the legal community.  I love the city, you know.  It was--the thing about Chicago that's great versus kind of the New York [New York] and the East Coast, is you get a city but you get, you know, less of the hassles that you have in New York.  You know, you can get on the subway.  You don't have to take your jewelry off (laughter).  You know, you can live--I lived on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I ended up, I had an apartment that was in a house.  I had, you know, two floors.  I had a backyard.  I had a garage.  It was right by the train, right by the lake [Lake Michigan].  You know, it's just easily accessible, and the people here are nicer.  You know, yes, it's segregated.  It's not perfect, but it's just easier to get along, you know, to get where you need to go and do what you need to do in Chicago.  So, and I love--and the politics are interesting.  So I just, I loved it from the moment I got here.
Story_ID: 614041
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there a particular case that you remember?  I mean is there, is there something dramatic during the time that you were clerking for Judge Leighton [HistoryMaker George N. Leighton] that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, the big case we had--well, we had several, but the big one was, you know, the Bee Gees, we had a huge case with the Bee Gees (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Bee Gees, the entertainers?
Speaker 2: The singers, yes, 'cause you remember the song, 'How Deep is Your Love'?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, they got sued for copyright infringement--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --by a guy here who said he wrote it.  So, and it went to trial, and the Bee Gees came, they were all here for a week.  And, and when--this was the '80s [1980s] so they were really famous then, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the disco (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would be like having Justin--
Speaker 1: --songs were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right, they had just done--it was two years after 'Saturday Night Fever,' so I mean this, it was, they were super hot, you know.  It would be like having Justin Bieber on trial in your courtroom.  And you know, they came with their big New York [New York] lawyers, and this guy from--he was from the West Side or like Oak--or west suburbs like Park Ridge [Illinois] or northern suburbs.  Anyway, he had one, a solo practitioner representing him.  And the guy won.  It was a jury trial, and he won 'cause the Bee Gees' lawyers were just, you know, they were classic New York lawyers.  They knew the law.  They didn't know how to try a case, and he just out tried them.  But the judge actually overturned it on the law 'cause it was kind of wrong (laughter).  So, but anyway, but that was kind of fun.  That was pretty exciting.
Story_ID: 614042
Speaker 1: Meanwhile in '82 [1982], your father [Reuben K. Davis] is elected to a full term to the state supreme court of New York [Supreme Court of the State of New York].
Speaker 2: Right.  So, he ran for the Appellate Division of the supreme court and was elected.  And it's a ten year term.  And he'd been on the city court, you know, since the '70s [1970s], since he was appointed, ever since he ran and was elected in '70 [1970] after he was appointed.  And, yeah, and he was an appellate court judge, and he was, when he--from the time he got, when he finally got elected to the bench, he never came off.  My dad was a, you know, once they got over the hurdle of having a black guy on the bench, they, you know, he was a really good judge, really smart.  People liked him.  They liked being in front of him, and he never, he never had any other issues getting--and, you know, that's not unusual for judges.  You know, you kind of--once you get on, you kind of have to be super bad to, or really offend somebody to get, not get reelected.  So, yeah, so he went on the appellate court and stayed there until he--in his eighties, he was still sitting by designation like for a few months every year.  And then finally stopped like--he passed away when he was eighty-nine.  So I think like eighty-eight was the last year that he did it.  But, you know, my--he was fortunate, my dad was really fortunate to have all his faculties until he passed away.
Story_ID: 614043
Speaker 1: After two years of clerking for Judge Leighton [HistoryMaker George N. Leighton], you went to work with Sonnenschein Nath and Rosenthal [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: No, actually, so I clerked for Judge Leighton, and then, so, you know, I still wanted to do criminal law.  And I was thinking about being a criminal defense lawyer.  But I was clerking for Judge Leighton and I saw the prosecutors, people from the United States attorney's coming in, and I was like, you know, and here's what you saw.  So you saw the, if you look in a criminal case in the courtroom, the defense lawyers were always being reactive.  They had no control over what was going on.  They had no control over their clients.  And the prosecutors had all the control in the courtroom.  They decided what evidence to put on at the time.  They decided, they made recommendations on sentencing, and there were very few women and almost no black people.  And I thought, wow, you know, if I was really gonna have an impact, I'd kind of rather be a prosecutor.  So I applied for the U.S. attorney's office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of Illinois] and much to Judge Leighton's disgust--Judge Leighton was a defense lawyer forever, still is, actually.  And he wasn't unhappy, but he wanted me to be a defense lawyer, but I applied.   And then, Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], Judge Ann Williams, who was in the office at the time.  It was before she went on the bench.  So I had applied, and I had gotten an interview.  And she called me one day, and she was like, "You don't know me.  My name's Ann Williams.  I'm with the U.S. attorney's office, and you and I are gonna have lunch."  So we had lunch, and she said, and she basically schooled me on how, what was gonna happen in the interview.  She goes, "They're gonna ask you these questions.  There are expected answers.  Here's the kind of, you know, your answers have gotta be in these parameters.  And here's how you've gotta be."  And she basically, you know, helped me get ready for this interview.  And I went to the interview, and she was right.  They asked the questions.  I gave the answers she told me to give, and I got, and I got an offer.  And, you know, that was my first--and she's been a mentor and a friend since then.  But that was my first, you know, that real example of that clear thing where it's, you gotta bring people along.  You know, you can't, you know, you gotta--you have an obligation when your place is to help other people get there.  And she's modeled, lived that her whole career.  So I got in.  And it was, you know, I was there for seven years.  It was the greatest job on the planet.  I loved every minute of it.  I loved being a prosecutor.  I loved the work.  I loved the, trying cases.  I loved working with the agents, and I always loved working with the agents.  But usually, I loved working with the agents, and it was just, it was interesting, it was fast moving; it was results oriented.  You know, you kind of knew, win or lose, one way or the other in a relatively short period of time (laughter).  You were like, "Yeah, okay, you did a good job; you didn't do a good job."  You know, unlike civil litigation that goes on forever, and, you know, and in criminal cases, people tend to take it more seriously.  So people don't cut corners.  Judges don't cut corners 'cause you're talking about people's liberty.  And the other thing is that the criminal bar, even, even though we fight really hard, generally, you know, most of the people, at least when I was practicing criminal law, you know, if somebody said something, you could trust them, right.  You knew they said it, and it was the same thing with us.  So, you know, I would regularly open up my entire files to defense lawyers.  I would be like, "Okay, here's the discovery, here's my file.  Knock yourself out."  And the, you know, one of the guys in the U.S. attorney's office told me, long, early on, you know, "If you can't, if you don't have the evidence to win it, then you don't need to win it, period.  The evidence is the evidence.  You can't--you're not gonna make it any better than it is.  It is what it is.  And so you shouldn't be afraid, ever be afraid of your evidence, good or bad.  You can't run away from it.  So, if you've got evidence in there that's not good for you--," you know, that was his test.  His test for discovery was (laughter), is it bad for you, then you should be disclosing it.  That was, you know, that was kind of his fundamental rule of discovery.  If it hurts your case, you need to disclose it, which was, you know, it was great.  It's where I learned, you know, the fundamental rules of being a lawyer, you know, where you have all this power and authority and control.  And so you have an obligation to bend over backwards to go beyond fairness, you know, to do that 'cause it doesn't matter, you know.  If you lose, you lose.  So, it was a really high integrity office then.  Dan Webb [Dan K. Webb] was the U.S. attorney when I first got there, followed by Tony Valukas [Anton R. Valukas].  And I learned every fundamental principle of law, you know, practicing law, you know, that I hadn't learned from Judge Leighton, which is fundamentally about integrity and fairness.  And it was just a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 614044
Speaker 1: When you came on, the city of Chicago [Illinois] was going through one of the biggest dramas in its history, and that was the election of Harold Washington as mayor.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What are your reflections on that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was really fortunate that Harold--I started at the U.S. attorney's office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of Illinois] in '83 [1983] and so he had already been elected.  And so I was able to, when I was clerking, I could work.  And I worked, you know, for him, did a lot of work for him, did a lot of volunteer work.  It would have been harder to do in the U.S. attorney's office which is very apolitical--
Speaker 1: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and your political ability.  So, so, you know, that was obviously a huge time.  I was relatively new to Chicago, so I'd only been in Chicago like a couple of years.  So, you know, I didn't truly appreciate the whole, historical significance, but certainly appreciated the power of the African American community coming together and electing their mayor.  So, but by the time I got to the U.S. attorney's office, what was happening, he was mayor, but was when we really had that, you know, just horrific divisiveness in the city council [Chicago City Council].  You know, kind of, interestingly enough what's happening to Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know, after he was elected president.  It's kind of exactly the same thing, right.  You know, basically, they go, "Well, okay, well, you're here.  Well, now we're gonna do everything in our power to--," you know, the legislative body goes, "Fine, maybe you got elected.  But watch us make you fail."  And it's, you know, it's kind of eerie in its, in its comparison, you know, so, when you see the [U.S.] Congress, you know, once the Congress became Republican controlled.  But even under the Democrats, you know, he had, Barack's had a much harder time than he ever should have getting his own party in line.  But anyway, it was very, it was very similar, only, you know, magnified by a factor of ten.  And I just remember, you know, unfortunately, the divisiveness, you know, it was just--it was that real issue that the majority culture has with seeing, or had, with seeing African American, an African American in a position of power.  Like they could, they could, they can think about it, but when it actually happened, they were like freaked, and it created for many years this huge divisiveness that took a long time to get through.
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago, for those who are watching this and not from Chicago, all of the aldermen pretty much are Democrats.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the divide was along--
Speaker 2: It was purely race.  It was, it was, there--and they didn't even pretend, right.  And they were like, it was: "We're here, and you're here, and we're gonna--," and, you know, but for standing up and saying, "We're gonna oppose everything you wanna do 'cause you're a black guy," you know, it, and there was, 'cause there was no other rational reason for them behaving in the way, you know, Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] and even Eddie Burke [Edward M. Burke], which is kind of interesting, you know, now that he's parenting a black child.  But, you know (laughter), you do sort of go, what happened?  Did ya', and, you know, and I know the guy pretty well now.  And, you know, I think at some point he had an epiphany.  I don't know if anybody's ever asked him.  It'd really be, great, and, you know, he's actually a member of a, you know, black social group now, which is also kind of interesting.  But I don't know if anybody's ever asked him, "Do you regret--," and maybe somebody has and I just haven't seen the interview, "Do you regret how you behaved" 'cause he was right up in it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've never heard him talk about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've never--it'd be really an interesting conversation because he's living a life that is kind of completely different from what you would entail.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was Burke and Vrdoylak, the two leaders of the opposite--
Speaker 2: Right, and he's very engaged with the African American community now.  He's, as I said, he's raising a son, an African American son.  He's, you know, so it kind of--it's really just interesting.  So, and I don't know if that's, you know, just the political times changed, and, you know, his ward got a little more diverse than it was.  I don't know.  It's just interesting.  But anyway, at the time, it was kind of ugly.
Story_ID: 614045
Speaker 1: I remember one of the first things that happened after Harold Washington was elected was that several black aldermen were convicted of taking--this is, Michael Raymond case.  It has a name, but the case, the whole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --process has a name.  I can't think of the name.
Speaker 2: It was a big undercover operation.
Speaker 1: Michael Raymond was a government operative--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --using, working for the U.S. attorney's office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of Illinois] who set a trap for, I think it was six black aldermen.
Speaker 2: Right, it's not--it wasn't operation, was it?  It might have been Operation Breadbasket [sic. Operation Incubator].  I don't remember what it was called.  But I know--I don't think that's right, but I--
Speaker 1: Greylord was another one. That's the judges.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, Greylord [Operation Greylord], was before that, which was the judges.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So Greylord was right before, and then there was this case with Michael Raymond.  And, you know, I know a lot of people thought it was targeted at the black aldermen, but the truth was, you know, and that's how, a lot of times, how these cases go.  You go after who the informant--you know, Raymond had gotten caught doing something else, and said, "I will give you these people."  And they wired him up and then, I mean that's kind of the same thing that happen with Mel.  It's not like went, Mel Reynolds, it's not like people went, let's go get Mel Reynolds, which a lot of people think.  But I know, you know, the teenager that he'd been sleeping with went to the police.  That's what happened, and, you know, you can't, you know, you can't say to the guy, "Oh, no, sorry we don't wanna go because it's all black people.  I'm sorry," you know, and the, and this is the thing that people have to understand, and this was the thing about the black aldermen, you know, that, 'cause, you know, it's what we do all the time.  We're stupid.  It's not, you know, we're just, you know, the white guys, you know, they're not--the aldermen who were doing stuff were not, you know, they were never toe to toe with the really, with the bad guy who could flip on them, right.  So the only people in their circle, you know, they have, you know, they were close, like their brother or, you know, somebody who was never gonna be Michael Raymond.  Black people, you know, they're like, you know, they're dealing directly with the criminals.  So they made themselves vulnerable.  And that's like not an explanation.  I mean a crime is a crime.  They shouldn't have been doing that, but, you know, the problem, the challenge is that, and, you know, this happens to everybody.  It happened to George Ryan.  You know, you get somewhere, and they go, "Well, that's how everybody's doing it so I guess I can do it too, right."  And the answer is, you know, you gotta, well, you gotta know right from wrong, like wrong is wrong (laughter).  You know, if everybody's doing it, it doesn't make it right.  It's still wrong, and by the way, you know, the fundamental rule of being, you know, that, of being black is, if everybody's doing it, and it's wrong, the black people are gonna get caught first, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: --and that's just, you know--not 'cause they're targeted.  It just is 'cause we stick out.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, some people we were not surprised at.  I mean looking at, living here in Chicago [Illinois].  Some of the aldermen were not surprising who were involved in--it didn't surprise the black community.  But Cliff Kelley kind of took people aback.  That was one that we would hope would not have been involved.
Speaker 2: Cliff Kelley was tough, and I, but I think Kelley falls, Cliff falls into that category of, you know, in retrospect, I'm sure he knows what he did was wrong.  At the time, my guess is he thought, "This is how it's done," right.  You know, less of us, 'cause his stuff was a lot smaller, it wasn't a, you know, it wasn't quite as egregious.  But when the day is done, he took money to, you know, get stuff done.  And you just can't do that.
Speaker 1: I remember the community was really fearful that, they were hoping against hope that the mayor wasn't involved.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, you know, I don't--I don't--I wasn't, it wasn't, I wasn't in that case.  I was relatively new in the office at the time.  I don't recall there ever being any conversation around or issue around trying to get to the mayor, and, you know, and the thing is I don't think the mayor was corrupt.  So I think that, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that kind of helps.  Yeah, and, you know, the thing people forget 'cause you know, people were like "Oh, my God, you're going after, targeting black people."  Well, at the same time, they were targeting white police officers in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois].  You know, people forget that we did a huge, Dan Webb [Dan K. Webb] did a--Dan Webb tried a huge case against dirty cops.  They were all white.  You know, the one thing I would say, during my time in the office is, you know, people prosecuted the cases that came to them.  To the extent that there were issues at all, it wasn't those big cases.  It's the ones on the border, you know, on the--you know, when people, the smaller ones where people have a choice to say, "It's gonna be a possession case or we're gonna charge the guy with dealing or we're gonna, or we're gonna give him probation versus a court supervision."  It's those cases where the discretionary decision making were, you know, not that it was racist, but people tend to see, at the time, 'cause it's still a very non-diverse office, forget--tend to see black people not as human.  You know, we're less human, and so when you have to make those discretionary calls, it's so much easier, you know, when it's a white person, somebody who looks just like you across the table, you're--they were more willing to make those discretionary calls in their favor than they were, you know, for black people.  And that was a bigger issue, that, to me--and that's the core issue.  It's not, the big stuff is kind of a no brainer.  You know, it comes to you; you gotta do it.  You don't have, you just don't have a choice, and it is what it is.  And you can't make those cases.  They make, you know, that's my point about the facts.  The facts are the facts.  You gotta decide whether you're gonna charge 'em, and the real question comes in how people exercise their discretion.
Story_ID: 614046
Speaker 1: I know in Corporate America, even in not-for-profit groups, people sit down and they discuss these discrimin--these areas where discrimination can take place.  And do prosecutor's office actually sit down and discuss these discretionary kind of cases as whether to charge (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they, you know--and that was the point.  And that's why you want those offices to be diverse because it happens because you have black people in there going like, "Whoa, wait a minute," you know.  You need to think about this differently.  And if you don't have that, then there's nobody in there to raise the issue because, no, they don't sit down and talk about the impacts, just like they didn't sit down and talk about when they changed the sentencing on crack [crack cocaine], you know.  Nobody sat down and went, "Well, whoa, you know, this is gonna really have a horrible impact on the urban community."  So they just went, "Ooh, we're gonna be hard on crime."  And that's, you know, you see that all the time in the juvenile justice system.  I was just reading an article yesterday where, they were talking about a kid who's in custody--oh, it's a kid who died.  And this little kid's in custody on a burglary.  I'm like, "Why is he in jail, why is he in the juvenile detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] on a burglary?  You know, burglar, you know, adult burglars don't go to jail, and what is that?  How did he get a bond?"  It was just kind of--yeah, how does that--and he has parents.  He has a place to go.  I don't, and that's the point.  You'd never see, never, you know, there are no white kids, I guarantee you, unless it's a homeless kid, who's got nobody there, no white kids in the juvenile detention on a burglary charge, you know, not an, not an armed robbery, not a violent crime.  A burglary?  That's, you know, that's like one step up from trespass.  That's crazy.  Kids do that all the time.  Why is he on custody on it?  And that's the kind of stuff that happens to us, you know, those--stupid stuff, things that kids do, you know, white kids get a pass on all the time, well, you know, not a pass.  But they don't go to jail, and half the time they don't even get in the system.  And our kids, you know, (makes noise) you know, and that's, you know, and I'm not talking about the violent stuff.  I'm talking about the run of the mill, stupid stuff that most of our kids that are in the criminal justice system are in for, you know, just ridiculous stuff.
