Story_ID: 16158
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the Producer-Interviewer.  With me is Scott Stearns, who is the Videographer.  And I'm gonna ask you to state your name and spell it, please.
Speaker 2: My name is Doris Lowe Zollar.  And that's D-O-R-I-S, L-O-W-E, Z-O-L-L-A-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is May 17, 2002.
Speaker 1: Mrs. Zollar, where are we right now?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago in my apartment at 1700 East 56th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth (laughter)?  December seventh, 1930.
Speaker 1: And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a business consultant.  I have my own firm.
Story_ID: 16159
Speaker 1: Okay, could you give us the names of your parents and your mother's maiden name and the names of your siblings in birth order?
Speaker 2: My father's name was--is--he's deceased, Lawrence Lowe.  My mother is Luvenia Henson Lowe.  She is also deceased.  And the one brother that I had, Fred Lowe, is deceased.  I'm the only survivor.
Speaker 1: Are you the youngest of the siblings or--
Speaker 2: No, I was the oldest.  My brother--there was only a year and two months younger than I.  Okay, now, could you tell us where you were born?
Speaker 1: I was born in Little Rock, Arkansas, where I grew up, went to grammar and high school there.  Left there and went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama].  From there I went to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] graduate school, studied history and completed the course requirements for my master's there. Came to Chicago [Illinois], went to further graduate studies at DePaul University and the University of Chicago.
Story_ID: 16160
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we want to go back to Little Rock--
Speaker 2: Little Rock, okay.
Speaker 1: Can you--what are your recollections of your ancestry?  Do you know anything about your grandparents or great grandparents or the background of your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know about my ancestral parents on, on my mother's side.  I met, I knew my grandmother on my father's side.  But unfortunately, my father's father died when he -- when my father was only three years old.  My grandmother and grandfather lived in Malvern, Arkansas, which is forty miles from Little Rock.  They lived on a large farm.  My grandfather was a truck farmer.  He had lots of land, which he largely inherited from his father, who had been a slave.  And he had gained his freedom, came -- migrated from Alabama to Arkansas and acquired land.
Speaker 1: Can you, excuse me, can you spell Malvern?
Speaker 2: M-A-L-V-E-R-N.  Malvern.  And it's been Hot Springs [Arkansas] and Little Rock [Arkansas], forty-four miles.  My grandfather cultivated watermelons in addition to all the other things that you grow on a farm.  And he transported those melons to Hot Springs during season and had a big business.  We were very proud of our inheritance and our heritage through my grandfather.  He always taught us that land is precious and that we should keep it.  And, unfortunately, the town--well, the white business people of Malvern wanted the land because our land was right on the highway--is still right on the highway there.  And they tried to entice my grandfather, whose name was Hezekiah Henson, to sell it.  And he said, no, I will not sell this land.  My father worked too hard to acquire it.  And he said, land was indispensable.  And it's--you know, once it's gone, it's gone.  So one day, they came--my grandfather was on the front porch.  And they had some sort of argument, and one of them struck him in the head with a gun--and this is a--
Speaker 1: --he was arguing with a white person from Malvern--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then early 1940's, and he said, he would not sell them the land.  And as I said, he was struck in the head.  And shortly thereafter, he died from cerebral hemorrhage.  So it really killed him, but we, we kept the land.  And my mother's sister who is now eighty-eight years old lives next door to the family home, which is right across from the brickyard there.  And then one of my uncles built a home right down the street--right down the road from there.  And then we owned acres of land, some of which I did sell because it was my mother's portion.  I did sell just a portion of it to Southern Pacific Railroad Company because it had timber on it which they found, they, they wanted to buy.  And it was a good deal for me at the time.  My husband was in medical school.  So it came in handy.  But we still own a large part of land that we live on, right on the highway in Malvern.
Story_ID: 16161
Speaker 1: So when your maternal grandfather was struck in the head and killed, they put him-- how did the-- the family sort of rallied together, I guess to --
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  Well, we were already close, but it certainly banded us closer and made us realize that we would have to try to protect ourselves, best we could.  My great grandfather, Taylor Henson, there's a book written by him which I've been unable to find.  But I know that it's out there somewhere, and we are trying to research it.  But I do have the papers where he won a lawsuit in 1892, I believe it was, against white, a white male who had tried to sue him about some land.  But my grandfather won the suit, and the man was forced to pay the court costs too.  So that, that is a historic document, and I must get it out and find it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have the-- do you know the name of the book he wrote or the subject matter?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't write it,  it was written about him.
Speaker 1: Oh, about him.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we, we plan to do more research.  I simply have contacted the library down there.  And they don't have a copy of it.  But I have been told by a number of people who knew my grandfather that, that book was written about my great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us maybe what the, what the--
Speaker 2: Because he was a very strong and stalwart person, you know.  He preserved in the face of all kinds of odds.  I understand that he walked a large part of the way from Alabama to Arkansas after he was freed.
Speaker 1: So was he a community leader in Malvern?
Speaker 2: Well, Malvern, I suppose as much as, as a community as they had, Malvern is a small town.  And, as I said, we had a farm, which is like on the outskirts of Malvern proper.  And I think he largely tended to the farm and to his children.  He had, he had about twelve children, some of whom have died since, including my mother.  But I don't know how much he actually impacted the community, except through is reputation. Everybody knew of him as a strong, black male, with a good family focus.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I, I know he was churchgoing.  They--my grandmother, my grandmother was very religious.
Story_ID: 16162
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Nettie Henson] was a very warm person.  I loved my grandmother.  I would go and visit them.  My uncle in Little Rock [Arkansas], Paul Stewart, would take me, my aunt and uncle would take me to visit with them.  And my grandfather would hide me, when I was a little girl, so that he, so they wouldn't take me back, he thought, to Little Rock.  He wanted me to stay.  Well, my uncle could not go back home and say, "I've lost your daughter," to my parents [Luvenia Henson Lowe and Lawrence Lowe].  So it only delayed their trip.  And my uncles always wanted to get on the road before dark.  And so, finally, my grandfather would have to bring me out.  But anyway, my grandmother-- I would go down-- My mother would take me down sometimes, and, and, of course, I would spend a couple of weeks and visit with them.  And I just remember these-- her preparing large meals for their workers who would come in at noontime or thereabout and eat in their home and go back to the fields.  They had, what'd you call the place, where they'd hang their hams and --  A smokehouse.  A smokehouse, they had a smokehouse.  And they had, you know, a lot of-- they had horses and cows and pigs.  I remember that.  And, but my grandmother largely worked to take care of the family in the home.  She, you know, never worked out, but she had her hands full taking care of her children --  What was your grandmother's name?  Nettie, N-E-T-T-I-E.  Nettie Henson.  So, unfortunately, we're not long livers 'cause she died shortly before I was married.  My grandfather died while I was in college.  So-- but I have just loving memories of them.  They were a great couple.
Story_ID: 16163
Speaker 1: Now, on your father's side, you say (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: On my, on my father's side, I had a grandmother who-- let's see, I have a picture of her too.  She lived in Missouri.  Of course, she had migrated to-- and I'm not, I'm not sure where she was born because my father is from Columbus, Ohio.  So I suppose she lived in Columbus.  I don't know if she was born there.  And as I said, my father's father died when Daddy [Lawrence Lowe] was three years old.  He has a brother, Albert Lowe, who is the longest liver of them all, and who is still alive, living in Springfield, Massachusetts and with his wife and family.  My grandmother, I only knew sort of from afar because she didn't live in Arkansas.  She always lived in Missouri while we were, while I was growing up.  And then she died just after my wedding.  She was at the wedding, and I was very happy about that.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Alyce Lockhart cause after my father's father died, some years later she remarried.  She married a man whose name was Maurice Lockhart.
Story_ID: 16164
Speaker 1: Okay, can I ask if we can go back to-- did you ever visit Columbus [Ohio] at all?
Speaker 2: No, not when I was growing up, no.  And so you spent most of your time in Arkansas?  I spent, yeah, except every summer, my mother and father would take me and my brother to different places like Chicago [Illinois.]  We had a number of relatives here at the time.  And they'd bring us here.  They'd take us to Denver [Colorado] just because they wanted to expose us to other communities.  And we lived in a segregated community, which my parents tried to keep me isolated from, from the indignities of segregation as much as possible.  And they also tried to expose me to other environments through travel.  So every summer, we would go somewhere where it was-- which was not segregated.
Story_ID: 16165
Speaker 1: Can you kind of reflect back and think of what were the sights and the sounds and smells of growing up, you know.  What kind of things did you see on a daily basis?  What was the countryside like there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I liked Little Rock [Arkansas].  I still like Little Rock.  When I was growing up, we grew up--even though there was segregation by law, there were good people in both races.  And the one thing about Little Rock, the neighborhoods were not as segregated as we see in Chicago [Illinois], as we even see in Chicago today.  whites lived right across the street from us.  So, and they were good neighbors.  We -- I grew up going to high school.  I walked to high school, which was about thirteen blocks from my house.  The weather was mild in Little Rock.  We scarcely ever had snow, we didn't -- it was very little snow.  My cousin, Carlotta Walls, is one of the Little Rock Nine [group of black students who integrated Little Rock Central High School], and I would have been, but I was about two years, I think ahead of her.  So, I, I mean I'm sure I would have been selected to have been one of the Little Rock Nine.  Before Faubus came into office as Governor--Orval Faubus--Faubus, at the state of Arkansas, Little Rock was a peaceful, nice community, clean.  People are getting along with, with each other.  When he was going to run for reelection, he let the farmers outside the community foment racial insults and stirred up racial passions.  And, and it was just, it just became a different type of community.  And, but it wasn't the people of Little Rock initially.  It was the people outside Little Rock, coming in and determining that they were going to keep Little Rock schools segregated because the people of Little Rock had just determined that there was going to be integration.  And then they, they peacefully determined that.  But once they said that, then these people outside Little Rock said, oh, no.  We can't have that, our tate capital being desegregated.  So that's how the, the racial divide came about, largely from, from outsiders.  And, of course, Eisenhower, President [Dwight D.] Eisenhower, had to send in troops to--so that the kids could go to school without being killed even; rocks thrown and so forth.
Story_ID: 16166
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your school days, I mean before all this turmoil?  I mean what were your school days like?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Little Rock, Arkansas.]  And I always loved school.  I was always tops in my class.  I was a vic--valedictorian when I graduated from Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Can we go back to grade school first?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I went to Seventh Day Adventist School, pre-school.  And then my parents enrolled me in a Catholic school for grammar.  But I didn't stay but a day or two because I didn't like it.  At that time, the nuns there were not very kind to black students.  And I told my mother I didn't want to go there.  So I went to an elementary school, a public elementary school which was Gibbs, not far from my home, and had a very enjoyable experience there--went on to high school where I was involved in a lot of activities.  I was elected to the National Honor Society, I was in a drama club and did the normal things that high school kids do.  I liked going to football games and basketball games and so forth.  But we were segregated community and a segregated high school.  So all we ever had, as I recall, we had most of the equipment that other high--other white high schools had.
Speaker 1: They were like [Little Rock] Central High Schools, like --
Speaker 2: Yes, Dunbar was not too far from Central High School.  But we had a gymnasium and we had laboratories and so forth and so on.
Story_ID: 16167
Speaker 1: Was the black population of Little Rock [Arkansas] fairly well-to-do or was there a sizable middle class population of black people?
Speaker 2: There was a sizeable middle class population.  There was a, a side of town, the East side where there were poor people.  But there was not a large population of, of poverty-stricken people, black or white, in Little Rock.  It was a real nice community with activities and nice churches.  I went to Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church.  I became-- my, my people were Methodist. But when I got to be about twelve, I found that there were not a lot of activities for young people in the Methodist church.  So my uncle, the one I had mentioned before, Paul Stewart, who was like our mentor, belonged to Mount Pleasant Baptist Church--which incidentally, is where I was married.  And, and I wanted to go to that church because they had all kinds of activities for young people like the BYPU.  And then they had the choir, and I sang in the children's choir.  And it just made me feel more involved.  And that was at 14th and Ringo [Streets] in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: What does BYPU--
Speaker 2: Baptist Youth-- B-Y-P-U-- Baptist youth, something, union (laughter). [Baptist Young Peoples Union.]
Story_ID: 16168
Speaker 1: So were your parents in the traditional United Methodist or where they CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] or--
Speaker 2: They were AME [African Methosdist Episcopal], I believe.  And I went to the Methodist church as a youngster.  But as I said, I didn't feel really involved.  And this other way, there were a lot of young people, you know, and, and they had activities at the church.
Speaker 1: Was the Pastor of the church a figure of veneration, you know, by the--
Speaker 2: The Baptist church, yes, yes.  Dr. Gaines, and he was well known and well respected in the community too.  Now, I don't even remember the names of the ministers for the Methodist church even though I went to that church longer than I went to Mt. Pleasant  [Baptist Church, Little Rock, Arkansas]  But Dr. Gaines was a powerful speaker.  He was a--I, I enjoyed hearing his sermons.
Speaker 1: So did young people admire him as a community leader?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: I think that's why they--well, they gravitated there.  And then, because they had activities for them, they stayed.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of the people you went to church with or went to school with?  Any--do any particular people like, stand out now as you look back?
Speaker 2: I went to church, of course, with my parents.  Yes, some of the people I went to school with became, did well, and, and had made contributions to their respective communities.  One was Donald McCullum, McCullum.  And he became a judge in Oakland, California.  Can you spell his name?
Speaker 1: Yes, D-O-N-A-L-D, M-c-C-U-L-L-U-M.  He, his sister lives here and, and his sister and I both went to Talladega together at the same time, Laura McCullum Daniels.  She is a teacher, well, no, she's in administration with the Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools here now.  But Donald was ahead of us, but he was at Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] too.  But Laura Daniels and I went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] all through high school together.  And then we went off to college together.  So we're very good friends.  The Ishes were very important in our community, Dr. Ish, G. W. Stanley Ish.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: Okay, his last name is I-S-H.  And it was G. W. Stanley Ish.  He was Harvard University Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate in the 1890's.  And he delivered me and then he married a young woman, much younger than he was, from New Orleans [Louisiana.]  And she came to Little Rock, and she taught me in high school, but she was young.  And the--as I said, the Ish family was well known.  I'm trying to think of who else.
Story_ID: 16169
Speaker 1: And I want to go back--we were talking about some of the people, the other people you went to school with or to church with in Little Rock.  And you were getting ready to talk about a family that, well, you were talking a young man who would have, you would have dated, had you been able to (laughter) at the time.
Speaker 2: Yes, this was the Torrance family.  They were a very well-known family in Little Rock [Arkansas] also.  They had they, they were--they had the black florist shop.  And, in fact, Richard was in my class.  And, as I said, I would have dated him, but my parents wouldn't let me.  I was too young to date, they said.  But we were--
Speaker 1: Were your parents very strict?  Were they real, real strict?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, where dating was concerned, yes.  But they could come to the house, but I couldn't go out with them.  And so, in that sense, yes, they were strict.  My mother.  My father, whatever my mother said in terms of, you know, rearing me, that was it.  But Richard was a nice guy, and we've remained friends.  And he was one of the, a groomsmen in my wedding when I came back to Little Rock.  Billy Guilty was a very good friend.  He was also a neighbor.  He lived--so sometimes we would walk home from school together.  And his birthday is December seventh and mine is December seventh, although he was a year older than I.  And he was one who named me 'Butch' because, at first he was trying to, to become more than just a friend, and I rebuffed him.  And so he called me Butch, and it stuck with some people.  So I was nicknamed Butch for a long while.  And now people call me 'Dori', short for Doris. But let's see, the Guiltys and the Torrances.  And some of my teachers were very outstanding.  In Little Rock we had a suit against the state for discrimination and particularly, discrimination in wages.  The teachers, we had outstanding teachers, Alice Perry and Gwendetta Scott are two that come to mind.  Gwendolyn McConnoco, who was a--became principal.  These women had gone to various--one, Alice Perry got her master's from Columbia [University- New York, New York].  And they all had master's degrees, and yet they were receiving pay much lower than the white teachers.  So they knew that they, somebody was going to be fired once a suit was instituted.  So they banded together and determined that one person would file the suit, and the others would pay the salary of that teacher over a period of years.  And, and I thought that was very remarkable that they had that cohesiveness.  And that--of course, they won their suit.  They had to go to appellate court or somewhere, but ultimately they were paid the same as white teachers were paid.
Speaker 1: So was this widely known in the community that they had made this arrangement to do to this?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, it was known.  I suppose it must have impressed younger people to--
Speaker 1: It did.
Speaker 2: --who had known.
Speaker 1: It did, it did.  And they were, they were excellent teachers.  I, I mean, Gwendetta Scott is the reason I went into history.  And she was such a model teacher.  And she taught history with passion.  And she was passionate about it.  And she used to say, "I'm captain of this ship, and I'll run it as I see fit."  (laughter)  But she was, she was a strict teacher.  She meant for you to do your homework and your work.  And, but I liked that.  I liked the challenge, and always, as I said, I'd always liked school and stayed in school for a long, long time, even after I had began my family.  I was still going to the University of Chicago [Illinois] 'cause Nikki [Zollar, daughter]was a baby.
Story_ID: 16170
Speaker 1: Okay, your high school days, what outstanding memories do you have of those days?
Speaker 2: Well, doing some things like being in high school plays, going to football games, going over to Hot Springs [Arkansas] and Pine Bluff [Arkansas] for some of the games.  I have a very good friend, Charlene Abner, who now lives on the West coast -- one thing, I try to keep my friends.  And I stay in touch with them and they stay in touch with me.  She's an AKA, and I'm an AKA.  Teachers were AKA's, and they--and that's Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, and they inspired us to enroll into the sorority once we went to college.  And I remember that just after we were finishing Dunbar-- high school, desegregation of the high school was about to come, come into being.  And they created another high school--Mann, Horace Mann High School, for the educator, Horace Mann.  And it was on the other side of town.  And some of the kids who were younger than I, I guess the next four years, then went to Horace Mann.  And some stayed at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], and later Dunbar became just seventh through ninth grade, in terms, I guess, the population had shifted and grown so they needed another school as well.  But high school was fun,  It was fun.  It was challenging, and I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 16171
Speaker 1: Did they discuss who [Paul Laurence] Dunbar was a lot in school?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: I don't think they really discussed that a lot.  In those days, we had black History Week.  It was called "Negro History Week" then.  And then we studied about, you know, I guess, black heroes and, and discoverers and so forth.  But by and large, we, we didn't have a lot of, of negro history. I remember though we had civics, and that was a good class.  Ernest Green's mother and his aunt, his mother's sister, taught it.  And Ernest Green was one of the Little Rock Nine [group of students who integrated LIttle Rock Central High School.]  He later became politically active, and he has a consulting company in Washington.  He became Secretary of Labor, remember some years back [sic. Green was Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Affairs under President Jimmy Carter.]  Well, his aunt and his mother taught me.  And his aunt taught me civics.  And that was a course which was a very informative course.  And I am sorry that civics is not taught any longer as a course in school.  Perhaps, they've integrated some of the materials in, in other courses like history.  But geography is no longer taught just as a subject.  And I think we're missing a lot when our children don't know the terrain, they don't even know where another state is located.  So, and we had history and civics.  We had a very good high school.  I had a very good foundation.  And when I went away to school, I went to a Southern college.  And, then I decided that I wanted to be sure that I was up to the challenge.  So the college asked me to go to--
Story_ID: 16172
Speaker 1: Now, when you're finishing your high school career, I mean you graduated with honors, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was valedictorian.
Speaker 1: When you were deciding, trying to decide where to go to college, how did you make that decision?
Speaker 2: Well, I--actually, I sent off for books from the, from several schools.  And one was West Virginia State [College, Institute, W. Virginia], which was the one I decided to go to because the institute in West Virginia, where the college was located, was a beautiful--it looked beautiful in the catalog and the description of it, plus the course of study seemed to fit me.  So I had been accepted at West Virginia State.  And that summer before I was to leave, my cousin came home from, from the service.  And he visited with me, and he said, "Well, I--you're going to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama]."  And I said, "I'm going to West Virginia State."  He said, "No, you're going to Talladega."  He loved Talladega, and then he convinced me that I should go to Talladega.  I said, "Well, it's late now, you know, the classes are full."  No, it's not too late.  So he saw to it that I got in Talladega.  And I was very happy because it's a small school, a small community.  And all the Talladegans love all the other Talladegans.  And we, we knew everybody in the college.  And as the years went by, we formed friends who remained friends.  I have a very dear, two very dear friends in Michigan now.  And we see each other at least three or four times a year.  And that was fifty years ago.  So friendships remained from my college days.  It's Kenneth and Ethel Hilton and Zerelda Palmer.  Kenneth and Ethel were high--were college sweethearts.  And they married, he's an attorney in Detroit [Michigan].  And Zerelda married somebody outside the college family as did I, and she's married to a professor at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan.]  And they live in Ann Arbor.  His name is Dr. Warren Palmer.  How did you parents feel about Talladega.  I guess they were -- that was all right with them?
Speaker 1: Yes, in fact, they, they, I think preferred Talladega to West Virginia State simply because they knew more about Talladega.  And, as I said, we'd had, you know, my cousin, who went there.  So--and then I was able to get a scholarship even at the last minute there.  And so, they were happy.
Story_ID: 16173
Speaker 1: Now, where is Talladega, and can you tell me something about the history of it?
Speaker 2: Talladega is located in Talladega, Alabama.  That's an Indian name.  It is fifty miles North of Birmingham and it is near Anniston, which has an Army base there.  It's-- was founded in the 1890's--1860 or '70's [1870s], and, by the American Missionary Association.  And it was supported by them.
Speaker 1: Let's pause one more moment.  Okay, we were talking about Talladega College.  And you said it was founded by the American Missionary Society--
Speaker 2: Association.
Speaker 1: In the late 1800's?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they, they had been very instrumental in funding the college even to today, I believe, in helping to fund the college.  Of course, Talladega needs a lot of funds because we don't have as many chairs as some universities have.  We're not endowed as well.  So we have to do fundraising ourselves.  And we try--the alumni try to help the college.  It was a source of much happiness for me for the years I was there.  As I said, it's a small intimate school.  The instructors were marvelous, they were much like our parents.  It was a school that was devoted to academics.  We did not have sports and emphasis on sports.  We had intramural sports, not, not intermural sport.  So the emphasis was on your academics.  The--and we had to go to chapel.  The chapel services were at 11:00 o'clock [a.m.] on Sunday.  And after that you were, you know, free, on your own for the day.  But that was required.  One of the outstanding graduates of Talladega was Dr. Lawless, T. K. Lawless [Theodore 'TK' Lawless M.D.]  And he's been, he was very good to the school, while he was still alive.  His brother, Oscar Lawless, also is a graduate there.  Bill Cosby [philanphropist, comedian] and his, his-- well, Bill Crosby came to one of the graduations recently and spoke. He's not a graduate of Talladega, but he was invited and he did come.  The president of Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], Bill Harvey, is a Talladega graduate.  And I was down to the graduation exercises last year in May.  He came and he gave the school $20,000. He's very supportive of Talladega, as well as the school he is president--of which he's president [Hampton University.] And, I'm trying to think of other people you might know who are graduates.  Oh, we have, oh, we had one of the highest percentages of Ph.D.'s of black -- of any black schools.  We're a small school so it was percentage-wise, that we had the number of Ph.D.'s.
Story_ID: 16174
Speaker 1: Who were the, I guess the outstanding teachers at Talladega when you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, we called him 'Buss'.  Well, it was my department head--
Speaker 1: And this is the History Department?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he-- I'm trying to remember his name because we always called him 'Buss'. But he's a short teacher in height, but with a booming voice.  And he would say, "It's a hot potato, ladies and gentlemen, it's a hot potato," when he was talking about issues that we should be in-- involved in or that the world was involved in.  He lived in New York.  Dr. Pappenheim [Fritz Pappenheim, Professor of German and Economics 1944-1952]  was a very good teacher.  He was German.  We had quite an interracial--in the heart of Alabama, we had quite an interracial faculty. And until after I left, we never had a black president.  Dr. Beitel was the president during my term at Talladega.
Speaker 1: Is this the same Dr. Bietel that was president at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi,  was president until the 1960s] at one time too?
Speaker 2: It might have been, yeah, because I know he was --
Speaker 1: From, from Ohio?  (Unclear) someone from Ohio?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He had a son.  And his son went to Talladega too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think it must be the same.  I don't--I 'm sure they're not two Beitels who were presidents of black college.
Speaker 2: How did he spell his name?
Speaker 1: B-E-I-T-E-L.
Speaker 2: That's the same spelling.  That's the same.  Yeah, that's, that's Dr--well, you know, college presidents have a rough time.  They don't stay forever, and after--shortly after I left, I think he left.  Another, Dr. Gray from here, Dr. Arthur D. Gray was the black president who came.  And he was an excellent president and excellent speaker.  He was a minister.  And he was also a graduate of Talladega.  And I noticed that graduates of Talladega return.  Our recent female president had been a graduate of Talladega. But there are just relationships that I formed there that were great to, to keep, including some of the teachers.
Story_ID: 16175
Speaker 1: Now, you had an interesting experience.  Your sophomore year, you actually went to another college, right?  I did.  I was selected out of my class to go to Cedar Crest College in Allentown, Pennsylvania.  It was a college of upper-class white females.  It was -- the college itself was Cedar Crest College.  And it was located right across the way from Mullenburg College.  It was seven miles to Lehigh University.  So we had all of those, those two schools that we related to, which was good because they had males at those schools.  And we were all females.  But I was sent to that school to really expose that caliber of white females to my caliber of black females.  And also to entice someone to come to Talladega [College] as an exchange student.  I paid my tuition to Talladega, which was minimal compared to the tuition required at Cedar Crest.  And so that was a plus for me.  The school was interesting.  And I would hold sessions in my room at night.  I made it known that I was open to questioning, and I got a lot of questions about race, about how we did things and why we did things and so forth.  And I hoped that I was able to, to--well, I know I was able to influence some people positively.
Story_ID: 16176
Speaker 1: What would be a typical question that they would ask?  Well, why would blacks, maybe--and their impression of blacks was from their maid and the maid's family and so forth.  And why did black people talk so loudly.  Why did black people dress as they do?  Or why did black people talk as they do?  And, you know, that was -- some of the stereotypes that we know of now, they--we examined them.  And, and, as I said, I must have impressed somebody because--positively, because one girl from Elizabethtown, New Jersey decided to come to Talladega [College] the next year.  And I was sort of grateful for that since that was my purpose for going as an ambassador of goodwill.  Did you feel a lot of pressure or anything (unclear)--  No, I felt no pressure at all.  None.  I enjoyed--you know, I was young and I enjoyed life at that point.  And I en-- I enjoyed meeting them.  I had a roommate who was really lovely.  Her name was Diamantes,  she was Greek.  And her father owned a candy manufacturing company in Rochelle--New Rochelle, New York.  And we became friends and, and corresponded for a number of years afterwards.  I'm not still corresponding here forty-some years later, but we did stay in touch for a long time.
Story_ID: 16177
Speaker 1: And so when you come back to Talladega, what was the rest of your college (unclear) like?
Speaker 2: Well, when, when I came back to Talladega, of course, I gave a report to the student body about my trip there and my stay there.  And then I went into the sorority [AKA-Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]  Now, did they assemble, I mean an assembly.  They had an assembly, we had assembly--
Speaker 1: All the students (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because the point for the whole thing was to influence both our students to want to go there and influence their students to want to come here.  Just to have an exchange of ideas, an exchange of cultural, cultures in, in a sense and so we wanted them to know what was going on and what, you know, the whole point for my trip.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were there, just for a moment, just go back for a second, what's the most important thing you learned from them about how they lived and what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, I knew about them.  I knew that they did not have the experiences which I thought would be helpful in race relations.  And I, I learned from them that I was right (laughter).  And some of the girls were, you know, too steeped in what they believed to, to change, just with my little input.  But most of them were at least curious and would stop by or I would go out for Cokes or whatever and have chats about our various lifestyles and so forth.  So-- basically, that, that's the way it was.  I, I did find out that what we thought was accurate was accurate.
Story_ID: 16178
Speaker 1: We were talking about the pressure or the lack of it that you felt being in Pennsylvania at the all-girls school there.  And we're back at Talladega [College, Talledega, Alabama], I guess, trying to close out--
Speaker 2: Okay, well, then, that, my senior year--well, after I went back I joined the sorority.  And we had good time, and a little troubled times because they wanted to emblazon our chest with AKA [logo, Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] on it.  Yes.
Speaker 1: To be on there in order to brand you or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, brand you with hot candle wax.  But, and that was illegal.  You know, they weren't supposed to do that, but they did it.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Did it to some of the students?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  And me too (laughter).  But they tried to make me drink, drink something which I refused--I just absolutely refused.  I said, "I don't need to be an AKA this badly," (laughter).  But anyway, I went on through, and we had fun by and large.  And then I graduated with honors, and by that time I had heard from UCLA [University of California Los Angeles].  I chose UCLA because they had a good history department and because it was West.  And I had had experience in education, being educated in the South and in the Northeast.  So I wanted to go West.  I got a full scholarship to UCLA.
Story_ID: 16179
Speaker 1: So you're making very deliberate choices about what you are exposing yourself to?
Speaker 2: I've always, I've always done that.  I've always had at least a five or ten year plan for my life.  I always -- that's just me.
Speaker 1: Where did you--did you learn that from someone or did you--
Speaker 2: No, that's just in me.  And I tried to teach it to my daughter [Nikki], who says, no.  She doesn't want to have a plan like that.  She says that God has helped her this far and she feels that he will show her the way.  And she has gone from one thing, from being chairman of the Board of Election Commissions to--commissioners, to being in the Governor's cabinet without a plan.  So and she says that's good enough for her.  But now, I've always sort of known where I wanted to go, what I wanted to be and where I wanted to be at a particular junction of my life.
Story_ID: 16180
Speaker 1: So at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles], now, this is the year -- what year was this?
Speaker 2: 1951 to '52 [1952].  I went to UCLA on the scholarship.  I met lots of people.  I enjoyed--I was the only black, and the only black female in the graduate school class for history until one man came, Manny Lowery.  And he wound up in Chicago too later. And he had a Schlitz [beer] distributorship here after, after graduate school.  He was in the history department and ended up with a Schlitz distributorship.  Right, that's what he did with his degree.  And he married--he was married at the time, and I didn't meet his wife during that time.
Speaker 1: This is just for the sake of those whose seeing this later, this is Schlitz, Schlitz Beer, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Schlitz beer.  He was married to Winifred Lowery who now is one of my dear friends.  We met when they came to Chicago [Illinois].  I didn't meet her on the West Coast cause I think she was still New Orleans [Louisiana], and he had just gone there for his graduate work.  I met good friends--people who became good friends, Billy Mills who became a judge out there.  He was--he wasn't in history.  Oh, he was an undergrad student when I was a graduate student, but we were good friends.  I met a fellow who became a physician, met a female who became, went to the House of Representatives in, the U.S. House of Representatives.  Now she's back on the West Coast with the State Legislature there.
Speaker 1: Who was that female?
Speaker 2: I was hoping you wouldn't ask me that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, Yvonne,Yvonne--
Speaker 2: Burke? [Yvonne Brathwaite-Burke, ]
Speaker 1: Burke, yeah.  Brathwaite-Burke.
Speaker 2: We [The HistoryMakers] interviewed her.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, great, yes, she's, she has visited me here in Chicago long years ago.  And she's married to Billy.  Is she still married to Billy,[William A.] Bill Burke? Scott?
Speaker 1: I believe so.  I don't, I don't recall, but I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she is a great gal, and I like her.  I haven't been in touch with her in a while, but--
Speaker 1: She made a lot of news in the early '70's [1970s] out there.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she did.  And so I met some good people, and, and, sometimes when I go to the West Coast, I look them up and say hi.  And when they come here, they look me up.
Story_ID: 16181
Speaker 1: What was it about the History Department at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, California] that, that really attracted you?  Was there some professor there or some project they were working on that you thought was interesting?
Speaker 2: No, basically, I went--I wanted to be on the West Coast.  I also got information from the University of Southern Cal, which is a private school. UCLA is a state-supported school.  And the U--at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] was quite high.  I could have got a partial scholarship there, but here I got a full scholarship.  I felt that after my parents had sent me through college, that should be enough except for my ancillary expenses. And so that's really--I chose UCLA over USC because of the finances. While I was there, I received the Fuller--Florina Lasker Fellowship Award and to begin really working on a doctorate.  And I had to determine whether I was going to work a while or go to school and work.  And I, I didn't like the idea of going to school and working because in history, there's so much reading to be done.  And it's, it's hard work, and I didn't want to have to divide my time like that.  So my uncle from Chicago [Illinois], who was a bachelor, came out to California.  He had a home out there as well and spent the winters in, in California.  He asked me to come back here with him, and he told me if I did--because he was ill at the time, if I did, he would send me completely and I would not have to work.  So I decided to do that.  And we left California in August of that year when I was through at UCLA.  And he died here in October, he had liver cancer.  At the time, they weren't telling people they had cancer if they could avoid it.  So he didn't really know that.  I was left as Executrix of his estate.  And so I stayed here for a little--I was planning to stay here for a little while until I got all the matters settled.  He had had a billiard parlor at 51st and King Drive [Chicago, Illinois] and he had a livery service earlier.  And he had some real estate.  So there were matters that I had to deal with.  In the interim, I met Lowell Zollar and decided to stay here, period, (laughter) instead of returning to California.  And a year later we were married.
Story_ID: 16182
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet him again?
Speaker 2: I met Lowell [Zollar] in his house because of my girlfriend, Jean Austin, later Hancock, whom I had gone to pick up.  We were going to the theater and shopping, dining.  And Lowell was home from the service for the weekend.  And I bumped into him as he was coming out of his bathroom.  And we chatted and--briefly. Then June and I went on. And she said, he hadn't written her but once in the two years he was away.  And immediately she got a letter from him when he returned to the base in St. Louis [Missouri].  And the letter was all about me (laughter), asking her to ask me if he could call me when he returned to Chicago.  And I said he could call,  and he did call.  And from then on, we became a twosome and later were married.  So that's how I met him.  So--  But we were married at my church in Little Rock [Arkansas], yeah.
Speaker 1: Then you moved back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 16183
Speaker 1: So what happened next?  Did--
Speaker 2: In my life? I began to teach.  When I came to Chicago [Illinois], the high school history, which is what I wanted to teach, the field was crowded.  I was sent to an elementary school, New Litwin (ph.).  And the principal there was impressed with my ability to handle the different levels of classes.  And he told me that he would like to keep me there.  I was just a sub [substitute] at the time because I couldn't take the exam for elementary school.  He encouraged me to go back to night school and get elementary education so that I could take the exam and became a teacher at his school.  I did, and I was in the ninenty-ninth percentile.  And he had sent a letter asking for me to be assigned to his school.  His name was Eugene Beaver.  And he had been a colonel in the Army, and he ran a tight ship. He--we had three thousand students.  At one time, we were the largest elementary school in the city at that time.  So after I did that, he encouraged me to go further in graduate school in administration so that I could, I'd become a principal.  And I was just in the midst of doing that when my husband, by that time we were married, got admitted to Howard [University] Medical School [Washington, D.C.].  And I went down with him.  So that aspect was cut off.  And by that time, my husband and I had decided that after he became an M.D. [medical doctor], I would come home and just--and devote myself to the family and the community.  I wanted always to give back something to the community since he was making his living from the community.  And therefore, I got involved with more awards and charities than I knew what to do with (laughter).  But I've had a very full, active and enjoyable life.  And I hope that I've in--well, I know I've inspired my daughter to follow in my footsteps.  And now, as far as I'm concerned, her footsteps are bigger than mine ever have been.  She's a great gal.
Story_ID: 16184
Speaker 1: Now, part of the reason that you stayed -- well, the main home that you stayed home was to raise your children.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you guys, how many children do you (unclear)-
Speaker 1: We had one at that time who was small.
Speaker 2: This is your daughter.
Speaker 1: My daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: By that time, she was about six when--or seven when my husband finished his schooling at Howard [Medical School, Washington D.C.] and his residency here.  And he was the Chief Resident at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and was always very good with medicine.  That was--he wanted to devote his, his professional life to medicine.  Later, we had another child Larry--Lowell, his name is really Lowell N. Zollar, Jr., but we call him Larry.  And he is eleven years younger than Nikki.  And so I was with him and her for a while.  And then, and then later the emphasis in the outside world was women in business and women becoming productive members of society.  And about that time, [Rev.] Leon Finney [executive director, The Woodlawn Organization] calls me and asks me if I would come to work as his executive assistant.  And I told him I would do it, you know, on a consulting basis --
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this that Leon Finney--
Speaker 1: This is in the early '70's [1970s], about--cause I was home a little over ten years.  So it was about, about '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 16185
Speaker 1: During your years as a housewife basically, and were raising your children, you were involved in a number of civic activities, and could you describe those activities and the kind of thing that you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I am the founding member of the board of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity, Chicago, Illinois.]  And I was very involved with PUSH during those days, in the fundraising capacity particularly, because we were trying to help people who were burned out and who had lost their jobs and so forth.  And towards that goal, that end, I formed a board of women called the Women's Benefit Board of Operation PUSH.  We not only raised funds, but we contributed services.  We would contribute our clothes, and it was a very active board and comprised of substantial members of the community--of our Southside community.
Story_ID: 16186
Speaker 1: And then, I became a board member of the Chicago Academy for the Performing Arts.  That's a high school on the near West side which Essee Kupcinet [wife of late Chicago Sun-Times newspaper columnist Irv Kupcinet] helped to establish.  Well, she formed this board to help that school.  It caters to young people who are talented and who want to become professionals.  And this is their first step in that direction.
Speaker 2: Were your children going to school there or--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  My children went to the University of Chicago-- Lab School [Laboratory School in Hyde Park neighborhood of Chicago, Illinois], my daughter did.  My son went to Robert A. Black School, a magnet school near us.  No, this was a school just for kids who were talented, who loved to dance, who loved music, who played instruments and that kind of thing.  And most of them, of course, needed financial help and the school was a private school.  So we had to raise big bucks for that.  Well, with her being Essee Kupcinet, Kup's--
Speaker 2: She's the, yeah, the--
Speaker 1: Wife.
Speaker 2: She was able to get us started in the right direction.
Story_ID: 16187
Speaker 1: Then I was on the Women's Board of the American Heart--the Chicago Heart Association, which is the Chicago chapter of the American Heart Association.  And I was the only black on that board after I was put on that board by Marvell Milesfield (ph.), who had been the only black.  And then I got on.  I tried to get a couple of other black females on the board because we needed diversity.  And it was hard. Because the board meets during the day, and the board is a money-raising board, and you need some money to raise money, you know, and you--because once you start asking people for money, they want to turn around you to help them with their little project.  Well, that gets to be a problem.  So I wasn't able the people I wanted to.  Now, my daughter is on the board, has served as the president of that board.  And under her leadership, they raised $450,000 with one benefit about two years ago in the, the Heart Ball, which we had at My Time.  I became the first black president of the Chicago chapter of UNICEF, which is the United Nations Children's Fund.  And I'm very proud of that achievement.  I was given a lifetime award to, to be an advisory board member for a lifetime, when I took an emeritus status.  And I have a letter in there apprising me of that.  We, we did quite a bit with the children.  And we, we instituted the Halloween boxes for money raising with the children in school so they can be aware of the needs for--of the children of the world because the money that we raised to go--the money goes to Africa and goes to India and goes to really poverty, poverty-stricken people.  And just at that time, just 50 cents could feed a child for a week, you know.  And, and 50 cents could provide immunizations for kids who had not ever been inoculated and who were--would become ill and would die because of these various diseases likes small pox and so forth.  So I think that's a very important organization and I still advise, help to advise the people on that board.  I worked, of course, with TWO--the Woodlawn Organization.
Story_ID: 16188
Speaker 1: Now, did you volunteer for them before you were asked by [Rev.] Leon Finney [executive director, The Woodlawn Organization, Chicago, Illinois] to help?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, but I volunteered afterwards (laughter) because I, I didn't stay very long --  So it's in the, for the balance and the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s] after your husband completed medical school, and you were a volunteer for these organizations.
Speaker 1: No, he completed [Howard University] medical school [Washington D.C.] in 1964.
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], oh, okay.
Speaker 1: He didn't go to medical school until 1960.  And then I was home until about '75 [1975], from '64 to '75 [1964-1975]--from '67 to '75 [1967-1975].
Speaker 2: And you lived in Washington, D.C. during part of this, during the time he was in medical school?
Speaker 1: Enjoyed that too, very much because I had friends who were in the diplomatic area, friends who were in the medical area, friends who were in the educational area.  So I was invited to all kinds of parties and events and situations.  And I went at Easter to visit one of the friends that I made there, then.  So enjoyed that stint very much.
Story_ID: 16189
Speaker 1: So when did you come back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he was at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] for three years, doing an internship and a residency.  In '67 [1967], I gave up teaching, went home, got on these boards and helped.
Speaker 1: And now, now, your husband, did he establish his practice when he --
Speaker 2: On the South side, right there at 71st and Jeffrey.  We bought a building there, 7141 Jeffrey, which more recently we've sold, as we are liquidating some of our assets.
Speaker 1: And you lived--
Speaker 2: I lived at 69th and Constance in the [Jackson] Highlands because we bought the house as soon as he got out of medical school.  So, you know, and his hospitals were also nearby.  He was on the Mercy Hospital staff and became chairman of Pediatrics there. He was on the Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] staff in the Department of Pediatrics.  And then later became chairman of Pediatrics at Jackson Park Hospital [Chicago, Illinois.]  But he's on the staff now of Mercy and Michael Reese [hospitals, Chicago, Illinois].  And so that's right in the community.  And he didn't want to go further, but the main thing about his career and mine, which dovetailed in a sense, was that he always had a lifelong dream to build a hospital for children who were both mentally disabled and physically disabled, developmentally disabled.  And we did that, we built a hospital. We call it [Children's Haven] a children's nursing home in Harvey, Illinois, 121 West 124th Street.  It's 108-bed hospital, and it's around-the-clock nursing care in addition to medical doctors.  But the nursing care is continuous.  And also I was the first director of the education program there for three years.  He asked me to do that, and I was happy that I was able to.  And I must say that after doing that, I was asked by the Illinois State Board of Education if I would serve on its board and help to certify other programs as they developed.  So I did that for one year, and then I found a good director for the educational program at Children's Haven and gladly turned it over to her.
Speaker 1: So you've been busy.
Speaker 2: I was busy.  I've been busy.
Story_ID: 16190
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois], and you in 19--
Speaker 2: My entry into the business world.
Speaker 1: Yes, your entry into the business world, 1975, Leon Finney [Executive director of TWO ] asked you to come over and do some consulting --
Speaker 2: Become his, become his executive assistant.  And I told him I could do it on a, on a consulting basis because I didn't want a full-time position.  I was so involved in everything else.  And I'm quite a bridge player, and I had my bridge groups to go to as well.  So he said, fine.  And I served as his executive assistant for about a year and a half.  And then he asked me to take the task of development director raising funds for TWO [The Woodlawn Organization], which I did through the corporate community. And at that time Chicago United [a corporate diversity advocacy organization] was very much in, in evidence, and I suppose it still is.  But--and Leon was the principal.  They had the organization divided into principals and deacons.
Story_ID: 16191
Speaker 1: Can you tell me like what T.W.O is, first of all, and then Chicago United?  T.W.O is The Woodlawn Organization.  It represents or purports to represent the people in the Woodlawn community,  it's a community organization.  It has provided a lot of housing and substantial housing for a number of T.W.O residi-- Woodlawn residents there along Stony Island [Avenue], you see that block of housing and the Woodlawn Gardens on Cottage Grove.  And now they are building middle-class housing, houses, in the Woodlawn community too.  But they, they had a gamut of activities for their residents.  And Chicago United is, then was an organization comprised of forty big companies in Chicago, such as Sears and such as First National Bank [of Chicago, now Bank One] and various, various banks and various entities.  They had about four black representatives on that board, and that was-- one was T.W.O and Leon was the principal of T.W.O.  He asked me to serve as the deacon.  The deacon was the second line.  The principals were the first line, and we, the deacons would represent the principals when the principals weren't able to come.  And they would also be there when the principals were there.  And we served on committees, housing committees and economic development committees and so forth, that-- standing committees that Chicago United had.  Its purpose was to help the broad-based community in Chicago to, to service the community in as many areas as it could.  And so I was, as I said, the deacon for T.W.O.  And in working on these various committees, I developed relationships with chairmen and their representatives.  And after that I decided that I should go into business for myself.  And I formed Triad Consulting Services in 1977.  And we've been in business since, a small company and--for a long while, a one-woman company. Doing projects that I wanted to take on, when I wanted to take them on because I still liked to travel, liked to play bridge, I like to shop and I still am on boards. So I've done management training programs for CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], for the Urban League, for--then I did employment, employment training programs such as job readiness programs with youths in the summer and reading and diagnostic programs for, for youths from Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago public houising buildings] and various other housing developments.  I had a program, an adolescent counseling program at Jackson Park Hospital. We just were housed there after, an after-school program that was.  I wanted a parental component and, and never could get it funded so after a while, I folded up the regular adolescent counseling program.  But, and I also served as educational consultant for several private schools.  And, as I said, this was a management and business consulting service.  One of the, one of the--well, after Harold came in office, Mayor Washington, I should say, he was very instrumental in exposing black people to the business world and what could be, but had never been, but could be.
Story_ID: 16192
Speaker 1: Now, just a second.  Were you involved in the Harold Washington campaign?
Speaker 2: Very much so involved in it.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: My, my daughter [Nikki] and son-in-law [Bill Von Hoene Jr.] were there night and day, and day and night because the young people did all the, the gritty kinds of work.  And they were there until 2:00 in the mornings and 1:00 in the morning.  And Bill, my son-in-law did a lot of legal work for Harold [Washington] and even took, some case he had for the Washington administration, he was trying. And Tom Sullivan of Jenner & Block [large Chicago-based law firm] saw him and was impressed with him and asked him to come, after the campaign, and become a member of the staff over--of the law firm, I should say, of Jenner & Block, which he did.  And he became a senior partner in three years there, a partner.
Story_ID: 16193
Speaker 1: Can you tell me how you met Harold Washington and, and why you supported him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had Mayor Washington for years, and I can't tell you where or when I met, but I met him when he was a legislator.  He was in the state legislature when I first met him.  And I was very enthusiastic about his campaign.  We had just been under the yoke of domination for so many years.  And I could see this as a means of liberation.  And I, I just can't say enough about how I feel about, how deeply I felt about the Harold Washington campaign.  And I was involved in, in many aspects of that campaign in terms of fund raising for it--golf outings.  We sponsored and, and raised money through that.  In terms of helping Lu Palmer [political activist and radio host] with some of the programs he had for Harold.  I was very happy when Soft Sheen [formerly Chicago-based black hair care products company] gave two hundred-some odd thousand dollars for the campaign to put posters like ones you did the graphs--the graphics for all over the viaducts and so forth.  And so Mayor Washington exposed me, as well as other people to the possibilities of what could be.  And he followed his word in terms of, of making accessible the kinds of opportunities that we should have.  We didn't know the, the power of contracts at the time because we, we didn't have any.  And when he got in office, and he, when he made, through executive order, come true the fact that women and minorities must be given 30 percent or 25 percent of the contracts that the city was letting, that was an open invitation for those of us who were ambitious and bright and who wanted to, to do things.  So my first--experience under him, personal experience, was in getting a popcorn concession at O'Hare [airport.] And I was in Terminal Two for five years with the popcorn concession.
Story_ID: 16194
Speaker 1: Is that a lucrative concession?  It was very lucrative at the time and probably is again.  When I took over, there were, there were Eastern Airlines, Continental, Braniff, and all of United.  At that time, they were building the terminal, the Terminal One and the walk-through passageway there.  So after United was built, of course, that took some of my trade away, as well as the fact that Eastern folded, Continental went out, Braniff went out [became bankrupt].  But still had quite a bit of traffic. Popcorn is sold by two means, traffic and aroma.  And so you have your help to keep popping so that people can smell it as they go by.  It wafts over to them, and then they come back, "Oh, I want some of that good popcorn!"  Well, I did that for five years and after that developed an opportunity at Navy Pier.  That was after Mayor Washington's death [in 1987].  And I went to Navy Pier as [a consessionaire for] Triad Beer and Wine.
Story_ID: 16195
Speaker 1: Now, getting a con--the process of getting a contract in the first place, I mean does it involve--what do you really have to have to get a lucrative city contract?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all you have to have ability, knowledge and you have to look for the requests for proposals in, in the businesses I've been in.  Some of them, for smaller contracts, are let without a proposal.  I understand professional contracts can be let up--well, then it was $10,000.  It's probably more than that now, without a proposal.  With mine, you had to have a proposal, and, and usually the proposals ask you what experience you have had in doing what you propose to do.  And you have to have a financial statement.  It's, it's really rather complicated.  But, you know, Chicago too is Chicago (laughter).  And ultimately, other factors enter into the picture.  I won't name them now, but you know Chicago.  So I also was put on the Illinois Port Authority board.  And that was quite an experience.  I was the only female on that board, and that board is appointed by both the Governor and the Mayor. And the Governor has five members and the Mayor has four.  And so I was one of the mayoral appointees.  We--that was, that was a very interesting board (laughter).
Speaker 1: What kind of things did they do?
Speaker 2: They (unclear) control or--  Well, they controlled all the items that come into the Port and all that go out, the shipping, you know.  In fact, the head of our Port Authority then was the longshoreman, Mr. Serpico.  And, of course, they had experience with, with shipping.  They controlled land, the landfills out there at 114th-- 119th [streets]--
Speaker 1: In the South, South part of the city.
Speaker 2: Southeast--and that's where our headquarters were.  But we met downtown on Erie, right there at Erie and Rush [streets] once a month.  And that, I was on that board for about, well, three years or four.  And when my term expired, then by that time, we had a new mayor  and, of course, he appointed his people that he wanted.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Richard [M.] Daley, I mean the current mayor, Mayor Daley or was it [Eugene] Sawyer [appointed mayor in 1987 by Chicago City Council after Harold Washington's death ] you're talking about?
Speaker 2: No, it was Daley, Mayor Daley.  [Acting Mayor Eugene] Sawyer, you know, my term overlapped Sawyer's term of office.  What else were you asking me about?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking like what kind of things that the Port Authority did and, you know, and you basically, you know, discussed the things that--
Story_ID: 16196
Speaker 1: Oh, you were asking me what I was doing during, during the '70's  [1970s] and '80's [1980s], and I told you about--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) [Rev.] Leon Finney and TWO --
Speaker 1: Right, and then my forming my own firm, my own firm, which is--and as I said, I do some consulting now also for a foster care agency on a part-time basis.  And I enjoy that.  In fact, as I said, I've had a colorful, interesting life and I have traveled a great deal.  I love to travel.  I love to meet new people.  We have a home on Hilton Head Island, so I go there when I get a chance to.  And I belong to some groups down there that are interesting and give me access to that community.  And so I live a dual life.
Story_ID: 16197
Speaker 1: What do you think, and you're around people, a lot of black people, which is the minority of black people, people that have--that are well off.  And that's true.  And do you think that most of them--or do you think that people who are as well off as you, are really living up to their responsibility to the community?  You do a lot of volunteer work,  you sacrifice a lot of your time helping and what's your impression of the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in the midst of really lots of activities, and some of peers were also.  I found that I don't think that some of the younger black people are as committed as we were.  And it's not their fault because they don't have--they haven't seen what I've seen, you know, in my days, say 30, 40, 50 years ago.  They probably would know nothing about lynching.  They probably--well, they see segregation, but it's not endowed by law.  I mean it's still against the law, but they're still segregated.  And they don't have a full understanding of what we've been through and what can come again if you're not very careful.  I just don't see the commitment of a lot of the young people to--one thing too, they're, they're busy trying to just stay afloat.  The economic situation to live now is, is hard for them.  And they have to work sort of night and day to stay ahead of the game.  So they don't devote as much time and effort to the kinds of things that, that are needed.  Another thing I, I wish that they would develop a philosophy about our people and about helping the deprived because if they don't, the base at the bottom is getting broader and broader for people who are on drugs and people who are almost committing genocide.  So I think that we've got to, we got to--I know we've got to stand up and be counted.  When, when the powers that be do something that is against our people, we should, we shouldn't just let that slide.  We should do something, we should rally,  we should get together.  And, of course, that's a major part of our heritage, the, the inability to get together because of many years of slavery and the fact that we were sold.  Our families were sold apart.  And we still are not--we have no family heritage. And family is so important.
Story_ID: 16198
Speaker 1: And now the young people don't even think of marrying, a lot, a lot of them.  They want to have babies without fathers in the home.  And it's, from my perspective, it's unfair to the child.  A child needs both a mother and father. And in this day and age, they definitely need that, even just to make a living. To say nothing of the guidance that both parents can give.  So I'm kind of disturbed that we don't the values that we should have.  And we don't have the philosophy and the commitment that will make us--make for a better world.  That is not to say that some of these young people aren't doing a fantastic job with helping the race.  They are earning money, and, and some of them are giving money to causes.  But I can see that we need people who will stand up and tell our politicians that they can't do that kind of thing against black people or other minority people; that they, they have to listen to our planks and our complaints and, and have to enact legislation that would help.  We have to better our schools.  Our school system is down, down, down.  And some of the schools in the area, in--other the South side and West sides are dismal in terms of just the, the physical plant.  And you certainly aren't, you aren't getting the best situation if you're breathing asbestos, you know.  So anyway, enough of my soapbox (laughter).
Story_ID: 16199
Speaker 1: Well, just to go on the soapbox again for a minute, you were trained in history--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were a teacher, a history teacher in school.
Speaker 2: Right.  What type of history should be taught in school to, I guess, increase the sense of responsibility you were talking about?
Speaker 1: Well, I think if they teach the true history of our country, the true history of the peoples of our country, that would be very helpful.  For example, the Jewish people teach their children in, in their homes.  Their families teach their children about the Holocaust.  We should teach our children about Slavery. What has happened is that we have been so ashamed that we were slaves that we have hidden that fact from our children.  We should teach and proudly show how we have risen from that servitude to the, the place we are today, even though many of still have servile attitudes and we have not gotten out of that mode, that mentality.  We still have a slave mentality.  But if we at home teach our children about what has happened, and if the schools were to inculcate that kind of training in the schools, it would be very helpful.  However, many of the books don't have any mention of, of anything substantial about black people and how we evolved out of slavery into where we are now.
Story_ID: 16200
Speaker 1: Now, are there any particular books that you would recommend for teachers or for leaders that you'd recommend in terms of the message that they're delivering that could remedy this?
Speaker 2: Well, not per se, but I would say that it is incumbent upon our ministers, for example, in other words, black people have always been a church-going people, even though we don't largely portray (laughter) what is taught in churches.  But our ministers have a duty, to my way of thinking, to teach and talk and discuss black history with, with their flocks. And we have very few leaders now. It seems when we get a good leader, he's killed, assassinated.  But whatever leaders we have, have a responsibility to do that.  And teachers must become--and teachers themselves are deprived.  They have not been trained to teach anything about blacks and how we have suffered and how we have risen, in spite of the suffering.  So teachers and educators need to be trained and need to, to teach.
Story_ID: 16201
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you what have been the high points of your life.  And I know you've met a lot of famous and influential people and been in rooms where people are meeting about, you know, very-- extremely important things.  So can we have you comment on some of that?
Speaker 2: Some of the, one of the, the most notable of the people--two of the most notable of the people whom I've met were Mr. [Nelson] Mandela and Bishop [Desmond] Tutu.  And I've had a chance to talk at length with both of them, and they were so inspiring.  The kinds of things that they did were inspiring.  When Mr. Mandela sacrificed, all those years of his life rather than--I mean he could have gotten out if he wanted to say-- out of prison, if he just wanted to give up and give in to the racist people over there.  He could have gotten out.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet Nelson Mandela and how did you meet Bishop Tutu?
Speaker 2: Bishop Tutu was our guest at a UNICEF luncheon, which we hosted.  And, of course, I was one of his host for his visit here.  And therefore, I was able to talk with him at length.  I was invited as a guest of the Mayor, Mayor [Richard M.] Daley to meet him at City Hall, to meet Mr. Mandela at City Hall.  And I have a photo of us there, and I was just able to talk with him on the side while, while being there.  So those were my experiences with those two.  I--
Story_ID: 16202
Speaker 1: Well, I just had a question and it's--
Speaker 2: What ?
Speaker 1: Do you find that the lecture that people give at these events are more instructive or discussions on the side?
Speaker 2: The discussions on the side (laughter).  The discussions on the side, although Bishop [Desmond] Tutu [Nobel Peace Prize winner 1984],  is very frank.  I mean he's small in stature, but his voice is booming and he is very colorful, let's put it that way.  He's very colorful.  He, he tells it like it is.  But Mr. [Nelson] Mandela [Nobel Peace Prize winner 1993, former President of South Africa] is, he has a lovely personality and-- especially, with women (laughter).  And he was eighty years old I think at the time I met him or something.  But he's charming.  And--
Speaker 1: Well, what--what kind of things would he tell you on the side that he wouldn't tell you--you know, that he didn't share everybody?
Speaker 2: Well, just, you know, what you ask him about.  You might ask him about, you know, how he really felt about the people who enslaved him, incarcerated him and, you know, what, what were your true feelings because when you're standing there, you don't want to indict a whole people, but if you're talking to somebody on the side, you can tell them how you really feel about situations.
Story_ID: 16203
Speaker 1: Okay, did--
Speaker 2: Some of the other people I have met who have been, who were Bill Clinton.  I met him first as my Governor.  I'm from Little Rock, Arkansas, and he was Governor of Arkansas while I was--not while I was there, but later.  And--
Speaker 1: You consider yourself a lifelong Arkansas (unclear) person--
Speaker 2: A lifelong, right, yes, I do. Even though I've been here much longer than I was there.  I was only there the first fifteen years of my life, and I've been here since I was twenty-two years old.
Speaker 1: It's something, you know, when--I know when we talk about, when I came, you know, our view of Little Rock, as we saw it on television was one of terror and--
Speaker 2: Yeah--  In fact, most of the South.  We looked--and I was raised in Ohio, but I looked at that (unclear), but you know. People that we've interviewed, you know, seem to really--they look back at the South and they know the, you know, the problems. But they--but there's a certain love for the country that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, the city was, had a metropolitan air, but it was a smaller city.  And it was clean.  The people were amenable until that horrible time.  And see I was leaving at that time, but, so my memories really of Little Rock are the good times that I experienced, the first fifteen years of my life.  And it was after I left there, that all that came about.  But anyway, Bill Clinton asked me to be an ambassador of goodwill from Little Rock [Arkansas].  And then I worked in his first Presidential campaign here in Chicago [Illinois], met him at the Drake [Hotel] at one of the events that we gave for him.  I had met his wife [Hillary Rodham-Clinton] at the White House at a reception that was given for artists--for blacks who are collectors, substantial collectors of art by black artists and African art- artists, sculptures as well.  And I met President [Jimmy] Carter at his inauguration.  I was invited to his inauguration and I went.  And he's a charming man too. And Roslyn, his wife, although I didn't like that gown she on, (laughter) The one she made herself, but she's a sweet person. And I knew of the Imam of the Muslim faith.
Story_ID: 16204
Speaker 1: Wallace? [Wallace Deen Muhammed].
Speaker 2: Wallace--And I helped even to raise funds for them (laughter) at one time.  In fact, we had Jim Brown as one of the, our celebrities at a dinner that I put on--my girlfriend and I put on at the Westin Hotel.  I have met a lot of, of celebrities, particularly in the entertainment world because when I was doing fundraising for Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], we had Harry Belafonte [entertainer].  I was chairman of that event at McCormick Place [convention center, Chicago, Illinois].  We had Marvin Gaye [R&B singer] out at Stockyards Inn [performance venue and restaurant]. We had Cannonball Adder--Adderley , Nancy Wilson, Ramsey Lewis.  Of course, Ramsey lived across the street from me and Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] lived next door to him.  So we were--and Sammy Davis, Jr. [entertainer]  Frank Sinatra [entertainer] kissed me on the cheek on my birthday.  My birthday is December seventh.  His is like December tenth and Sammy's is right in there, December eighth or something.  So I went to the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles [California] when Sammy Davis did a benefit performance with Frank Sinatra for [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.'s--for the founding of this, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference build--edifice.  He was doing that for Coretta Scott King [wife of Martin Luther King Jr.], and I was able to go back stage because Ramsey Lewis and Geri--at the time, he was married to Geri [Geraldine]--we went to Reno [Nevada], in Harrah's [casino] and Sammy--he appeared with Sammy Davis there.  So we stayed several days, and we got to know Sammy and, and then also, Sammy came to [Rev.] Jesse's [Jackson Sr.'s] house once.  And we were invited to dinner there.  So we had a, we had a nice relationship.  And I, as I said, I've known a lot of, a lot of celebrities and a lot of, of substan--people of substance, substantial people who are, are writers and philanthropists.
Story_ID: 16205
Speaker 1: Who's the most impressive person you think you've ever meant?  I mean whose the most impressive one?
Speaker 2: The most impressive?  I think I would have to say Mr. [Nelson] Mandela is the most impressive.  The most charismatic is Bill Clinton.  He's very--no, the most charismatic, I met Jack--President-- shot in the-- Jack--Jackie's husband, Onass--not Onassis, Kennedy.  Kennedy.  [President] Jack Kennedy.  He's the most charismatic.  He had, had a shock of--corn silk hair, blue eyes that were piercing and a smile that was dazzling. So I think he's the most charismatic person.
Story_ID: 16206
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that you remember that you might want to tell us that we haven't talked about?
Speaker 2: Well, just that I, I, like many Americans, feel that the first family was the Kennedys.  And I went to--I was privileged to go to the Sotheby [auction house] auction to--  Well, what happened was, I was invited to the viewing at Sotheby's of Jackie Kennedy's personal possessions. And I have the book there, which shows all of the items.  And I went for that.  And then you could call in and make your bid, which I did, and I was able to get one of her necklaces that she had made from Aristotle's [Onassis] gift to her of this necklace.  This is a substitute so she wouldn't have to wear the 'real mccoy' every time she went out.  So I was very privileged to, to win that bid.  And I have that necklace.  And I liked them very much.  I, I grew up loving the Kennedy's and Jack--John-John [John Jr.] and Caroline and still admire them.
Story_ID: 16207
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you think will be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would hope that I have served as a mentor, and I know I have served as a mentor to a number of people.  And what I did in my later life, I have served as a resource person for people I've put -- people come to me.  I make myself available for people to come to me, to ask me where they can go to get this or to do this or do I know somebody that I can introduce them to for, maybe their research or even sometimes for a job, positions and so forth.  I would--the other day--and, and many times you have an impact on people you don't even know about.  The other day I went to a dress designer's place of business.  Her name is J. J. Hobeau, H-O-B-E-A-U.  And she said to me, when I called to say I was coming, she said, "Oh, I'm so happy to hear from you."  And I didn't even realize who she was until I saw her.  I went to her place and-- which is where she makes her clothes as well as sells them.  And she said, "You're the reason for my being in business.  I said, "I'm the reason for you?--"  She said yes.  One day, long ago, we were--many years ago, we were at a party together, and you sat, we sat next to each other.  And I said to you--she is saying, that I wanted to, to be a dress designer.  And I said, "Well, why aren't you?"  So she said, "Well, I don't have any money to get started and I, I just thought I would wait."  And I said, "No, you have talent.  You get started now with whatever you have, whatever little money you have, buy some material and sew."  She did that.  She said, she made herself a pair of gold pants and shortly after that, she went to a party on Oak Street [upscale shopping district in Chicago, Illinois] where they have these interesting boutiques. And the lady who owned the shop there, said to her, "Oh, I like those pants."  She said, "Where did you buy them?"  So she said, "Well, I didn't.  I made them."  She said, "You made those?"  "Yes."  "So, could you make some for me to sell?"  And she said, she didn't have but $50 to her name, but she said, "Oh, yes, of course."  So she made--you know, she bought, found money to buy additional material and made them, sold them to her, took that money, plowed it back into some more materials.  And from there she became, you know, a designer.  So I was very pleased to hear that story, that I have helped people along the way.  And I'm very happy about that.  I have mentored people and I'm very happy about that.  And I see--even, the other day I ran into a young lady, and she said, "Did you ever teach at [James R.] Doolittle [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?"  And so I said, "Yes, I, I taught at Doolittle for ten years.  She said, "Well, you were my kindergarten teacher," because I taught various grades at, at Doolittle, and that was the elementary school.  And I said, "Well, I'm happy to see you."  I said, "And I want to know what are you doing that my teaching you helped you?"  She said, "I'm a nurse now."  I said, well, fine.  I'm happy to see that.  And I ran into a fireman who had been one of my students.  So that makes me happy, those kinds of things make me very happy.  Now, the thing that I will-- if, if I were to have any regrets--I usually don't regret things because I feel there's a reason for everything.  And if my life had taken a different turn, I wouldn't have my son and my daughter.  Maybe I wouldn't have married who I married and so forth.  But the one thing that I would love to have been is a lawyer.  I would have loved to have been that.  And my husband, more recently has tried to encourage me, he said, "Babe (unclear) if you wanted to be a lawyer, it's not too late."  Yes, it's too late (laughter).  But, you know, to remember all the things in the law books and so forth, but that would, would have been my role, my life's ambition to, to be.  But my daughter became a lawyer so, you know, I, I can sort of live through her (laughter).
Story_ID: 16208
Speaker 1: So your children are relatively happy and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Our son is director of pension benefits.  I have a letter from him there at the Jewish Federation [of Metropolitan Chicago, Illinois].  And he's single, He's thirty-five, thirty-four years old now and has recently bought a condominium in South Commons [a condo development on Chicago's South side].  So he sent me a letter with some, some complimentary tickets to movies, a movie. And when he got his new card, you know, his business card, and attached it to that.  So we're proud of both our kids.
Story_ID: 16209
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As somebody who helped other people.  That's how I'd like to be remembered, that I made a difference in the lives of other people.  Okay, as I said, earlier, I guess--as a wife and mother and a community activists.  Those are the kinds of things I'd like to be remembered for.
Story_ID: 16210
Speaker 1: I have three additional questions I didn't ask you at the beginning.  I'm gonna ask them now.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Could you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: --Well, I hate to tell you, but my favorite food is Fannie Mae Candies, (laughter) chocolate.  I'm a chocoholic.  And I love chocolate milkshakes.  I don't drink alcoholic beverages, so I like sweets. And I like pop, pop and the chocolate milkshakes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, summer.  Summer.  I do not like winter.  I don't like having to stay in or bundle up to go out.  My favorite time of year is summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your favorite color?  Green, for various and sundry reasons.  One it, it--green is good for my complexion and my eyes.  It brings out the green in my eyes.  And also green symbolizes money.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what's your favorite vacation destination.  The world.  I love to travel and I've gone to Europe several times.  I've been to parts of Africa.  I've been South America.  And I've been in Canada.  So I like to travel.  So the, the world is, is my oyster.  There's always an adventure.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess one that I use fairly frequently is, "It ain't over 'til the fat lady sings."  And that means that you have more opportunities to, to do what you need to do to get the job done.
Story_ID: 16211
Speaker 1: Oh, what do you think of--as a former history teacher, what do you think of this project?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's very needed.  Oh, I, I was so enthralled when I learned of the project.  And I feel so honored to have been one of the honorees of the project. Because unfortunately for us, we have not documented our history as a people and this will certainly go a long ways towards remedying that situation.  So Julieanna Richardson and her staff and all of you are to be complimented.  I think it's marvelous.
Story_ID: 16212
Speaker 1: And give us the commentary on this one.  Okay, great.  Go ahead please.  This Doris L. Zollar, me, in my hard hat of President of my construction company, Apex Construction Company.  And I was at my drawing board.  Do you remember the year or the decade when this was taken?  The decade was in the '80's [1980s], and I was doing work at O'Hare Field at that time.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar during the 1980s. From the collection of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16213
Speaker 1: On the left is Senator Percy and on the right is Sharon Percy, one of his two daughters.  The other daughter was deceased.  She had been unfortunately murdered in their Winnetka home.  And they never found the murderer.  And I'm in the middle background.  I was serving as Sharon's escort for the evening and had been asked to serve.  Senator Percy had been very instrumental in bringing to Chicago for me a, a woman from Ghana, well, not Ghana, Guyana, I'm sorry.  It used to be British Guyana, but it's Guyana--to serve as a maid for me here.  And they had just instituted--the [United States] Congress had just instituted harsher immigration laws, but he was able to get her here for me in no time.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar with Illinois U.S.Senator Charles Percy and his daughter Sharon at a social event. From the collection of Doris Zollar].
Story_ID: 16214
Speaker 1: My daughter, Nikki Zollar and her husband, my son-in-law, Bill Von Hoene gave a beautiful party of 200, with 200 guests for my husband and me, celebrating our fortieth wedding anniversary about 5 years ago at the Drake Hotel.  And that was the family table.  His sister is there in the foreground, Pearl Rouse, who is a nurse.  And we have my great Aunt, then my husband's niece who is the daughter of the sister.  And --  Could you do me a favor?  Start with -- from the end, at the very left in the White jacket, and then identify the people in relation to him, just maybe going counter-clockwise around the table.  That is, that couple, that's Kenneth and Ethel Hilton of Detroit, my lifetime friends I spoke of earlier from Talladega.  And they were wed right after Talladega, they both were at 'Dega with me.  The next Juanita Rawls, my cousin from Denver, Colorado, who is the mother of, of one of the Little Rock Nine that I spoke of earlier too.  I can't quite tell who the next person is, but the person in red is my daughter and then her husband.  And who are those?  I can't quite distinguish -- my son or my Aunt is the person with the glasses there, great-aunt.  And she is now a hundred years old and looking like she's only eighty.  And Larry, our son, and, and here in the foreground my sister-in-law and her husband.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar with her family at her 40th wedding anniversary. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of a color photograph.]
Story_ID: 16215
Speaker 1: Those are some dear friends of mine.  That's me on the left.  That's Dr. Beth Stone who taught at Howard, which she is now retired.  And she and her husband, French Stone live in Florida--Del Ray Beach.  And then my other friend, Agnes Jones, who formerly lived here, but she and her husband, attorney Roscoe Jones, now live in Scottsdale [Arizona].  And we visit back and forth, both of us.
Speaker 2: [Two of Doris Zollar's friends.  Courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16216
Speaker 1: That's at my party.  And that's me on the left.  That's Clementine Jones, a dear friend and the next person is Louise Lawson, who was the first female president of Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan.  And that's French Stone, Beth Stone's husband.  I just introduced you to Dr. and Mrs. Stone of Del Ray Beach [Florida.]  That's her husband, French.  They were here for the affair.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar poses with friends Clementine Jones, Louise Lawson and French Stone during Zollar's 40th wedding anniversary party. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.]
Story_ID: 16217
Speaker 1: That's my girlfriend, the Talladegan I spoke to you about, Zerelda, whose husband is at University of Michigan and we were at Talladega together many years ago.  And that's Norma (unclear) Menter, and then that's Ethel, the person we saw earlier with her husband, Kenneth at my table.
Speaker 2: [Three of Doris Zollar's college friends, Zerelda, Norma Menter and Ethel. From the collection of Doris Zollar]
Story_ID: 16218
Speaker 1: And that's my gynecologist, whom I dearly love, Dr. Fritz Michelle there at the center.  And that's Maxine and Ernest, J. Ernest Wilkins next and  --  Moving?
Speaker 2: Moving left to right.  And that's Joyce and Carl Beecham, next.  I can't determine the next couple.  Then there're Roy and Lavette Levy and the one lady on the end is a dentist, Dr. Kyra Barnes, whose one of my daughter's best girlfriends.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was also at the 40th Anniversary, is that correct, at the Drake [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes, at the Drake.
Speaker 1: [More celebrants at Doris Zollar's 40th wedding anniversary party at the Drake Hotel. From the collection of Doris Zollar].
Story_ID: 16219
Speaker 1: That's -- well we're start here with Rick Wyman whose a CPA person.  He lives in Northfield.  And the other gentleman -- is Leon Robinson from Evanston--
Speaker 2: [More celebrants at Doris Zollar's 40th Wedding Anniversary party at the Drake Hotel. From the collection of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16220
Speaker 1: Okay, Rick Wyman and Debbie, his wife here on the right.  Next to them is Leon Robinson of Evanston, who owned the Robinson Bus Company.  He's recently sold it.  Next to him are the Marshalls of Detroit.  He's an attorney there.  She is a public school administrator.  Next to them is Hazel Huggins--Hazel Anthony Winthrop Huggins.  And next to her are the Cannon's, Joe Cannon and Peggy Cannon from Hilton Head Island [South Carolina].  We had a number of people from out of town who came.  And the couple in forefront here are Wilma (unclear) Setler and her husband.  Got through that.
Speaker 2: [More celebrants at the Zollar's 40th Wedding Anniversary party in 2003. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16221
Speaker 1: That's the great publisher [ Johnson Publishing Company], John Johnson and Eunice Johnson and me and my husband.  Same event, right?  Same event.
Speaker 2: This whole series has all been from the fortieth anniversary.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, from the fortieth.
Speaker 2: [From the left, Johnson Publishing Company owner, John H. Johnson and wife Eunice pose with the Zollars, Doris and Lowell, at the Zollar's wedding anniversary party. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16222
Speaker 1: Now, this is not from the fortieth anniversary (laughter).  This is in Little Rock, Arkansas when we were getting ready for my wedding.  And Lowell's mother and father had come down, and that's my--in the middle is my grandmother on my father's side, Elise Lockhart.
Speaker 2: Did you tell us the year for this?
Speaker 1: 19- 1954.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar's in-laws and her grandmother MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16223
Speaker 1: And this was at a social event some years ago with Irv Kupcinet here in on the left me.  And that's me speaking to him.  And that's Ramsey Lewis and Geri Lewis on our right.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar at a social function, greets Irv Kupcinet and Ramsey Lewis and his wife, Geri [the late Geraldine]. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16224
Speaker 1: And that's at the same event, and that's Geri [Geraldine] Lewis on the left, Ramsey in the middle and me on the right.
Speaker 2: [Geri (the late Geraldine) and Ramsey Lewis with Doris Zollar. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16225
Speaker 1: And this at a social event that the (unclear) Roves of Detroit gave.  And that's Kenneth Hilton, Zerelda and I'm in the gold.  And that's Billy Parker of Detroit and Ethel of Detroit.  Ethel is Ken's wife.  You've seen them before. My very dear friends from Talladega.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar at a social event with some of her friends from Talladega College. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16226
Speaker 1: Okay, this is when my daughter was taken [sic. sworn in] into the Governor's cabinet as Director of the Department Professional Regulation.  And this is Barbara Green, one of our --
Speaker 2: Left to right.
Speaker 1: Left to right.  Okay.  One of our friends, Barbara Green.  This is Nikki's best friend, Kyra Barnes.  You just saw her, Dr. Barnes.  That's Nikki, our daughter.  And that's my great aunt, Mrs. Emmie Beard, the one that I told you was a hundred now, but who--and that was eight years ago.  So--about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar's daughter after being sworn into the Illinois Governor's cabinet poses with friends and family in 1992. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16227
Speaker 1: Okay, and that is the whole picture taken in the Governor's office when she was initiated or taken into his office.  Those were politicians with me and her husband, Nikki -- Nikki's husband on the left.
Speaker 2: We got the year for that, didn't we?  Or did we?
Speaker 1: Ten years ago.
Speaker 2: And that was--
Speaker 1: Ten years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was --
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 2: [Nikki Zollar with family and friends after her swearing-in ceremony in 1992. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16228
Speaker 1: That was a picture around the time when I was helping to organize Operation PUSH.  On our left is Attorney John Bustamant.  He is the legal eagle for PUSH, and, of course, in the middle is Reverend Jesse L. Jackson.  And that's me on the right.  All right, could you give us a year and also spell Bustamant, please?
Speaker 2: Bustamant is B-U-S-T-A-M-A-N-T-E, with an accent.  I can't give you a year, but it was about twenty-five, twenty-six years ago.
Speaker 1: [Atty. John Bustamente, Jesse Jackson and Doris Zollar at an Operation PUSH event 1978-1979. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16229
Speaker 1: The picture on the left is of me as Director of Children's Haven, a school for multiply handicapped children in Harvey, Illinois, which my husband and I built and founded; had been nominated by Alpha Beta Chapter of Iota Lambda Sorority, Inc. to receive the Lola M. Parker Achievement Award.  Mrs. Zollar was the promoter of Project 70, a program to for -- to raise money to assist minority youth through medical school.  The Lola M. Parker Award is for outstanding achievements in the field of business and for her contributions to civic and community life.  So I read you the article about it.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar in a newspaper clipping. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16230
Speaker 1: Okay, those, those are three of our parents.  That's my mother in the newspaper article.  Her name was Mrs. Lawrence Lowe or Luvenia Lowe, and the other is Lowell's parents, Carolyn Zollar and Anderson Zollar.
Speaker 2: Can you guesstimate anything as far as the year or the location of the -- look under those paper clips in the upper left.
Speaker 1: My -- see if there's anything on the back of that.  My husband would know.  It says years ago (laughter) many years ago.
Speaker 2: [Pictures and newspaper clippings of Doris Zollar's parents, the Lowes and her husbands parents, th e Zollars. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photographs.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16231
Speaker 1: No objections by these lawyers.  Nikki got her degree and she's on the left, our daughter and her law degree from Georgetown University Law Center [Washington, D.C.].  And Bill, her husband, on the right, [William] Bill Von Hoene [Jr.] got his degree from the University of Chicago [Law School, Chicago, Illinois].  And he was number one in his class and therefore won the Order Of [the] Coif for being number one in his law class.
Speaker 2: [Magazine clipping of Doris Zollar's daughter, Nikki, and son-in-law Bill Von Hoene MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16232
Speaker 1: Those are both my mother--no, we want the one in the center.  That's my mother, and next to her on the right is our son when he was young.  He was a child.  (Unclear)  You could just do either.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar's mother and son from a family photo album. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16233
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with Mrs. Mary Rockefeller.  And we were at her estate in upper New York [upstate New York].  That is a picture of us at the World Service Council Meeting, which meets once a year in New York.  And she hosted a beautiful meeting.  The estate is forty acres of beautiful grass and trees and a brook running through, and just lovely.
Speaker 2: Do you recall what years?  She's, she's deceased now.  But it's about eight years ago.
Speaker 1: [Doris Zollar with Mary Rockerfeller at the Rockerfeller Estate. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16234
Speaker 1: This is a picture depicting a fashion statement by me at a hat show.  Year?  And it was about five years ago [1998].
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar models a hat during a 1998 hat show. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16235
Speaker 1: All right, description, please.  This is a photograph which I sent to my parents during my tenure in college.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar's Talladega College portrait. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16236
Speaker 1: This my favorite mayor in all the world, Mayor Harold Washington.  And he was kind enough one day, when I was in his office to autograph this for me.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Chicago, Illinois Mayor, Harold Washington. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16237
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the Reverend Jesse Jackson, Mr. Mandela, Mayor Richard Daley, Dori Zollar and Reverend Willie Barrow, when we were meeting with Mr. Mandela in the Mayor's office.
Speaker 2: And the year
Speaker 1: -- is there anything on there that symbolizes the year--oh, it was just after--
Speaker 2: '92 or '93 [1992-1993].  Just after he, shortly after he came out of prison.
Speaker 1: [Doris Zollar meets Nobel Peace Prize winner, Nelson Mandela with Rev. Jesse Jackson Jr., Rev. Willie Barrow and Chicago Illinois Mayor, Richard M. Daley. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16238
Speaker 1: This is the First Lady under Bill Clinton, Hillary.  And she is now a state senator [United States Senator- New York] as we know, from New York. But this was at the White House at a reception for art collectors of black, historically black art and African art.  It was a lovely party.
Speaker 2: [First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton with Doris Zollar at a White House event. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16239
Speaker 1: This, on the right, this is me on the right.  And this is with Bill Clinton when he was running for the Presidency during his first term.  And he was here at the Drake Hotel and we were helping to raise funds for him.  Would that have been 1991?  Yeah.  Okay, whatever you say (laughter).  Yeah, --  It says during the election (unclear) inaugurated in '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: [Presidential candidate Bill Clinton poses with Doris Zollar during a fundraiser at the Drake Hotel in Chicago, Illinois in 1991-1992. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16240
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] Jane Byrne and of me with her.  She had invited me to come to talk with her about a position that she wanted me to take in her administration, but it turned out that the position was full time and I was not interested in working full time.  But I, I went to see her, and then we were going out to lunch from there.
Speaker 2: Okay, can you recall the year or approximate time frame?
Speaker 1: Well, whenever she went in, in office--
Speaker 2: During her administration.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it would be--
Speaker 1: First part of her administration because she was getting her staff together. [1979]
Speaker 2: [Chicago mayor, Jane Byrne and Doris Zollar in 1979. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.  Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16241
Speaker 1: This is the wedding that Little Rock said was its 'Wedding of the Century' (laughter).  And that's me and my husband, then we were wed that day, September 5, 1954 in the right.  Those are the groomsmen at the left and those are the maids of honor at the bottom.  And most of them traveled from Chicago [Illinois] to Little Rock [Arkansas] to be in the wedding.  We had the entire black population turned out to our wedding, which was at Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church.  And they filled it to the rafters and some stood outside to see us come out.  Wow, great.  Yes, I was very pleased.
Speaker 2: [The Zollar Wedding in 1954. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of newspaper clip of b/w photograph. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16242
Speaker 1: The photos on the left are of me when I was being photographed really by Steven Birmingham's crew.  Steven Birmingham is an author who did the Jackie Kennedy Story '[Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis', PocketBooks 1978]  and Lee Radizwill, and several other books (unclear).  And he wrote 'Certain People, the Black Elite' [Certain People: America's Black Elite. Little Brown, 1977]  And I was--this picture was included in that.  That's my home in the background at 69th and Constance and my car and me.  On the right is an article in our now defunct Chicago Daily News and it was an article about me and my fashions with the Bill Blass [American fashion designer] dress on and with the Missoni [Italian knitwear] outfit on, and it just depicts one aspect of my life.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar in a fashion photo montage from the 1970s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color and b/w photographs. Photo courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
Story_ID: 16243
Speaker 1: N'Digo [Chicago black weekly magazine] was interviewing several women they called 'Divas of Chicago'.  And I'm the one on the left.  Isabelle Neal is back, background.  Barbara Burrell [HistoryMaker, wife of HistoryMaker Tom Burrell ] is on the right and Juanita Passmore [HistoryMaker, philanthropist] is in the foreground.  And I was interviewed mainly because I had--I was a female in a historically male-- trade.  I had Apex Construction Company at the time.  Okay, January 1991.  Okay.
Speaker 2: [Doris Zollar on the front of N'Digo magazine. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of magazine reproduction of color photo (N'Digo Magazine, January, 1991); Courtesy of Doris Zollar.]
