Story_ID: 361025
Speaker 1: Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  And this is--I am the interviewer and Neculai Burghelea the videographer.  So, Shawn and Nick, and I'll just have you introduce yourself to me.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Jawole Willa Jo Zollar.  Jawole is a name that I took.  Willa Jo Zollar is my birth name.  Jawole is spelled J-A-W-O-L-E, Willa, W-I-L-L-A, Jo, J-O, Zollar, Z-O-L-L-A-R.
Speaker 1: So we'll come back to your name and why you choose that name again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Continuing, today's date?
Speaker 2: Ah?  I--
Speaker 1: August 2nd.
Speaker 2: August 2nd, 2006 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: It's in the A.R.T./New York [The Alliance of Resident Theatres/New York] building.
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, New York.
Story_ID: 361026
Speaker 1: --I'm going to ask you five simple questions.  These answers will appear on the website.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food, that's really hard.  Oh, my favorite food.  Arugula, I love--I could eat arugula every day.  I love arugula.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: That changes year to year.  I'm kind of into orange right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I th- you know, I travel so much, so when I'm in Florida, fall isn't my favorite time of year, but if I'm in New York [New York] then it is 'cause I love the changing of the colors.  The--just the way--I love the fall colors, and if I'm not in New York for that then I would say spring is my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Whoa, these are hard.  Any place with a spa (laughter).  I love to take spa vacations.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A phrase my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] used to say to me all the time, go for what you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we are going to start the interview, but under occupation, what do you list nowadays?
Speaker 2: I list myself as artistic director of Urban Bush Women and a Nancy Smith--the Nancy Smith Fichter Professor of Dance at Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida].
Story_ID: 361027
Speaker 1: So we are going to start, and we're going to talk about your mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] and your mother's side of the family, but before we do, you were born Willa [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why did you change your name?
Speaker 2: You know, I had--I had always wanted to change my name from a child, and I think it had to do with that--you know, my [maternal] grandfather [Barney Mason] was really kind of old school, and, you know, loved him very much.  They used to bark orders at my [maternal] grandmother [Willa Mason] who I'm named after, and so I think I later realized that I had that memory, "Willa, turn off the TV!"  "Willa, get in here." (Laughter) And she loved it, I mean, she just--it wasn't--but I think something in my mind you know.  So then when the--in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] when African American people started taking on African names, I knew that I was gonna do that and so I wanted--I searched for a name and it took me a while, but about a year after my mother's passing, that's when I felt like I--the name was signifying a new kind of place for me, and so I took the name Jawole which means, she enters the house.  It's a Yoruba name, although I didn't know that at the time.  And if I understand, I've heard different variations, that in the Yoruba language, it's actually a sentence, not necessarily a name, and depending on how it's said, 'cause it's tonal language, it can mean, she enters the house, she bursts through the house, she fell through the house, so I've heard a lot of different variations of what my name means.  But I think I like the sound Jawole, and then it was later that I realized that it almost was like a reverse of Willa Jo.  So, it was very complicated, and when I found the name in a book, the book actually listed it as a Kiswahili name meaning, clear water, so that was what I was attracted to, but then I later found out that that was not true.
Speaker 1: So it's pronounced JA-woe-lay?
Speaker 2: It can be ja-WOE-lay, ja-woe-LAY, JA-woe-lay, you know it's--I usually say Jawole.
Speaker 1: Jawole, very nice name.  So what do you think you're--and then we're gonna talk about your mother and your history, but what do you think she thought about you changing your name?
Speaker 2: I came from a mother who was bohemian and accepting of whatever people wanted to do, and so my mother in the '50s [1950s], it was in the mid-'50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s], to prepare for a fashion show, dyed her hair lavender, you know, like a blueberry lavender.  So I had a mother who was very adventurous so, I think that she--it was not an issue at all.  My father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] had already passed away at that time so it wasn't--oh, what am I saying?  My mother had already passed away when I changed my name, so it is funny because I feel like she was part of that, but she wouldn't have had an issue.
Story_ID: 361028
Speaker 1: Where was your mother born and her date of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Temple, Texas, and she was born October 3, 1922.
Speaker 1: And her first name, and we'll just stick with the first name?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Because of the identity issue.
Speaker 2: Dorothy [Dorothy Zollar Hoover].  Dorothy Dolores, and a lot of people called her Dot.
Speaker 1: And she was born in Texas in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Twenty-two [1922].
Speaker 1: Twenty-two [1922].  Now that was during--I mean, the Depression [Great Depression] came shortly after that.  Did she talk about her life as a child to you?  What was it like to grow up in Texas?
Speaker 2: Well, they had moved, I think by that time they had moved to Kansas City [Missouri].  There's some information I don't quite have accurate, but I know that my [maternal] grandmother, Willa [Willa Mason], was married to my [maternal] grandfather, James [ph.], but then got a divorce and I'm not sure if the divorce sparked their move to Kansas City, and my other grandfather who was actually my step-grandfather but, you know, you don't make those distinctions as a child.  Grandpa Barney [Barney Mason] is the grandfather that I grew up around, so I'm not exactly sure when they came to Kansas City, Missouri.  But I remember later in my life realizing that my mother never talked about hardship during the Depression, and I never--didn't have the sense of--I didn't hear those stories and she said, "Oh that's because your grandfather ran reefer for the Mafia," (laughter) and so that they lived well.  Reefer was not a problem at that time, it was alcohol that was the issue.  So marijuana was not so much an issue.  And I don't know how much that's true, but they seemed to live a--their economics seemed to have come from an underground lifestyle in terms of, you know.  I'm sure he had a job, but he was a truck driver, so.
Speaker 1: So he made his money mostly through a back door?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So Dorothy was a child in Kansas City, Missouri.  Did she ever talk about what life was like in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, I just actually interviewed her best friend who they were raised as sisters recently.  I wished I had that in front of me 'cause my cousin, Rosie [ph.], was raised as a sister to my mother.  Her father--they--her father was my mother's uncle.  Although Rosie was discovered, she was a child that was--she was not the--my uncle's wife, you know, so.  But you know, there's a certain kind of tradition within the African American community where you just take in the children 'cause people didn't really, you know.  So when this was discovered about Rosie, she was then taken in and she was raised alongside of my mother.  So, I--what she talks about in growing up in Kansas City--can you go back a little bit, the question?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, your mother's life in Kansas City as a child, Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Part of the time was in Texas and part of the time was in Kansas City, and part of the time was sometimes in Temple, sometimes in Houston [Texas], sometimes in Kansas City, and I don't quite have all those years, but they lived in a boarding house, which when I saw the film 'Lackawanna Blues,' you know, it sounded like my mother's upbringing.  They lived in a boarding house and the person's house they lived in was Mama King [Villa King].  That's how we knew her, and she took people in, and so lots of different families, you know, I guess that's how they lived, and then at some point they lived on their own or either moved back to Texas.  And it seemed that she had a pretty, you know, happy and, you know, when I talked to my cousin, Rosie, and she said that they would just--they would spend the nights in the park when it was hot that you would just--families would just spend the night in the park and you would leave your door open, or you would sleep on your front porch and, you know, that there was no risk of, you didn't--people didn't think about not being safe.
Story_ID: 361029
Speaker 1: --This was in the black community that she went to school, and my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover]--'cause I remember one day coming home and saying to my mother about black history and she was like, "Well, you know, when I was growing up that was just part of the curriculum, Negro history that was--we didn't have to have a special week or day, it was just part of what we learned because the schools were controlled by African Americans."  So she talked about, you know, that what they called Negro history is a part of the everyday curriculum and, you know, reading and writing and being able--the recitations that people would do in terms of like Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and, you know, the kind of the grand oral tradition that was part of her upbringing.
Speaker 2: Where did she go to school?
Speaker 1: Lincoln, Lincoln High School [Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] or Lincoln Middle School.  I'm not exactly sure.
Speaker 2: Does it still exist?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think.  Kansas City [Missouri] has been under a lot of desegregation and they have changed schools around.  So, I'm not sure if Lincoln still exists, but when I was in high school, Lincoln still existed.
Speaker 2: Was it an all-black school then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So was it named after Abe Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, probably.  I'm sure it must have been (laughter).
Speaker 2: So your mother went to the school when it was legally segregated, or when it was segregated?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And she talked about Negro history?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now in your mother's life, and we're going to go back and forth, but in your mother's life, she referred to this Negro history.  She lived long enough to be called colored, Negro, black, African American.  Did she ever talk about the changes and what those changes meant to her?
Speaker 1: No, my mother was on the militant side of things (laughter).
Speaker 2: So she was black?  She considered herself black?
Speaker 1: Yes.  She rolled with it, you know (laughter).  Wherever it went, she was fine to--you know, to take on the new definition.
Speaker 2: How do you feel about them, the changes in the definitions?
Speaker 1: I think it's all part of, you know, evolving of our identity and culture that the thing of naming yourself and saying as the different constructs that I think the, the--from, you know, Negro, colored, I'm not exactly sure that progression.  I guess it must--was probably colored first and then maybe Negro.  I'm not exactly sure, but I know to black that construct was an important one.  That was my generation, and that construct of black and being able to say, "I am black and I'm proud," was an important one, and then I think coming into African American was an important one, and I suspect sometime in the future we'll go back to a pl- a time when you were identified by where you were from.  You know, so you are--you know, Jawole [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar], she's from America or, you know, I think we'll probably end up going back to in the way that Cuba, you're Cuban, you know, you're Puerto Rican.  I think we'll eventually evolve to that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's interesting.  Back to your mother, did she have the opportunity to go to college at all?
Speaker 1: She did.  My mother was brilliant, she was really smart.  These are the stories that I always heard from not only her.  She graduated from high school at fifteen.  She was skipped several grades and just--you know, evidently, really brilliant mind.  She recognized that coming out of high school at fifteen was a little bit too young, and so I think she went to community college, but she didn't finish college and, you know, so the times--the times, we're talking about a lot of discrimination.  She was dark skinned.  My mother was a dancer and wanted to be a dancer, but she was dark skinned and so I think that that--and she was a singer, she was a jazz singer.  So later in her teens or early twenties, late teen years, she went to Chicago [Illinois] and was on the Chicago jazz scene and then came, came back in the Kansas City jazz scene, but had wanted to be a dancer, was considered too dark at that time, so she made that available to my sister and I to dance.
Story_ID: 361030
Speaker 1: So did she [Zollar's mother, Dorothy Zollar Hoover] ever talk about the jazz scene in Kansas City [Missouri]?  Was it much like the movie 'Kansas City,' the Robert Altman movie (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was--she had already passed away when the movie came out and my brother, James Zollar, was in the movie 'Kansas City.'  He plays trumpet.  And The Character Never Seen [sic. Seldom Seen]--I think it was The Character Never Seen, was, you know, they talked about that character in 'Kansas City.'  You know, the Pendergast [Tom Pendergast] I think, machine and jazz were kind of growing and developing simultaneously.  You know, you had this--you had--the Mafia was very strong in Kansas City [Missouri] and with it was this underground scene, and then the jazz music was very much a part of that scene, so those things were very tied together.  So she talked about that, and she talked about Charlie Parker, and I think that, you know, she and her friends kind of lived--they went to the fast life, and she talked about her just every--it revolted her stomach when she saw him shoot up.  She talked about seeing that and she talked about, she said, "Okay, experiment with drugs, do your thing, don't smoke opium, don't do anything," she said, "that is a bad scene."  Because she talked about the opium dens, dens and seeing people kind of that so, and she was into jazz, and so I grew up with jazz around me.  Albums, jam sessions, people coming to the house, and it took me a long time to realize that my upbringing wasn't necessarily typicals.
Speaker 1: So as a jazz musician, did she travel a lot?
Speaker 2: No.  By the time she had children, she had really let go of that part of her life, by the time she got married and had children, but she would still play the piano and sing and she would take us to the musicians' union for jam sessions which they would sometimes have on Sunday when they would bootleg liquor 'cause it was outlawed on--you know, as little kids, you know, we would--you know, we would go to that and just--I loved the music, and so I fell in love with the music from a very early age alongside of my, you know, pop culture with, you know, rock and roll, and rhythm and blues and soul music, but the love of jazz was also parallel to that.
Speaker 1: Did she play any other music in the house?  Now speaking to her music of her time, she played jazz.  And what else did she play?  Spirit, gospel music?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  I don't--she might have, we might have had some gospel music.  I remember jazz mostly.  I remember listening to--like one of my favorites, I used to love to listen to Roy Silver and all of the female vocalists, I would put them on like Sarah Vaughan and [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne, Nina Simone.  I would put on that, but I also remember there was some--we had 'Rhapsody In Blue,' Gershwin [George Gershwin], we had that in the house and I didn't--I would always imagine movement and dances to this music and I didn't realize 'til later that everybody didn't hear music and imagine choreography, that that was part of my own gift, but I would just play Charlie Parker, and I just would sit at home and just sometimes when I was there by myself, just play jazz.  That's what I listened to.
Speaker 1: Who do you think were your mother's role models?  Who had inspired her to become a jazz musician?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know, but I remember her saying the story.  I remember hearing this story that Count Basie, she loved Count Basie.  Count Basie broke in her first piano, so you know, that must have been part of the scene that she was on.  Jay McShann, Kansas City jazz musician.  Eddie "Cleanhead" Vinson was--these were all friends, these Kansas City jazz musicians.  So, I don't really know who her--oh, well Billie Holiday, certainly Billie Holiday--you know, Dinah Washington.  My mother had a very deep voice, and in fact in the church choir, she sang like in the baritone or bass section because her voice was that deep, and one of the songs she would play a lot on the piano at home was '(In My) Solitude.'  So Duke Ellington, you know, all of that she was, that was--that was her influence.  But I never really heard her talk about specifically a mentor or anything like that.
Speaker 1: What was your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know what, it would have been her mother.
Speaker 1: Now, I was going to ask.
Speaker 2: They were only fifteen years apart.
Story_ID: 361031
Speaker 1: I was going to ask what was--what was her mother like.  So what was her mother's name and do you know your grandmother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know my grandmother's date of birth.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Willa [Willa Mason].
Speaker 1: Willa.
Speaker 2: And I don't know her date of birth.  Willa Mason, she married--she became Willa Mason when she married my step-grandfather [Barney Mason].
Speaker 1: But we know that they were only fifteen years apart so we can calculate back.  She was born at least nineteen--what is it, '07 [1907], or fifteen from twenty-one, whatever the difference is?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they were--she had your mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] as a very--as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As a teenager.
Speaker 2: So I know that they were very close.
Speaker 1: So they grew up together almost?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But I don't think that was that unusual, that age; women had children early at that time.  I don't think that was an unusual thing.
Speaker 1: Now did Willa live in the boarding house as well?
Speaker 2: She--yeah, I think she must have.
Speaker 1: So in the boarding house maybe all of these different musi-, your mother may have been exposed to jazz musicians or music just through the people coming in and out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would assume so.  She met my father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] as a little kid.  They, he was living in the boarding house, so that's where they met.  So I'm sure there was, you know, that was Kansas City [Missouri] at that time, so it had to be.
Speaker 1: What stories can you tell me that your mother told you about her mother?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have--God, my sister probably has more stories.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother's mother a musician?  Your Grandmother Willa a musician?  What did she--what was her passion?
Speaker 2: Not that I--I don't know.  My grandmother passed away when I was around ten, ten or eleven, and I don't really know as much about her.  I don't know what her passion was.  I know she worked downtown in the department store.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: Like as a sales clerk, and they said because she was light--you know, I said well, 'cause she was kind of light skinned, they said, "No, she powdered white."  She powdered light.  So she made herself appear lighter so that she could have a job.
Speaker 1: Do you know the store?
Speaker 2: I don't think it was Macy's.
Speaker 1: What stores would have been big department stores in downtown Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Harzfeld's, Jones [The Jones Store Co., Kansas City, Missouri], Macy's.
Speaker 1: Now were those stores segregated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she only could work there because she powdered light to look white?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Although I can't--I mean, if you look at pictures of my grandmother it's like how--she does not look white (laughter), so I don't know if there was an assumption she was Jewish?  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: But she passed, by any means?
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure if it was that they only hired light-skinned black people.  It may been that they hired black people but only light-skinned, so I'm not exactly sure of that dynamic.
Speaker 1: So she died when you were ten years old and you don't have any record--stories or any stories about what your mother said about lessons her mother may have taught her that she passed on to you?
Speaker 2: Cooking, my mother was an incredible--my grandmother and my mother were both incredible cooks.
Story_ID: 361032
Speaker 1: Well, what were holidays like?  Speaking of cooking, like Christmas?
Speaker 2: Food, lots of food.  See, my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] had prior to marrying my father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.], she was married twice before.  So, either her fat- I get confused with where there's--her first husband--this might have been her second husband, was Creole, and he sent her, the story is that he sent her back to Louisiana to learn to cook, so she spent a month learning to cook gumbo and etouffee, and so I grew up with those dishes not knowing that.  Then either her first or second husband was Mexican.  Similar story, so I grew up with tamales and enchiladas and all of that, that food.  So she--so the cooking was a big thing on the holidays and the family's gatherings, as well as the alcohol, I mean this was a generation there was no such thing as Alcoholics Anonymous, or, that came to mainstream much later.  So the drinking was also just as lively and sometimes not in a good way, but, you know, that was--and I just remember lots of food in the family gatherings, and also like when my mother made gumbo, there were people that just came from all over.  Big parties, you know, and my mother would make gumbo.  You know, she would make--or she would make a shrimp and crab boil, or she'd make a dish unique to I think her shrimp and neck bones with like a crab boil kind of, you know, thing to it.  So, food was a big organizing and social in parties and drinking, playing cards, very social.  My parents were very social.
Speaker 1: So your mother had two interracial marriages.  Did you see them as interracial ever?
Speaker 2: I never met them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Was it unusual, did she ever say, for her to marry a Mexican man and a Creole?
Speaker 2: I realize now that that was maybe unusual (laughter).  And, and again, with Creoles, see he may--he could have been my color, you know, so the Creole is the culture in some people were--so.  And again because she spent time living in the Texas--in the Texas area--Texas, Louisiana area, it may or may not have been that unusual.  I suspect that probably there was more interracial marriage among Mexicans and Creole and native than we often document.
Story_ID: 361033
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Your father was born, his name and when was he--and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He's Alfred, Jr.  Alfred Zollar, Jr. and my grandfather was Alfred Zollar, Sr.
Speaker 1: And they were born?
Speaker 2: My grandfather we think was born in--oh, I was just looking at that family history.  I think in Texas, but later lived in Oklahoma, or either it was Kansas City [Missouri] and moved to Oklahoma.  But, there's like this--Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas City kind of circle.
Speaker 1: But this isn't the step-grandfather, this is your--
Speaker 2: This is my father's father.
Speaker 1: Father's father.  Now--
Speaker 2: And he was--he was half Creek Indian [Native American] and the story--the story that I remember on that side was that he was half Creek Indian and half black, and his mother [Hannah Willis Zollar] or father [Hampilton Zollar] was--somebody was raped by the slave owner, and so on that half black they were--they were in fact half black.  So that was the story.  My grandfather was probably born somewhere between 1875 and 1880.  So, and he was the youngest, one of the younger of thirteen children, so most of them were probably born into slavery.  My grandfather didn't talk a lot about his past.  I don't know what happened, I know he hated white people with a vengeance.
Speaker 1: How did he express it?
Speaker 2: He did not trust white people (laughter).  He did not.  He had no tolerance for white people, so I don't know what happened to him, but I suspect that it wasn't pleasant.  In his family he used to be known as the crazy Indian, because the story is that, you know, he was uneducated.  He could not read or write, and that he would go throughout little towns to make money betting people that he could crack a two-by-four over his head, and that, you know, of course you know they were betting then he would crack the two-by-four over his head and he would win this money.  So, people called him--he was also known as Uncle Babe or the crazy Indian is what people called him.  And so he was like in his seventies when I was born, so he was in his later years, and I would sit and watch TV every morning with him.  We would watch 'The Today Show' ['Today'] which is still a ritual, I still watch 'The Today Show' every morning.  So I remember the chimp [J. Fred Muggs] and Dave Garroway as kind of like my first early memories of that, but he would sit and watch that every morning, and I would sit and watch that with him.  He didn't talk a lot but, you know, he'd walk to the store every day, which is probably why he--you know, he always walked, you know, always kept his exercise up.  But I think he and my father really knew how to live off the land.  They were both strong hunters and fishers and fishermen, so they would--you know, my father would go on hunting trips and my grandfather, you know--you know, knew how to fish and knew which plants were edible as well as my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover], she would go picking wild greens.  So there were people that lived that knew how to live off the land and, you know, we ate everything from squirrel to groundhog to beaver to possum, coon, deer.  You know, if you could go out there shoot it and kill it, we ate it (laughter).  So, that was the family.
Story_ID: 349772
Speaker 1: We were speaking about your father's father [Alfred Zollar, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandfather, Grandpa Zollar, we just called him grandpa, lived with us, so he had always--I always grew up with grandpa there in the house and he was probably in his seventies when I was born.
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about his father.
Speaker 2: His father, Hampilton Zollar, who was born in Big Sandy, Texas, that I know for sure, was a product of- he was raped, his mother I guess would have been raped by the slave owner and that was how he came into existence.  That was his story (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was his mother the full-blooded Indian [Native American]?
Speaker 2: His wife.
Speaker 1: His wife.
Speaker 2: Hannah Willis [Hannah Willis Zollar] was full-blood Creek Indian.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about his mother?  The one who was raped by the slave owner?
Speaker 2: Don't know anything.  Don't have a name or anything for that.
Speaker 1: But, so grandfather--the great-grandfather, what stories do you know about him outside of--
Speaker 2: I don't know anything other than he was born in Big Sandy, Texas, and that story I don't know anything about.
Speaker 1: Any story--did his father, did your grandfather ever talk about his father in any way at all?
Speaker 2: Just the rape, that's it.  That's all I remember--
Story_ID: 349773
Speaker 1: So moving forward, how did your mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] and father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] meet?
Speaker 2: They met in the boarding house.  They were--as children they kind of grew up together and so that's how they met.  The story is that my grandfather--my grandfather's [Alfred Zollar, Sr.] wife, Annie Woods, is that right?  My grandfather's wife, Annie Woods, died when my father was around three, and so evidently this, the courts or whatever tried to take my father from my grandfather.  So, the story is my father--my grandfather ran away with my father and that they were living in a wagon and Mama King [Villa King] said, "You know, you can't live with a child in a wagon.  You know, you come on in here," and my grandfather was like a handyman so he fixed things but, you know, they were kind of living just in dire poverty because he did not want to have his son taken away from him.  Oops!  So, I'm trying to think.  What was the question?
Speaker 1: You were telling me about how they met.  So that's how he gets to the boarding house and then he grew up with your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At what point did love develop, or?  How did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure because she moved back to Houston [Texas].  At some point she moved back to Texas and then came back to Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Do you know what year they married?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't.
Speaker 1: When do you--
Speaker 2: I can probably guess because she was twenty-five or twenty-six when they got married.
Speaker 1: Where were they when you born in 1950?
Speaker 2: We were--they were in Kansas City.
Speaker 1: Now were they living in their own house at that time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They were--I don't remember that house, but they said it was a house on 23rd Street, then we--then we moved to 2617 East 27th Street.  I remember and we were there until I was about ten and we moved to 4344 Benton Boulevard until I was like fifteen, and then we moved again.  I do not remember that address.
Story_ID: 349774
Speaker 1: What were the highlights of your childhood?  And let's go back to the early days.  You were living in this I'm assuming black neighborhood in Kansas City [Missouri] that was full of musicians, people coming to the house for gumbo, playing cards.
Speaker 2: I think the highlights.  I don't know if this is a hindsight memory.  It's just being able to run free.  I think that in those times you just as a child you ran free.  You were in like a several square block area but, you know, nobody--your parents didn't know where you were and so when they needed you, you'd get the chain, "Willa Jo [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar], your mama's looking for you.  Willa Jo, your mama's looking for you," and then you know it was just kind of passed down that and, you know, you'd scoot your butt home, but I think having that freedom to explore and run.  There were woods that were by.  We used to go and play in the woods, and my parents [Dorothy Zollar Hoover and Alfred Zollar, Jr.]--also the thing I really appreciate is that I was pretty a wild, I mean, I really seriously today think that I would be medicated and--if not imprisoned for some of the things that I did as child that they just kind of accepted, like that's her spirit.  The story that I like to tell 'cause I remember this one so well is I used to really like to curse.  I don't know where I figured out that cursing was power, but I just used to love to curse, and I used to love to curse people out.  I just thought it was like ah, you know, so I was a little six, seven-year-old kid like cursing people out.  And my favorite expression was cocksucker motherfucker, and I used to just (laughter) curse people out and my mother said, "If you do that--if I hear about you doing that again, I'm going to wash your mouth out with soap," and so of course I did.  I remember I got something at the corner store and I cursed the woman out (laughter), and my mother gathered all my friends from the neighborhood and got this big metal tub and, you know, got the soap in it and swished it around and, you know, washed my mouth out with soap but, you know, I was the kind of spirit, so it was Ivory, it was a big chunk of Ivory, and I bit on the soap and started chewing it and said, "I like soap."  "This is good."  "I like soap."  "I want more soap."  "I want to eat more soap."  And I remember my mother just throwing her hands up in the air (laughter) and just saying, you know, "Maybe she'll survive her childhood," but, you know, whatever, and after that my mother--they would just kind of say, "Well hard head makes a soft behind.  You don't believe fat meat's greasy," and they let me just kind of be wild, but I was focused in school.  I was very focused, academically strong in school, and didn't get into very much trouble at all in school, but in the neighborhood I was just wild and they didn't try to break my spirit or, you know, make me--I mean, now a child would have been on Ritalin, I mean because the stories--I mean, I did, you know, I chased the kids with the butcher knife and things.  The--I would have if not been shot by the police, but there was a community policing at that time in terms of the neighbors call and say, "Okay, she's out of control.  You better come home and see about her," you know, so growing up in the strong community, and that's what I remember if there's memories it's--I grew up in a strong community where everyone looked out for one another and I think that has become a part of my work, the idea of building community and connecting to community.  That's the part I remember as being powerful.
Speaker 1: Where do you think the wild spirit comes from?
Speaker 2: They say I was born with it.  They say that I did not--as a baby I was very independent.  I did not like people to hold me.  I--you know, that I didn't like, you know, that I was very stubborn from--.  There's a story that my father--it's two parts to the story that we were--we had taken--they had taken a train from Kansas City to California, and in taking that train, my mother knew that at eight months I would not let anyone feed me.  I just would not.  So, you know, 'cause she was the primary caretaker.  She said--my sister [Donna McCraney-Cavanaugh] is a year older.  She said, "Oh, I'll feed Donna Rae first and one of them.  When I'm finished, you can take Willa Jo into the dining car."  My mother, knowing that I would not let anybody feed me, so my father had said that by the time that I finished with this white linen cloth and all of this, there was food everywhere that he'd left a five dollar tip which in 1950 was a really big tip.  Then part two of that story is someone said, "That story can't be true."  They said, "Segregation, you wouldn't have been in the white dining car.  You wouldn't have been in with the--you know, that couldn't have existed because of segregation on the train, you wouldn't have had that access.  Your parents wouldn't have that access."  So later when I talked to her she said, "Oh, your father and mot-, your father bought a private car for you all to travel.  This was when he was in real estate, so that he had a private car that you all went across the country in."  So, you know, my father was an entrepreneur and he was in real estate and that's--I think that's part of my spirit.  But they said that that wildness was just what I was born with, that I was stubborn, I was independent and I was like that from day one.
Story_ID: 349775
Speaker 1: Do you remember what life was like in first grade?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, I loved school.  I do remember in first grade (laughter) that I left early because I thought like kindergarten it's time to leave, so I remember I guess at lunch time I left.  You know, I was--I starting walking.  I was walking home and I don't remember if somebody said, you know, they saw me and said, you know, or I showed up at home and it was like what are you doing at home?  And I was like, it's over, and they had take me back, but I--my first grade teacher, was that Ms. Porter [ph.] or Ms. Jackson [ph.]?  Ms. Porter I think.  I loved school.  I was always a natural learner.  I had--I had learned to read by three-ish, four because my sister who's a year older taught me every, she taught me everything she was learning, so I learned at her--I learned right alongside with her, so I was accelerated a year in my learning patterns, but I remember being able to read at a very, very early age and because my parents [Dorothy Zollar Hoover and Alfred Zollar, Jr.] would call people over and like, "Look, Willa Jo [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar] can read," you know, and you know, I could spell, you know, at--you know, ages--you know, four, three and four, but I loved school and I loved learning and I loved teaching.
Speaker 1: How many siblings were there?
Speaker 2: There are six of us.
Speaker 1: And can you give me the order?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My oldest sister, Betty [Betty Zollar Martin], who's five years older, my sister Donna--Donna Rae [Donna McCraney-Cavanaugh] who's one year older, me, then my three younger brothers, Alfred Zollar III [HistoryMaker Al Zollar], Tony Zollar--Anthony Richard Zollar [Anthony Zollar], then James Delano Zollar [James Zollar] is my youngest brother.
Speaker 1: So the six of you grew up together in the same household and they turned to music.  You said one of your brothers played trumpet?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you turn to dance?  How were you exposed to dance?
Speaker 2: My mother took us to a dance school.  The first place she took us was, actually, the conservatory of music had a new Russian ballet teacher and my mother called and said, "Will you accept black students?"  And, you know, she was from Russia and she was like--'cause this must have been around '56 [1956] and it was the height of segregation, and she said, "Sure," you know, but it was too strict for us.  The--it was too strict and she called, you know, kids monkeys and with for us that had--that took on another meaning.  So, we told my mother we didn't like that, so she ended up taking us to another dance school called Joseph Stevenson School of Dance [Kansas City, Missouri], and it was a community dance studio and Joseph Stevenson, he had studied with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and he had been a ballroom dancer as well, kind of like post-vaudevillian, so that was what I grew up with and that was where my dance--primary dance life was from the age of like seven to high school.
Speaker 1: Did she do it because she herself had wanted to be a dancer, or why did she do it?
Speaker 2: She exposed us to the arts.  She felt that was just--or maybe it was something that was, you know, she wasn't able to do.  She felt it was important but, you know, she'd take us to art galleries and things, but she--I think she wanted us to have dance.  Oh, I played music and flute.  I played piano and flute, had those lessons, so we were all given the opportunity to be exposed to the arts, and connect with whatever we connected with.
Speaker 1: Was that common or uncommon for African American children in Kansas City, Missouri in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: In the middle class, I think it was pretty common that your child took either piano, piano lessons, or dance lessons.  I think it was a pretty common thing, piano lessons particularly.
Story_ID: 349776
Speaker 1: Did you attend church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Growing up we did.  You know, my parents [Dorothy Zollar Hoover and Alfred Zollar, Jr.] weren't deeply religious and one of the other things I appreciated about my-, they were deeply spiritual not religious.  We went to Allen Chapel A.M.E. Church [Kansas City, Missouri].  But the thing that I appreciated about my mother and father is that I was a spiritual seeker from a very early on and I had questions, and they would--they would really take the time to get my questions answered, like how could like if--I'd remember saying, "Well, if you're not--if you're not--if you're not a Christian then--and then you're going to go to hell, you mean to tell me all these people all over the world who are other religions are going to go to hell?  You know, either if you're Muslim, or if you're Hindu, you know, you're going to go to hell?"  And I said, "Even if you've lived a good life, you're gonna," you know, and so they had a reverend come over and he talked with me and answered my questions and his point of view was that no, only if you had a chance to know about, you know, Christianity and then you didn't, then--you know, I was like well God, if you're telling them you're condemning them, it's like--so that never made sense to me, but and because we had encyclopedias and globes I was--I used to read the encyclopedia incessantly and learn about other cultures.  I was, you know--I would play this game where I would spin the globe and close my eyes and wherever I point my finger I would look that place up and be interested in the culture, you know, old encyclopedias.  Remember they used to show the national dress of people and they'd have those things, so I was always interested in other cultures, so I think that that was just a part of--my parents were really into information that we would--we had access to information and the arts was part of that information as well as education.
Story_ID: 349777
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what the black middle-class community looked like in Kansas City, Missouri?
Speaker 2: It kind of had two faces.  One was the light-skinned doctor, lawyer.  And then the other was kind of like where my family was situated, the--kind of up from the streets, not generations and middle class, but kind of up from the streets.  So, our family, though the thing that--what I remember is that they kind of, our house was often a gathering of both but, you know, each one had their tolerance of the other, you know, each one had their tolerance of the other, but we weren't in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] because we were too dark and things like that we were not a part of.  But my father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] was what I called street middle class.  He was very--had a tavern, he owned a tavern which on Sundays--on Saturdays after dance classes, we would go to the tavern and wait for my father to take us home.  So, I kind of grew up in the tavern.  You know when I walked in, people--it was--people were very respectful, you didn't hear, you know, it was a gathering place and with a jukebox, you know, jukebox, but it was a street element there.
Speaker 1: Did you call it a tavern or was it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he called it a tavern.  It was Alan Bud's [ph.].
Speaker 1: Alan Bud's Tavern?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because I'm wondering--I mean, was it common that African Americans called bars taverns then?  Because I've been interviewing a couple of people and they're like, "Oh, my dad had a tavern," and I'm just wondering if--
Speaker 2: Must have been.
Speaker 1: --it was given.  Was it--it was called--
Speaker 2: It wasn't called a bar.  It certainly wasn't--it was never called a bar.  Yeah, because I'm thinking of, yeah, they were called taverns because the Green Duck [Green Duck Tavern, Kansas City, Missouri] was another one.  They were all called taverns.  They were not called bars, they were not called saloons, it was a tavern.
Speaker 1: So who were the other people that made up the neigh- your particular neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, my neighborhood changed radically quick, white flight.  I think we were one of the few--first black families, a couple of other blacks on our block.  Well, this is--the high school tells the demographics.  When my sister [Betty Zollar Martin] who's five years older than me went to Central High School [Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri], it was probably 60 percent white and it was just--it was integrating and lots of gang fights.  By the time I came to Central--what's that, maybe five years later?
Speaker 1: Which is nineteen what?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], there were two white people in the school, two.  One was a foreign exchange student, (laughter) so that kind of tells you white flight was like whoosh!  So our neighborhood just like--felt like it changed within the course of a year.  Now that might be my child's mind, but it changed very quickly to being predominantly--going from being predominantly white to being predominantly black.
Speaker 1: Who were the predominantly black people that were entering the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: They were working, working middle class.  They were--
Speaker 1: Postmen--?
Speaker 2: Postmen--
Speaker 1: --teachers.
Speaker 2: --school teachers, the real estate, the--our neighbors across the street worked in my father's--Mr. Plowright [ph.].  They were from Jamaica and Cuba.  They worked in my father's real estate office.  Mr. Jones [ph.]--what was Mr. Jones?  Was he a postal carrier?  But that--you know, working, working middle class.
Speaker 1: Now was your father selling these homes that the white flight people were moving out of to black people?  Was he partly responsible for helping to create this black middle class neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father, in fact, our house was picketed and threatened to be bombed because my father sold houses to black families in white neighborhoods.  So yeah, he was--you know, as a real estate person he was definitely part of that, you know, he had really developed a very successful real estate business at one time.
Story_ID: 349778
Speaker 1: Now was that when you realized you were black in a racist sense, that people would discriminate against you when your father's [Alfred Zollar, Jr.]--when your house was picketed, or did it come earlier through your parents saying, "This is the world in which we live in, you're black," and this and that?  How did you know?
Speaker 2: I think they protected me, like I didn't know that Kansas City [Missouri] was segregated.  I didn't know--I thought it was all black in fact because that was my world.  I didn't know that we couldn't go.  I mean, every now and then we would drive in the white communities and look at the houses, but I just--I didn't have a sense that we just couldn't go there.  I just--my world was contained and there were real estates and banks and everything was contained within the black community, so I thought Kansas City was predominately black.  I was aware when you went downtown you had to dress with the gloves and all of those things.
Speaker 1: Tell me about going downtown and having to dress up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you went shopping downtown, you know, had to dress up, and I learned to code switch, you know, how you talked in front of white people and how you talked in front of black people and, you know, all of that which I finally started breaking in my thirties, sort of making a conscious decision that I would try to talk the same way all the time 'cause I found myself, you know, I'd be talking to somebody like this and soon as white people, "And where I grew up," and I didn't like that, you know, so I decided that I would get rid of that white telephone voice and just start trying to be consistent in that.  And I still do it back and forth, it just sometimes switches on.  But yeah, we were taught that, you know, you talked a certain way around white people, you behaved a certain way.
Speaker 1: Who explained those things to you?  Who says, okay, when you're around white people you speak the King's English, or however you want to put it?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that they explained it.  It just--I don't know if it was by example, but somehow you just knew it, you just knew that that was what you were supposed to do.  You knew that you had to be a credit to your race.  Now that I remembered, you know, hearing that they used to say, "Act your age, not your race."  You know, we had all of these self-denigrating expressions when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, give me some of those, act your age, not your race?
Speaker 2: Act your age, not your color.
Speaker 1: That's what it was.
Speaker 2: Act your age, not your color.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We, we grew up and were saying like--somebody would say, "How do you figure?" and then you'd say, "I figure like a nigger 'cause a nigger can't figure, got a horse named Trigger want a ride."  There were all these things, of course, subconsciously.  That's why the Black Power movement was so important because my generation had been with all these unconscious things or cons- going into our unconscious about being inferior and less than, so this internalized racial inferiority that we would act out on was just part of like jumping rope, you know. "If you're black, get back, if you're brown, stick around, if you're yellow, you mellow, if you're white, you're all right."  I mean, these were things that we on a daily basis, you know--you know we'd say, "Oh, that's a nigger mess," that we're part of this internalized racial oppression, so that's why the Black Power movement was so much needed.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the use of the word nigger today, yesterday, days gone by, in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly, we used it--we always used it internally, you know, and in endearment ways, but also in self-denigrating ways, but if a white-, there was also a way that it could be used where it meant--it wasn't a putdown.  I think the problem today is that you know, it is a different generation and so they have different ways of thinking about things, but we're still confused about inside, outside, you know, if you're, Jews might call themselves something internally?  That doesn't mean that I can say what they would call--how they might call themselves internally, like some people may, you know, call each other like, oh, well he's--I hear gay men often saying, you know, "He's a sissy," that doesn't mean--that's part of an internal dialogue, and I think people get confused when they hear us and say, "Oh, well I can say that too," and it has consequences.  Just as Jennifer Lopez, she thought she was in, she thought she was in, she said, "Oh, I can say nigger and I'm in," and it's like no, you're not.  So, I think it gets confusing when it can, you know--so I prefer that--not to use the language 'cause for me the history is too tied to a negative history.
Story_ID: 349779
Speaker 1: So, going back to the place at which a point, or the point at which you realized that you were black.  I mean, was it the Emmett Till murder in Mississippi, although you were only five years old, was there an incident to where you personally yourself knew, I'm black and the world in which I live in is going to discriminate against me?  Was there--did somebody call you a nigger?
Speaker 2: I think--no, I didn't because see again, I grew up in an all-black community.  I didn't get called a nigger the first time--the first time was in Tallahassee, Florida in 1975 when I went to grad school there [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] and I was--I almost left because here I was growing up in Kansas City [Missouri] through all this because I was in a black community, so I never had a white person, even with--my teachers were white and there were store owners but they would've never used that language, so it was when I went to college that I, and not even in my undergraduate experience.  In my undergraduate experience at the University of Kansas City [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri], no white person would have dared, you know, call a black person that name, but in Tallahassee at that time the fraternities flew Confederate flags, fraternity row, and then I learned quickly that--and they had on their trucks these things they called nigger knockers, and I learned quickly that I was in the South, Tallahassee is twenty miles from the Georgia border and I was in the South, and I was experiencing in 1975 stuff that, you know, you kind of thought had like--and in fact, Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] didn't even integrate until '62 [1962], so yeah (laughter).  So, that's when I, that--I mean, I had faced discrimination in certain kinds of ways, but I wasn't--I could tell it on TV, you know, there was the unspoken, any time a black person was on TV and the family rushed to see them, and it was a big deal.  So you--so that that--you know, that gives you unconscious clues and you'd hear your parents say things like, you know, "It's always something," you know, that kind of thing, but when I went, the mo- my awareness came when I went to hear Don L. Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], as an undergrad, speak.  At that time his name was Don L. Lee, Haki Madhubuti, and he talked about it and he talked about where he's from, so I went home, and he talked about wearing your hair natural, and I went home and then cut off the perm and, you know, put on that--you know, got an afro--you know, let my hair grow into an afro.
Speaker 1: I want to hear about that story in detail.
Speaker 2: I went to hear him speak and that was like kind of like a turning point for me.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: It must have been--I get confused because I started college in '68 [1968]. I dropped out and then came back in '70 [1970], 1970, '72 [1972] actually, '71 [1971], '72 [1972]--
Story_ID: 349977
Speaker 1: We're gonna go back a little bit to high school [Central High School; Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] because someone there had an influence on you.  What was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I thi- I want to say his name was Mr. Johnson [ph.], but I don't think that's right, but he was my English teacher in my junior year and he was--I remember he was this little white man with these glasses and he was--he'd graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with a philosophy degree, but he was trying to introduce us to, to what was going on, on the coast because, you know, in the center of the country it's, the movements don't happen as quick, so this was--this would have been '67 [1967], so he brought in the idea which, you know, they were doing it on the East Coast of-, you had to have a black Santa Claus and the use of the word black.  And we were like, "We're not black, we're Negroes," you know. "We're not-, my skin is brown and I'm not black--you know, we're Negro," and "what, that black Santa Claus, that don't even make any sense," you know, we were just--you know we-, and he was trying to push our awareness of that.  Now interestingly enough, I was on--I was in the tracking system and I was on the A track, but I didn't wanna take history.  I was terrible at history--hated history and also the teacher who taught it was really racist, it had that reputation, so I found this little loophole in the rules that if I took three semesters of political science, I could not take history, but in order to do that, I had to take one class in the C track.  So, I took the class in the C track.  I think it was political science or current affairs, and what I discovered there is that that's where--they were militant, so us on the A track we were very obedient (laughter), you know, and in the C track they were like--no they were talking about against the Vietnam War.  I mean, I was at that time, "Well, of course we're gonna fight the Vietnam War.  We have to uphold democracy."  (Laughter) They looked at me like where--you know, they had not bought the bill of goods that we had been sold on the A track, and so the discussions were much more about racism and what was going on in the country and that was kind of--and that's when I got introduced to Marxist thought and study--we had to study--we studied Marx [Karl Marx] and I wrote a paper on it and I was like oh, wow.  This is great, you know, why can't we live like this?  So that then when I--but it didn't, it still was like, I wanna be a good Negro.  I wanna be, you know, I want to succeed.  I wanna be a good Negro.  So, that stuff was there but it just was kind of pushed back somewhere, it's like I didn't quite know what to do with it.  Then when I got to college [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri] in '68 [1968] and I remember in '68 [1968] this was--you know, a lot of stuff going on.  Feminist movement, antiwar movement, you know and--
Speaker 1: King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated.
Speaker 2: --King's assassination happened when I was in high school.  So I remember that, and that's when the urban rebellions, you know, happened.  So, all of this--all of this is bubbling, but I don't think I was processing it as, you know, I don't think I was processing it, I was just experiencing it.
Story_ID: 349978
Speaker 1: When I got to college [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri], I started to have the feeling like Santa Claus, when I realized that there was no such thing as Santa Claus and the tooth fairy, that I had been sold a bunch of lies.  And when I started, you know, listening to about the Vietnam War and all of these issues and starting to realize, "Wait a minute, I've been told a bunch of lies," and so I needed to rethink about my identity and then I heard [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti speak and I said, "I realize--okay, I'm going to wear my hair in an afro."
Speaker 2: No, but tell me what he said to you because you used the word natural (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  He told--I don't--yeah, he said that.
Speaker 2: And that's what he was calling it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's called a natural.  He talked about that, you know, that we were buying into the oppression of, you know, buying into--you know, white people's belief systems by straightening our hair.  It was like a form of mental colonization that that was not our hair, so we should proudly wear our hair in its natural state.  I remember he was reading poems and it just had a profound influence and I actually later used that in a piece I developed called 'HairStories,' and there was a dual thing going on.  My sister who's a year older than me--I always had hair that would just grow, it was thick, it was.  People would always ooh and ah over my hair because it was long and thick.  And my sister had had a fever when she was younger and her hair wouldn't grow much, and so people used to make that joke, "Hair ain't but that long," you know, that thing that people would say, and so I always could see how painful that was for my sister, so in when I wrote 'HairStories,' I said, "The first time I cut off all of my hair, I said it was because I was black and I was proud," and that part was true, but the real reason I cut off all of my hair was so I could be like my sister and experience the world through her eyes, so I could be like my sister, Donna [Donna McCraney-Cavanaugh] and see what--experience the world through her eyes.  So it's kind of both of those things going on, is that I had felt like there was an over attachment to my hair.  The fact that I had good hair.  There was an over attachment to that by people, and then hearing him talk about that kind of confirmed for me that I wanted to let go of that attachment for political reasons and for personal reasons.
Story_ID: 349979
Speaker 1: So when you were at Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida]--
Speaker 2: This was at University of Missouri-Kansas City [Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Were you a dance major?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, the first time--when I first started in school, I was like undergraduate, lost, confused major.  You know, sociology something (laughter), you know, I really had no direction and I-, it was there that I discovered that you could major in dance, I never knew you could major in dance, and then I got pregnant and dropped out of school.  Had a baby.  Placed her for adoption and then came back to school in nineteen--this is '70 [1970], '71 [1971], so I get those sometimes those two periods a little confused, but when I came back in '70 [1970], '71 [1971], I was clear I wanted to major in dance, and that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now did you see dance as a world that was void of color where you could be anything you wanted to be?  Or did you see it as a tool to speak against what you were seeing?
Speaker 2: No.  I, dance was what--dancing is what I had done all my life.  So it was my love and my passion.  So, I had set--I was pretty segmented.  So, here's my dance world, here was my spiritual world, here was my political world, and they were pretty segmented.  Then in undergraduate school, there was an organization called Black Exodus, which was a dance company run by Milton Myers where he would have poets speak and, you know, singing and dance and so the poems would be like [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni and, you know, then there would be a dance and everything was red, black and green.  And so then that's when I started to realize that maybe these worlds could merge, but in the degree program, it was all pretty separate.  It was, you know, dance rehearsals, dance classes, but I--but my circle of influence and friends were people who had a, Black Panthers [Black Panthers Party], cultural nationalists.  There was a group who had formed a political education group.  They were reading Amilcar Cabral, Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure].  They were reading about revolutionary thought in Africa and, you know, they were--you know at that time, you know, we knew we could be revolutionaries, we thought that it was possible to radically change the United States.  There were lots of underground movements and, you know, the weather--what's it--the Weathermen [Weather Underground Organization] and SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] and, you know, Black Liberation Army, there was a whole lot of stuff like that that was swirling around me that I never got directly involved with, but--
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: I was never one for dogma.  I think my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] raised me, you know, I was independent.  I was an independent child and my mother let me be independent, so I was never one to go into an organization where there was a party line and there was a dogma.  While I believed in a lot of things that the organizations were doing, I remember going to, I can't remember if it was a Black Panther or a cultural nationalist and it was like, all right, the sisters let the brothers eat first and you wait on them, and I was like, I didn't grow up that way.  I'm not doing that now, you know, I didn't have--it wasn't about feminism.  It just that it was my mother had raised us to be independent and I thought well, I ain't gonna start this now, you know.  So, I rejected certain kinds of dogma that were attached to a lot of the philosophical things that I was interested in, so I never joined organizations.  And at points I got close, and I read Frantz Fanon and all of that, and, you know, thought about the justification of violence, but there was some part of me that always just felt like, I can't take up guns.  I can't go the violence, that's not--it was just some little voice in me that just said, "That's not you, that's not you."  And though I felt, you know, like that the king--you know, that that was like they were victims and, you know, I'm not going to turn the other cheek and all of that.  I also, when it was possible to have gone into underground routes and to other things, I never went that direction.  Thank God.
Story_ID: 349980
Speaker 1: So when you think about yourself as a dancer in college [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri], what types of works were inspiring to you?  What type of dance was inspiring to you, like when you were looking at [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham at the time?
Speaker 2: Didn't know much--I mean, I had, didn't know much about Katherine Dunham at that time.  One of the first things--early things I saw in college was a man named Daniel Nagrin, he was a white choreographer and he did a piece at an anti-Vietnam [Vietnam War] rally, and it was based on the Peloponnesian Wars, and he used that as a metaphor.  It was one--you know, one-man show, and that showed me the power of art to address a social issue.  I saw Alvin Ailey and was blown away, but my physicality, I was like, "I'm never gonna be able to dance like that, so what am I gonna do?  My body's never gonna have that kind of facility," so didn't know.  And then I--so I was always attracted to the experimental, the avant-garde, the left of center kinds of things.  Kind of unknowingly that even as a child that I was always interested in that.  You know, my family used to say I was always like to shock people with these statements that I used to just pronounce.  But I was always attracted to that which was different, so I think somewhere in college when I started getting exposed to like the avant-garde movement in dance, that's where I was really attracted to.
Speaker 1: Now was the dance at that time, the world in which you danced, and I'm talking about the classes, the people, was it predominantly black or white?
Speaker 2: White.  Predominantly white.
Speaker 1: What influence was that having on the work you were creating or the style of dance you were understanding?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was contemporary dance, so it was western based, pointed feet, turned out legs.  I mean that was--but I was embracing that and wanting that, so.
Speaker 1: What did you see yourself doing at that time?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: I mean did you see yourself dancing with Balanchine [George Balanchine] or--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no.  I was real clear that I was not going to be a ballerina.  In fact, I remember telling one of my teachers like, "I'm having trouble with ballet.  I can't see myself as this little ethereal white woman that needs to be lifted around the stage."  (Laughter) And she said, "Honey, just straighten your legs and point your feet."  "Get that far, okay, just get that far."  So I knew that--I didn't know what I was going to do, but I knew that cert- I was not going to be a ballerina.  I knew that--I thought maybe I would teach.  I didn't really know what I was gonna to do.  I hadn't really figured out that I was a choreographer though I loved to choreograph.  But the reason I didn't think I was very good is that I couldn't get my works to look like other peoples, like Ailey's or Limon [Jose Limon] or, you know, you were choreographing in those styles.  And it would never look like that, it would look different, and so I thought that meant I wasn't a good choreographer.  I didn't realize that meant I had my own voice.  So I didn't think I was like any good at choreography.
Story_ID: 349981
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate undergrad [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: And then you went back to Florida?
Speaker 2: I went to Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida].  That was my first--I went there for graduate school.
Speaker 1: And that's when you were called a nigger for the first time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then people said, "Oh no, don't walk down frat row.  Don't walk down that," there's certain places you learned to avoid, and this is right when the five black fishermen had disappeared off the coast of Pensacola [Florida] and--
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know that story.  Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: And they suspected Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] activity.  Klan activity was very strong in this--their headquarters were in Tampa, Florida, before Morris Dees bankrupted the Klan.  So, there was lots of--this is north, north Florida.  Lots of Klan activity, so I started to become concerned about being out in Tallahassee [Florida] not from crime, but from possibly white retribution.  That was--yeah, that was going on then.
Speaker 1: And this is the mid-'70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So out of this--so you completed your studies there then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: An M.F.A., and you graduated what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].  I had an incredible--or have an incredible mentor there, Dr. Nancy Smith Fichter.  She was my teacher and her aunt had been--oh, the name just went out--Lillian Smith.  I don't know if you know Lillian Smith, was a writer who wrote against segregation in the '40s [1940s], '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], maybe '50s [1950s].  And so this was Nancy's aunt, so she was very much--she worked her hardest to make the dance department a place of not being a place of discrimination about color.  And, you know, she had done, she was an activist on that front as well as anti-death penalty work, and so she was a real mentor to me.
Speaker 1: So how did she do that with that department?  Did she go from the angle of making it just void of any color or did she have you introduce an African culture too?
Speaker 2: I think she tried to make me feel that whatever contributions that I had to bring were valuable.  She's the one who really helped me recognize that I was a choreographer, that there had been a history of discrimination in this country or there was a continuing history of discrimination, and she would do her best not to play into that.
Speaker 1: So when did you see--realize that you were a choreographer?  What year and how did it happen?
Speaker 2: I think when I made a piece about my mother's [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] death called 'Crossings' and it was really interesting 'cause in that same year I restaged Pearl Primus' 'Fanga,' so in--originally in my--and 'Fanga' was all, you know, black cast and drummers and dancing and, you know, African clothing, and I think that's how my identity was within the dance department.  But then I did this very personal piece about my mother's passing and originally it had a cast that was black and white, but for different reasons the black dancers dropped out and I ended up with an all-white cast and I had put them in white and so when we had the showing, everybody was like, "Who's piece is that?  Whose piece is that?"  And I said, "It's mine," and people were like, "That's your piece?"  (Laughter) Because it didn't have a black angle on it, but it was from a very personal place and then one teacher became like, "Well, are you trying to say the African world or black world is happy like with the Fanga and the white world is dying," and, you know, and I started to realize that I would always be looked at in a racialized way.  So, so that--it was that moment that I realized the reaction to the work, that I realized that maybe I'm a choreographer.  But prior of that I thought it was something I enjoyed doing, but maybe I couldn't get it to look like other people, so therefore I probably wasn't very good at it.
Story_ID: 349982
Speaker 1: And how did you get to New York City [New York, New York] from that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I stayed in Florida another year after graduating to work with a company.  They had just formed a univers- a dance company in the university [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] called--at that time it was called Dance Touring Theater, DDT, and I think they realized that maybe those weren't the best initials, then it became Dance Repertory Theater.  So I stayed another year, and I didn't feel like I was ready to move to New York, I still needed more training.  You know, it's a big move, and so I called my cousin who's a very well-known classical singer who I hadn't seen since I was ten (laughter), Faye Robinson.  And it's like, "Faye, this is your cousin, Willa Jo [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar], and I want to move to New York to become a dancer, can I live with you?"  (Laughter) And she said, "Yeah."  And so that was--well actually prior to that I'd seen [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre's company perform and I went up to Dianne and I was like, "I want to be in your company," and she said, "I'll give you a scholarship to my studio," so that kind of was that little thing of like, okay, I have the confidence to go to New York now I gotta find a place to stay.  So that's when I decided to move.
Speaker 1: How was it working with Dianne?
Speaker 2: Incredible.  That was a--she's another mentor to me.  She just--she created a space for other people to do their work as well as her, a place for her to do her own work.  And she again, she was using--she was connected to this incredible world of jazz.  She was choreographing to jazz music, so she was working with people like Max Roach and David Murray, and, you know, Abbey Lincoln and Oliver Lake and World Saxophone Quartet and, you know, these are people I'd been reading about, you know, reading about the kind of music they were doing and listening to and so I was coming to the studio like, "Oh my God, I can't believe I'm meeting these people who I've been reading about and going out to hear their music."  And Dianne was working with that population and she was working with jazz, so that took me, which was great because in undergraduate [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri] they weren't--every time I tried to work with jazz they were kind of like, you know.  Except for Count Basie, I did a piece called 'Basie in Three Degrees of Boogie' because my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] had said, "You need to do something to Count Basie's music," and so I did this piece dedicated to my mother.  And so the department--that was really well-received, but some of the avant-garde jazz I was trying to use, Sun Ra, and other things they weren't feeling.  And so then here I went to Dianne and she was using this music and working with this music, and so she really mentored me about working with that music.
Story_ID: 349983
Speaker 1: When did you, let's say, get your own wings?  I mean, did that happen in 1983 when you started--
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983] I was starting to think about it, and, but I didn't feel like interestingly enough, I thought, but what role models do I have?  Who's been successful?  Dianne [HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] was having a hard time financially.  Alvin Ailey was losing his mind literally, I mean, he'd had had several mental breakdowns that were public and, you know, [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare was, you know, had terrible drinking problem and I was like well what makes me think I can do this because this is clearly really hard, so how am I possibly gonna do this?  And then I had several events that helped me to do that.  One is that I went to a folk art exhibit, a visionary art exhibit at Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York], and when I went to that exhibit, one of the things that struck me is that these were all people who were doing their work not from some idea of being successful, but they were doing their work out of an impulse they had to do it.  They had some calling late in life, some revelation, some vision that made them become artists, and when I saw the power of this work and I was like, they're not worried about all those external things, they're just doing their work.  And so that was one revelation moment.  Another was a dream I had which was a very powerful dream.  My mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] and father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] who rarely appeared in the same dream, like almost never, they had both passed away by this time.  We were sitting in a circle in the ocean, you know, we were just like sitting, me and my family all in a circle with plates of food like right in front of us.  And, you know, we were just sitting there and then my father got up and sang this song to the tune of 'Oh Mary Don't You Weep,' but the vamp was, "Success is not the test, success is not the test."  And he sang this song about--you know, because he lost his business eventually through alcoholism and neglect, and he talked about that he got caught up in external things as opposed to looking at, and wanting to prove himself on an external place as opposed to, look, working from an internal place and he was cautioning me against getting caught up in what were external measures of success.  And then he--you know, he sang this song and then he sat back down with the family, then this huge wave came and turned over all the food into the ocean, and I knew that dream was really profound.  And it was lucid, you know, it was one of those dreams that even though, of course, no, you can't sit in the ocean, it was just--it had a logic to it and it was in vivid color which is usually when dreams come to me like that, they're giving me other information.  And so that was like, okay.  Then a woman who was working at Sounds in Motion who was Dianne's cousin, Loyce Stuart [ph.], pointed out to me 'cause I was working for Dianne, she said, "Every time you kind of facilitate one of Dianne's concerts, I noticed that you go into a deep depression," 'cause I was having these really deep depressions, and I said, "Yeah."  She said, "It's 'cause you're not doing your own work."  That you, it's--you need to have your own company, your own work.  And so kind of those things then I, I formed the company [Urban Bush Women].
Story_ID: 349984
Speaker 1: So two things I wanted to talk about.  I--in hearing about your past, I hear that you were equally as much influenced by women as men?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering why you chose in the work, the dance, to primarily speak about women and women's issues.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't originally choose to.  (Laughter) Originally before I had a name, as I was forming this company and looking for a name, I had men working with me.  But, you know, men are more scarce (laughter) in dance, I guess, and so they would--you know, we would be rehearsing and then they'd get a better job and off they were.  Then I'd get another man in and we'd get other men in and then they would work with us and then, they were gone--got a better job.  And I was really influenced by Sweet Honey in the Rock and Women of the Calabash, and so I thought, well why not have a company of all women?  Because there was this group of women who were committed and while the men were, you know, coming in and out, there was this core group of women who were not coming in and out, so I thought, well, why not?  So that's how it became all women.  And I think the women's issues just came about 'cause that's who we were.  Had it been a group of all men that I worked with, it probably would have been different issues but, you know, I had been interested in feminist studies and feminist ideas, so that was part of my education and background as well as I had been--always been a spiritual seeker, so that was part of my background, so that went into the work.  The social justice concerns had been a part of my background so that went into the work.  So, all of the things, my interest in anthropology, that went into the work.  So all of that just went into--so rather than being fragmented, it was the first time I felt like I could do something, make something that was about all of my different interests and I didn't have to keep my feminist side over here and my spiritual side over here and my political side over here.
Speaker 1: So when you are identifying yourself in your own private world, are you black first or woman first?
Speaker 2: I can't do that.  I just can't do that.  I don't think there's--you know, I can't separate those things.  I think that I was aware of double standards very early on.  I remember proclaiming to my parents [Dorothy Zollar Hoover and Alfred Zollar, Jr.]--I must have been about ten, and I have no idea where this came from, I said, "I'm never gonna change my last name if I get married 'cause I think it's unfair that," you know, "why should women change their names," (laughter) you know, and I like my name, Zollar [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar].  What if I married a Smith and I would become a Smith and I have not--I'm not gonna become a Smith for, I'm not gonna lose my name Zollar, so.  I somehow--but then I remember, now I'm just remembering my mother used to always say, "What's good for the goose is good for the gander."  So maybe that put those notions in there early on.  So I don't know that I can separate any of those things because they're really tied to my identity.
Speaker 1: When you were coming up with names for the company, and let's just put in periods, the '80s [1980s], Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] president, there's a crack epidemic that's starting to spread throughout the country.  I mean, dismal days for African Americans.  Why Urban Bush Women?
Speaker 2: Well, the name has a history.  In 19--late '60s [1960s], there's a jazz musician named Gary Bartz who I really loved his music.  He had an album called 'Harlem Bush Music,' and he talked about bush as being this concept of the inner city, you know, that Harlem [New York, New York] was like this--another kind of bush.  That instead of being--it was thickly, you know, it was densely populated, it was thick, it was creative, it was dangerous, it was fertile.  So that, you know, the inner city was another kind of bush, so he had this album 'Harlem Bush Music.'  And so when we were looking for names for the company, and when I was--I was over at a friend's house, John Armwood, and we were, you know, we were talking and drinking and laughing and just, you know, putting on music and just, you know, brainstorming names and I picked up an album by the Art Ensemble of Chicago called 'Urban Bushmen,' and I held it up to him, I said, "Urban Bush Women," (laughter) "Urban Bush Women!"  And he knew the Art Ensemble of Chicago, and he called them and said, "I have this friend who wants to, you know, name her company Urban Bush Women, is it gonna be all right?"  And they said, "Yeah, yeah, that's fine, that's cool."  So, Urban Bush Women.
Story_ID: 349985
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the work--some of the pieces you've created, and I'm most interested in where they've come from.  Where the ideas have come from, so I can go through the list or you can just start from some of your favorites.
Speaker 2: I can pretty--I can pretty much remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first work that I did under the name of Urban Bush Women was called 'River Songs' and that was inspired by Jamaica Kincaid's book, 'At the Bottom of the River,' and I've always loved literature--I mean, I, and so the images in that book were so beautiful and I thought about--you know, as imagining a world of women who lived in river culture what they would do, so the 'River Songs' was about that, but death is always--was in most of my pieces in a profound way and most of my early pieces for a long time it was always something about death in the pieces because I grew up with so much death that that just for me was a part of life.  You know, my [maternal] grandmother [Willa Mason] died when I was ten.  My grandfather probably a little bit later when I was twelve.  My mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] when I was--my father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] when I was sixteen.  My mother when I was twenty-six.  My uncles all, you know, so I just grew going to a lot of funerals, and I didn't realize how much death was a thing that I was attracted to as a theme, so most of my pieces would have some kind of mourning ritual or acknowledgement of death alongside of life.  So 'River Songs' was that and on that same program was a piece called 'Xpujla,' which was an ancestral homage, and so I also realized that a theme in my life has been connection with ancestors, and that has been spiritual and in ways that scared me as a child or I couldn't quite get a hold of, but that connection or people coming to me or through me or however you want to see that, and I went through the western psychiatry and kind of, you know, like according to them I'd be schizophrenic or something else, but I understand that in a different way now, but that's been a constant theme in my life.  So that theme is very much a part of work.  'Xpujla' was about the honoring and the calling and that idea of possession--spiritual possession in exploring that part of me.  Then my second piece in '85 [1985] was again looking at improvisation.  I did piece called 'Working for Free' which is inspired by Dianne's [HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] improvisational work--Dianne McIntyre's work, and that was a solo work where I did free improvisation and also the free improvisational music I was listening to.  And, I did another work called 'Spirit Rising.'  Again, that was dealing with the ancestral energies and invocations.  Working with Craig Harris and he worked with a didgeridoo, and it was literally like he was calling the spirits up and we were embodying that.  And then in '86 [1986], I did a work which I was really dedicated to my mother [Dorothy Zollar Hoover] called 'Anarchy, Wild Women and Dinah,' and it was about the folk character of Dinah, looking at her as the counterpart to High John the Conqueror, that we sort of--one day in rehearsal, we just started realizing we all had all these different Dinah stories and, you know, it was like, oh well we sang a Dinah song like this.  Oh, we told this Dinah story like this, so then I started researching, and I made Dinah this character, this strong woman who would not bow down to slavery or sexism, and maybe she acted out kind of like my mother did because my mother acted out, "What's good for the goose is good for the gander," so my father [Alfred Zollar, Jr.] ran around, so my mother ran around.  So, it was acting out, but it was this idea of like I'm not gonna be--I'm not just going to just lie down and take this.  So I made this piece 'Anarchy, Wild Women and Dinah,' and it was about this collective Dinah that we wanted to aspire to be this free wild woman and we were going to let go of all of these things that kept us from being, you know, that person.
Story_ID: 349986
Speaker 1: Some of the works you've talked about, what has been the driving force?  What is still the driving force for you?  You choreograph because--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I breathe.  I don't know that I--because I probably don't write.  I've got stories and I think now, I, the way in our vision we articulated as that we tell under told and untold stories of disenfranchised people, that I'm kind of always rooting for the underdog and that part of our history that maybe is not spoken about, so I've always been attracted to stories and whether through abstraction or through linear narrative.  I think that would be the driving part of my choreography, and the other part would be emotionality that, you know, the European-based art values abstraction and high concept and distance, emotional distance, and I value emotional immediacy and, you know, that taking the lid off the emotion as opposed to letting--abstracting it to a point where you don't recognize it, so for me the emotion creates the form.
Speaker 1: So what are some of the achievements that you are most proud of?
Speaker 2: Our summer institute [Urban Bush Women Summer Leadership Institute].  I've, the point that we were able to get our summer institute, that's like my baby, my dream, my vision, and it's a thing that I hope will grow and expand so that we can have a teen institute and a children's institute, but it's about arts and activism, and being able to educate young people in a way around how their arts can be part of an activist community and still be--have all the concerns of art making.  So, that's one of the things I'm really the proudest of being able to do, and I've gotten great awards and grants and, you know, too many to list, and I'm so thankful for all of those 'cause each one teaches me.  The one at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a lecture there and I was like, wow, they're really serious about creativity here, and I still don't think in the dance world we have formed the kind of institutions like MIT where they're really serious about creativity, about solving problems, about--'cause there's money attached to that (laughter), and in the dance world, I don't think we've gotten that serious about making spaces for people to create with that level of intensity and thought and permission for them to break the rules, and so that was a revelation to me and I'm still working on that one--I'm still working on that one.  But the institute's my baby.
Story_ID: 349987
Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself an activist?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to be.  I'm getting there.
Speaker 1: What are you considering at?  What is your definition of an activist?
Speaker 2: Right now, I consider myself a catalyst for activist thought, and thinking and other people, to giving them information to--and what I'm working on is, how can Urban Bush Women be more activist-oriented?  Right now as I say, we're great catalyzers.
Speaker 1: What is the difference though between an activist and a catalyst?
Speaker 2: We plant a seed for people through the institute [Urban Bush Women Summer Leadership Institute] to go out to do things, and I think now that we--I'm very interested in getting involved and starting to get involved in this Brooklyn stadium [Barclays Center, Brooklyn, New York] fight.  I don't want it (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you don't want it because?
Speaker 2: Because I don't think--I love Frank Gehry's design.  That was the exciting part to me, I loved that.  The architecture, I don't think the density--we can handle the density in the area of Brooklyn [New York] that they're talking about.  I think it would destroy the reasons why people move to Brooklyn which is not to have the high rises, to have the sky, to have a different ease of life, that's what Brooklyn is.  Now, it's possible they're talking about it being out of Coney Island [New York, New York], but I don't think we can ever solve the traffic problems.  I've sat in traffic--we don't even have a stadium of eighty thousand.  I sit in traffic in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Do you consider Brooklyn urban?
Speaker 2: Um-hm!
Speaker 1: What are you--like you're Urban Bush Women, you also--before you'd spoke to the riots after King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed as urban--
Speaker 2: Rebellions.
Speaker 1: Rebellions.  Is that something that has come to you recently, or back then you considered it an urban rebellion?
Speaker 2: No.  In the--when it had happened, I cal- there were riots.  When I got to college, people talked very much about why riots was a term that allowed people to think of it as, "Oh, it's wild and un-, these out of control people," but a rebellion signifies an uprising that this is something where we're standing up against our oppression, and so the thing with urban uprisings, urban rebellions, so I consciously use that language because I think it more speaks accurately to- that people were starting to speak out and physically act out against their oppression.
Story_ID: 349988
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people in the world of African American dance that you look up to, that you are impressed by what they are bringing to the table as well as what you're bringing?
Speaker 2: Oh, so many.  [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre, Blondell Cummings, [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare, who when I was in college [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri], I hitchhiked to go see him perform in Lawrence, Kansas from Kansas City [Missouri], [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones, some of my contemporaries, Bebe Miller.
Speaker 1: When did you add spoken word to dance?
Speaker 2: Early on when Black Exodus--when I was in college and Milton Myers would combine spoken word poetry with a dance.  That was that early influence.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think that was--that has been something that the African American culture has brought to dance or were white companies doing it as well?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah because it came out of the Black Arts Movement, which is under talked about, but the Black Arts Movement was really combining all of the arts together, visual arts and paintings, you know, paintings, sculptures, jazz music, dance poetry were kind of--all kind of being harvested together, so, you know, that interest definitely, plus within African culture you understand, when you--the role of the griot and music and dance, they're not separate.  So, the impulse to not separate those I think is an ancient impulse.
Speaker 1: So, is there a black arts movement today?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who's involved in it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just feel it.  These young people with the spoken word and the hip hop, and what they're doing, I think that's the new black arts movement.  And I don't know as much about it as I've like to know about it 'cause often the music is just too loud for me to go to the clubs.  I've just--you know, too old to put myself in the environments, but when I work with it in our institute or other things and I see the power of it, yeah, there's--I definitely see that.  There's a lot of consciousness.  Not on the commercial hip hop level, but on the underground or non-commercial I should say hip hop level.  It's, they're coming with it.
Speaker 1: What do you think about hip hop?  Hip hop as a culture, the music, dance?
Speaker 2: I think it has--you have to be kind of careful how you--I'm not an authority on it, but I think it gets all kind of commingled and I think there's aspects of it that are like the heightening of prison culture with the wearing of the oversized clothes and the gangster part of that.  I think--I don't think that's maybe--I wouldn't consider it with the essence of hip hop, but I think it might be like a branch of it that people make money from.  But, what I really--I love the fact that young people became interested in poetry again, and writing poetry and speaking poetry and studying.  You know, they're interested in rhyming, but sometimes it's not about rhyming but they're also going back and reading, you know, poets and so I love that, that part of it.  And I love that in the dance, it is about individual style, which means that every hip hop dancer really is a choreographer 'cause it's an improvisational form, and it's about developing your own style, and I feel like, and I can--I've been trying to get my university [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] to do this, that that's our next--that's where the next energy choreographically is going to come from is those dancers who do hip hop announced at a formal choreography through the university, that voice that comes out of that, that kind of marriage is where I think the next powerful voices, and that's--I want to nurture that.  I love that, I want to be able to have a part in really nurturing that.
Speaker 1: If that voice--if, do you think that voice is the next voice that's coming out of that, what-, where did your voice come from?  What do you attribute your voice coming through or out of it?
Speaker 2: How I was raised?  Community, the importance of community, jazz, music (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But if you had to put it in a nutshell, black and white?
Speaker 2: --expression and then Black Arts Movement--the Black Arts Movement.
Speaker 1: The Black Arts Movement.
Speaker 2: Well, the Black Arts Movement and the Judson Church [Judson Memorial Church, New York, New York] movement which was the white counterparty, which was the white avant-garde movement.  So, I was very interested in that too, 'cause I was interested in experimentation, but I didn't talk about it in certain circles, but I was, you know, checking that out and reading about that, so I was always interested in that post-modernism, experimentation with form and content.  So those two things really coming together.
Story_ID: 349989
Speaker 1: So when you look at all you've done, you know, from the start, from the little six-year old girl who went to the one Russian dancer to the choreographer you are today, what has been the crowning effort for you?
Speaker 2: Keeping this company going for twenty-two years, and starting to see generations of Urban Bush Women take flight and do their own work and hearing them talk about the influence of Urban Bush Women, and starting to see Urban Bush Women as an idea larger than me.  It's not about me anymore, it is about this larger idea, and that is really exciting.  It's one of the reasons I never wanted my name on it.  I didn't want it to be Jawole's Hour Company or the Jawole Zollar's Urban Bush Women.  I wanted it to be this larger idea, so the fact that that's manifesting is--it's great.
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes for Urban Bush Women in the future?
Speaker 2: Our own building (laughter).  We need our own building.  I want a community art center dedicated to social change and artistic investigation.  So, you know, different kind of com- like Highlander Center [ph.]?  Something like that in Brooklyn [New York], but with dance and the arts being prominent and being able to get training in both social justice work and the arts coming together, but really being tied to the community.  That's my big vision.
Speaker 1: Do you think it has been any more difficult for you than any of your white counterparts?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But you know, Garth Fagan--when I first formed the company said, "You're going to experience racism, you're going to experience it.  You see, you know, other people jump out ahead of you who you might feel less deserving, so don't get caught up in it 'cause it's just going to make you bitter, and once you become bitter, then you're not doing your work."  So, yeah, that's there and I'm going to address that to whatever degree I can in social action ways and information ways, but I can't let that--you know, the fact that Mark Morris was able to get a building, I was talking to someone about this and they were like, "Well how come he can get one and you can't," I said, "Don't block your blessings by hating on somebody else.  You know, he deserves that, he worked for that, let's just concentrate on how we're going to get ours."  So that's where I am with that--
Story_ID: 349990
Speaker 1: Sort of my last question to wrap up when you--and I kind of went out of my head.  Let me think about it for a second.  It's about the history.  When you think about Urban Bush Women and you being the founder, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Creating my own personal evolution.  I think the idea of transformation.  In my early--in the early description of our mission statement, it used to say the work was about the growth, struggle and transformation of the human spirit, that I think that we have the possibility to transform and deal with social issues in ways that are about heart, and that's what I want to pass down.  We know that violence begets violence and we see that thing played out in horrific ways, and I think it's possible to transform society in another way.  In a way that is about nonviolence, is a way that is about making grassroots change, and I absolutely believe it's possible, and I think the arts can play an active role in that.  They need to play an active role in that because we're the hum- we can be the humanizing element around that, and that's what I'd like to be remembered for.
Story_ID: 349991
Speaker 1: One more thing just before we go.  If you were--and this is just, I'm just thinking because you may be able to answer me.  But if you were choreographing a piece about your life now, what would it look like?
Speaker 2: Ooh!  It would be ultimately a celebration of individuality and letting people--providing a safe environment where people can be at the edges of sometimes what's considered acceptable behavior, like the fact that I had these spiritual experiences, now I'd be medicated or, you know, these--I was allowed to be, and so it would be about being allowed to be, and I was on the edge of things, I mean, I experimented with drugs and I did these things, but the center, the strong center kept pulling me back to the center, so it would be something about--I think my generation is like getting into this horrible, fascist, don't do this, don't do this, and we did it!  (Laughter) And now we're don't do this, don't do this, don't do this, don't do this, but what we need to provide is the safe center for people to come back to, so you can maybe go out to the edges, but you come back to center, and that's what this piece would be about, going out like this, but coming back to center.
Speaker 1: And that center music it would be?
Speaker 2: That center music would be jazz!  It would be jazz, of course!  It would be jazz.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
