Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  McFerron  Finchum  Bellmon  Today is April 11, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Juliana  Nykolaiszyn. We are with the Oklahoma State University Library and  are conducting the Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families Oral History  Project. Today we   re in Billings, Oklahoma, visiting with the Bellmons  about their centennial farm. Thank you for having us today. Let   s start  by having each one of you introduce yourself and say a few words.  I   m Pat Hoerth. I   m the oldest  daughter , and I live here on the farm in  the old farmhouse.  I   m Gail Wynne. I   m the middle  daughter , and I live in Enid.  I   m George Bellmon, and I   m owner, or past owner, of the Bellmon  farm. I am eighty-seven years old, and I reside at the Methodist  retirement center, known as The Commons, in Enid, Oklahoma.  Thanks for coming today.  And I   m Ann McFerron. I am the youngest  daughter . I live on the farm  in what we call the new farmhouse, even though it is fifty years old.  Well, thank you for having us today. Let   s start by having someone tell  how the Bellmons came to have the land to begin with.  As I know it, our father was a little bit too young to make the Run, and  he purchased a relinquishment, I think they called it, from somebody,  from a person that did stake the farm. And by doing that, he purchased  the farm and a couple years later built a home, and they   ve lived here.  It   s been in the family ever since.  5  Hoerth  Bellmon  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Bellmon  Wynne  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  Finchum  Bellmon  When he came, George, didn   t he live in a dugout with his family?  Yes, he did.  And worked for the original homesteaders, the people who staked the  land. They lost one or two children and decided to leave, and that   s  when he bought the ranch.  And where had they come from?  Kansas.  Came from Kansas?  Yes.  And this was the Cherokee Outlet Run of 1893.  And how many acres to begin with?  A hundred and sixty.  What crops did they start with?  Wheat and cattle.  I think they tried corn, too, early on.  Corn and possibly cotton. I think they raised some cotton in those days,  here on the farm.  What was the closest town?  Closest town was Billings. Yes.  Dad told a story one time about when they came by covered wagon, they  brought chickens with them so that they would have eggs and have some  meat in the winter. But when they got here and they had the dugout, they  actually had the chickens right next to them, and it made it too warm for  them. They actually died, so they didn   t have the chickens for the winter.  Was it mostly just cleared land at that point? No trees or     No, no, it was mostly trees. When you say cleared land, you mean  cultivation, of course.  6  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Right.  There wasn   t much land in cultivation at that time. They had to break it  with a walking plow, you know, and a team of horses. That was pretty  slow farming, you know. But as time went on, there was a lot of  changes. Equipment got bigger and mechanized, and it   s certainly a  contrast from what it is today.  What was their original water source?  Water was a problem in certain areas, including this area. Getting water  that could be used for domestic purposes was a problem. A lot of the  wells, the water wasn   t fit. And a lot of us, a lot of people had to haul  water. As time went on, of course, probably thirty-five years ago, they  started putting water districts through the country, and we were able to  get on a water district out of Marland. The water comes from the Salt  Fork River, wells drilled near the Salt Fork River. We   ve been using that  for the last many years. It   s proved to be very satisfactory, I think.  Are there any ponds on the property?  There are now. Of course, at that time there wasn   t any ponds, but now  there   s several ponds.  George, do you remember carrying water from the place over here?  Oh, you bet.  As kids, you all had to carry the water.  We did.  There   s a windmill over there, and that was where the well was.  Yes. There was a good well there. That water was pretty good, but we  had to haul it. We lived about a, oh, half a mile west of the well she   s  talking about.  Now, they tried to drill some wells, and they couldn   t find wells on the  property, could they?  If they found them, the water wasn   t fit for use.  So how many brothers and sisters did you have?  I had three full brothers. We had half-brothers and half-sisters. Our  7  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  father   s first wife died in about 1918 or    19. He had seven daughters and  two sons by his first family. And in the second family, which we are a  part, there was four boys for a total of thirteen.  Describe the house that you lived in.  The first family had left by the time we came along, so we weren   t all in  the same house at the same time.  Well, how was it heated, the house?  With a woodstove. We burned wood.  And did you have some chores that you were responsible for?  Oh, yes. We had quite a lot of chores. We milked, oh, from twelve to  fifteen cows year round, and we had to take care of them. We milked  twice a day, and we had chickens, and we had a garden, and we had to  cut a lot of wood for the winter. There was lots to do. We used horses to  farm with, and this entailed a lot of work.  Did your mother have a large garden?  We had a garden, a large garden. Potatoes, vegetables, of course. We  had an orchard, apples and peaches.  And besides the farmhouse, what other buildings were there on the  property?  Well, we had a garage, and we had a granary, and we had two different  barns that we used to milk the milk cows.  Chicken houses.  Yes, we did. We had at least two chicken houses.  And a smokehouse, did you?  We had a smokehouse, yes.  And I   m assuming an outdoor toilet?  Oh yes, oh yes.  Of those buildings, are any of them still standing?  8  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Oh, by golly, just the home. The rest of the buildings are gone.  Is the chicken house north of the old house not original?  No.  The one that   s there now.  One of the chicken houses burned down, didn   t it?  Yes, the brooder house.  That was years later.  Well, how far would you have to go to school?  A mile and a quarter, north.  And how would you get there?  We   d walk. There wasn   t much traffic on these country roads in those  days. (Laughter) No, we walked, and it wasn   t bad. In the wintertime we  faced the north wind going to school. And we had a tail wind coming  home. That helped. The one-room school north, a mile and a quarter  north, was named Glenrose. When we were in grade school there, there  was as many as thirty-one went to school in that one-room schoolhouse.  Each class would go to the front of the room. They had a bench, and  we   d sit on the bench while the teacher taught our class. Then the next  class would come up and it was quite different. Quite different.  Grades one through     Eight.  And then where would you go from there, after the eighth grade?  Well, we went to Billings High School. Rode a bus. The school district  was pretty large. We rode the bus, of course, and it seemed like a lot of  miles getting to and from school.  Well, did your father only farm, or did he have other sources of income?  He farmed. In the very early-   20s the East Billings Oil Field included  some of the land that we farmed. He had a lot of horses, and he did a lot  of work for the oil companies. In those days, they didn   t have the  equipment. They didn   t have the bulldozers and the backhoes and the  9  McFerron  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  McFerron  Hoerth  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  track hoes and all that. All the work was done with horses, and he was  quite active in that regard.  And then your mother was a school teacher.  Yes.  Did he have to have hired help around the farm?  Yes. Not too much, but we did have a little help.  And did he participate in the rings that would go from farm to farm, like  the combine or harvesting rings?  Custom combine.  The thrashing crews.  Oh, we didn   t have a thrashing machine. In those days, there were a few  thrashing machines in the country, and they would move from one farm  to the other and thrash the wheat and the oats or barley or whatever.  They were powered in the early days by steam engines, which were  large and very slow moving, but that was a source of power for these  thrashing machines. Quite different. And later on, of course, we got  combines, and the first combines weren   t self-propelled by far. They  were pulled by either horses or tractors and that   s what we used. Now  we   ve got, as you know, self-propelled combines that are much larger,  much more efficient.  And some of them have air conditioning, I hear.  Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  Makes a difference.  Computers.  They   re quite modern, very comfortable, quiet, and it   s quite a  difference.  Well, in the    30s, did they do anything with the WPA  Works Progress  Administration , with soil conservation or anything like that?  Oh, the WPA wasn   t active in this area that I know of, and particularly  in soil conservation. They might have had projects, maybe, that I don   t  know about, but generally speaking, I don   t think they were, not here.  10  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Hoerth  Didn   t need to do terracing on the property?  Oh, yes. I can tell you that when we came back here from World War II,  there were hardly any terraces in the country. I don   t hardly know of  any. My brother and I were able to buy a couple of used dozers,  caterpillar dozers. We bought them from what they call the War Assets  Administration. It was army surplus. We used those, and we did a lot of  terracing and built a lot of ponds in this area. There   s been many, many  ponds built since then. The government assisted in paying for the  terraces and the waterways and the ponds, and they did a lot.  You can   t believe the difference now and what it was then. We came  back here in    45 and    46, from the war, and it wasn   t unusual to start  around a wheat field. You   d come to a ditch that was so big you couldn   t  cross it. You   d have to turn and go up that ditch until you could find a  place where you could cross. The erosion, you know, had washed it.  And it wouldn   t be unreasonable to come to another ditch that you  couldn   t cross, and you   d have to go up and go around it, which slowed  the farming operation up considerably. Now we don   t have that. The  land is terraced, and we don   t have the erosion that we did then.  And which brother was this?  That was my older brother, Henry.  So from the    40s just move into the    50s. What   s going on in the    50s?  Well, much of the same in the    50s. There was an awful lot of work went  on in the fields in those days. Been a lot of improvement, very much.  And the three of you  referring to the sisters  came along in the    50s,  I   m assuming? Each of you to tell a little bit about your experiences,  early days on the farm.  We helped out with sheep and chickens. We would help with shearing.  We were the ones who were in the bottom of these giant gunnysacks that  were hung from the ceiling in the barn. They would put us in it, and  they   d throw the fleeces in, and we   d stomp them down all day. It was  usually a day or two of shearing. We brought the sheep in at night, and  we   d walk out to the field, the pasture, and they   d follow us in.  And then we helped with the chickens, which they had a lot of chickens.  Like twelve hundred chickens, I think, was the figure I remember. And  we had to gather the eggs and candle them and then grade them. Then  our mom would drive them to Enid to different places where she had  11  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  arranged to sell them.  Dad also drove them. I was a preschooler at the time, and I would ride  with him. He would sing songs about Mom as we drove to Enid and  delivered the eggs to the hospitals and nursing facilities.  Songs about your mother?  Yes. He had some real funny songs about Mom that he would sing.  You want to sing one?  (Laughs)  I   ll put you on the spot.  I don   t remember them, exactly.  But, he would buy her candy. Pat and I were in school, and she would  come home and sell it to us.  Ann would, not mother.  Ann would. Not mother, no.  (Laughs)  Ann was not in school yet. She was pretty savvy, early on. The job I  remember the most from the    50s had to do with this house. I loved  going into the field every night and bringing the sheep home, and even  liked gathering eggs. But this house, which was built in 1960, is built out  of the bricks from the post office in Billings that burned in the late  1950s. Mother and Daddy bought those bricks, and we cleaned every  brick. (Laughs) They dumped them at what we call the old house, and  we spent a summer cleaning the old mortar off the bricks so that they  could be used for this  house . No child would come and play with us  that summer. (Laughter) We were all alone. No, we did have some  friends that would come, but that   s one big project that I remember from  the early    60s, actually.  Just brought them truckload by truckload     Just dumped them. Mountains of them.  They brought them all at one time. The post office in Billings, yeah.  12  Finchum  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Did you get an allowance for doing that?  No, we got a new house. (Laughter)  Well, we did get a little money every Saturday. We were taken to the  McClellan, a little dime store, in Perry. We were allowed to  shop , so  we had a little money to buy something with on Saturdays.  And then after harvest every year, there would always be rain during  harvest, and it would always leave wet spots that the custom cutters  couldn   t cut. So, Daddy would go back in when they dried up and cut.  We would get the money from that wheat, from whatever wet spots there  had been that year, and they would take us to Enid. I remember, one year  they thought we would all buy bicycles, and we got suitcases instead.  (Laughter) We intended to travel, just by different means. I can   t  remember the name of the store in Enid. So, we did have a little income.  Were you all in 4-H or     Yes.  We have the record books to prove it.  Different projects or the same?  We really didn   t do animals much in 4-H. I did the horse, I was in the  horse part of 4-H and did a little bit with horses. Mostly we did the dress  review, and the canning, and the fair, and the books, and the  demonstrations.  The poultry, cake and egg show. We baked for it.  Talent show.  The wool.  Trips to Europe. People-to-People trips to Europe.  With what was his name?  And we did the summer camps. We always went to 4-H camp. Our mom  was one of the 4-H leaders, and so she was always at camp.  And she would cook.  And back to the chicken house thing. When we gathered eggs, you  13  Hoerth  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  know, Mom got the taller ones because we were too small. Those were  the ones you reached in and you couldn   t see, and sometimes you   d get a  snake instead of an egg. You would know when she screamed that she  found something she didn   t like.  She found a snake.  One of the best stories from this farm, actually, is from their generation.  And it may just be family lore, but here   s how I remember it, and you  can correct me, being told. There were four boys born in five or six  years, so they were pretty close together. That house has a really steep  staircase that must   ve originally had a closet door on it. So, it has a big  header right above the door to go up the stairs. The boys would take  turns moving up the stairs and jumping to the bottom to see who could  get the furthest up and land at the bottom. And Daddy, being the oldest  of those boys, I guess, went first. He ended up the highest up, and he  jumped off the top steps. On the way down he hit his head on the header,  which knocked him cold. And the cat walked by at a most inopportune  moment, and he landed on the cat. So, he has blood running down his  head, and there   s cat guts everywhere. Of course, you can imagine what  your mother thought. (Laughter) Is that accurate, George?  Yes, it is. (Laughter) It is. It really is.  It is? It hasn   t been embellished along the years? You remember that  day?  I certainly do. I certainly do.  How old were you?  Gosh, I don   t know. We were probably, I   d say, eight, nine, something  like that. We went to grade school, it was during the Depression, and I  don   t recall ever having heard the term    Depression    used. Things were  so different. We had plenty to eat. We didn   t suffer. And we didn   t know  any better. We thought everything was normal, but we had to provide  our own entertainment. I don   t remember the first movie I ever saw, but  I was well along. Probably in high school.  I remember one thing that we did for entertainment, and that happened  every, oh, about every Sunday afternoon during the summer. The boys  from the whole community, which is a pretty large area, we   d get  together in somebody   s cow pasture on Sunday afternoon, and we   d play  baseball. We didn   t have a backstop. We had a pigtail. He was a boy that  stood behind the catcher and run down all the foul balls and missed  pitches, you know. But this was something that we looked forward to  14  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Hoerth  Bellmon  every day. Our mother was very religious, and this bothered her because  it was the Lord   s Day, and there wasn   t supposed to be anything that  went on. She didn   t want to deprive us of that entertainment, but it  bothered her pretty much. I could tell that. We would get together on  Sunday afternoons. We   d either have to walk or ride a horse to get  where we wanted to go. Maybe somebody would get the family sedan  and drive, but not too many did that. It was quite different.  And we spent a lot of time trying to raise a little money. We   d scour the  area trying to pick up junk, scrap iron, or whatever we could do. We  might gather the eggs and go to the country store up here, buy a Coke or  something. It   s quite a contrast from what it is today. I can tell you that.  And there was nothing open on Sunday. Nothing. You might find a  filling station someplace, but you   d have to look for one. And, in those  days, nobody, hardly anybody worked on Sunday. They just didn   t do it.  And that was true when we were growing up, too.  I know.  It continued.  But when you contrast that with today, you see?  The other thing, Dad talked about his mom a lot, and she was a really  great cook. He said they would take their lunch to school every day. She  always fixed big lunches, and he said the other kids would tease him  about his lunches, because they were always  big . She made great pies  and really good food for your lunches.  And he told us that she could time the cinnamon rolls coming out of the  oven when they arrived home from school, so they had warm cinnamon  rolls.  And we never knew her. She died while they were both   were you  home yet from the war?  No.  They were both overseas during the war.  George, do you remember musical evenings with neighbors, when  everybody would get together with instruments and play music?  Oh, some, but not a whole lot. My mother played the piano, and we used  to sing some in the evenings, you know, and that sort of thing. I can   t  15  Finchum  Bellmon  Hoerth  McFerron  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  remember too many people coming in for that.  Well, do you remember when electricity came?  Oh, yes. Very much. I remember very well. That was quite a fine  improvement. If you   ve ever tried to study, and we probably didn   t do a  lot of studying, but a coal oil lamp doesn   t give you adequate  illumination, I   ll say that. I do remember, I was in high school at the  time, and must have been about 1939 or    40 when we got electricity.  George, could you tell her about Irwin?  Irwin?  We had a brother that was between Henry and I. His name was Irwin,  and he graduated in 1940. We were helping a neighbor right south of us  harvest his oats. They had a thrashing machine in there, and it was  powered by one of these steam engines. They had horses and hay racks  they hauled bundles in and pitched them in this thrashing machine. But  anyway, during the afternoon, it came up an electrical storm, a  thunderstorm. Pretty severe. Our brother was standing in a barn where  they would haul the load of oats. They had scooped it in a bin there. He  and a couple other men were standing in the driveway of this barn and  the lightning struck and hit him pretty directly and killed him. That was  quite a calamity in the family.  He was scheduled to go to OSU that fall, wasn   t he?  Yes. Yes, he was.  Was he the youngest, or was Randall the youngest?  He was the second youngest.  He was next to the oldest.  Okay. He was next to Dad.  So, and then Randall and then you   re the youngest, aren   t you?  Nope.  It was Randall? Randall   s the youngest.  Yes.  16  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  Finchum  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Is that barn still standing?  No.  And it wasn   t on this property. It was the neighbor   s property.  Not the  farm that became the Bellmon farm   another neighbor.   So once your family had it, and then Henry got it, how did that work?  Yes. Henry got it. Actually, our younger brother wasn   t interested in  farming, and they gave him some money. I don   t know how much.  Wasn   t very much. Our father gave the home place to Henry and I. Later  on, oh, golly, I don   t remember when, but later on, he bought me out,  and I went to North Carolina and bought a farm out there. I had been  stationed there during the Korean War and got interested in the country  out there and liked it. After I got out of the service, I went back there  and bought a farm, and Henry ended up with the home place.  And is it still one hundred and sixty acres now?  Yes.  Well, there   s more.  The original one hundred and sixty is still     Yes.  And Pat is the owner of it now.  Henry accumulated more land and bought land in the area. So, he had a  pretty good farming operation.  And then at what point did you come back?  I came back in    65. He, as you know, had got involved in politics, and  got himself elected Governor, and he wanted me to come back and  manage the farm, and it wasn   t an easy move for me. I liked North  Carolina. I really did, but I did come back and manage the farm. And  then a few years later I went on my own and I accumulated land, and I  had my own farm operation.  When you were managing the farm, you were still raising wheat,  primarily?  Yes. Primarily wheat and cattle.  17  Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  McFerron  Wynne  And when your father was in the governor   s mansion, did you come back  and forth, or stay down there most of the time?  We came back most weekends. We didn   t like coming back every  weekend, once we got to high school.  We were teenagers and we made new friends. (Laughter)  But we came back to church in Perry and came here quite a lot of the  time.  Every weekend or most?  This was always home.  This was always their home base, no matter where they ended up.  What is so special about it, you think, that has kept you all wanting to  keep it in the family? Anything in particular?  Oh, we love the wind, and we love the extreme temperatures. (Laughter)  You said the wind? (Laughter) Okay.  It   s just lovely. (Laughter)  It is lovely. I wish people would quit disparaging over it. With weather,  we have more good days than bad.  I know it   s home     Well, yes, just walking the prairie. Actually, I lived in Maryland for  twenty years, and Maryland is full of trees. When I would come back,  and just driving from the city or driving in, to be able to see a distance,  you know, and to see the sunrise and the sunset. There   s a beauty to the  prairie that if you haven   t experienced it, you just maybe don   t  understand what a beauty it is. It   s really special, and even as kids we  loved to walk, and I always loved the animals and the nature. So, it   s a  special place to us.  We had an eclectic, I guess you   d call it, childhood really, here. I was  twelve when we moved to Oklahoma City, and we were there for four  years and then came back here, and I graduated from high school. Then  Mother and Daddy moved to Washington. We all three graduated from  different high schools. (Laughs) But we were very deeply rooted here  18  Hoerth  Finchum  Bellmon  Wynne  and in our young years. Ann was eleven or ten when we moved to  Oklahoma City. So, the first ten to fifteen years of our lives, we were  pretty much putting down roots here. Then we began to see more of the  world. We had a wonderful mix that I think has allowed us to make  really good choices about coming back. I   m the only one who doesn   t  live here now, but I live close by. It wasn   t that we never left, but it  wasn   t that we ever totally left, either. So, I think it   s just been a good  mix of being able to pull on the strings that they gave us. We hit the  jackpot in the gene pool with them, in my opinion, and got to see a lot of  the world. I think that gave me, I can   t speak for them, an assurance of  where I wanted to be.  I think there   s a sense of responsibility for the land. I know that came  from Mom and Dad, because of the Depression and the changing of the  way they farmed. That was a huge lesson learned and still there are  lessons being learned. It   s kind of our turn to make sure that the land is  taken care of in the very best way. I think that   s a real pull. We   re  willing to withstand the weather, and certainly deeply care about the  unique beauty here. I think there is a sense of responsibility that keeps us  rooted.  Well, what were some of the holidays like? We can start with George.  What were holidays like when you were a youngster?  You know, holidays, to me, I just have never appreciated them. I just  don   t. I know that   s negative, but that   s the way it is. And one reason   I  don   t know how many times I   ve been working on the farm in the field,  and maybe you   d have a break down, and maybe it would be Friday at  three o   clock. You would go to the dealer to get a part, and he had to  order it, and it was Friday and it was too late to order it there, and the  next day is Saturday and then Sunday. And then the holiday   s always on  Monday, which meant you had about five days, or four at least, before  you could get what you needed. And it seemed like invariably that  would happen. You   d break down and have to deal with a holiday. I  never did get used to that. I just don   t care for holidays.  I can answer that question a little bit, because my dad once wrote me a  letter about Christmas trees. Mother was allergic. We always cut red  cedar trees, and there   s a difference in proportion in the great outdoors  than in the house. So, we always ended up with this humongous tree that  would hardly fit through any door, and I   m sure many families in this  part of the country did the same thing. Mother developed an allergy to  them, and I insisted that they get, at some point, an artificial tree, and I  got a very pointed letter about Christmas, about an artificial Christmas  tree. And in that letter, he talked about what your mother did at  Christmas, which was usually just a branch of a cedar tree. She would  19  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Finchum  McFerron  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  cut, he described them as    paper dolls holding hands,    a connection of  paper dolls, not the construction paper link, but paper dolls and strung  popcorn, and that would be your Christmas tree. Not a full-blown tree  and I think he made up for it later on, because we had the biggest tree  you could imagine. Even when we lived in Oklahoma City, he   d come  up here and cut a cedar tree and take it down to the mansion. And we all  know what happens to a cedar tree after about three days. (Laughs) They  get prickly and     But back then, there weren   t cedar trees everywhere.  That   s true.  So one of the things he taught us was that when you cut a tree, you  would leave a branch to make sure that you didn   t kill the tree, and so  that the trees would come back. Of course, nowadays if you were to cut  a cedar, he   d cut the whole thing and forget about the branch. (Laughs)  But at the time, that was real important for him to conserve the tree and  save it for the future.  We celebrated mostly with Mother   s side of the family, either at our  grandmother   s house or here, and there were ten grandchildren on the  Osborn side, and that   s who we pretty much spent our Christmases with.  And how close was that to this house?  Six miles? Seven?  Oh, so, pretty close.  Six, seven miles. South and east. Or south and west.  And Memorial Day was the holiday we would spend with Dad   s side of  the family. They would all come. They were a very big family with, you  know, all these step-kids and all, so it was a very large family.  Daddy   s mother, their mother   s family was very musical. There, I don   t,  how many Caskey children were there? Eight or nine?  Oh, there was probably seven. Oh, wait a minute. Counting the girls,  too.  Yes, let   s count the girls, too. (Laughter)  I was thinking about the musicians.  20  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Bellmon  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Oh, the musicians. Right. But there were four boys. Four of George   s  uncles who were a gospel quartet traveled with the Lyceum Circuit of  the Redpath Chautauqua, all over the country with a set of Deagan  Shaker chimes that are eleven feet by twelve feet, and they collapse  them into a little carriage. They went all over the country and played  chimes and sang.  And brass. They had a brass quartet.  And they had brass. So, it was a musical family. I can remember them  standing in this living room, those four, my great-uncles, singing  harmony to great old hymns and patriotic songs. Beautiful. Their voices  blended so beautifully.  Gail has the chimes over in the church in Enid. They   re still working.  The Presbyterian Church in Enid. And they were played yesterday. They  play them pretty frequently.  And there are not very many sets surviving. It   s a really unique  instrument.  Purdue has a set that   s about two-thirds of our set. Our uncles were  really tall and there were four of them so they ordered the biggest set. It  was from a company called Deagan out of Chicago, and they ordered the  biggest set they could make. They came about 1905 or    06, I think.  And they just happened to want to do that, or     Or somebody wanted them to.  Is there a story behind that?  I don   t really know. I   d have to reread the book to find out.  I heard that the chimes were made for them because they were big, but  do you know anything about the story of the chimes?  Oh, not really. I   ve heard it, but I can   t recall.  It   s written in Edith Pease   s book about the Caskey family. So, we   ll  have to dig it out, look it up.  We   ve, at different times, tried to contact the Deagan Company     They don   t exist.  21  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron     but there   s not a lot of information on the internet. I heard of one in  New York, and I know Disney has small Shaker chimes, but other than  Purdue, we haven   t found     There   s a man in Connecticut in a church who won   t talk. I found him,  but he doesn   t want anybody to know he has them, so he won   t talk  much about them. (Laughs) And then the set at Purdue, and they   re  played on a regular basis at Purdue.  At their Christmas concert.  Very interesting tidbit there.  And that was the Caskey side of the family. But I always think of them,  when you said Memorial Day, I thought of all the uncles.  And these chimes were so big that they wouldn   t fit in most houses.  Actually, our Aunt Beth, she had them for several years in her house in a  bedroom. She couldn   t put the tallest ones up because they wouldn   t fit.  We would go to her house, and the uncles lived in different states. So,  when they would get together it was such a treat to get to hear them sing  and to play these chimes. They were just phenomenal.  Any recordings, you think, you have around somewhere?  I have a recording of my Aunt Beth and Uncle Joe playing them, but I  don   t know if there are others. Our Uncle Randall originally owned  them, in his generation. They played them in Yukon in different places,  so there may be some recordings. There were three women that played  them in Yukon, and then we bought them from Joyce, his widow, oh,  probably five or six years ago.  But as far as recordings of the actual brothers playing them, no.  Well, this question   s for Juliana. Since you mentioned chickens earlier,  did you have specific methods for killing them?  You know, it   s funny that you should say that, because we were just  talking about this yesterday. Our dad didn   t like to eat chicken, so I  don   t remember     He sold them off the farm a lot. They would come, a huge truck, and put  them in wooden cages and send them off.  So we didn   t kill chickens.  22  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  I remember Grandma, Mother   s mother, wringing chickens    necks, but I  don   t know how she did it. We ate a lot of lamb and a lot of beef, but I  don   t remember much chicken.  Yes, it   s interesting because he really didn   t kill them. Mom didn   t kill  them.  But the turkeys, turkeys were different. We were all ready to kill the  turkeys. We had turkeys for I don   t know how long. We were pretty  little. Daddy, we don   t know whether this was intentional or just  happened, but he managed to put, where we burned the trash on the  other side of the house, and the turkey pen. So it was house, turkeys,  trash, and there are home movies of Mother     In her short shorts.  In her short shorts trying to get the trash taken out and coming back  through the turkey pen with the empty trash can just,    Move out of my  way.    She wasn   t hitting them hard, but just clearing her path. Turkeys  are pretty aggressive.  They   ll peck you.  They weren   t our favorite and they didn   t last very long. We tried about  everything on this farm.  And they   re not smart. (Laughter) If you would happen to set a five  gallon bucket in the turkey pen, one turkey would jump in, and the  others, out of curiosity, would jump. You would end up pulling ten dead  turkeys out of this five gallon bucket because they would just keep  piling on top of each other. And if you should happen to drive the tractor  in there and leave the keys in the ignition, when you would go back,  they would have taken the keys and swallowed them and you had no  keys.  We had all sorts of turkey problems.  Yes.  I take it something like that happened?  Yes, that   s how we know. (Laughter) We actually have movies of the  day we sold the turkeys. I   m not even sure why they owned turkeys. We  didn   t kill them either.  23  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Hoerth  This was not really a 4-H project, but as a kid I had my piggy bank, and  I saved my money and went with Dad to the auction one day, I was like  five years old, to buy a pig. So, it came time for me to bid on this pig,  and I start bidding, and the other farmers realized they were bidding  against a five year old, and so they stopped bidding. I knew how much  money I had, so I just kept bidding until I spent all my money. (Laughs)  So, I was actually bidding against myself. Dad didn   t stop me, I don   t  know why. I brought home a pig that then had little ones, and then I   d  made my money back. That was my adventure into pigs.  Another pig story was we had a rat issue in the pig pen. So, Dad would  go out at night, at least he did it once, with a gun with a scope on it. He  would lie on his belly and it had a flashlight on it, and the flashlight  would shine, and when he did that, he started shooting. The rats got  scared and came right out at him and went down his bib overalls.  (Laughs) I don   t think he tried that anymore. I think once was sufficient  for that.  I remember that night, him coming in the house. It was pretty awful.  (Laughs)  Well, and that reminds me of another incident with bees. They had bees  back then, and this was before us. Mom and Dad were first married, and  they had gotten the honey out of the hives with the comb, and they  brought it in and put it on the stove. Mom left and Dad was in charge of  watching the honey on the stove, and he fell asleep. So it boiled over.  Their brand new stove ended up with all this honey, and years later they  were still getting honey out of that stove.  They were married in    47? January of    47?  Yes.  And at that time, at the old house there was no running water, and my  grandfather Bellmon was living with them when they were first married.  Pat came along shortly thereafter, like fourteen months, and then she had  polio. And so it was a pretty difficult life, I think, especially for Mother,  very early on.  Well, and the night I was born was a horrible blizzard. Dad and our  mother   s father, it was lambing season, so they came back from Enid  from the hospital and got stranded and had to walk about five miles in  waist height snow. Our grandfather Bellmon was living about a mile east  of here. He got so cold he stoked his stove heavily, and the chimney got  too hot, and the house caught fire and burned down that night. The  neighbors across the way, about a quarter of a mile away, took him in,  24  Wynne  Bellmon  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  but it was a very traumatic time.  It was March 11, which is now a famous disaster.  1948.  1948. Yes.  I think we have to record Mother and Daddy   s long courtship as part of  this. Daddy was six years older than Mother, and he skipped a couple of  years of school. So even though they grew up six miles apart, they didn   t  really know each other growing up. After the war, he came home and on  a Sunday, coming home from church he had a flat tire. Mother stopped  to help him fix the flat tire, and he asked her out for that night. She said,     No,    because she was too excited to go home and tell her mother that  he had asked her out. So, he asked her out again, and by Wednesday  they were engaged. And five and a half weeks later, they were married.  And they were married for fifty-three, fifty-four years, until Mother  died. So, they knew what was right from the beginning. And I   ve heard a  lot of early post-World War II stories of ten day romances like that.  Where did they get married?  They got married in Billings at the Methodist Church.  Well, we   ve had them talk about chickens. George, did you have to kill  chickens when you were younger?  Yes. I can remember when they wringed their necks. It wasn   t easy, but  they could do it. A lot of women could do it, of course. But I preferred to  put their neck across the chopping block and take an ax.  Make it quick.  It was much more humane, I think.  George, do you remember skunk hunting, trapping skunks?  Oh yes. You bet. We trapped skunks and possums and coons and  whatever.  Did you eat them?  Oh, no. We   d sell the pelts and get maybe a dollar and a half for them.  But that was pretty good money.  25  Hoerth  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  Hoerth  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  McFerron  Bellmon  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Do you remember wearing skunk stuff around your neck?  Yes.  What was that for?  Well, our father, he had a lot of home cures that we used in those days,  and one of them was if you got a cold or had a sore throat, when we   d  trap a skunk and kill it and skin it, we   d end up with some lard, you  know, or grease. We   d render that and get it in an oil form. He would  take a sock or a cloth or something and soak it in that and wring it out  and put it around your neck. That was a cure for colds and sore throats  and whatever.  Did it work?  Well, it must have, I guess.  How bad did it smell?  No, it didn   t have the skunk odor. It smelled, but not like that.  Really?  Not like a skunk.  We had a medicine we used in those days, and they called it,    Cascara  Evacuant.    The most terrible tasting stuff you   ve ever tasted. I haven   t  heard of it since. I don   t know what happened to it.  It became Creomulsion in the    50s. (Laughter)  I was going to say that   It became what?  Creomulsion in the    50s was the really horrible tasting     I don   t know if it was the same, but it was a terrible tasting medicine.  Yes. Nobody coughed at our house because one cough and you had to  take it. (Laughter)  Well, one go around with that and you didn   t get sick anymore. I   ll tell  you that.  26  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  Finchum  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  You were a healthy crew.  You bet. You stayed that way.  If you got bee stung, did they have a remedy for that?  I don   t recall that they did. No. I don   t think they have one yet, do they?  Well, my dad had a few.  Did he?  Tobacco juice, for one.  Oh, really?  You were a tobacco farmer. You should know that.  And a few others we won   t go into. (Laughter)  Baking soda paste works pretty good.  Didn   t go barefoot too much out here, I guess?  Yes.  Yes, we did. I went barefoot as a kid.  There were sandburs, but     I used to like to get animals. They could possibly be dead or alive, or  whatever, like dead skunks, then I would chase my sisters. I would chase  them around the yard with a dead skunk, or maybe a snake. I was  bringing home critters all the time. Lizards, and just anything I could  find, came into the house.  And when she would chase us, instead of Mother correcting her  unladylike behavior, Mother would get the movie camera and take  pictures. (Laughter) So, we have movies of Ann chasing Pat and I with a  skunk.  We used to hunt quite a bit, and in those days there wasn   t near as many  ducks and geese as there are now. There just weren   t, and you really had  to do some hunting, a lot of times, to come up with any game. There  wasn   t many ponds in the early days. There just wasn   t. The oil  companies might have built one, very few. But anyway, we would walk  27  Hoerth  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  Finchum  McFerron  Hoerth  from one pond to the other, and sometimes we   d be gone the big part of  the day and we   d get hungry. And if we hadn   t killed any ducks, why,  we had to provide something else. I remember one time we didn   t have  any ducks or nothing to eat. We got pretty hungry, and we shot about  four meadowlarks and cleaned them and ate those meadowlarks. Have  you ever heard of anybody eating meadowlarks? I hadn   t either.  Did you cook them?  Yes. Well, we cooked them over an open fire, you know.  Well, they must have been little.  They were pretty small, but by golly     They were tasty.  I don   t remember what they tasted like, but they were probably as good  as quail, I suppose.  Oh.  Maybe not, but     Did you fish? Oh, there weren   t any ponds to fish.  Well, there wasn   t too many, no. There really wasn   t. If we wanted fish,  we   d get them out of the creek usually. Seemed like there was water in  the creeks more in those days than there is now, for some reason. I don   t  know why. We used to get a lot of catfish out of the creek.  What other things would you do for fun, besides your baseball game on  Sunday?  Oh, golly, I can   t think of much.  What about you girls? It wasn   t all work.  Our Sunday afternoons, we would go to church in Perry, and we always  ate lunch in Perry with the same two families. Then we would come  back and often drive around the farm. Go check out the wheat, check out  the cattle. We always had our Sunday drives. Then we would come  home and sleep, take a nap. Sundays were a real relaxed day.  That was also a time to go visit neighbors. We   d go visit people on some  other farms.  28  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  But during the week, we pretty much just played with each other. As we  got a little older, we   d have friends come home from school. We just  played outside, just all the time.  Oh, well, our cats got, you know, snap beads and dresses and     And we harassed the hired man pretty badly from time to time. When  they   d say,    It   s hot enough to fry an egg,    we   d go put one on his  tractor seat and make sure that it was hot enough to fry an egg.  (Laughter) There wasn   t a lot of concrete around, so what else got that  hot? So we were, Ann was really mischievous, actually. (Laughter)  I can remember, we were in grade school probably in the later years, and  we got our first bicycle. We were coming back from a swimming trip or  something, walking, and we were west of the house probably a quarter  of a mile on this road down here, and I saw something glisten, the sun  reflecting off something. They were unloading it out of the car, and it  was a new bicycle. Now that was a big day, and of course, we started  running and we got home pretty quick. We would take turns riding that  bicycle out to the mailbox and back. We rode that thing until way after  dark, back and forth to the mailbox. That was quite a prized possession  for four boys in grade school.  None of us rode a bike as children, the three of us, because they were  building I-35 when we were  young . They finished it in the early    60s,  and all the construction, the big trucks came up and down this section  line. It was the first full, easy to get through section line, and Mother and  Daddy didn   t want us to have bicycles because of all the trucks.  Actually, I did.  Did you have one?  Cecil     Well, you   re so much older. (Laughter)  Yes. Cecil, from the Osborn side of the family     Goldsmith?  Goldsmith taught me how to ride a bike from the house up to the north  corner. Just a quarter mile on the dirt, you know, on the gravel. It was  not an easy place to learn to ride.  29  Wynne  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  We didn   t get to.  Tell her about our swimming.  Yes. This is kind of horrifying, but in the summer, there was a pond just  south of the house, less than a quarter of a mile out in the pasture. And  Mom would put us in bright orange life jackets and give us an alarm  clock with the time set. We would walk to the pond with the alarm clock  set, and when the alarm clock went off, we were supposed to get out of  the pond and come home.  No adult.  Mom didn   t go with us. Just the three of us in our life jackets, and we  never took them off. We   d swim, and when the alarm went off, we came  back.  I have absolutely no memory of this.  And how old were we?  We were in grade school.  Isn   t that amazing? (Laughs)  She   d probably go to jail, today. (Laughter)  And there were no car seats, either. There weren   t even seatbelts. One of  my vivid memories, for some reason, of things outside growing up was  when a pond would dry up, or a creek bed, and there would be these big  thick pieces of clay that would be so dry that they would curve up on the  ends, and we just played with them. I don   t know what we did with  them, but I just remember at Grandma   s house and here, there must have  been a drought during that spell of time, but we just built things with  them. It was pretty basic.  Also, this pond, this would have been probably in the    60s     In high school.     or so, got a lot of carp and things in it. Or maybe not even that.  It was carp.  They decided to rotenone the pond, which means they could take the  oxygen out of the water, and that affects, of course, all the fish. Not just  30  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Wynne  the fish you want to get rid of. So, we had basically the town of Billings,  it seemed like almost, I just remembered all these steps totally were  covered with fish because as the fish come up, you literally just grab  them and put them in the boat or whatever. Then we had a huge fish fry  of all of these catfish and everything and had a huge part of the town  come out and enjoy the fish.  And we used to water ski on this pond with friends, and when it would  freeze in the wintertime, people would come out and skate. We   d have  bonfires and all sorts of     Hot chocolate and marshmallows.  Yes.  Well, the power went off in Billings one time, so people just headed out  here and we had a great big  skate party . They even took benches, I  mean, this was how thick the ice was. They took benches and the men  would run, we have movies of it, and slide on those benches on the ice.  Seems like a scary thing to do.  Yes. Of course     Well, that     I mean, we entertained ourselves with the outdoors.  And at that time there was a lot more snow in the winter. They would  put snow fences up on Highway 15, like you see in Colorado now. And  I   m sure during your youth, there were a lot of snow fences around to  keep the snow off the roads.  There seemed like a lot more snow in those days. We used to try to ice  skate on the creeks. Then the only ice skates we had were the kind that  clamped onto your soles, and they weren   t satisfactory. (Laughter) None  of us, I don   t think, ever learned to ice skate.  It probably wasn   t real smooth ice, either.  No.  Yes, I remember not even having ice skates. The water would freeze and  be really bumpy. You would put, like, six layers of clothes on and just  go out and play on the ice.  We didn   t have a television for a long time. Can you tell? (Laughter) We  31  McFerron  Wynne  Finchum  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Finchum  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  only got a television when my great-grandfather Osborn died, and we  were the only people in the family that didn   t have one so they gave us  his. And this would have been     We were all in school.  Yes, this would   ve been like 1960 or pretty close.  Just by choice? Your parents    choice? Chose not to?  Yes. So we spent a lot of time outside entertaining ourselves. And  music. We all took music. A lot of music.  Some more successfully than others. (Laughter)  No, we all took lots of music lessons.  Were there some outside chores and inside chores? How were those  divided? Or were they?  Well, you know our parents then began getting in politics and did a lot  of entertaining here. I always remember us washing the big three pane  window, washing the windows. We used this glass wax stuff that was  this pink stuff, and so that was a big chore. We would get kind of rowdy,  and Mother would say,    You girls settle down,    and we   d squish down  on the ground. (Laughs) We gave our mom a hard time.  We did.  I don   t remember any sort of system.  We all did the chicken egg gathering and the candling, we all did that. I  remember all of us, at different times, going to bring the sheep in and  cooking.  Doing dishes.  We did a lot of cooking because those days you fed the harvest crew,  and so we all cooked. I know I sure did.  My memory of the routine was that you   d fix a big noon meal, like fried  chicken and mashed potatoes and take that to the field, and we   d come  home and clean that up. Then at four o   clock, we would go back out  with sandwiches and everybody got a little homemade pie.  Fried pie.  32  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  No, they were baked.  Oh.  I   ve got the tin.  Yes, they were regular little tins.  I remember I folded over and fried ones.  Oh.  We must   ve done both. But we worked a lot, especially during harvest,  in the kitchen.  And they both drove wheat trucks. And when they became     Some more successfully than others. (Laughter)  But I was too young, so after they   d stopped cooking, I continued. I  didn   t drive a wheat truck until in my fifties.  Do you remember the night I backed it into a    (Laughter) Yes, you  remember that night?  It was a storm.  It was a storm. And I     You mean over here on the corner?  Yes. And Daddy had told me,    Don   t go up that, because the bridge is  out.    I got a couple hundred feet up the road and remembered the bridge  was out, so I tried to back up a full load of wheat in a storm, to get to the  intersection to go into town. My back wheel dropped into the ditch and  we lost some wheat that night. You weren   t real happy, as I recall.  (Laughter) Pat was mad at you because you were more concerned about  the wheat than me. (Laughter)  Oh.  Well, George, do you remember your first tractor?  Oh, yes. Absolutely. I do. I don   t remember what year it was, but we  bought it, I remember, from a neighbor who lived up the road a few  33  McFerron  Bellmon  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Bellmon  miles. It was an Allis-Chalmers. I think they called it a Model U, and it  had lugs. No rubber tires, just steel wheels, which the early tractors all,  of course, had steel wheels. But this was quite a day, to have a tractor.  And my father never did learn how to drive a car. He would drive, but he  never learned how. (Laughter) I look back and I can understand. When I  compare his dealings with machinery in a car and compare it with my  experience with computers and smart phones, I would like to apologize  to the old gentleman. (Laughter) Because I can understand now.  That   s funny.  We used to go to Perry. We had a Buick touring car, an older model, of  course, and the four of us, we learned to drive early. Real early. My  mother would take us out in this big pasture over here in the car, and we  would learn to drive. And we were awfully young, but we would go to  Perry and our father would be driving, and we   d come down to the  square down here at Perry. At the southeast corner there was a stop sign,  a light. And he would pull up to that light and he   d reach down and get  the emergency brake. He pulled the emergency brake and it would kill  the motor. He wouldn   t release the clutch at all, just pull it back and  would kill the motor. He   d always say,    I wonder what makes this damn  thing die.    (Laughter) And we were in the back seat and, of course, we  knew all the functions of the clutch and the motor and the transmission  and the differential, but he could never understand that he needed to  release the clutch before he pulled back that brake. That used to bother  us quite a bit.  Dad told us a story of that first tractor, of him, their dad, starting out and  driving the tractor. Then he couldn   t make it stop, so he   d go,    Whoa,  you son of a bitch     (Laughter) That   s in the book.  But one thing learning all that early, when Daddy was in the Marines,  and I can   t quote it exactly, but when it came time to place you where  you   re supposed to be, he ended up being in the tank platoon. And he  recruited all farm boys to be in his platoon with him, because they could  work on equipment. Most of them made it through the war because they  were able to keep their tanks in good shape and keep them running when  they needed to. It was a very intentional thing.  He was a tank commander.  He was a tank commander in the Pacific, and I don   t know, did you  work on tanks during the war?  I was in a tank battalion, yes.  34  Wynne  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  So it was a good, safe place to be, apparently. Not safe, but     Not really. Anyway, Henry and I were both in the tank corps, and us old  farm boys had one advantage. Back in those days, double clutching was  a big thing. It was before the synchromesh transmissions, and we would  take a lot of pride in the way we could shift these trucks. We could do it,  after you get started, without using the clutch. When I got in the Marine  Corps and ended up in a tank outfit, went through the tank training  center out near San Diego, a little crude camp by the name of Jack   s  Farm. I went through the training and we did a lot of tank driving. When  it come time to graduate, went through the line and graduated, and I was  notified that I was being retained there as a driving instructor. I didn   t  ask for it, didn   t want it, but that   s the way it worked out. No big deal,  that   s the way they got their instructors.  Us old farm boys had the advantage. We could drive them tanks. We  could shift gears, you know, which is important. And I   d like to think we  had a little common sense, and we   d know where they   d go and where  they wouldn   t go. Some of these guys couldn   t even drive an  automobile. You put them in a tank, well, you had a problem with them.  But we did have an advantage, and we knew how to double clutch. I was  a driving instructor for only a few months, and I was kind of glad when I  got out of there, but after I got out, I kind of wished I was back.  (Laughter) It was pretty good duty, really.  Well, in the earlier days, it was easier to fix things than it is today, too.  Oh, yes.  Our very last wheat harvest, the year or two before Dad died, our cousin  had worked for him for twenty-five years, and he decided to retire, so we  were having our last wheat harvest. Nowadays, people have these  beautiful combines and they have these semis. Well, our combine was a  1984, and our two trucks that we used were 1970s,    72 and    74. To start  harvest off, one of the trucks lost second gear, so we spent harvest going  from first to third. And the combine we were just praying that we would  get through one last harvest. Just keeping these machines going was a  big job, and luckily our cousin was excellent at fixing machinery and  figuring out what was going on. So finally, the last day, the last harvest,  the auger broke. It wouldn   t shut off. So as you were going along getting  the grain, it was auguring it out onto the ground. So, he had to  disconnect the auger and go and do around cutting the wheat, and then  come in and connect the auger and put it into the truck and then  disconnect it and go around again. So, we were really thankful that we  made it through that last harvest with the trucks and the combine. It  wouldn   t have made it another year. That was the end of it.  35  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  We never had fancy equipment. I can remember a pickup with an upside  down bucket for a seat, which probably doesn   t meet any sort of  standards today.  But we did, some years, hire custom combiners. That was always  interesting.  Although they couldn   t cut for us on Sunday. They could cut for  somebody else, but Daddy wouldn   t let them cut wheat on Sunday.  Because when he tried to cut on Sundays, everything would break down.  So it was a sign from God. (Laughter)  And his mother, probably, not to work on Sundays. That was a serious  thing around here.  Well, let   s talk a little bit about the farm today. What are you calling the  place these days?  What do we call it?  Yes.  The farm. We also have a retreat center operation here that   s called  Turtle Rock Farm: A Center for Sustainability, Spirituality and Healing.  The farm still is a wheat and cattle farm and a young man who lives  nearby does the farming and the ranching, on Dad   s land. George   s is  different. Then the retreat center, Ann and I do that. People come here to  do different types of retreats, programmed retreats, or their own kind of  retreat. We do help them have a chance to be on the prairie and be in  nature and get to know it better and learn how to live more sustainably.  Some of our retreats are workshops about gardening and composting and  bee keeping and cooking in a way that   s good for the earth, learning to  live more simply. We do a lot of things that our grandmother did like  hang the clothes up on the lines and use all the chicken and alpaca poop  for making the garden better. So, we   ve actually gone back to some of  the old ways, although it   s not as hard as it was for them. We do have  the advantage of modern things to help us do some of the things that  were pretty smart back then.  Why the name    Turtle Rock?     Well, Gail was talking about how the ponds curl up, the mud curls up  when it dries. This, you know, millions of years ago, off and on, was an  ocean, and when the ocean mud would curl up, it would petrify. There  36  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Wynne  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Bellmon  Wynne  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  are rocks on this piece of land, only here, actually, not on other parts, not  on the original homestead place, but that are white, and they   re shaped  like, there   s one right there.  Oh, oh. Here you go. That   s what she   s saying.  They   re shaped like a turtle back, and when you turn it over, it   s actually  the curled up, petrified mud flat. There   re often fossils in there. Dad  called those turtle rocks, and when it came time to name the retreat  operation, that   s what we called it, Turtle Rock Farm.  He actually toyed with naming the farm Turtle Rock, but he just never  could bring himself to give it a name. That was kind of fancy, but for  this situation, it works out beautifully.  And what do you see for the next one hundred years?  Well, all of our children will come home and be part of it. (Laughter)  There you go.  Without wind, right?  Well, you know, it   s a good question. There are going to be issues here  with water and productivity.  And the soil.  And the soil. So, we have a lot of work to do, actually. And I think we  should point out, George   s. Could you talk a little bit about your farm,  who runs it and who operates it?  Well, I retired. I don   t know when I did retire. (Laughter)  Shortly after your three-wheeler accident.  But I leased my land out and fortunately I got a very fine tenant and  everything. I have no problems, and he   s doing a good job and I   m very  pleased. What else?  He has wheat and cattle, right?  Oh yes, he does. He farms quite a lot, quite a lot of land, and a good  farmer. I   m in the process of having some good luck and getting some  oil production that I didn   t anticipate. This is going to be a break for me,  I think.  37  Hoerth  Bellmon  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  McFerron  Bellmon  Finchum  Bellmon  McFerron  Bellmon  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  George, another important part of my life was the day that you were  putting the fuel in the tractor, filling the tractor. Would you tell that  story?  I don   t know what you   re     You got burned.  In the late    60s.  With the explosion.  The explosion.  When I got burned? Oh, I see. Well, that happened in 1965, I guess it  was. We burned propane in those days. Didn   t burn diesel fuel. Or, we  didn   t. Some people might have. I was working one night and came in to  fuel up and had hooked the propane hoses on the fuel tank, and  something ignited. It exploded, and I was burnt pretty severely on the  side of my head and arm and clear on down. And unfortunately, the tank  that was burning was parked so close to the pickup that there   s too much  heat, I couldn   t get to the pickup to get away, and had to stay there.  Fortunately a neighbor boy saw the lights from the flame and came over.  He had to come about a mile and a half. Picked me up and took me to  the hospital.  A good neighbor.  Yes, very good. It was Brinker that did that.  You had third degree burns over quite a bit of your body.  Yes, I did. I was in the hospital for three weeks, I think. But I healed up  pretty good. Very good.  You know, I think the question of what happens to the land for the next  hundred years is something that maybe you could, as you talk to all  these families, make information known to other farm families of how  they   re handling it through generations. Probably none of our children  will come back to the farm. At this point it doesn   t look like it. They  may, but     You have no faith. (Laughs)  But I don   t think you can count on it. So, I think it would be interesting  38  Finchum  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  to hear how this is being handled by lots of other families.  There   s a wide variety.  But, you know, I didn   t know I was coming back, and so I think it   s  really hard to know what will happen down the road. I really have  confidence that my kids will come back. I think it   s really great that they  go and in fact, there are people I know that made their kids leave for ten  years, or something, because to just always stay here, and to stay on the  farm, then sometimes they wonder, what have I missed out on, what  could I have experienced? So I think it   s good to leave and then as we  said with ours, you value the land and you value the experience.  You know, my kids did not grow up here. They grew up in the city but  our kids would come back during the summers and help with wheat  harvest, and even though they never lived here, they always considered  this home. When you   ve got that in your family, and even now when we  have people come back for retreats, they say,    Oh, I   d forgotten.    People  our age, they   ve had that experience, and so it   s really nice to reconnect  with that and have a remembrance of their grandparents and those times  that they got to spend on the farms.  My son was born on the farm. We were living in the farmhouse when he  was born, so he spent his first five years here. And the morning that we  were moving, I slept in the upstairs bedroom, and you could see out  across the prairie from that window. Will woke up before I did and  climbed the stairs and crawled into bed with me. I said,    Well, Will, this  is the last morning we   ll look out there and see the prairie.    He said,     Good, Mom     (Laughter) Because he just innately loves trees. He gets  excited about trees. When we moved to Enid, he said,    Mom, these  sidewalks go all the way to Oklahoma City.    (Laughter) He now lives in  L.A., but when he comes home, especially the last couple of years, he   s  now twenty-four, he doesn   t, he used to come home and go back to Enid  or Stillwater and stay with friends. Now they all mostly come here and  spend their time jumping on hay bales and playing in the pond. So I  think that internal knowing really pays off. It   s in the blood, and being in  nature is still central. And Elliot grew up in Enid, but he spent a lot of  weekends here. That   s important, too.  And he was the only kid in his junior high that left early to go to tractor  driving school. He worked on the farm from about eight, seventh or  eighth grade on and until college, probably, and then was back and forth.  It   s home to all of them, and so who knows what will happen. We don   t  know.  And here it is, it   s April, he   s in Denver, and he   s already planted  39  Wynne  Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Wynne  zinnias. (Laughs)  Yes. He didn   t quite get all the lessons down. Yes, he is a huge gardener.  He is a garden-crazed person. So it is in their being, in their genes or in  their life experience, and there   s a lot of connection. But our parents  didn   t expect us   they hoped that we would come back, but they didn   t  expect us to and didn   t force it upon us. I think that   s sort of the legacy I  pass on to my child is having it available if he makes that choice, but  letting it be a choice. So, I think you do kind of have to think about,     What if he doesn   t?    I mean, ultimately my land will be his land. And it  will be his choice.  Is there anything else we need to cover that we haven   t? Any last words  from any of you?  There are a lot of great stories about the farm in the book, so I   m sure we  missed some.  The first part of the book.  It   s laid out chronologically, so you don   t have to read the whole book,  Dad   s book. But there are a lot of great stories about growing up.  Anything that   s not in it that you want to share?  No, I think the parts he left out were politics stuff, not childhood stuff.  Well, have the neighbors changed much or the neighborhood itself?  Well, actually, the first family, when you come on CR-90, across the  road, that falling down brick place is the school, Glenrose School. Then  the first house on the right is an interesting story. That house used to be  a mile south of here, and as we were growing up, we watched them  move that two-story house to the first place after you turn down CR-90.  There were two children in that house, the Livingstons, and one of those  girls is now living back in the old home place.  And they were the only people who had a storm cellar around, and  Daddy hated going down into that cave. He just didn   t like it, and so we  would all pile in the car from the old house and drive up to Highway 15  and sit at that intersection by their house and watch the storm, and just  before the tornado would hit, or whatever, the high winds or whatever  was coming our way, he would throw it in reverse and we   d back up and  pull into their driveway and dive into their storm cellar so that we had to  spend as little time packed in. I don   t know whether he was  claustrophobic or what, but he didn   t like that at all. So we watched a lot  40  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Hoerth  McFerron  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  McFerron  of storms come across sitting in the car up at the highway.  The one night when we went home, their roof was in our yard, a mile  and a half south.  We cut that one a little close.  The other family, the next house was the Brinker family, and they don   t  live there anymore.  And the Raines, they had three boys, and they   re gone. There   s not a  house there.  So yes.  Odenwalds.  Yes. Now, their house burned down when we were kids, and the son   s  actually married to one of the Livingstons, so the Odenwalds are still  around.  And his brother   s still here, Butch.  Yes.  There are some families.  As my grandmother used to say,    There just aren   t as many houses as  there used to be in the country.    Because she could remember,  especially, they lived west of here, more toward the Billings oil field,  and there were a lot more houses when she was a child.  And I don   t know why this came to mind, but that house, the original  house, at some point, we had a porch on the south side, and our dad was  always bringing, we had a live owl that he brought into that porch and  snapping turtles. He was a consummate educator. I mean, you would go  out in the pasture with him and he would explain the different prairie  grasses, or, you know     And wildflowers.  I remember sensitive vine and touching that and how it would curl up.  And he would bring these animals in for us to see, and to know which  ones to avoid. And I remember specifically the owl grabbed onto his  arm, and I   m not even sure how he got it off of his arm, but     41  Wynne  McFerron  Wynne  Hoerth  Wynne  McFerron  Finchum  McFerron  Wynne  Finchum  McFerron  Wynne  I remember, but        and the snapping turtle, you know, showing us the stick and how the  snapping turtle would grab it. I moved back four years before he died,  and so I spent the last four years with him, you know, again, going  around and him teaching us about the farm, which I   m very, very  thankful for because that   s an education that you just can   t get.  He could catch baby jackrabbits. He   d bring them home. I don   t know  how.  Well, they would get stunned with the     Yes, with the plow or something.  So, but he had such an appreciation. I think I hope that we got some of  that from Dad, because he just had such an appreciation of the land and  what lived on it.  And he always wanted to come back, from what I   ve read.  Oh, always.  That   s what kept him sane.  He always came back.  And even after our mom died, he remarried, but it was kind of funny.  She lived in Kingfisher, and she had a farm and she had two sons who  farmed, and of course, he had the farm here. He would go back and  forth, and he still spent a part of every week here. He would never have  considered not being able to come home. And was home until two days  before he died.  Well, and when you ask about the future, right before he died, he died on  a Tuesday morning. On Thursday of that week, he had a meeting in  Oklahoma City that he had arranged, and Cherokee Strip Transport took  him down, to talk about the twentieth anniversary of House Bill 1017,  which was kind of the major legislation passed during his last term. That  anniversary was last October, and they were talking about what they  wanted to do to commemorate that. He said at the end of the meeting,  we learned at his funeral, he looked around and he said,    You know, you  all have to figure out who   s going to carry this on, because I   m not  always going to be around.    He comes back to Enid, had lunch at my  house on Friday, spent the weekend with you, and George took him to  the hospital on Sunday morning, and he died on Tuesday morning. So he  42  McFerron  Finchum  Wynne  was concerned about the future, too, right to the end. And not just  thinking about it, but acting on it. And hopefully that   s another piece of  the legacy that we   ll all get that will sustain the farm.  We   re very grateful to be back here.  Well, we appreciate your time today. It   s been great hearing the stories.  Thank you for asking.  -------  ------- 
