 Nykolaiszyn. With me is Tanya Finchum. Today is  Monday, July 28, 2014, and we   re in Jet, Oklahoma, interviewing Jerry  and Connie LaGrow along with their son Jeffery. This is part of our  Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families Oral History Project. Thank you,  y   all, for joining me today. So happy to be here. Jerry, let   s begin with  you. Can you tell us a little bit about your family and how they came to  Oklahoma?  Well, my granddad came to Oklahoma as far, as I know, from Iowa and  settled in this area, and he bought this farm that we live on in 1908.  Lived here for several years from that time on.  Do you know why he picked this particular piece of land?  No, I really don   t. He bought a piece of land just west of here a mile and  built a house on it, a brick house that still stands. My grandmother, from  what I heard, didn   t like the house, so he sold that place and bought this  one in 1908. Then they remodeled the house that was here.  So was he already married when he moved here?  Yes.  How did he meet your grandmother?  That I really don   t know. I think they were married before   well, I  know they were married before they came down here.  Okay, and his occupation?  My grandfather   s occupation?  5  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Yes.  My grandfather carried the mail and farmed and built barns. My father  did a lot of the farm work while my grandfather did these other things.  My grandfather farmed, too, but my dad did a lot of the farm work while  Granddad carried the mail and built barns.  Well, when your grandfather came here in 1908, outside of the house on  the property, was there anything else on the land at that time?  Yes, the barn. My dad says that red barn was built in 1905. Since, I   ve  built new doors for it and put colored tin on it to try to preserve that  barn. This building behind the house was here. It had a row of windows  all the way around it. We   ve kind of remodeled it. We   ve used it for  several things. When our kids were home, we had a pool table. We still  have a pool table out there. Had a pool table and we got it inside and  redid it. Put a pool table out there and a ping-pong table. Kids hung out  there a lot and played pool and ping-pong. Then my wife for a short  while had a preschool, and she had it out there after the kids left home  and now made it into an office. The pool table   s still there, but the only  time it gets played on is at Christmas time.  We have five grandsons.  This little garage, it was out there, I think, when they bought the farm,  and there was some other buildings. There   s still one other building  besides those three that was here. We   ve used it for several things. It was  originally an old wooden granary, and then when the kids (Jeff and our  daughter, Penny) had hog projects for 4-H and FFA,  Future Farmers of  America  we made it into a farrowing barn. Now it   s just full of junk.  And the windmills.  Windmills, that   s the original windmill. It   s the only three-legged  windmill that I   ve ever seen. That windmill, I think, is the same  windmill that   s in that original picture I got on the wall.  In terms of ponds and water source?  We haven   t got any ponds on this place. We have two wells. We   re not  hooked up to rural water. The original well out there, I have re-cased it  with plastic casing inside the old steel casing, but it   s been there. It was  there from when my grandfather bought the place, that well was. We  have drilled another well. I say    we    did. My grandfather drilled another  well, so we   ve got a water system in both of them. I   ve got it where if  one goes down I can put it all on everything. The way it   s hooked up  6  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  now, the outbuildings and the stock tanks all go from one well, and the  house goes to the other well. If one of them goes down, I   ve got it where  I can hook the whole thing on either well.  Then the cave.  I think my grandfather built that cave after they moved here.  Tell me about it.  We go down in it when we   in the storm cave. It   s a storm cellar. When  we built this house in 1970, we built it so that the cave is under the patio  cover so we can get out the back door and get in the cave. We kind of  positioned the house around the cave.  Would your grandmother do much canning?  Yes, when we moved here after I graduated from college in    59, we  moved back here and started the farm. My folks at that time then bought  a house in Cherokee and moved to Cherokee. The cellar was full of old  rotten, canned fruit. We loaded all that up and hauled it to the Cherokee  city dump, but it was stuff that was probably twenty-, thirty-years-old in  those jars down there. You   d pick up a jar of peaches, and it was nothing  but mush inside of it. She canned a lot, yes. My mother also canned a  lot.  Do you have any idea of the early crops raised on the farm at that time?  Mainly wheat. I can remember my grandfather and dad cutting wheat  when I was just a little kid. It was mainly wheat they raised.  And then livestock?  Livestock, mainly cattle. I don   t think there was any livestock on the  place except horses and cattle. Of course, back in early days they farmed  with the horses, and they had the horses, and they had cattle. I don   t  think there was anything on the place except those draft horses and cattle  until our kids got old enough to have 4-H and FFA projects. Then we  had hogs and sheep around, too, at that time. Then after they graduated  and left home, why, the hogs and sheep went, too. We run a cow herd,  fifty-cow herd.  Chickens, your mother had chickens.  We had, yes, a lot of chickens. We don   t, but my folks and grandparents,  both, had a lot of chickens.  7  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Your grandparents, how many children did they have?  Two: my father and my dad   s sister.  Okay, and were both interested in continuing on with the farm  operation?  Just my dad. My dad   s sister married Jim Lookabaugh. He coached at  Jet for a while, and I think about 1930 they moved to Oklahoma City.  They never did farm.  So tell me a little bit about your father growing up on the farm.  Well, I think my father did most of the farm work when he was young. I  think he kind of got burned out on it. Then he was ready to give it up,  certainly, when I graduated from college. I didn   t have any problem. He  was ready to give the farm work up. He didn   t want to give up being the  boss, but he wanted to give the work up.  How did he meet your mother?  My mother   a mile east of here, there was a country school called the  Chicago Schoolhouse. At that time, I understand that you could teach  with just two years of college, and she had gone over to Northwestern.  Then she got the job of teaching down here at this Chicago Schoolhouse.  She rented a room here from my grandparents, and that   s how she met  my dad.  And your father, where did he go to school when he was growing up?  To that same Chicago school, but he only went through the eighth grade.  Then what did he end up doing?  Well, he was doing the farm work.  Okay, so he was a full-time farmer at that point, helping out on the  family farm?  Yes.  Okay. And then how many children did your father have with your  mother?  One.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Just you.  Just me.  You, you   re it.  I   m it. (Laughter)  Lucky you.  I was the only child.  And where did you grow up?  I grew up a mile west of here on a farm that my granddad had bought.  Then my granddad died in    53 I think...  You were in high school.     or   54,    53 I believe. Then my grandmother lived here not very long  after that until she moved to Cherokee. Then we moved from that farm a  mile west over here. They lived here until I graduated from college.  Then they bought a house in Cherokee, and we moved here.  Well, let   s back up a little bit and talk about your younger days helping  out on the farm. Tell me about some of your chores.  Well, I was driving a tractor probably from the time I was probably in  about the fourth or fifth grade and did a lot of the field work from that  point on. We had a few cows that we milked. A tornado came through in  1947 and blew   I   m talking about the farm a mile west where I grew  up. Tornado came through in    47, blew the barn down, and blew the  windmill down, and dad sold the cows. Then finally we put a windmill  back up by the time that I wanted to get some livestock of my own. Put  the windmill back up. We didn   t have much of a barn left, but at that  point I started out with a cow herd.  We still have that door, don   t we?  Yes.  The door, the door to the barn.  Yes. I started out with a cow herd when I was a freshman in high school  as an FFA project.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Would you ever come and help Grandma and Grandpa on the farm,  their farm?  Well, yes, some, but mainly I started to farm, myself, as an FFA project,  and I cut my first wheat crop in 1952 as an FFA project when I was a  freshman in high school. Then I kept taking over a little more of the land  and a little more of the land all the time, so I was kind of farming but for  myself.  Your hands were full.  Yes, that   s how I sent myself to college. I   d come home on weekends  and run night and day on the tractor, and then Sunday late go back to  Stillwater. That   s how I sent myself to college was farming wheat. We  had a cow herd. Dad took care of our cows while   we got married  between my     It was after my freshman year, 1957.     okay, between my sophomore and junior year. I guess we spent two  years in Stillwater married. We   d come home on Friday as soon as my  classes were over. I   d practically run the tractor night and day trying to  get the farm work done after school started, so I was kind of farming for  myself.  And is that what you kind of intended, the direction you wanted to take  your career?  Yes, when I graduated from college, my major is in accounting, so after  I came back, I got a job with a law firm working income tax for their  clients. That was a winter job, and I did that for forty-eight years. I  haven   t done that   I think 2006 was the last year that I did that. That  provided some extra off-the-farm income and gave me a full-time winter  job.  Would you spend the holidays with Grandma and Grandpa at all?  Would you ever come back?  Oh, yes.  Tell me about holidays.  Well, holidays we would usually   we lived a mile west until my  grandmother moved to Cherokee. I would guess she moved to Cherokee,  I don   t know, shortly after Granddad died in   53 or   54, but before that  1 0  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  we spent most of the holidays over here.  Big family gatherings?  Yes. At that time, Dad   s sister and my cousins, the Lookabaugh boys,  lived in Oklahoma City, and they would usually come up on holidays.  Big family gatherings, yes.  Any food that you remember that you really enjoyed?  Rhubarb pie.  Really?(Laughter)  Yes. Grandma baked rhubarb pie, and my wife won   t bake rhubarb pies.  (Laughter)  Connie, you won   t make him a pie?  No, not rhubarb  (Laughter) I   ll make him a cherry or an apple pie, or a  soft pie, cream pie.  But Grandma made rhubarb pies.  Since y   all were actively farming, was it a time that you would take off,  or would you still have to farm and tend to everything or     You mean for the holidays?  Yes.  Well, cattle still had to be taken care of, and usually we didn   t observe  many holidays in the summertime. Thanksgiving and Christmas in the  winter when we weren   t so busy.  And your high school was in Jet?  Yes. I went to it and graduated from Jet.  And how would you get to school?  How would I get to school? I rode the big yellow bus until I was in high  school and then played football, and played football all four years when  I was in  high school . The first year, for twenty-seven cents, I could  ride the Trailways bus from Jet, and he   d let me off at home. It cost me  twenty-seven cents to ride. I think it was called Trailways, the bus that  1 1  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  would get on at Porgies Caf  , and it just happened to come through  about the time football practice was over. I did that when I was a  freshman. Then before my sophomore year, and I wasn   t quite sixteen  yet, but I bought a car and took a chance and drove it to school and  drove it home. Never did get caught.  And we have a car in the garage like his first car.  Yes, I   ve got a car just like my first car, a 1950 Ford Crestliner. If I  happened to miss the bus, I   d hitchhike home. I never did have any  trouble getting a ride if I missed the bus with a letterman   s jacket on and  a bunch of books in my hand. The first car that came by would stop and  pick me up.  Well, after high school were you encouraged to go to college?  Yes, there wasn   t any question about it that that   s where I was going to  go.  And how did you choose Oklahoma A M?  Well, how did I choose that? I guess I just knew that   s where I wanted to  go.  No, you wanted to go out to Panhandle A M.  Well, I got a football scholarship at Panhandle A M, but I turned that  down. I was offered a scholarship at Panhandle A M, and I was offered  one at Wichita State University, but I didn   t want to go to either one of  those places, really. The coach and I went down to, well, it was  Oklahoma A M at that time and talked to the coach down there, but  they wouldn   t give me a scholarship. I went down there anyway. Didn   t  play football then.  How did you choose your major?  I like figures, and I like to work with figures. I took the basic course in  accounting, and I liked it, so I majored in accounting.  So tell me how you met Connie.  Well, we were high school sweethearts and started dating probably about  my junior year.  It was between my freshman and sophomore.  1 2  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Something like that.  Well, at what point did your grandfather   s farm come into your hands?  You mean when did I start to farm it, or when did I own it?  Both.  Well, I started to farm it when I was a freshman in high school, some of  it     Okay.     and didn   t own it until we built this house here in 1970. At that time,  my grandfather was dead, and my father owned this farm. He lived in  Cherokee at that time. We were still living here in the original house,  and in 1970 my father said that he would give us the forty acres here that  the house sits on if I   d build a house and stay out on the farm. So he  gave us forty acres back then, and we inherited the rest of this place  when my mother died.  And what year would that be?  She died in 2006.  Okay.  She was ninety-seven.  So from the time you started farming this land, what changes did you  make in terms of its operation, what you were growing?  Well, still grow wheat and grow some alfalfa. Mainly a wheat farmer.  We have added two farms to what we inherited. We bought Connie   s  brother and sister out on the farm that she grew up on, so we own it.  Then we bought another farm down to the northeast here, and then I  inherited this farm and the one that I grew up on. Of course, my sister  got some of   not my sister. I didn   t have a sister. My dad   s sister  inherited some of my grandfather   s land. That belongs to my cousins  now, and I still farm it. My cousins, one of them lives in Midland,  Texas, and the other cousin that I farm for, he is deceased, and it   s in a  trust. I still farm the ground that my grandfolks had that my dad   s sister  got.  So let   s talk about how farming has changed through the years. You   ve  probably seen lots of changes from the time you were younger to today.  1 3  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Yes, but I   m old and set in my ways, and I don   t like change I guess. I  haven   t changed as much as a lot of farmers have. At least I don   t farm  with horses, though. (Laughter) I mean, back when we started to farm,  nobody even heard of fertilizer. That   s one change.  Terraces.  Terraces is another change, terraces and waterways. That   s some of the  changes.  Cab tractors and combines.  Yes, cabs on the tractors and combines. Jeff, with the first cab we put on  a combine, he and the hired hand got in a fight over who was going to  drive the combine with the cab on it because only one of them had a cab.  Jeff gave him an understanding: It was his dad   s, and he would be on the  one with the cab.  He won the fight. (Laughter)  I   m sure cost of equipment has also changed through the years.  A whole bunch, yes. (Laughter) The only brand new tractor I ever  owned is a 1958 John Deere 720, and if I remember right, it cost a little  over  3,500. Now you can   t buy a lawn mower for  3,500.  So how do you cope with the changes in the economics today? Are you  still running the older tractors or     Yes, my tractors are in the   90s. One   s a   91, and one   s a    92 model  tractor.  Being an accountant, we didn   t buy anything if we couldn   t pay for it.  That   s kind of been our   we   ve been in debt twice in our life. The first  farm we added, went in debt to buy it. Got it paid off. Went in debt to  build this house a little bit. Got it paid. Sold a bunch of cattle the next  year, got it paid off. When the house was a year old, it was paid off. My  theory has always been if you can   t pay for it, you haven   t got any  business buying it. The last pickup I bought, a 2011 pickup, the dealer  made me finance some it to get the rebates. You couldn   t if you didn   t  finance it. I told him, I said,    My theory has always been if you can   t  pay for it, you haven   t got any business buying it.    He said,    I   m glad  that not many of my customers feel that way.    We had it paid for. We  1 4  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  made one payment on it and then paid it off. That way we got our rebate.  Has the government programs helped through the years?  Yes. Sometimes I get irritated at the restrictions that are in it, but the  money helped.  And how do you keep up with all the programs out there?  Well, now the way you keep up with what   s going on, I guess, is through  the emails that they send out. I like a lot better to get the updates in the  mail, but that doesn   t happen anymore. You have to get on the computer.  That   s another change, I guess, is computers.  Being an accountant, you probably have an eye on the books?  Yes. I can get in the computer, and I can tell you. I   ve got every check  that was written and every deposit that was written and all categorized  out.  How has bookkeeping changed through the years?  Well, I remember in college in the accounting course they taught us how  to run those little machines that had those little rectangle cards in them  full of little rectangle holes. Of course, that was obsolete by the time I  got out of college, practically. That has certainly changed.  How would your father keep track of farm expenses?  Probably didn   t very well. It was probably my mother that did most of  that.  And then today it   s all computerized?  It   s all computerized. Everything   s in the computer. The one computer  that I had up to date   I   ve got our records in two computers, and the one  computer that   s clear up to date, I think it crashed day before yesterday.  I can   t get anything but a black screen, so I   m hoping that it can be  recovered. We called a computer guy, but he hasn   t showed up yet.  Has there ever been times where the farm has not turned a profit?  Yes, in 1981 we got completely hailed out. I think I cut two truckloads  of wheat off of all the farms. It didn   t turn a profit last year. Probably  won   t turn a profit on this harvest this year. It   s been the poorest harvest  this year since 1981, and 1981 was because of a severe hailstorm.  1 5  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  And what are the causes for this year?  Dry weather. No rain.  Have you seen this type of weather in the past?  Yes, but this is about the worst that we saw last winter and spring.  Course we   re wet now, but that didn   t do the wheat crop any good.  And how many acres are you farming today?  Eleven hundred and twenty.  Okay, and the original centennial farm was how many acres?  Eighty. We own 680, and then my cousins own the difference between  1,120 and 680. We own 680.  So take me through a typical day on the farm.  A typical day is to   I   m not an early riser. I get outside by a little after  seven unless I   m baling hay. I don   t like those mornings that I have to  get up in the middle of the night and bale hay. Get up about seven and  go out, and I usually have the tractor serviced up and make a few rounds  before the hired hand ever gets here. Then I usually take care of the  cattle and do the odd things if he   s working. He hasn   t worked now for  about three weeks, so I have to do it all.  So you have one outside hired hand?  Yes, part time. Supposed to work pretty well full-time all summer. He   s  supposed to be back tomorrow. I hope he gets back tomorrow.  (Laughter)  How late do you go at night, typically?  It depends on what we   re doing. If we   re in harvest, we try to get in the  house by eleven. If we   re just working ground, about dark.  Have you instituted any new practices, any type of hybrid seed?  Well, we try to replace seed every once in a while. We bought seed a  year ago, some new seed. No, it   s two years ago, bought some new seed.  The year before that I bought some new seed to update the varieties.  1 6  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jeff  He   s not much for change. (Laughter)  I   m kind of set in my ways. One year I decided that I like that old wheat  the best. There was a still a neighbor   back then, you could still buy  wheat from a neighbor. You can   t do it anymore. He had some old  Triumph wheat, and I thought,    I   m going to get some of that and sow  it.    I sowed that stuff, and it got up about waist high and all went down  flat on the ground. It took us two days with two combines to cut one  quarter. That cured me of going back and getting the old seed.  (Laughter)  How have your neighbors changed through the years?  The neighbors?  Yes.  There   s a lot of no-till farming, and I don   t no-till anything. I don   t  really like to have neighbors that no-till because we get a hard rain, all  that crop residue washes down. You get water from above, and all that  straw and crop residue that runs off usually deposits. Then you have to  burn those piles of straw and stuff, and it takes out fences. Then the  spraying is hard on the trees along the edges of the field.  The aerial spraying.  The drip. The aerial spraying has killed a lot of our trees, neighbors     aerial spraying in pastures. I don   t like to see all the dead in those trees.  That   s the main change in neighbors farming is the no-till.  Yes. Have you considered it?  No.  I had to ask. I know you   re not a big on change. (Laughter)  Well, it takes a lot new equipment, too.  You have to have a no-till drill, and unless you hire all the spraying  done, you have to have a big spray rig. I just don   t like to mess with the  chemicals.  Jeff?  Yes.  1 7  Nykolaiszyn  Jeff  Nykolaiszyn  Jeff  Jerry  Jeff  Did you grow up on the farm?  Yes, I did.  So tell me a little bit about your early life growing up on the farm?  Well, it was a great upbringing. I mean, you can always tell when  someone   s grown up on a farm because they understand responsibility  and know what needs to be done and takes it seriously. I was able to  have, in the 4-H and the FFA, was able to have hog projects and had  steers and sheep. It was a responsibility that you needed to make sure  you had time to take care of that plus do all the fun stuff that you want to  do as a young kid. Dad   s right. We would get up   I think when I was at  home we got up earlier than seven o   clock, (laughter) and we started  before then. We would work until dark, and dark was nine, nine thirty in  the summertime.  We did not have air conditioned cabs. It was nothing to come in in the  evening and just be covered with dirt. You would sit on those tractors,  and that hot air coming off the radiator would just blow right back in  your face. The combines, you   d always want to head south because then  the chaff didn   t come over the top of the combine and go down the back  of your neck. I remember one summer we had a hired hand that helped  us. He started cutting wheat at an angle, and it made Dad mad. He said,     What are you doing cutting at an angle?    He says,    Because that chaff  either goes off at an angle this way or goes off at an angle this way. I   m  trying to keep it out of the back       He says,    No  We go round and  around.    I   ll never forget that.  I didn   t like change. (Laughter)  Dad did not like change. (Laughs) Then there was one summer when I  went to, my first year I went to NWOSU  Northwestern Oklahoma State  University  and played football over there. I had a custom hay hauling  business and also tried to help on the farm. I   ll never forget that the guys  that was helping me on the hay crew also helped in harvest. I remember  Dad coming up to me, and we were right outside here because we were  finishing up. Dad came to me and says,    Thank God harvest is over  because these guys   .    Well, one of the guys was driving a tractor, and  it caught on fire, and he sat there and watched it burn. He got outside of  the tractor and sat there and watched it burn. I don   t know. There was  several. Well, that same summer the same guy drove the other tractor  until it ran out of water and locked the engine up on it. It was one of  those deals that cost him a lot of money for me to have that custom hay  hauling crew. (Laughter)  1 8  Finchum  Jeff  Finchum  Jeff  I went to Oklahoma State University. In fact, I didn   t know there was  another university in the state of Oklahoma from a standpoint of if  you   re going to go to a big college, you go to OSU. Didn   t know that  thing down in Norman existed. My wife and I both graduated from  there. If we could have figured a way out to make a living, we would  have stayed there and lived because it was just a wonderful place to be. I  guess it was the small city but had big town amenities which we really  liked. The farm was a great place to grow up. It was. My oldest boy,  (he   s going to be thirty this year) he enjoyed coming up and helping on  the farm. Then I   ve got twin boys, and they could care less.  What was your major at OSU?  Agriculture.  You planned to farm or     No, when I graduated, my wife   s dad was in the horse business, so we  trained horses and quarter horses. After that, I got in the golf business  and was a greens superintendent. As Dad always said, he says that I was  a glorified farmer with miniature equipment. He always said,    You   re  lucky because you don   t have to produce a crop.    I said,    No, that   s  wrong. I produce a crop every day.    I always said you never knew what  the next day brought because if you showed up and you had a green or  two dead, you were probably looking for another job. I was in the golf  business as a greens superintendent for seventeen years, and my success  in that business came from my farming background.  I understood what needed to be done, and working on equipment, taking  care of equipment, spraying, fertilizing, that sort of thing, it was all  second nature. The first golf course that I worked on I worked as a   I  had a landscaping company, and we worked as a contractor. They asked  us to go and if we would seed the green. I said,    Sure, we   ll seed the  green.    We seeded that green, and we had it up in seven days and was  mowing it in ten. That   s when the general partner came to me and asked  me if I wanted to be their greens superintendent. I said,    Listen, I don   t  know anything about golf. The only thing I know how to do is grow  grass.    He says,    That   s what we need. We need somebody that knows  how to grow grass and maintain it and take care of it.     I   ll never forget, it was Thanksgiving, and my sister lived in Houston at  the time. Still lives in Houston. We were going down there for  Thanksgiving, and we were riding down with my mom and dad, my wife  and I and son. Dad says,    You don   t know anything about golf. You  have got over your head.    By the time I got back he had convinced me  that I was going the wrong direction, that I did not know anything about  1 9  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  golf. I called the general partner and told him that I was bringing the  company truck back. I left the keys in it, and I was done. The general  partner said,    You   re going to go right back to that maintenance barn.  You   re going to meet me and pick your keys up and your truck because  I   m not going to take no for an answer.    I owe a lot to that gentleman for  giving me the opportunity because it was a great career for seventeen  years. Now I   m in the house building business, or the construction  business.  Jerry, would you have a lot of interactions with extension agents?  Some, not a whole lot. Of course, now, to buy any chemicals you have  to have the chemical license, and I   ve got that through extension  education. Went to a class on it through the extension. I   ve had soil tests  run through the extension, and hay tested for nitrates through the  extension, so used them some.  Were your mother or your grandmother a member of a homemaker  club?  No. My mother was too busy dressing chickens and canning stuff and  helping Dad to have time for that.  But her church was very important.  Yes, her church was. Her church was her thing away from the farm.  Connie?  Yes?  You   ve been involved with extension quite a bit. Why don   t you tell me a  little bit about that?  Well, my introduction to it was I joined 4-H when I was in the sixth  grade. It was just a continuation of 4-H for me, in a way, because I was a  4-H member through high school. When we moved back to the farm,  one of the first things I did was join an OHCE  Oklahoma Home and  Community Education  group. I can remember the first meeting I went  to. The lesson was on how to iron a man a shirt. (Laughs) I never will  forget that. I have served on the state level as chaplain and culture  enrichment. I can   t remember what else, but it   s been a big part of my  life. I like the competition at the fairs, and I appreciate all the   I feel  like it   s been a continuing education for me.  I only got two years of college, which was nobody   s fault but my own.  2 0  Finchum  Connie  Finchum  Connie  Jeff  Connie  Finchum  Connie  I   ve enjoyed the lessons. I   ve gained a lot of knowledge from them. I  know one of the things that I can remember was we had a lesson on  accidents. Got a telephone call from my niece. I had put on some grease  to heat, and I got so interested in the telephone call I forgot about the  grease on the stove. I turned around, and I had a fire. I remembered from  one of the lessons to smother it, and I found the lid. I had a hard time  trying to find the lid that fit the skillet, but I finally did. I got it put out,  or I   d have had a real big mess.  I went to school at OSU, and one of the classes I took was in home and  interior design. I drew the house plans for our house, and so that paid for  my whole education that I got at OSU. (Laughter) Jerry and I have been  married for fifty-seven years. It   s not all been easy, but we made it. We  raised two kids we   re very proud of. Wished we could have seen the  growth of our five grandsons more, but very proud of them and the lives  that they   re leading.  In the homemaker business, did you quilt?  Yes. The last two years, I have had enough quilts to give each one of the  grandsons a quilt. The first Christmas, (I never will forget) we put all the  numbers in hat, and the boys drew them out. The first one got his choice,  and the second one, and so on. Two of the boys got in an argument over  which quilt they were getting. He looked at the other one, and he said,     Don   t be surprised if you don   t find your tires slit in the morning.     (Laughter) In fact, I   m working on two quilts right now for our kids that  are OSU quilts. I did them stack-and-whack. I don   t know if you   re  acquainted with that or not. I   ll have to go get it and show it to you in a  little bit. Both of my grandmothers, my Grandmother Richardson and  my Grandmother Shaklee, both were quilters. It   s kind of followed along  in the family. My daughter probably makes more than I do.  Did you sew the children   s clothes when they were younger?  Yes, in fact, my daughter-in-law still makes fun of one of the suits I  made for Jeffery. (Laughs). One of his eighth grade   wasn   t it eighth  grade?  Eighth grade graduation suit.  Yes, I made for him. We   ve got a picture of him in a black velvet coat  that I tailored for him. I learned a lot through 4-H.  Those skills you don   t learn anymore.  No, I know they don   t. In fact, I   m teaching our little neighbor girl to  2 1  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  sew. She went on vacation, so we haven   t been able to do very much  lately, but she   ll come back over. I worked with 4-H kids through meat  identification and sewing and what have you. Since I didn   t get to see  my grandkids grow up very much, I go to the school twice a week  during the school term and listen to the first graders do a one-on-one,  and they read to me. I really enjoy that. I think one of the cutest stories  was a little boy came in, (I like to talk) (laughs) and he had an OSU shirt  on. I said,    Oh  You   re my kind of man. I   m a Cowboy fan, too.    I said,     When I went to school there, it was called Oklahoma A M College.     He kind of looked me over, and he said,    Yes, you look old.    (Laughter)  The teacher sends in words for me, and I go through the words with  them. Then they usually bring in a book, and each one of them read to  me. It   s just a one-on-one, and I   ve really enjoyed it.  When did electricity come to the farm?  Nineteen forty-three.  And were there any, at that point, big purchases made?  Light bulbs. (Laughter) Well, the first thing we got, if I remember right,  was a refrigerator. We probably had electricity almost a year before we  got a refrigerator. We got electricity just a few days before Christmas in  1943. On the Christmas tree we had one string of lights that had seven  lights on it. I can still remember that. We thought that was just really  great.  Did you listen to the radio as a family?  Yes, always listened to the Grand Ole Opry on Saturday nights, and Dad  would always make sure the battery was charged up in the radio. That  was before the electricity, before Saturday night. Now my grandfolks  had electricity over here earlier. They had a carbide system. Then they  had some kind of an old generator that was out in that building out there,  and that old house had what you call knob and spool wiring in it. They  had electricity over here a little bit before we did. My dad was kind of  like I   he wasn   t much for change. This electricity was something new,  and the line was by there, oh, I don   t know, two, three, four years before  we hooked onto it.  In fact, the little house back behind, when we moved here, it was divided  into two rooms, and the back room still had a wood cooking stove in it.  We kind of felt sorry we let it go, but at the time.     At the time, it was junk. Now it   s an antique.  2 2  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  And at what point did the house over here have indoor plumbing?  Nineteen fifty-two.  Okay, and so it had an outhouse?  Yes.  One-seater? Two-seater? (Laughter)  Two-seater. My grandfolks put that in over here not very long before  Granddad died.  The bathroom had an outside door. It didn   t have a window, but it had  an outside door.  So of the old structures, what still exists on the property today?  The red barn and this building behind the house and that little garage  over to the south of the house, and there   s one granary. We don   t use it  for a granary anymore. It was the kids    hog barn. We changed it into  that. There   s that and the windmill and then the cellar that my Granddad  built are what   s left of the buildings that were on the farm.  In the early days, what did they use for fencing?  For fencing?  Fence.  Well, of course there wasn   t electric fence, but my Granddad eventually  took up all the   a lot of it was the old woven wire fences, and he took  up a lot of that, I can remember. Now they only thing we really have  permanent fences around are the grass pastures.  What did you use for posts?  Used bodark, and I hated those things because you couldn   t drive a  staple in them. They were hard. And old hedge tree posts.  He grew those?  Yes, cut them out of hedge trees. I was sure glad to get rid of them.  They   d last forever, though, was the problem because they were hard.  You couldn   t drive a staple in them.  2 3  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  And where would you take your product to market?  Jet.  Grain elevators in Jet?  Yes. Jet, we hauled wheat to Jet, and my granddad used to haul wheat to  Yewed, which that   s not in existence anymore as far as the elevator. I  think the old elevator   s maybe still standing there, but they don   t buy  wheat or anything anymore.  But he didn   t sell it to the co-op.  No, hauled it to Jet. Fuquay  Grain  had an elevator there, and so hauled  some of it there to Jet, which that elevator   s not there anymore. The co-op  elevator, of course, is the only elevator there now.  And was there a train that came close to the property or across it or     If the train went across the Salt Plains up here, the nearest train track to  our property would have been probably, as the crow flies, a mile and  half, two miles.  Any hobos come through?  Yes, a lot of hobos. I know when I was a kid, my mother never would let  them come in the house, but she   d fix them a sandwich, and they could  sit on the front porch and eat it. I can still remember it. I was probably  five years old, and it was during the war when, of course, you couldn   t  buy a car. A guy came in. I   m talking about when I was a kid. We lived  a mile west on that farm. That guy came in and said he was thirsty. He  wanted a drink of water. Of course, he had to pump it, the water.  Pumped him a drink of water. Then he said he had a flat tire, and he  wanted to borrow a jack. Dad was out in the field, and Mom and I went  down to the   at that time, we had practically a new car. We had a 1940  Ford. Mom was leaned over the trunk trying to get the jack out of the  trunk, and he pulled a gun out and said,    Never mind the jack. I   ll take  the car.     I guess I was jumping up and down and screaming. Cars were driving by  the highway, and he finally got scared. He said,    If you don   t tell  anybody, I   ll just leave.    He put his gun up and left. Mom went out in  the field and called Dad in, and they called the sheriff. The sheriff came  out and looked around and decided he was gone. She said she wasn   t  going to give him the keys. She was going to throw them out in the  weeds before she was going to give him the keys. (Laughter) He kept  2 4  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  pointing that gun at us, and I can remember it. I was scared to death. The  hobos would come by, too, but he wasn   t a hobo. He was just a thief, I  guess.  Would there be traveling salesmen come through, like the Raleigh man  or Watkins or whatever there was in Oklahoma?  Well, I don   t remember the Raleigh man. When I was a kid, before we  got electricity, we had an old icebox that you put a big fifty-pound cube  of ice in the top of it. The ice man would come by and deliver the ice,  and it was a fifty-pound cube, usually about yeigh big, that   d fit in the  top of that. If you wanted something real cold, you   d lay it on the ice up  in top. The rest of the stuff went down below which was cool from the  block of ice up above. I remember the ice man coming around. That   s  about the only person I can remember coming around.  And if you wanted ice cream?  If you wanted ice cream, until we got electric refrigerator we didn   t have  ice cream except when you go to town.  And then your mother made it in an ice tray.  After we got that first refrigerator   it was a Montgomery Ward  refrigerator. It came in on a freight train. Ordered it out of the  Montgomery Ward catalog. Came in on the freight train in Cherokee. At  that time, Dad had a Model T trailer made out of a Model T frame. I can  remember we went to town and got that icebox at the depot in Cherokee  and put it in that Model T trailer and pulled it with the car and brought it  home.  You live really close to the Great Salt Plains?  Yes.  Growing up, did you ever go over there?  Oh, yes, I   d go up there and ride my bicycle around on the plains all the  time.  And have you noticed an impact on the environment around your house  with different birds or     Well, different birds? The seagulls used to come in here years ago, and  they   d follow the tractor. You   d see them swoop down and pick up the  bugs that you were turning up and so forth. Now I haven   t seen a seagull  2 5  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  for years. There are these egrets or whatever you call them that follow  the tractor now, but I don   t know what happened to the seagulls. I   ve  noticed that change.  Well, looking into the future, what do you hope to see happen in the next  hundred years to the farm?  Next hundred years?  Yes.  Well, that   d be way beyond my time. (Laughter) I don   t know. I   ve told  Jeff, I   ve said,    I   ll quit today, and you can take over tomorrow.    That  hasn   t happened, and I don   t see it happening, I guess. I don   t know  what they   ll do with it when I can   t do it anymore.  What do you hope happens to it?  I hope they at least   when it   s theirs they can do with it what they want  to. What I   d hope would happen is one of them would come and live and  farm it. (Laughs)  When do you anticipate to retire, yourself?  Connie anticipates right now. (Laughter) As long as I can keep the hired  hand that I   ve got and I   m able to get around, I intend to farm. When I  can   t get around or I lose my hired hand and can   t find another one   .  Right now he   s working for a friend that   s a carpenter that needed some  help on a job, and he   s been gone for about three weeks. Like I say, he   s  supposed to be back tomorrow if they get that job done. He   s a good  hired hand. He   s worked for me off and on for years. I don   t know how  old he is. He   s probably in his early thirties.  Probably.  He knows how to do everything. I mean, I can just turn him loose, and  he could do whatever needs to be done. As long as I can keep him, I can  handle it, I think, but I   d still quit tomorrow. (Laughter)  Any memories that just really stick out in your mind from being on the  farm?  Well, I can remember that we had a  John Deere  4020 tractor. I   m  talking about when Jeff was probably in the grade schools yet. We had a  G705 Moline Tractor. Everybody at that time was beginning to kind of  get cabs on tractors. Something happened to the Moline. Jeff said,  2 6  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jeff     When are we going to get a tractor with a cab?    I said,    When one of  these blows up.    Well, the M M  Minneapolis Moline  Tractor, the  bottom broke out, and a push rod fell down and wrapped around the  crankshaft, made a terrible noise. Jeff was very hopeful and said,    Did it  blow up?    He was hoping that we would get a tractor with a cab. It  wasn   t long after that until we put cabs on the tractors that we had but  not the Moline. We got rid of it.  I thought you was going to tell about the tractor pull between him and     Oh, yes. (Laughs) My dad, he   d usually come out and harvest, and he  had an old  Model  Z M M, which wasn   t a very big tractor. Jeff   s job,  when he was just a little kid, was to take   at that time we had an 80  John Deere, I believe, and it was a lot bigger than the Z M M. It was  muddy that harvest, and his job, Jeff   s job (he was probably back in  grade school) was when the combine got stuck was to bring the tractor  and pull us out. I looked up, and there they had tied the two tractors  together with a chain. Jeff was on the John Deere, and Dad was on that  little Z M M, and Jeff was dragging that Z M M backwards. My dad  said,    You jumped and got the clutch in before I had a chance to get my  clutch in.    (Laughter)  All right, Jeff, you   re up.  Oh, there was several. I guess probably the one thing that I remember,  (and it   s just really a memory) I had gotten in trouble, and I was dating  my wife. I stayed in trouble most of my life. I was dating my wife, and it  was my birthday, and I was grounded. I wasn   t able to go. Mom went  and picked my wife up, brought her over. I remember her sitting on the  pickup, and I was unloading hog feed into the self-feeder. It was dark,  and we had the cargo light on in the pickup.  We   d had the feed ground at the Jet co-op, and then we   d bring it back  and unload it. I get it all scooped out, and I   m getting the broom out and  starting to sweep it off the inside of the bed and clean it all up. My wife,  Alana, she looks at me and she says,    What are you doing?    She says,     You can just go down the road at fifty mile an hour, and it   ll all blow  out.    (Laughs) I said,    No, I   ll get in trouble. I   m already in trouble. You  sweep it out, you get every bit, and you put it in there. You put it in the  self-feeder. You don   t let it go to waste.     I guess to that point was, I   ll never forget, as I started these projects that  was FFA and 4-H, (this was before computers) we had spreadsheets that  were this long and this tall. We had everything. Dad says,    You need  write down everything you spent, everything you make.    We had those  spreadsheets, and I   ll never forget those long spreadsheets that we had  2 7  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Jerry  Connie  with everything. We never wasted anything. Everything was always     she just could not believe it that we wouldn   t go down the road and let it  blow out because it wasn   t much, probably maybe a scoopful. No, we  had to get it all.  All right, Connie.  Well, I was trying to think of something about Penny, maybe a couple of  things. One of them was growing up on the farm. Jerry took the kids a  lot with him. I remember they were in, I think, a red pickup, and they  were going down the road. Penny always loved the cats. I remember that  Jeff asked her,    Have you got a boy or a girl cat?    Penny picks up the  tail and says it was one or the other. Jerry said,    I know she don   t know  what she   s looking for.    (Laughter) You remember that, too?  Yes.  And then the other thing is   Penny, I guess, is pretty well kind of bossy.  Jeff thought so, anyway. There   s two years    difference in them, and  when she went off to school, she started to school when she was in the  first grade, and he went to kindergarten. He came in and said,    Mama,  how do I play it? What do I play?    because she   d always made the rules.  One time, it was wheat sowing time. Jerry said,    I   m going to need some  help moving,    because he was working down on the far half section  here. I kept listening. It was warm, and the door was open, and I kept  listening for him. Pretty soon I heard the tractor coming. I thought,     Well, he didn   t come and get me to help him move. Wonder how  come.    Of course, Jeff was with him. We have a pretty steep driveway  there. I saw the pickup drive up the driveway, and then all of a sudden it  went rolling backwards. Jeff was, he wasn   t even in school yet. Jerry had  put him in the pickup and put it in low gear, and he let him drive up  from the mile line, up here. He couldn   t reach the foot pedals, so he  didn   t have enough gas to get up the hill, so it died on him and rolled  back. (Laughs)  Another time Jerry came in, and Jeff said,    Mama, I drove the tractor all  by myself.    I said,    Yes, I know, Jeff,    because I knew when he went  with Jerry, he   d put him between his legs and let him drive the tractor.  He said,    Mother, I did. I drove the tractor all by myself.    I said,    Yes,  Jeff, I know.    He said,    Mama, Daddy was on the other tractor, and I  was by myself.    I thought,    Oh my gosh.    But, you know, on the farm  the kids do things because they watch and they observe. Penny did the  cooking during harvest, and I hauled wheat. It was wonderful place to  raise our kids, and I wouldn   t have had it any other way.  2 8  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Finchum  Connie  Jeff  Connie  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Connie  Jeff  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Team effort.  Yes. As I said, we   ve been married for fifty-seven years, and I   m real  proud of that.  What   s your favorite time on the farm, you know, season-wise or time of  day?  Christmas. Christmas, when the kids all come home, and we   ve got our  traditions. One of the things that they do is Jeff   s wife and Penny started  having a treasure hunt. When they boys were small, they   no, it was  more like a scavenger hunt     Scavenger hunt, yes.     scavenger hunt. Well, they   d just go to different places here in the  house, and then finally they ventured outside. Now that they   re grown,  we send them to Cherokee, we send them to Jet, to the cemeteries. They  have a wonderful time. Even though his son   s the oldest, thirty years old,  they still want that scavenger hunt. Then a new tradition that they   ve just  started the last few years is Penny bakes sugar cookies and gets all this  frosting, and they decorate cookies. Grandpa can   t watch. He has to  come in and be the judge. (Laughter) Those are some of the things.  We   ve got a great-grandson, too, we   re real proud of. We just can   t get a  girl. (Laughter) I like to sew, and I said I   d just have to put the ruffles on  the curtains because I couldn   t get a granddaughter. (Laughter)  Well, is there anything else any one of you would like to add before we  sign off for today?  I guess not.  I might tell you that Jerry, like he said, he likes numbers, and I can  remember going over to the Mabee Center at Oral Roberts University.  We hadn   t been there very long until he told me how many ceiling tiles  there was in the building. I heard that   s kind of a phobia, that people  count things, and Jerry does.  You can   t go into any arena anywhere with him that he hasn   t figured  out how many seats are in it because he   s already calculated and  estimated how many. It   s amazing.  Well, all you got to do is count how many is in a row and then count the  rows and multiply it out. (Laughter)  You picked a good career.  2 9  Jeff  Connie  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Finchum  Jerry  Jeff  Connie  Jeff  Nykolaiszyn  Yes, he did. He did.  But he drove back and forth to Alva for almost forty-eight years. He  started out in Cherokee. Then the lawyer that he worked for said he was  going to move his practice to Alva and he would pay his mileage if he  would go with him, and so he did. He spent the rest of the time for a law  firm called Morford and Benson, which were very good to us, very  good.  Do you have a ballpark figure on how many trips around the field  you   ve made in your lifetime?  (Laughs) I would have no idea.  Okay.  Like I say, I put out my first wheat crop in the fall of    51 and harvested  it in    52.  You figure on it tonight and let us know. (Laughter)  Okay.  One thing I can tell that he has passed on to both myself and my oldest  boy is you don   t have to buy new. My oldest boy   s in the construction  business, too, and we   ll go find a really good deal on a piece of  equipment. It may need some work on it, but we both are very  mechanically oriented and understand it and get it, so we   re able to buy  used and fix it up where it   s in very good shape. Well, he was talking  about that M M tractor that broke down. He really broke my heart  because we pulled it in the shop, and we started working on it ourselves.  I was planning on having that tractor with a cab on it, but we were  getting ready to fix it. We did. We would fix   you know, a lot of  farmers will take their combines to the dealership and have them prep it  for harvest. No, not us. We did it right here.  Didn   t you and Daddy completely tear down a little Ford tractor?  Oh, yes, we took it totally down and redid it. We did our own welding  and a lot of our own mechanic work and that sort of thing. It has proven  very valuable in my career and in my son   s career, too. The twins, one of  them   s pre-med, and the other one is an accounting major and wants to  go to OU and get a law degree. I can   t believe I just said that. (Laughter)  You got to do what you got to do.  3 0  Jeff  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Finchum  Connie  Finchum  Jerry  Connie  Finchum  Well, the best part about it is he   s also talking about Oklahoma City  University, which I am very pleased. That would be okay, too.  Anything else?  Jerry   s mother was very influential on his life, very much so, on all of  our lives, really. She lived to be ninety     Seven.  Ninety-seven.  Yes.  She did without a lot in order for us to have what we have.  Her church was about all the social life she really ever had.  Yes.  Then her church ran a second-hand store in Cherokee, and that was the  highlight of her life when it was her time to work in it.  I think the funniest story on it was   Jerry wore a suit and tie seven days  a week, with church, too. He gathered up a bunch of his ties one day and  took them up to the thrift shop. He always stopped when he came back  from Alva, working. He stopped, and she said,    You know, somebody  brought in a lot of ties today. This one just looked like you, so I bought  it. Here, you can have it.    (Laughter) He said,    I just took it in there this  morning.    If she wanted to give us something, a lot of times she would  put it in the bottom of a sack and then put something on top because  Daddy really didn   t always like for her to give us things. She had to do a  lot of things in secret. All five of the grandsons got to meet her.  Ninety-seven, that   s a long     Yes.  Did she have a secret to her longevity?  I know she worked hard all of her life.  Yes.  Had her parents lived longer?  3 1  Jerry  Jeff  Finchum  Jerry  Jeff  Connie  Jeff  Connie  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  No, her dad died when I was just a real small kid, and my memories of  him are very faint. Her mother would probably have been in her eighties  someplace. Probably early eighties when she died, but her dad was  probably   I doubt if he was even sixty.  I don   t know. I think she was still in her, well, it was late eighties or  early nineties, she could still bend at the waist and put her hands flat on  the floor.  Wow.  I figured she was failing when she stopped changing the oil in her own  car. That was probably eighty years old.  She was a very independent, strong woman. She was amazing.  She had a bed that was too tall, and so she took it outside and took a  hacksaw to it and cut the legs off.  Cut the legs off of it. If she needed something done, she wouldn   t ask  anybody. She   d just go get it done herself. I   ve got her   I   ve got two of  them, in fact. I was not very nice to my sister. I got both her cast iron  skillets, and you won   t get them from me either. It fries the bacon up just  perfect.  I know after she passed away and the kids got here, we went up to the  house. We told both of them they could have anything in the house that  they wanted right now. Jeff said he wanted the cast iron skillet. Well, we  looked and looked and couldn   t find it. Finally Jeff said,    You know,  Grandma always kept that in the oven.    Opened it up, and there it was.  Then we asked Penny, and she said,    I want that bird that   s up there in  that window.    I said,    Penny, it   s broke.    She said,    I know it. Every  time I broke her, Grandma said,    It   s all right. We   ll just glue it back  together.       (Laughter) She only had two grandkids, but she treated them  very well. I know one of the questions that asked about was money, you  know, how they took care of it. Jerry, tell about your grandpa, what he  did with money.  I can remember when I was just a little kid out behind this building  that   s behind the house that he put money in the jar and take it out there  and bury it. I assume that it all got dug up because I haven   t found any  of it.  Did he trust banks at all?  3 2  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Nykolaiszyn  Jeff  Jerry  Finchum  Connie  Jerry  Jeff  Connie  Jerry  Connie  Jeff  Connie  Finchum  Connie  Nykolaiszyn  Jerry  Well, some, but he always had some buried.  Have you continued the tradition?  No. (Laughter)  I figured your son would want to know.  Yes, that   s right  That would be good. (Laughter)  No, I haven   t continued that tradition.  That   s something you could add to your scavenger hunt.  Yes. (Laughter)  Yes.  That   s right  Absolutely.  Knowing those five boys, they   d dig up the whole yard. (Laughs)  Oh, yes, it would be dug up.  In fact, we have a family reunion every Saturday before Easter, and the  oldest boy and all of them still participate in the Easter egg hunt because  Aunt Penny puts Sonic cards in them.  Yes, Sonic gift cards.  We don   t get together very often, but when we do we have a wonderful  time.  Sounds like it.  In fact, they came out, what was it, about two years ago and did an  article on our barn quilts that we have. Jerry and I argued over as to  where we were going to put them. He wanted to put them on the front of  the barn, and I said,    Nobody lives on past us. Nobody   s ever going to  see those.    I made him put them on the north side of the barn. We   ve got  two barn quilts. We got some pictures together if you want to look at  some of them.  Great  Well, is there anything else before we wrap up?  No.  3 3  Jeff  Nykolaiszyn  Connie  Nykolaiszyn  Don   t think so.  All right, well, what we   ll do is we   ll sign her off, and we   ll look at your  photos, and thank you so much for taking time out to talk with us today.  Oh, we appreciate you coming.  Thank you.  -------  ------- 
