 Finchum  Today is March 23, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum along with  Juliana Nykolaiszyn. We   re with the Oklahoma State University Library  doing an oral history project called Centennial Farm Families. Today  we   re in Billings, Oklahoma, to speak with J.D. Waggoner about his  Centennial Farm. So thank you for having us today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start by having you tell us how your family came to own the land to  begin with.  My grandpa got this land. He did not run in the Cherokee Strip. He  operated a store that   s about two miles south of here, and he swapped  that store for this land in    94. He homesteaded it, though, and he got the  homestead rights, an agreement signed by President Theodore  Roosevelt, after ten years.  And where had he come from?  Kansas. He was in Kansas.  And what kind of store did he have?  Just what you call a wholesale store now, sold anything he could to  farmers, individuals, Indians.  A general mercantile, basically?  Yes, yes.  And the name of that town was?  5  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  White Rock.  And it   s no longer in existence, you said?  No ma   am.  When he came, did he come by himself or with his parents, or do you  know?  I assume he came with his wife.  So he moved to this piece of property here     Yes ma   am,  after he swapped the store for the land .  And what did he do? Did he farm, what?  Well, he had to homestead and farmed for ten years before he earned the  rights to it.  And what did he farm?  Wheat and other grains, probably some cattle.  And how many children did he have?  He had four children. Three boys and one girl.  Take us through the  lineage . Who owned it next? Who did it pass to?  He gave it to my father, Chet Waggoner, and they lived here, and they  raised all of us children here. Then I bought it from my mother after he  passed away. Then my wife and I lived here, and she passed away about  four years ago, and I   m still living here.  When it was your father   s, did his siblings not have an interest in  farming?  Oh, yes. One brother farms. The rest went off and did other things.  So there wasn   t any debate over who got it then, at that point?  No ma   am.  And then you had how many brothers and sisters?  6  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  I had four brothers and three sisters, and two sisters passed away.  That   s a big family.  There   d be ten of us if we all survived.  And the rest of them were not interested in farming it when it came your  turn to get it?  Well, no. My mother was old, she needed a little money, and she wanted  to sell it. And nobody else wanted to buy it or maybe not even had the  money, so I just bought it. And my brother still farms it today.  Okay. What   s his name.  Wilfred.  Wilfred.  Willie.  J.D. and Willie. So as a child you grew up on the farm.  Yes ma   am.  What were some of your chores?  Gather wood to burn in the fire   the wood burning potbellied stove. We  milked, and just normal things that people don   t know what is today.  (Laughs)  And what was the farmhouse like in those days?  It was a two-story building, right west of us here, and had three big  rooms downstairs   no, wait, wait   two big rooms and a kitchen, three  bedrooms, and two big rooms upstairs. The only heat you had upstairs  was when the wood burning fireplaces were burning and the chimney   s  run out the roof.  It was pretty cool in the winter, then?  It was cold in the winter because it sat about two, three foot off the  ground. So it was cold. There was no running water in the house, no  bathrooms in the house.  Until when? Do you remember when they first got them?  7  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Yes, my brother put them in when he came back from Korea in the    50s.  We didn   t get electricity until I was in high school.  Made for some cool mornings and some     Well, those old potbellied stoves kept warm. (Laughs)  Would you have to do chores before you went to school in the mornings?  Oh, yes ma   am.  Milking cows, or   ?  Milking cows and whatever we were supposed to do. We went to a  country school a quarter of a mile north and a mile east.  And what was its name?  It was uphill both ways. That   s a story I always tell. It was uphill both  ways. It was a mile and a quarter, we usually walked. We cut across the  wheat field if it wasn   t wet, or we   d go down the road. And once in a  while we   d ride horses.  That was the days before school busses.  Days before school busses, and they didn   t have school busses out in the  country. We had one woman that taught all eight grades in a one-room  building.  Would you take your lunch?  Usually.  And usually what would that be?  Just a sandwich or fruit. You couldn   t come home because you didn   t  have time.  From there you went to   ?  I went to Billings, sixth grade up. They closed this school down and  wanted me to go three miles farther east and it was just as close to  Billings. My brother worked out of Billings, so he went to town every  morning, and I rode with him.  8  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  You graduated from high school in Billings?  In Billings, yes ma   am, in 1952.  And then what did you do?  I went to Northern Oklahoma Junior College, which was NOJC,  graduated from there in    54, and then went to Oklahoma A M and  graduated from there in    57.  With a degree in?  Mechanical engineering, petroleum option.  Mechanical engineering came in handy on the farm?  Well, I didn   t come back to the farm after I graduated.  Okay, then take us through your career, and then we   ll come back to the  farm.  I went to work for the old Magnolia Company as a gas plant engineer in  South Texas, at Vanderbilt, which was between Houston and Corpus  Christi. When you went to work back in those days, they moved you  every two years, they said, to get you experience. I moved to North  Texas, Electra, Texas, then I moved to Albany, Texas, then I moved to  Wichita Falls, then I moved to Pampa, I moved back to Wichita Falls,  and I moved to Midland, Texas. Stayed with Magnolia, changed their  name to Mobil, for ten years, and I resigned from them and went to work  for an independent called Texas Pacific, which was owned by the  Seagram Whiskey Company. In 1982, they sold out to Sun, and I stayed  on with Sun until I retired in    91. Engineering ranks to management, to  Vice President of Production with Texas Pacific, and then to regional  manager with Sun. I got some overseas experience. I   ve had two years in  the international department with Sun. I lived in Dallas, but I traveled  overseas. I had men overseas that I worked with, but I did not live  overseas. And in    91 I retired. Then we moved here and built the  farmhouse.  In    91?  Yes.  And you came back to Oklahoma just to do that, or   ?  Well, no, I moved back to Oklahoma City, and I was in Oklahoma City  9  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  when I retired. Most of my time was in Texas.  Not too awfully far from home, I guess.  No, not too awful far.  Did you always want to come back to the farm?  Well, my dad wanted me to come back and farm, but I told him no. I  didn   t want to farm. My wife, I met her in Dallas, and we got married,  and she wanted to come back up here and build a house on the farm. So  we did after we retired. We came back up here and built a house.  About ten years ago, then,    91   no, twenty.  Twenty years ago. (Laughs)  I can   t do my math this morning. So when your father had the farm, did  he do any soil conservation efforts or anything like that?  Oh, yes, he did some. Yes, but when he first started, he worked other  jobs. It was hard to make a living with eight kids and what they raised  and all that.  Did he have to have hired help?  No, not with five boys, he didn   t have to.  Did they divide the chores by gender? Like, did the girls do housework  or did they help outside?  Oh, no, they helped some. Just whoever was around when they needed  something done.  Do you remember your first tractor?  I remember him going to get a tractor that had the old lug wheels on it.  And then I remember him going to get a Case, always had rubber tires  on it     Did he ever have a combine?  Oh, yes. At first, they had the thrashing machines where they just pull  through the field and   well, they shocked the wheat, and then they   d  haul the shocks to the thrashing machine. They   d have big stacks of  straw, then they harvested the grains through the thrashers. Then they  10  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  had a tractor pull a combine, then they got the self-propelled combines.  Yes, my dad used to, you   d go out to the field, and you had bare feet,  he   d spit tobacco on your toes. (Laughs) He   d always chew tobacco and  spit it on your toes. (Laughter)  I guess if you had a bee sting that was a good thing, wasn   t it?  Yes. (Laughs)  Did he participate in any of the rings, the thrashing rings, or where they  would work around?  Yes, all the farmers did. All the women, you didn   t come in to eat, you  ate out there in the field. They   d take the food out there in the field and  feed the guys.  And what would that typically be?  Just like you was here at the house. Regular food, fried chicken,  whatever they   d cook.  Raised their own chickens, I guess?  Yes ma   am. And the chickens came in the mail. They   d mail the  chickens to you in the mail.  We haven   t had anyone tell us that.  You   d order them, and they   d come through the mail. You   d have to go  to town and pick them up.  How many at one time?  Whatever they   d order. I don   t know how many. We just had chickens  all summer, eat all summer, twice a day.  So did you have to kill them yourself?  Oh, I helped kill them, yes.  Julie likes to know how.  Well, I step on their head and yank their legs and leave their head on the  ground. Some people could twist them, others used a hatchet, any way  you could kill them.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Everybody seems to have a different technique as to how they did it,  depending on how they were taught or how Mama did it or Grandma.  I never could wring them chickens    heads off. I was always the littlest. I  was the youngest one in the family. Well, I had a younger sister that  died.  How many ponds are on the property?  Now? Three.  And originally?  Two.  The original was 160 acres?  Yes.  And how much do you have now?  Here, I   ve got 180 acres.  And three ponds. Do you do mostly wheat now?  Yes, that   s all he does. My brother just plants wheat.  We didn   t see any fences, so we figured it wasn   t cattle.  Well, we used to, but I just bale this out here now and keep the cattle  someplace else.  When you were growing up, tell me a little about the holidays.  The food, or   ?  Well, I mean, would you stop to celebrate a holiday?  That   s according to what was going on.  If it was Christmastime, what would you do?  Oh, we   d have a big celebration, big dinner. Every Sunday we had a big  dinner. My mother, she just didn   t make one meat, she   d have two or  three meats and all the family would get together. There wasn   t much  gifts with eight kids, only one gift a piece. (Laughs) But it was always  12  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  good.  Would you have a program at school?  Oh, yes, they always had a program. They   d give you a sack of candy at  church, give you a sack of candy. Same thing today.  So on the Sundays, you   d do this big meal after going to church?  Well, no. We hardly ever went to church. If there was something to do,  you did the work there. In those days, we had a barn and all the hay  never got rain on it. They always put the hay in the barn, and it was up  high. I remember a lot of times at night, it would come up, start to rain,  and Dad would take everybody to the field and they   d haul hay, because  he didn   t want it to get wet.  And if it was pitch black?  If it was pitch black, he was out there loading that hay. (Laughter) All  the family was there, too. Nowadays, they just stack it outside.  And roll it up instead of the squares.  They still have the big old round bales. They weigh about 1,200 pounds.  You can   t lift them now like you used to.  So other buildings on the farm. You had the farmhouse and the barn,  what else?  We had a chicken shack and an outdoor bathroom. We used to have a  smokehouse that you   d hang your meat in. Like I said, we didn   t have  electricity, so you couldn   t have a lot of meat. I remember a lot of times,  our neighbor over here, you   d see him have his calf hung out on the  north side of the house in the wintertime to keep it cold. When it  snowed, you was snowed in maybe for three or four days at a time  because we did not have the equipment to clean the highways. One  morning I woke up and there was, I think, about thirty-something people  in the house that got trapped in the snow. A lot of good things.  A lot of good things, yes. (Laughter)  Well, since you didn   t have refrigeration, I   m guessing lots of canning?  Well, yes. There was a lot of canning. We had a garden right out behind  you there, and it was probably an acre. My brother said he would never  grow another pea because we   d have tons of green peas and have to shell  13  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  them, potatoes, corn, whatever. (Laughter)  Well, with seven children in the home     Eight.  Eight, plus your parents, so ten people to feed.  Yes.  That took a pretty big garden.  And then when they did build some lockers in town where you   d have  meat in the refrigerator, everybody would rent a locker and keep their  meat stored in there.  In Billings?  Yes. And, see, you had these old kinds of refrigerators. You   d have to  have a block of ice.  There was an ice plant in Billings, too?  Yes. The old boys delivered ice for a long time.  I guess we   re too far north for it to have a cotton gin?  We didn   t have cotton up here in those days. I can remember we raised  corn. We   d shuck corn by hand. One year we raised peanuts. I don   t  know why. My grandpa and Dad on another farm down here, Brush  Creek, they always raised watermelons, cantaloupes and stuff. We   d go  break the watermelons open and just eat the heart out of them. My  grandpa couldn   t figure out what was going on. (Laughs) He probably  knew, but he didn   t tell us.  And would he sell those or was it just for family consumption?  Well, there was too many just for the family.  Take it into Billings to sell or somewhere?  Probably.  Well, in high school, were you involved with FFA or 4-H?  FFA. I don   t know if we even had 4-H back then. I don   t remember.  14  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Yes, I was in FFA.  Participate in county fairs, then?  Yes ma   am.  And where would they   I guess they would be in Perry?  Perry. We used to have one here in Billings and then go to Perry, then  Enid if people went that far.  What would you show?  Pigs and sheep.  Do you remember much about the county agent?  No.  Or a home demonstration agent? Would your mother participate in  homemaker clubs or anything?  I don   t believe so. I don   t remember. My mother came from a big  family, also. There was, I think, eight in her family   seven girls and one  boy.  Where did her side of the family come from?  Up in Indiana, I think. My grandfather on her side was from Canada. I  have his naturalization papers someplace here in the house. They also  ran in the Cherokee Strip, but they sold the farm after her father and  mother passed away. So we don   t have it anymore.  Well, any idea why your grandfather chose this area in general?  No.  Maybe the Strip     Well, the Strip, I imagine, had a lot to do with it. Land opening and he  didn   t have anything. He got married up here in, I think, it was Ashton,  Kansas. It was close, and he was a real small guy. That   s all I can  remember about him. I was born in    34, so I don   t remember seeing him  do too much work. My grandmother, I didn   t know her because she had  something, I guess you   d call it Alzheimer   s today, and he took care of  her. I don   t ever remember her talking or anything. She was just kind of  15  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  an invalid.  When you were in high school, at that point, you didn   t expect to be back  on the farm actually farming?  Well, I really didn   t think about it in high school, because I didn   t make  up my mind what I was going to do until I graduated. I went down to  Oklahoma A M, and I graduated from Oklahoma A M. I didn   t  graduate from Oklahoma State.  You   re an Aggie  That   s all right. (Laughter)  I went down while we were in school, and they had a senior day down  there. I went through the engineering department. I was enthused by it,  so I decided to start engineering. I had a little scholarship from  agriculture to study agriculture, but I turned it down and went to  engineering.  Now, that was a tough program back then. I mean, we hear lots of  stories that it was pretty rigorous.  It was. It was. Like I say, I went to Tonkawa first and I   m glad I did  because I wasn   t that bright of a student, but I got some study habits.  And we had some good instructors down there at Stillwater. I can  remember one instructor. I think he was in mechanics and dynamics. He  told us,    If you guys have any trouble, call me, and I   ll come over and  work with you at night.    And we would, we   d call him, and he   d come  over and work with us at night. You don   t find that very much.  Were you the first in your family to go to college?  No, my brother went to college then to the service, and came back and  finished college. So I think I was. He and I were the only two that went  to college. All of my family, every one of us graduated except one of my  sisters. She got sick, and she had a tumor or something on her lung, and  she missed about a year. She never did graduate, but the rest of us  graduated from Billings.  At Oklahoma A M, do you remember where you lived?  Yes, right across from the Student Union there was the Methodist group  and we were right behind them in a garage apartment. A friend of mine  here in Billings, his aunt or something, I don   t remember, we lived there.  We were supposed to live on campus, but I didn   t. (Laughter)  And would you come back to the farm often when you were in college?  16  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Oh, yes. I worked at a grocery store down there. An old boy used to own  a grocery store in Billings, he owned a grocery store down there. I  worked down there when I could. I worked on weekends.  How would you get back and forth?  My folks would come down to get me or my brothers would come down  to get me. Couldn   t afford a car back then.  You didn   t have to hitchhike?  No. (Laughs) I   d say,    I want to come home,    and they   d come get me.  How would you let them know you wanted to come home?  Call them on the telephone. (Laughs)  Okay, well, some places didn   t have those.  I know. (Laughs)  Growing up, did you have a party line?  Yes.  And do you remember what your ring was?  No. (Laughter) I just remember when you picked it up it would be a  click, click, click, click, everybody listening. (Laughter)  What did you do for fun on the farm back in your childhood?  Well, play games, act like we was sheriffs, all that good stuff. We   d go  to town whenever we could. Go to a picture show maybe once a week.  Billings had a theater?  Yes. Yes, had everything back then in those days. Out here east, at the  country school, we even had a basketball team. I don   t think we won any  games, but we played. (Laughs)  Outside or inside?  Outside, on the rocks. (Laughs)  17  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Did you play?  Oh, I tried. (Laughs)  What position would you play?  Wherever, wherever they wanted me. (Laughter)  Would you ever get into mischief?  No.  No? All of those kids? Come on  No mischief on the farm?  All kinds of mischief. (Laughter) We don   t talk about that.  And how would you be punished?  Well, it was according to who caught you. My dad had a hand that just  fit right across your butt. (Laughter) And he could hit  You lived under  his rules or no rules. You could do whatever you wanted to, as long as it  was what he wanted you to do. (Laughs) It   s not like that today.  I   d say you got into a lot of mischief.  Well, not that much. (Laughs) I didn   t get that many whippings, but I  got some   and you remember them. (Laughs)  Yes, that   s true. So the outhouse, was it a one-seater or a two?  Two-seater.  With that many in the family     Well, we only went one at the time, but it still had two seats. (Laughs)  And what was bath time like?  Well, a lot of times in the summer, we took our baths in the pond. In the  wintertime, we had a little round tub and would heat the water, jump in  and the next one jump in     Now, you were the youngest, so did you get to go first or did you end up  going last?  Probably last. (Laughter) I learned to swim, my dad threw me out in  18  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  deep water and said,    Swim or drown.     In the pond?  Yes. But you knew he didn   t mean it. You didn   t know, but now you  did. (Laughs) And my brothers was all there.  With bath time, though, with the tub, was it outside or inside?  Inside.  Inside, in the kitchen?  In the kitchen, yes.  And she would do laundry?  Yes.  How?  Well, we had a little utility room, but most of the time, I think, the  washing machine was on the porch.  Did you have a front porch and a back porch?  Yes, yes.  Side porch?  No, it was a side porch out of the kitchen, south door of the kitchen, and  one on the front.  Did you have a cellar?  Yes ma   am.  Under the house or   ?  No, right beside the house.  It had to be pretty big to hold all that canning.  Oh, yes. And the potatoes, and when we all got down there in the  storms. It was pretty good size.  19  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Any close calls with tornadoes growing up?  Oh, yes. In the early days, I don   t remember, but some of the later days,  I can remember some of the tornadoes around. But my dad would hardly  go to the cellar. He   d stand up on top and watch, and we   d all be down  in the cellar. Got one now, but I haven   t used it yet. Hope I don   t have  to. (Laughter)  Was there a windmill for water?  Well, we had three wells. There was a windmill down south, and we had  two wells here that had pumps on them. This one over here by the house,  that   s where we got all our water in the early days.  Hand pump?  Yes, hand pump.  And what was your favorite meal?  All of them. (Laughter)  You were not a picky eater.  You weren   t a picky eater back then. If you were, you wouldn   t get  nothing to eat unless your mother saved something back for you.  (Laughs) And she usually would, because I   d get mad and would run  away from home and stupid stuff.  Was she a good cook? Did she make bread and biscuits and that sort of  thing?  The girls would say,    Give me your recipe for this.    She   d say,    Well,  you just take a pinch of this, a pinch of that.    She didn   t have anything  written down that I knew of.  Did she sew much?  Oh, yes.  Make your clothes or the girls   ?  I don   t know. The girls were all older than I was. I don   t think she made  ours. Probably hand-me-downs by what we could buy. In the spring  when school was out, you started to go barefooted. You didn   t put shoes  on unless you went to town or back to school.  20  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  You mentioned your father had a job outside the farm.  Yes.  What did he do?  Well, he done a number of jobs. He worked on pipelines, whatever he  could do. He used to shear sheep. He   d go off and shear sheep, and we  used to raise sheep. He just done a lot of various jobs, whatever he could  do to raise a little money.  Did the oil companies ever come knocking to do a little exploration on  the farm?  Well, they drilled a couple wells around, but they didn   t drill the wells  on here until, I think, I was in college.  They ever find anything?  Oh, yes. They had two wells produce and they plugged them out.  Somebody else came in and drilled a couple more wells since I bought  it.  And your family retained the mineral rights on the farm?  All except a small percent. My grandpa back in the    50-somethings sold  a small royalty for fifty years or as long as there   s production on the  lease. And there is production, so that royalty is still out, and they won   t  sell it back to me. I bought part of it, but I can   t get the other part. And  they   re looking around again. Companies are coming in, this horizontal  drilling, which is not new, it   s been in for years, but it   s new in some  areas. They   re looking in this area. They   re getting ready to drill a well  north of here about four miles. I guess it   s going to be a horizontal well.  It   s getting interesting.  Did your father ever use any of the drip gas produced?  Everybody used drip gas produced. They used to have those drips.  They   d put it in the car, you hear the car knock, you   d know it was  burning drip. One kid got burnt pretty bad. I guess he lit a cigarette or  something and he got some drip on his clothes and got burned pretty  bad. How do you know about drip? Do you use drip? (Laughs) There   s a  big pipeline that goes right through this front yard out here. I guess it   s  about twenty-four inches or something. It   s a pretty good sized gas  pipeline.  21  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Besides the wind blowing out here, you hear the pump jacks doing their  thing?  You can hear them at times, but they   re not bad. They   re not bad.  Not too much different than a big rig going by, I guess.  No, no. I worked down in north Texas where they had these central  powers, and they had rods running out of the wells. And the wells didn   t  have the engines on them, they used these rods for pumps. I had a lot of  good experience with the oil companies.  Well, then you understand some of what they   re doing out here.  Yes, with the oil companies, like I said, I spent some international   I  got to travel a lot and had a good future with the oil companies, good  jobs, good bosses. I just hate to see some of them sell out, but they have  sold out. I never thought Mobil would go out of business, but they sold  to Exxon and     Happens in business.  Yes, but those big businesses, you don   t think the government would let  that happen, but they did. Just like AT T wanting to buy up this other.  That   s right.  But even after all that travel, you still wanted to come back to  Oklahoma, to this piece of property.  Ain   t nothing like the United States of all those countries that I was in.  Well, I mean, you could have stayed in Texas, but     Well, no. I had enough of Texas. (Laughter) I could drive down there  and back in a day. My grandchildren live down there, and I go down  there.  How many children do you have?  We have one child. It was my wife   s child by a previous marriage.  We   ve got two grandchildren and one great-grandchild.  Since your brother farms it, does he have children that would     22  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  Waggoner  Well, I   m leaving them some, but they   re up there, forty, fifty years old  now, so. Yes, I   m the youngest at seventy-six, so there you go. (Laughs)  It   s 180 acres now?  Why it   s 180, there was twenty acres right south here that there was  some old boy that lived in Oregon. He hadn   t paid his taxes on the farm,  and Dad somehow got it from him. I think just by picking up the taxes,  paying the taxes. Its twenty acres of grass pasture, so that   s why there   s  180 here.  And it   s attached to this   ?  Oh, yes, right.  How close is the railroad to this piece?  I guess Perry, Red Rock.  But back in your childhood, though     Oh, it ran through Billings.  Would there be issues of hobos?  We used to ride on the train once in a while.  To where?  Oh, go to Ponca City and somebody would pick us up. (Laughs)  Tonkawa. Just something different.  What would you do in Ponca City?  Get off the train. (Laughter) Get out of Billings.  Something to do.  Would your sisters do that too or just your brothers?  No, I don   t think my sisters would do that. In the old days, when they  harvest wheat, they would have elevators, and they didn   t get that many  boxcars to come and get them out. They could only fill so many, and  they   d block where they couldn   t get any more cars in the load, railroad  cars, and you   d have traffic backed up half a mile, three-quarters of a  mile north, three-quarters of a mile south. They may get one truck  23  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  dumped a day if they were lucky. So it used to be busy around this place,  but as you see in Billings, there   s not any more, hardly.  It once had a grocery store and     Well, it had three grocery stores at one time.  And a theater and     Yes, two beer joints.  Car dealership or anything?  Oh, yes. There used to be a car dealership.  Have your neighbors changed through the years?  Oh, yes. Yes.  So you probably have seen a difference in the way neighbors help each  other.  Oh, you don   t have help like they you used to have.  Well the other famous Billings person is Henry Bellmon. Do you have  anything to say about...?  Way to put him on the spot   He was a senator and governor. I know his brother real well. His  brother   s a nice guy.  George?  George Sheldon. He   s in a kind of assisted living over in Enid, now.  He farmed for a long time, too.  Oh, yes. He farmed until a four-wheeler threw him and broke seven ribs.  Back in those days it was horses but you could still have accidents.  Oh, yes. You can fall off of those, too.  Well, when you were growing up in high school and college, do you  remember how your parents kept records of what was going on here on  24  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  the farm?  I think Dad just had a shoebox and just kept everything in there, and the  bank.  Just handwrite everything?  Yes, that   s about all there was, handwriting.  He kept his money in the bank, but did he feel comfortable with that?  I think he felt real comfortable with the banks back then, and he didn   t  have a lot of money.  When he bought a new tractor or new piece of equipment, would he save  until he could pay cash for it?  I don   t really know because I was so young, and I really didn   t care back  then. (Laughs)  Well, and he may not have shared that information with the kids.  He didn   t share. He didn   t share that information. I just knew that he was  good with numbers. He could sit down and come up with a   multiply or  something like that. I guess that   s where I got that. I got good with  numbers. He was awful good with numbers. When I was in college, they  told me if I needed money, I could write checks on their account. One of  his friends told them,    Oh, he   ll bust you.    But I didn   t. (Laughs)  Today, what are some of the structures on the farm?  Well, that shed out there that I built when I built the house, and this  house, and that   s about it. That   s about it. Tore the old barn down, it  started falling in. Somebody burnt the house down. I guess it was  probably in the    70s. All the other structures were torn down. So when  we moved here, really, we had the barn torn down. That was the last  thing that was left, and we built a shed and the house.  Close to where the original house stood?  Yes, the house just stood right there west of us there, on the other side of  those trees.  When you tore the various buildings down, did you recycle the wood or  do something different with it?  25  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Well, some of the wood from the barn  was recycled , and then they  burnt some of it. My brother-in-law tore the barn down and took some of  the wood out and built him a shed at his place. But the other stuff, I  don   t know. I wasn   t here when they tore it all down.  Were you here when they built it?  The house?  The barn.  No, no. See, the barn was old, old     Old, old. So, where would they have gotten the wood is what I was  curious about.  I   m not familiar. I heard that some of these places had went all the way  to New Mexico to go to get trees to plant in their yards. So I   m not sure  where Grandpa and them got the wood to build the house. It was a solid  built old house, but it was a cold house that was built off the ground and  no insulation.  Did it have linoleum floors?  Some of it did, some just had wood floor.  So it creaked?  Like I said, we just had those potbellied stoves to keep warm with, but  they kept you warm if you kept fire in them.  In the old house, where was your bedroom?  Upstairs.  And you shared the room with your brother?  Brothers.  Brothers. How many in a bed?  There was probably two of us   well, it may have been more in  wintertime because the west room was kind of cold, and we all stayed in  one room.  Two bedrooms upstairs, you said?  26  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Two big rooms.  Girls got more room then, huh?  Well, maybe. (Laughter)  What was Thanksgiving like?  Just like Christmas, a big holiday when we could all get together. My  mother   s folks and Dad   s folks     Would they come to the farm?  Well, yes. They   d come to the farm some of the time. Some of them  would. Some didn   t much care to come.  Were they scattered around in Oklahoma or further away?  Yes, when I was young most of them lived here. Then Dad   s two  brothers lived in Tulsa. His sister died at an early age. My mother   s  family, some of them went to California. She had three sisters and a  brother here, and the rest of them was scattered. But they lived here in  the early parts of their life, but left here.  Oklahoma is home.  Oklahoma   s home. It is to me. Like I say, I   ve went to a lot of places,  nothing like the United States.  Do you recall some home remedies?  Oh, yes. Sugar and kerosene.  For what?  Whooping cough, coughing. Ever heard that?  I can   t imagine the flavor.  It wasn   t too good. (Laughter) I don   t know what else they used, but  they had a lot of stuff. Oh, if you   d cut your hand and you   re bleeding,  put pepper on it.  Pepper?  27  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Yes.  Black pepper?  Black pepper. It   s supposed to clog up, but I don   t remember too much  of that. I do remember taking Castor oil, I remember that.  If you got sick or broke a bone or something, would you go into Billings  or Perry?  Billings. Dr. Renfro, and if he couldn   t do it, he   d take you someplace  else.  Was he the only doctor in Billings?  At that time I think he was the only one. I remember one time I got the  whooping cough. They tried to take me to town, but a snow storm  stopped us, so we came back home. My mother got burnt by one  kerosene lamp. I don   t know whether it spilled or exploded, but she  burned her arm. She was in town about, I guess, two or three weeks.  They had a small hospital then or   ?  No, it was just a place where he had rooms, so he could watch her. One  of my brothers, his right arm, I guess, he must have had polio when he  was young because he could never really use that arm too much. He  could hold stuff with it, but he couldn   t kind of grasp his hand. He was  limping in his right leg I guess, too.  Were you born in the farmhouse?  I don   t know. I can   t remember. (Laughs)  I know I can   t ask you about your siblings because you were the last  one, so     I imagine some or most of them were born here. I just assume that.  My guess is you probably were, too, or maybe in Billings.  Well, it was either one of the two places, I agree to that, but     Did you have family pets growing up?  Oh, yes, we had all kinds of pets. Dogs, we   d make pets out of sheep,  calves     28  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Any snake stories?  I hated those things. Walked across the pasture and stepped on one.  (Laughs) As long as I could see them ahead of time, it wasn   t bad. But in  the ponds, they had a lot of the water moccasins in the ponds. We swam  with them.  Carefully. (Laughter)  If you see them, you ran. (Laughs) Lot of hunting, lot of hunting around.  Rabbits in the wintertime, quail, squirrels.  You   d clean them?  Yes. Mother would cook them.  Wouldn   t be much else out here. Deer?  See, we didn   t have deer back then. They brought deer in later and  pheasants.  Coyotes?  There was coyotes. We didn   t have mountain lions. We had road  runners. You don   t see them today.  Someone was telling us about a smaller version of a skunk that they  don   t see around too much anymore.  A skunk?  Yes, what did they call it, a scat?  It was some type of cat.  Civet cat, civet cat.  Yes, that   s it.  Yes, they used to have those.  We hadn   t heard of that.  It   s just a wild cat, I think. We used to have a lot of horny toads. You  ever heard of horny toads?  29  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  A frog, yes.  Well, it   s not a frog, no. It   s kind of like a lizard with kind of like thorns  sticking up on it. We used to have that. A lot of tarantulas, but you don   t  see them too much anymore, either. Big old spiders.  I   ve seen a few of those.  When we built the house up here, there was a lot of snakes that   d come  up and lay on the porch. I killed a bunch.  Do you have a memory growing up from your time on the farm that  sticks out in your mind that when you get together maybe for a family  reunion that everybody would always talk about or tell?  Just talked about the old times is about the only thing. It   s not like it is  today, I   ll say that part. We always ate at the same time, unless  somebody would be out in the field, and they   d take a lunch. Or maybe  somebody would go out and relieve them and the other would come in.  But usually, I remember Mom would say,    Go wave a tablecloth for  Daddy. He   s over on the hill. He   ll be watching to see if it   s time to eat  or not.    That   s the way you   d signal to him.  A cloth?  Yes.  Did you listen to the radio back in those days much?  You did it about once a week. You had a battery, and you didn   t want  the battery to go down, so you   d all get together and turn the radio on  and listen to it.  When did the first TV come in the neighborhood?  Well, I remember the old boy in Billings had TV, and he   d set it in the  window, and people would go to town and watch TV. Seen that with my  brothers. Overseas, one of the neighbors had a TV and they had some  people over because they were going to show some of the Forty-Fifth  Division in Korea.  Times have changed, haven   t they?  Times have changed.  30  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Nykolaiszyn  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Now we have cell phone towers everywhere.  And they still don   t work. (Laughs)  Yes.  She didn   t have any bars. (Laughs)  There are some dead spots around here.  Is there a tower on your property?  No. I don   t think I   d let them build a tower on it. It   d take up too much  room.  All the wires they have.  Yes.  What have we not asked you that we need to know?  I don   t know. (Laughter)  You mentioned that you   d like your family to keep the farm in your  family for as long as they can. Why is that important to you?  Well, this farm has been in the family for over a hundred years, and I   d  just like for it to stay in there. Like for it to stay in existence under the  Waggoner name.  When was the last time you walked the whole 160 acres?  Probably never. (Laughter) I walked the fence lines a lot, but not north  in the wheat field. But when I first moved here, I had my cows here, so I  used to walk. I   ll walk over to the far side. I try to walk every day, about  a mile, a mile and a half.  It   s pretty flat from what I can see, and it would not be too difficult to  find your way home.  Oh, no. No.  You   re familiar with most sections of it, most parts of it?  Yes.  31  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Waggoner  Finchum  Any streams?  Not on this one, no.  Well, the ponds, two were already here and one was made?  Yes.  Was that part of the conservation efforts?  Dad built one to keep the land from washing, and it filled up with mud.  Then there was a small pond over there and they drilled a well, and I had  them make it bigger. And then I dug it out again here about two years  ago. Just for water.  Not to swim in anymore.  No, not to swim in anymore, no. You   d probably sink in up to your waist  in mud.  That covers it, unless you have something else you want to add?  I don   t think so.  Well, thank you very much for having us today.  Well, you   re welcome. I hope I answered all your questions.  You did.  -------  ------- 
