 Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  library. Tanya Finchum is also joining me today as an interviewer.  Today is Sunday, May 17, 2009 and we   re in Crescent, Oklahoma on the  Abraham H. Acton Ranch with Jerry and Patsy Acton. This interview is  being conducted as part of the Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families  Oral History Project. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you.  Well let   s begin by learning a little bit about how your family came to  Oklahoma.  Well, the best I can tell you is the best we   ve heard. Patsy has looked  things up as best as she can, anywhere she can. The old folks, the old  homesteaders came in on the Run of    89 and staked this 160 acres out.  There   s been Acton family on it ever since, down through the  generations. There   s been, I guess, four, five if you want to include our  children, Acton families that have lived here.  And where did they come from, what state?  Well, the last, when they came here they came out of Kansas. White  Cloud, Kansas. We   ve never been up there to inquire about that and  check them out up there. But anyhow, they come from White Cloud,  Kansas. Abraham, the original, my great-grandfather and his wife and  they had several boys. You can probably tell it better than me.  I think I can. (Laughs) Abraham and Melissa, the great-grandfather and  great-grandmother, they had ten children. Jerry   s grandpa, Arthur, was  the baby. He was number ten. And from what we have here, a transcript  that his grandpa   s sister, Mary, who came with the great-grandpa and  two other brothers, they came first, they were ahead in the Run of    89.  5  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  According to what we have, the great-grandpa   s team wasn   t as fast as  the two oldest boys, so they staked this out.  The two boys come ahead and staked this farm and when great-grandpa  got here, well he got here.  His grandpa and his mama, they were coming to, but they came behind.  Because I think his grandpa was like eight years old.  Yeah, they stayed here awhile and made sure their claim was good I  guess and then they went back and moved the rest of the family down  here.  We have lots of information here for you to look at if you want to later.  Great. Tell me a little bit about the post office and the grocery store.  Well it was located just what we call caddy-corner to this place. To the  best of my understanding there was probably half a mile of stores and  homes; there was a blacksmith shop, the post office, and then there were  several more, I don   t know, I guess you would call them businesses  where the old timers would bring their machinery and get it worked on  at the blacksmith shop and then a livery stable. They called it Acton  cause she  great-aunt  rode to Crescent everyday and gathered the mail  up there and took the mail in from out here that needed to go and  brought it back and then delivered it out here in the post office to the  rural areas where people would come in and get their mail. That   s really  about all I can tell you about it.  Did you know it was called Acton, Oklahoma?  Well I read it, but I wasn   t sure that it was named after your family.  It was Mary. It was his grandpa   s sister, Mary, that came in 1889 in that  Run. And it   s in here too, it   s in that list of, right here in the Oklahoma  Place Names book.  So what became of Acton?  Well I assume that when she quit carrying the mail, I think she got  married to a Decker, as a matter of fact, over around Stillwater  somewhere. And she quit doing the post office deal and I assume that  they just closed the post office down and I never did hear of anybody  else going ahead with it.  It was in 1903, probably, when she moved on.  6  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Over by the post office was the blacksmith shop and the livery stable;  the stagecoach line used to come through there and stop there in Acton.  That   s what we were told, that they (the Actons) would always give  them (the stagecoach passengers) something to eat and drink.  And change horses if they needed to. But that   s really about, I was just a  little bitty kid   I can remember where the post office was. There was  just one building left over there when I came along and that was a long  time after that but I do remember where it was. There   s nothing there  now. Everything is gone and buried and they farm right over on top of it.  Well turning back to the old farm, can you tell me about some of the  original structures that were on the land at that time?  Well, down in this canyon there was what they call a lean-to. They lived  in a lean-to, just a shed that was built in the side of the bank. There was  a natural spring down there and that   s where they kept their milk and  their stuff that would spoil on them easy. Next after that, we haven   t  found anybody that knows much about that. All the old-timers are gone,  you know, and nobody asked, I guess, while they were here. But they  did build a house just about 50 foot north of this one sometime. I don   t  know when, what year or anything. But it was just the old house that  everybody built, I mean they were all built the same back in those days,  you know. Anyhow, that   s where the family was raised, the old Grandpa  (Abraham) and Grandma (Melissa) and all their kids. We   ve got what   s  left after a tornado come through here in I believe it was    57, all these  boys of the great-grandpa had dug rocks out of the quarry back here     what we call a quarry, you know   and shaped the rocks the best they  could and they built a chicken house right out here. The rocks are still up  on the chicken house, they built it up probably about four foot tall and  then they built with wood on up to eight or ten foot tall. I can remember  it and that was a chicken house.  Then down over the bank on north here in the side of the bank, they had  dug back into the bank and they had rocked the walls up with the old big  rocks, you know. Well it   s still there, the basement, and I can remember  the barn that was in there and it was a 4-story barn with a basement and  on each side of it, is where you could back your wagons in and get them  out of the weather. And there were granaries in there, where you scoop  your grain into the little granary parts to keep your seed till next planting  season. And then up above it had a full top in it which they come out the  A-frame door up there with the big hook and picked the hay up, brought  it up and that whole top was where they kept their hay. And then the  roof went on up another story to make the A-frame roof on it. But it was  a sight, I bet, when everything was going. It mentions it in these papers,  7  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  about the old barn.  It   s a very interesting story. The Mary Acton daughters, who were in, I  think their late 70s, 80s, they wrote a transcript, I mean it is a transcript,  of the history and she mentions it in this about his grandpa. When she  got married she hadn   t seen the family for so long and she was just  yearning to see them. They all lived here, Arthur and Blanch   well not  Blanch yet, but anyway. She surprised them. She rode from Guthrie,  (laughs) took her a whole day to get here it says. Arthur, Jerry   s  grandpa, saw her coming and went out to what he just described the barn  and they put the wagon in and Mary handed Arthur this baby. They  didn   t know that she had had a baby. And they still didn   t, they said they  went in the old house, which is right there, here   s a picture there of the  old house, but they were all sitting around the table visiting and eating  and they heard this baby. Arthur had put it in the bedroom. And so when  they heard the baby crying they all just jumped up so excited. (Laughs)  The old great-grandpa and great-grandma finally had a grandbaby. I  think they said Arthur was 11 when that happened.  What were some of the early livestock and crops?  My dad (Abe), I can remember him talking about cotton. He farmed lots  of cotton when he took over the place. I don   t know whether the old-timers  farmed cotton or not, I assume they did because that was a big  crop back in those days. And wheat and oats and what we could raise to  feed the cows. I remember one year we planted 60 acres of corn. It was  the first corn that was ever planted in this part of the country, that I  know of anyhow. And of course Dad always kept a couple hundred head  of hogs and that   s where the corn went, to feed the hogs. I think that was  about it. We had a little alfalfa, about 30 acres of alfalfa. We had it for  years and years and alfalfa will finally die out after years and it did. We  never did plant it back. But I think that was mostly it on the crops.  Do you know how back in the old days they would get the crops to the  market?  Well, no. I guess probably with horses and wagons. That would be my  best bet. We used to have some of the old machinery set around here  after they parked it, all the old horse-drawn stuff, wagons, and there  were several old wagons, the old wide wagons that they hauled the hay  and the cotton and stuff on. Big wagons. And there were several small  wagons, we called them lumber wagons, I don   t know why. Well they  were made heavy, you know. Had big old planks across them where they  could haul trees, haul them to the saw mill and have them cut up. And  that   s about all I can tell you about that. All I can recall, anyhow.  8  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Now was the farm primarily worked by family members or did you have  outside help?  No, I think probably, of course back in those days, neighbors helped  neighbors. But I think probably all those boys of the family were  probably the main caretakers and workers on the farm.  And the farm   s water source?  Well, you mean for the household or just the entire farm?  The entire farm.  This old creek down here, we   ve got a creek that we   re fortunate enough  to have that runs all the way through the place. It runs year-round. And  we   ve got a natural spring back over here that we   ve had dug out with  machinery, equipment and it   s probably 6, 8 foot deep and oh 30, 40  foot across. It stays full year round. And Dad had, when he took it over,  one of these canyons dammed up and made a pretty good-sized pond  down there. But that was later on, you know. The old-timers probably  just depended on that spring and the creek, I suppose.  And you were born here on the farm?  I was born   they had bought a quarter adjoining this one, caddy-cornered,  over there and there was a house on it. That   s where I was  born, over there. Grandpa and Grandma still lived here when I was born  and my dad and mother lived over there in that house at that time. But I  was born right over there and wasn   t over there very long till we come  back over here.  So as a little boy, you would spend a lot of time helping out, doing work  on the farm     Oh, yeah.  What would you do?  Dad rented a lot of land besides this and he had me on a tractor when I  was eight years old. I mean I could run a tractor just about as good as a  grown-up. And I   ve been on it ever since. But yeah, I helped. When I  got up old enough to kind of be more responsible for everything   in the  winter time we   d cut wood and back in the old days we had wooden  fence posts. Well we   d cut wooden fence posts and we   d take them to  the community sale and sell them for a little income besides what we  didn   t use. In the summertime we   d bail hay. We   d usually start from oh,  9  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  we   d go out towards Dover, out west of here about 15 miles and we   d  start in out there on alfalfa. Then we   d bail and bail and bail and we   d  wind up just west of Stillwater. We had a trail going through there.  These farmers expected us every year. We did that for years and years. I  thought it was lots of work at that time and now I think it was more than  it was then. It would be now.  So how early would you get up and what would you have to do and get  done before you   d go to school?  Well, we   d milk cows. We had to get up early. I don   t remember what  time, it was when Dad hollered. He was the alarm clock. (Laughter)  When he hollered you best get up. And we did. We   d milk usually three  cows and we   d have to separate the cream and all that stuff in the  separator. And Mom, she knew how to cook. She raised us up on that  good old country living. And then I   d go to school. I was fortunate  enough to have the school bus routes when I started so I got to ride the  school bus all the time. And I could look forward to every evening I   d be  ready to do something, they   d have something for me to do, Dad would.  But he   d give me plenty of time to do my homework and all that good  stuff.  Where did you live when you were back over here?  In this old house that used to set right out north of here. And then we  moved back over there in the other farm and we lived there till Dad  passed away. He died when he was 58 years old, real unexpected. Patsy  and I lived over there with Mom and helped her out with the farm. Dad  was farming both places when he passed. We helped her out for several  years there. And finally she decided that she   d just move to town so she  bought a place in town. We continued living over there till    76 then we  built this house here. And that old house, it was still there, but it was  rickety. All the lumber was rotten, there wasn   t nothing to salvage out of  it. It had the old rock foundation under it, the big rocks like I was telling  you about that the boys had dug up when they built that house. And I  wish I knew what year that was, but I don   t.  So as structures were coming down and going up, did you re-use a lot of  materials in different ways?  No, most of it we pretty well used up. The tornado took the chicken  house and the big barn. They had several other sheds around over the  place that they kept tack and stuff in to save from running the teams  back to the barn, to the big tack room to fix. They had tack in little  sheds. The tornado took it all, all except the old house. It didn   t take the  house. It kind of twisted it, moved it off of the foundation about a foot or  10  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  so but it   s a tough old house. In the cellar, I was going to tell you about  that, it   s still there, that the boys dug. This old place is pretty rocky; they  got down about four foot, then they hit that rock and they just kept  digging and they got her on down to, I don   t know what it is, it   s  probably six foot deep.  It   s a really neat looking cellar since it was hand-dug.  Yeah, it   s got an arch roof in it made out of bricks, just ready-made town  bricks, you know. And it   s got an arch in it for a roof and it   s a real neat  deal. But it   s still there, it   s still usable. Matter of fact we   ve been in it  several times when there was tornadoes.  I bet. Well you mentioned your mother   s cooking, what did she cook?  Oh anything you   d want to eat, we   d have it. We butchered our own beef  and hogs, and had the garden. We probably had a oh, two or three acre  garden every year and she   d can stuff out of the garden, put it up for  winter. And that   s what we   d eat. It was homegrown, everything was  homegrown.  Chickens.  Oh yeah, had chickens. Hundreds of chickens. I can remember that  pretty well. (Laughter) Yeah she was a wonderful cook. She really knew  how to please a hungry guy, you know.  Did she make your clothes?  No. Well some of them, but most of them was bought out of the store.  I think Grandma Blanch did make you some shirts.  Yeah, Grandma. Grandma Blanch made lots of clothes for me. But that   s  after she kind of retired and didn   t have much else to do.  Did they quilt much?  They did. Yeah, she used to make lots of quilts. Yeah, I can remember  those. I always thought they were neat. She   d make little flowery  looking deals on them and big squares out of all different kinds of  material.  We have one right there that she made.  Boy, they were always warm in the winter. That   s when we needed it.  11  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Cause that old house out there wasn   t nothing but boards on the outside  and glass on the inside and plaster. The wind would come through and  make your linoleum float in there, where we had linoleum. But it was a  cold, old house.  Was it heated?  No, just a wood stove.  And where was your room?  Well, it had an upstairs in it and that   s where I stayed. Yeah, it was all,  like I said awhile ago, those old houses about all of them were made the  same. Kind of an L-shape with a big kitchen on one end and a living  room and maybe a bedroom or two on the other end and upstairs had the  whole west half of it full, open upstairs if you wanted it open. You could  partition it off and make two or three bedrooms if you wanted to. But I  had the whole upstairs to myself. (Laughter)  You were an only child?  Well, at that time. I   ve got a sister but she   d already left home. Spent the  time by myself.  Well what would you do for fun? I know you worked a lot. Did you have  any free time?  Oh, it wasn   t a whole lot. I can remember going to town on Saturday  evening. We   d usually go to town and buy some groceries and whatever  we needed. We   d set up on the Main Street up there with a row of other  older people and kids and stuff and visit with one another and just kind  of take in the sights. I knew about everybody around kid-wise, you  know. We had lots of fun up there.  I guess Crescent at one point probably had the rail going through.  Yeah.  And it was probably a happening little town back then.  It was. A pretty spry little town. Yeah, they didn   t close the railroad  down till oh I   m gonna say what, ten years ago?  It   s been longer than that.  Has it? Okay. Oh yeah, I guess it has. But yeah, it was a rail come  12  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  through there out of Enid and went to Guthrie.  Well back during modern times for the farm, what were the crops and  livestock produced here?  Well, wheat and cotton and oats. That was about the main grains. And  then you know, like I said, they raised the hogs and the cows and  everything, mostly for our own consumption. But Dad raised lots of  hogs that he would sell. Then on the side of that, he and Mom would  make homemade sausage. They had a   now this is over at the other  place, they had a building out there that they built just for that and had  everything in there you needed to make sausage out of. They had  government inspectors, where they   d come out and look things over.  They had a stamp that they   d have to put on every package that they  made. It was Abe and Ava   s Whole Hog sausage. And they sold it all  over the county. They just couldn   t keep up with it, you know. But they  didn   t do it but in the winter, when he had slack time. Yeah everybody  knows it and they still want it. For years and years we   ve bought all  kinds of different seasonings and I   ve never found the right seasoning.  They never wrote down the recipe?  No, huh-uh. He had it up here, you know. And he   d mix it and like I  said, they   d be lined up out the front yard waiting to get some sausage.  (Laughter) But I never could find it. The seasoning, now some of that he  bought from a dealership over at Guthrie and I finally got a hold of the  old gentleman that used to own that and his memory wasn   t too good.  But he told me some names and I tried to chase it down and I never  could. Evidently somebody   s bought them out, some bigger company   s  probably bought them out. But I never could find the correct name and I  do not remember what it was. But it sure was good. He put the whole  hog in there; I mean the hams and shoulders and everything.  Wow.  He   d trim that old fat off and get the fat out of it. And that   s why they  liked it, cause it was so lean. You wouldn   t hardly have any grease after  you cooked a skillet full of sausage. But I do remember working,  helping them make that sausage.  Well, describe for me a typical day on the farm for you.  For me? During the summer?  Yeah.  13  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  Well like I said, we   d get up early in the morning and milk the cows and  slop the hogs and make sure everything was going alright with the  livestock, then we   d hit the fields. If we were combining, well we   d  combine the wheat and then after that we set in plowing. Everybody  plowed back in those days. When I was just a little old kid, Daddy put  me, we had an old    D    John Deere, it was one of those, I don   t know,  you probably don   t know what I   m talking about, but it was one of the  old husky looking old type tractors, the two cylinder, that popped. It had  an old hand clutch on it where you   d pull the clutch back to stop it.  You   d push it forward to go. I   d have to get up and rare up against that  stick to that clutch lever to get it to go, but once we got it going, we   d  just pop all over the country, round and around. And those old plows, I  think we pulled a 3-bottom behind it, I believe. And they had trips on  them where you   d pull the rope and it   d trip them to come up out of the  ground where you turn around and then you   d have to trip it again and  it   d go back down into the ground, the plow. And it was a pretty good  chore for an old kid here, you know. I really wasn   t big enough to do  that but I did it. Every year got better or easier it seemed like.  So tell me about the farm today.  Well, unfortunately I had my first heart attack in    91. Patsy and I were  farming the places and we were rocking along pretty good. I would work  for the county running road graders and all their equipment for them for  years and years. And I   d work for them all day and come home and farm  all night. She   d take care of the young-uns. We had two children. Well,  we still got two children. (Laughs) But anyhow, that was her job, to take  care of them and the house and all that stuff. Anyhow, I plowed or do  whatever I needed to do, usually plowing at night till one or two o   clock  in the morning. Then I   d come home and go to bed and get up to work  the next morning. Day after day after day till we got it caught up. Then  we   d work the ground two or three times in between seeding time, then  we   d seed it in and let the wheat grow and run the old cows on the wheat  pasture, raise a few calves. That was about it.  And you   re still doing that today?  No, in    91 I had my first heart attack and it was bad enough that they  decided I really didn   t need to be putting out a whole lot of effort. So we  sowed everything to Bermuda grass. Just sowed it into grass and after  we finally got that established, we baled some of it for the cows that we  got now, to run them through the winter. The rest of it we let the cows  run on it and eat it. That took out lots of effort and work on both of us,  down where we could cruise along a little easier.  Well, it was more manageable.  14  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Sure did cut down on the income though.  I   m sure.  So how many cattle do you have today?  I   ve just got ten cows and ten calves and a bull, three donkeys and a  horse. We just added a new donkey the day before yesterday, a baby,  one of them had a baby. First one I was ever around, a baby donkey.  (Laughter) Went out there and seen it and thought it was an overgrown  jackrabbit to start with. (Laughter) A cute little old thing.  Well today tell me about the current structures that are on the property.  How many barns?  Well all I   ve got is just three small sheds. Another thing we didn   t ever  get around to, we were going to re-build that barn down there with the  basement under it, or build a top over it anyhow, to have a barn for the  cows to get in and out of. But I built one up here on the hill for them to  get out of the weather and we just never did get back to the barn. And  plus the walls are starting to fall in now, the rock walls. The walls are  probably oh, I   d say eight to ten foot tall. Three walls, you know. The  front one had rock troughs that they   d feed the milk cows in and  stanchions built in there where they   d run the cows in and lock their  heads in the stanchion when they milked them. Anyhow, the walls are  starting to fall in now and it   s beyond repair. Someday when we get rich  well we might dig those rocks out and bring them up here and make  something else out of it, a flower bed or something maybe. (Laughs)  But yeah there   s an old road where they used to drive their teams and  equipment down across this canyon that we were talking about and up  the other side and go back in the far north side. There   s 20 acres back  there that   s in cultivation. The old road   s still there and I find some old  parts and pieces every once in awhile walking down the old road, bolts  and stuff that   s fell out of their equipment, you know. It   s quite  interesting. Wish you could talk to some of them.  Oh yeah. Well how was record-keeping done during your father   s time  and how is it different from your record-keeping today?  About the same. It   s all zeroes. (Laughter) Him and Mom kept records  of everything, just their ledger book.  And we do use the computer some.  Yeah, we   ve got about everything on the computer. I would say it   s just  15  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  not much different, you know. About the same old way of doing things.  Did your parents talk much about the 1930s during the Depression?  No, not really. I   ve heard them you know   neither one of them was one  to complain. But I   ve heard them talk about how rough it was, just  generally rough. The whole country was of course, but it was pretty hard  on them.  Being on the farm they had more things to subsist on than town folks, I  guess?  Oh yeah. But still yet, like I said, they planted a big old garden and  always had hogs and cows that they could back up on to eat for food.  Mom would can up stuff and then we   d have to find our own spots in the  cellar when we went down there to hide from the tornadoes because the  rest of it was full of food, canned food. She canned up a bunch.  Did you have fruit trees?  We had some. We   ve got some of the old pear trees out back here that   s  made it. They pretty well are the only ones that have survived. And they  were from the old   well, I   ll say the old days, I can remember them  being there when I was just a little kid. They had pears on them then  because I can remember picking them. So I don   t know.  Do you remember when electricity came to the farm?  I do.  Tell us a little about it.  I remember when we did not have that. It was just coal oil lamps and go  to bed early usually, where you didn   t have to use a light. But coal oil  lamps were our main deal. And we   ve still got some of the old lamps.  But yeah, that was it. Electricity come in I can   t tell you what year, but  Dad bought a radio and that was my entertainment, a radio. That was all  we had and we   d sit there and listen to the radio at night. And then we  didn   t have gas, we always cooked with wood and finally he bought a   I  guess it must   ve been a good year for farming or prices or something     he bought Mom a new cook stove, a gas cook stove. We   d run it off of  propane bottles or cylinders about this big around and probably that tall.  We   d have three or four of those cylinders and we   d have to fill them up  about every two or three weeks over at the propane place. But boy, we  were in tall cotton when we got that gas stove. You just flick a switch  and throw a match in it to light it back then. They didn   t light  16  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  themselves. But that was kind of it on that, electricity was wonderful.  You know, of course it   s kind of like it is now, you just keep adding  stuff. We got the old house wired up for electric. And like I said, the  radio and I don   t know what was next, may   ve been the TV.  Not the refrigerator?  Well, may   ve been a refrigerator. I don   t really know. But anyhow, that  TV was a pretty hot item back then, you know. Didn   t everybody have a  TV. And I can remember, it seemed like a little old picture was about  that big you know, the tube. Arvin, I remember the name of it. It was an  Arvin TV.  And where had he gone to get that?  Oh, gosh I don   t know. I guess probably Guthrie, over at one of the  hardware stores. I don   t really remember.  Let   s go back to the radio just a minute. Do you remember what  programs you may have listened to?  Oh, let   s see, I was trying to remember that a while ago but, oh my, there  were cowboy shows on there. Roy Rogers and Dale Evans, of course,  were the tops and Gene Autry, he   d sing awhile and have his little story  going on, you know. Oh gosh, I don   t know.  Baseball games?  No, we weren   t too much in on sports back then. That was about it, you  know. Some of those old comics would have comic programs on where  you could sit down to get a big laugh out of them. Yeah, it   s quite a deal.  Then we got a water well and we put an electrical pump in it. Oh yeah,  there wasn   t no more of that going out there and pumping that water.  That was a several times a day deal too, the old water bucket, had old  wooden water buckets. And the well over at the old place was just right  outside the house, oh 20, 30 foot out there to it. Had a windmill on it and  the windmill would let it pump most of the day and had a pipe on it that  run out of the pump down to the livestock tank and the old cows that we  had in the lot, well they   d have water. Then we   d go out there and take  that pipe off and put the old wooden bucket underneath there and fill it  up. Three gallons I believe it was, a three gallon bucket. They   re an  antique now. They bring lots of money if you can find them.  What about indoor plumbing?  Oh no, we didn   t have that for a long time after that. We were out close  17  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  to the chickens where we had to go for that.  Well speaking of all the water, what would you do for bath time?  Well we had the, what   d they call them? Number 3 tubs? The long tubs,  the galvanized tubs, where they made round ones then they made oblong  ones. That was our bathtub and we   d put that right out there on the back  porch and that   s where we   d bathe off.  Once a week?  Oh, when we was farming probably every night. But some of them were  farther than that apart.  Even in the winter time?  Yeah.  On the porch?  Yeah, we   d heat the water. Heat the water on that old wood stove. We  didn   t waste much propane on heating water, we saved that to cook with.  But yeah, you could fill that old tub about half full of cold water and it  wouldn   t take a couple gallons of hot water to make it warm, where you  could stand it.  Do you remember home extension agents coming by?  No, I don   t. I sure don   t. Probably did. But I don   t remember.  Had no county agents coming by?  No.  Well, now you   re grandma Blanch belonged to one.  Well, did she till she moved to Guthrie?  No, I think they     Before?  I think so. I don   t know, but I think so.  I don   t remember it. Sure don   t.  18  Finchum  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  Did you have any conservation efforts?  I   m sure they did in the old time. We haven   t done a whole lot here. Oh  we got a flood back in    98, I believe it was. Anyhow it was the first time  this old creek had ever jumped its banks and it come down across our  field down there in the bottom and cut a big old wash down through that.  I had to go get the   now you got me thinking hard here, now I can   t  even recall the   anyhow, it   s a conservation district over there. And  they come out and looked everything over and staked it off and helped  me out with some money on it. Then we made a big dam where it would  catch this water coming down through that wash and put a pipe in it  where it would go on into the creek and it sure has helped.  Did your dad give you any advice on how to work the land?  No. He just showed me. You know, ever since I was a little old kid he  said,    Do this and do it right,    you know. And I   m sure there   s lots he  could   ve told me if he didn   t go so quick. But anyhow, you follow him  around and he usually did it right.  Well how did he end up with the land if he had   how many brothers and  sisters did he have?  He just had two sisters. Grandpa was a baby of great grandpa   s kids, 10  of them.  Ten.  Ten. And he was the baby, the last one to leave home. So he bought all  of his brothers and sisters out and he wound up owning this place  where   now the royalty is a different deal. They had 160 acres of  royalty, oil and gas lease royalty mineral rights. Grandpa tried to buy  them out and some of them just wouldn   t sell it at all, they thought it  was a gold mine. But anyhow, he got some of it bought. But they sold  the top rights, the land rights.  So how many total acres do you have now?  160.  And how big was it?  That   s it.  That   s as big as it   s been?  19  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  That   s all they   d let them homestead in the Run was 160.  But then you had a half of a section for awhile?  We had a quarter. A quarter over there that they   d bought later on.  And then sold it?  Yeah. My cousin owns it now, he bought it.  What were holidays like?  Well, my mom had   there were 11 kids, wasn   t there?  Probably.  Yeah. And my  maternal  grandpa and grandma were named Charlie and  Ethel Cox. They owned a farm about three miles south of us down here.  And of course Dad and Mom were married and most of the time they  had all those kids. About every Sunday everybody   d show up down at  Grandpa and Grandma Cox   s for dinner. Now their dinner table  consisted of two, the big real long picnic tables that you   ve seen, you  know three or four card tables long or something like that. Well there  were two of them, but they were old heavy duty made out of 2-inch stuff  and that   s what they had in their kitchen. The whole house was big, or  the kitchen area was. All their 11 kids and them and all their kids would  gather up down there just about every Sunday and every holiday.  Usually we   d be down there. Oh we   d go to Guthrie for some of our  kinfolks over there, you know, on maybe Christmas or half a day or you  know. But there was always a holiday spent with family the best we  could.  Well how did you meet your wife?  Oh, I can   t tell that. (Laughter)  Geez.  Oh well, after I got up old enough to get a car, we always had to go to  different towns and kind of scout it out you know, look around and see  all the girls and all the history points of the towns, you know. I met her  at Guthrie, that   s where she was raised and went to school. So we kind  of hit it off and decided we   d get married. Ain   t been nothing but  happiness ever since.  That   s a very good answer. (Laughter) Where do you see the farm going  20  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  P. Acton  Finchum  P. Acton  in the next 100 years?  Well, we   re hoping that the family will be out here some of these days,  our kids    family, grandkids. I don   t know what the outlook   s going to be  for the United States, but I   m just pretty sure that people   s going to be  looking for a place to live. And we   re going to try to do our best to have  this in case worse comes to worse, they can come back here and build a  lean-to down here in the creek like the old folks did. (Laughter) But  anyhow, everybody   s not going to have that to come back on. And I   m  sure that they   ll   oh it may be after they retire, but I   m sure they   ll be  back out here. Living in a house somewhere.  Do you have daughters or sons?  We   ve got one of each. Our daughter lives down south of Crescent down  here. Her husband is our county commissioner here in Logan County in  District 3. They   ve got two girls. They   re just happy as they can be.  Then our son and his family live in Las Vegas. He didn   t think much of  the old tractors, like I did, when he was a kid. So anyhow, he met his  wife, he went through OSU, graduated out of OSU and met his wife in  Tulsa, I believe it was where they met.  But he did graduate from OSU in Engineering and he   s done real well  out there with his degree. But he does plan to come back. He promised.  (Laughs)  Ain   t no telling when it   ll be.  And our granddaughter, Halei   Lana has the two girls and Mark has the  two boys. Halei will be a senior in the nursing program at OSU-OKC.  And MegAnn, the second one, she   s going to SWOSU  South Western  Oklahoma State University . She   ll be a sophomore. Mark   s boys, AJ  the oldest, he is a high school senior and he will graduate next month.  He wanted to come to OSU but out-of-state tuition  is so much . Mark is  a lifetime alumni member and he thought that there was something that  maybe could help him out but they checked and there isn   t so AJ is  going to go ahead and go to the University of Nevada-Las Vegas. And  then Sean Abram is 11 and will be in the sixth grade.  He has a little bit of time.  He   s got a little bit of time and he wants to come to the farm. (Laughter)  He likes tractors.  He loves the farm. He loves it out here.  21  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  He comes back and spends the summer with us about every year.  Well, what are some of the biggest challenges today in running the  ranch for you?  For me, it   s my health. I can   t do a whole lot of physical work. I haven   t  been able to since the   I had three heart attacks and they got each one of  them cleared up with the angioplasty, but the fourth one they had to go  in and do triple bypass and that really knocked me down. And then this  horse wreck that I had, you know, they can   t get it straightened out. I  hope eventually they get it where I can do something. It   s a bad deal, I  can   t hardly do anything. It winds me just talking to you.  Did Crescent have a movie theatre when you were younger?  It did. Ritz. It was called the Ritz Theatre and it cost a dime to go every  time I   d go till I was 12, I believe it was, and then it was a quarter.  Raised it up to a quarter when you got to be 12. But yeah, we enjoyed  seeing all the old cowboy movies and all the good movies. They had the  top notch movies come up here. People would come from miles around  just to come to the little show at Crescent. I couldn   t tell you what year it  shut down, but it   s set there empty for years and years. Finally they tore  it out and filled up the slope down to the bottom, made it level to the  world, and now it   s a church. But that was the story on the show.  Well in those days too did they have any restaurants downtown?  Oh yeah, beaucoups of restaurants. Wasn   t a worry to find a place to eat.  They had several, oh they called it, one of them, the biggest one was the  City Caf  . That was there for years and years and still it   well, no it   s  not now but the building is. Anyhow, another big restaurant went in and  then there were probably three more smaller ones that went in.  Any five and dimes?  Yeah, used to have a five and dime store right next to the drugstore and  it was right next to the jewelry shop and it was right next to the man and  woman barber shop and it was right next to the post office and it was  right next to the hardware store. It used to be a thriving little town but  it   s pretty well folded up now.  Did the drug store have a counter for food?  It did. It had a bar in there with bar stools where you could     Ice cream.  22  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Yep. Ice cream malts. Their big specialty was malts and stuff. And the  pharmacy, you know.  I didn   t hear a library in there somewhere.  Well, it was on down the other side of town. (Laughter) It was down by  the park.  So there was one.  There was one, yeah. And still is.  Were any of the buildings built with the WPA, do you know?  Oh I   m sure, yeah. They   re all the quarried rock, you know. The old  sand rock where they cut them out in squares and built the buildings out  of it, I   m sure the WPA had something to do with it. My dad, back in the  Depression days, he worked for the WPA around here building bridges  and stuff and he had a team of horses and a slip, he called it. He   d move  dirt with it, kind of like they do with a scraper now or big machinery.  His old horses, I remember them, Dick and Diamond were their names.  Great big old work horses, and he   d walk along behind them and scoop  this dirt up and carry it wherever he needed it and dump it and come  back and get another load.  Are the bridges still standing?  They are. Some of the ends of them are still standing. Most of them,  they   ve re-done them and built new bridges, you know. Because they  was just single lane bridges and had the old banisters over them. Down  here where you came in, there was a   oh gosh, what   s it been, four  years? The new bridge is about four years old and there was an old  banister bridge there. You know those banisters were probably ten foot  tall. It was the rickety old bridge, but it held up lots of big loads that  didn   t nobody know but us and the truck driver that went across it,  because we   d see them, you know. But anyhow they   ve got us a new  bridge in there now. There are very few old bridges left.  When you were in high school did you participate in 4-H or FFA?  FFA. I was in FFA all through high school. But that was about it, I never  did play football, I was always on a tractor somewhere.  Well for your projects, what would you do?  I had cows. Or calves and hogs. I   d show hogs and calves. One year,  23  Finchum  J. Acton  P. Acton  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Finchum  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  Finchum  P. Acton  J. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  J. Acton  P. Acton  Nykolaiszyn  Dad let me have a quarter over here and I raised a wheat crop off of it to  put down on the book, for my project.  You went to county fairs?  Yeah, we would usually go to them. I never did show except through the  FFA, you know. But as far as     Well you had ribbons. You had some blue and red ribbons.  Yeah, that was off of the hogs and the calves. But I never did do any  canning or nothing. (Laughter)  Well, you would   ve had a good teacher though.  Yeah, I would   ve. Sure enough. My mom enjoyed going over there, she  didn   t go all the time, but when she did go she   d sure enjoy going  through the canning area.  And where would that be?  At the Logan County fairgrounds in Guthrie. Down on South Division.  Well is there anything else that you would like to add that we have not  talked to you about today?  Gosh, I don   t know what it would be. I   m sure there are lots of things,  like I said, probably I   ll think of, make you a whole list after you leave.  How long have you two been married?  Forty-four years and I will say Jerry loves the land. He   s been a  wonderful caretaker of the land and the soil. We plan to keep it right  here in the family.  Well, we don   t have anywhere to go, we might as well be here.  (Laughter)  We appreciate you taking time out this Sunday to speak with us.  Well, we enjoyed it.  Yeah, we love OSU. (Laughter)  Well, that   s good. And even if you didn   t, that would be okay too.  24  P. Acton  J. Acton  But we do.  Yeah, we   re pretty solid.  -------  ------- 
