 Finchum  Cavalier  Today is April 22, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum. I am with the  Oklahoma State University Library. I am here in Mayes County,  Oklahoma in Locust Grove. We   re doing an interview today with Jon  Cavalier regarding his centennial farm, and this is for our Oklahoma  Centennial Farm Families Oral History Project. Thank you for having  me today.  Well, you are welcome.  Let   s start by having you tell us how your family came to initially have  this land.  A fellow by the name of Joseph Vann, who was my great-great uncle,  came here in 1829. He sold his plantation down in Georgia. He lived in  Beaver Pond, Georgia, sold it and came here because he knew the  Indians were going to get moved anyway. He was foresighted enough to  know that. He came here and started a new plantation with his family  and nine slaves. He cleared land, and what have you, around here and  probably, I don   t know, forty or fifty acres is probably what a person, at  that time, could handle. Don   t know for sure. But anyway, he died in  1877 and his family lived here a few years  after .  Then in 1891 my grandfather, John Tyler Cavalier, and my grandmother,  Eliza, bought the improvements on the place. At that particular time the  Cherokee Nation owned all the land. The only thing that anybody had  was the improvements. You could use all the land you wanted. So that is  kind of the way it started at that point. That   s the way we acquired it.  Then in 1905 they started allotting the land, and my grandmother took  this allotment, on this acreage here, for her allotment. My grandfather, I  just found out lately where some of his was. These allotments were  scattered all over the state and all over the county. Maybe ten acres here  and forty acres there and what have you. But anyway, I found part of his,  finally. Initially the family, there was eight of them in the family, and  5  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  they should have gotten about 110 acres a piece. So in theory they  probably had around eight hundred and something acres, but it was  scattered. This portion here was together is the reason it has all stayed  together and in the family all this time. All out going pieces was sold  off.  How much was this? How much acreage for this one?  This farm that my grandma and grandfather had was about 350 acres.  My uncle had land across the road, his allotments, and another uncle on  north of here, he had 110 acres up there, but this was the main farm here.  It is down to my brother and I have 240 acres.  Total or each?  Total now. Total for both of us.  How did John and Eliza meet? Were they already here? Or where had  they come from?  He was a school teacher. He went to school at the Seminary at  Tahlequah, got an education. While he was there he got kicked out, but  anyway wound up being a teacher. (Laughs) I guess he was teaching in  this area, and she was one of his students. I think she was about fifteen  when they got married. So that is how they met.  To get allotments did you have to be Cherokee?  You had to be Cherokee, yeah. My grandfather was a half-breed and my  grandmother was a quarter.  They had how many children?  They had seven. Then they raised her nephew.  So when it was time to share this with siblings, how did you end up with  it? How did your father end up with it?  My grandmother died in 1947, and my grandfather had died in 1917 of a  stroke. Then Grandmother ran the farm, and she run the damn thing, too.  (Laughter) She died in 1947, and my dad inherited part of it here, and  then he bought the rest of it, and that is the way him and my mother  wound up with it.  Then your parents had it?  6  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  I think about 1985 they deeded  it over . We all agreed how we were  going to divide it up. I got sixty acres here with a home with all the  improvements on it. My brother got land, 110 acres north of here and  seventy south. We have been maintaining it ever since. (Laughter)  Well, it is a large piece and it is pretty. Do you have any idea why they  picked this particular piece to begin with?  No, I don   t, other than it is probably similar to where they came from in  Georgia. The Indians come to this country, especially around Tahlequah  and down in there is one of their favorite places. The farmers, the half-breeds  came up here. Joseph Vann was a half-breed or a mixed-breed.  They were the farmers and the most, well I would say, the most  productive of the Cherokees. The full-bloods, they wanted to keep the  old ways, and they didn   t want to have anything to do with the allotted  land. They made them take it, and consequently it didn   t last very long.  White man beat them out of it over a pint of liquor, but anyway, some of  them managed to hang on but a lot of it just went. They didn   t have any  need for it other than to hunt on it.  What were some of the crops or products that your grandparents had?  Well, they raised corn, wheat, oats, maize, used to call it kaffir corn,  some kind of head feed, high gear  milo , sorghum, and I heard them  mention flax. I don   t know why they raised flax but that was part of the  grain, too.  Do you remember much about them?  Well, my grandfather died when my dad was ten.  So you wouldn   t remember him.  Only ten years old. I remember my grandmother. I have numerous  pictures of her holding me. I guess I was the baby at that particular time,  and I got a lot of pictures of her holding me. I remember her. She was a  large woman and always went to church on Sundays. Now, nothing got  in the way of that. She was strong, strong-minded. In fact, some of the  Cherokee neighbors around here I   ve talked to said she was the J.R.   J.R. Ewing from the TV show Dallas  of Spring Creek. (Laughter) She  ruled everything with an iron fist. (Laughs)  She had been a school teacher, right?  No, she hadn   t. Her husband was, John Cavalier was a school teacher.  She was a student. She probably just went to the eighth grade at the  7  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Hogan Institute over here by Locust.  Do you remember some of the things she cooked?  That she cooked? Yeah. We would go to church on Sunday and come  back, and we would get a chicken killed and cooked for dinner that day  with all the gravy and biscuits and all that kind of stuff, her and my  mother. The kitchen used to be back there in the back of the house. They  had an old wood cook stove back there. They done all the canning and  cooking and everything there. It was so damn hot in the summertime the  flies wouldn   t even come in it. You didn   t have to worry about shutting  the doors. (Laughter) But anyway.  So they had a large garden?  She was quite a lady. They grew everything. Everything they needed to  survive on, they grew it.  They had a cellar?  Had a cellar. It was right out the back door, handy, so they could just  carry the fruit down there. It was special built. The shelves were built in  the concrete so they could store the stuff.  So if I understand you correctly, part of the original house is still here?  We are sitting in the original house built in 1866.  Just been updated along the way?  Yeah. This room and that one in there are the originals. There was a hall  right here, there was a fireplace right into this room, fireplace into that  room and this hall went into, there were two original rooms and later on  they added one room and the hall went into it. Where the kitchen was  originally, I don   t know.  In 1916 my grandfather decided this house   let me back up a little bit.  The road from Claremore to Tahlequah come by the house and went  down the west side here. The house faced that road. Everybody wanted  to face the road in them days, I guess, and still do. Houses are built  facing the street, and what have you, but anyway they changed the road  and went by the north side of the house and on down there. So he turned  this house around in 1916 so he could watch the people go by, I guess.  (Laughs) I don   t know of any other reason. (Laughs)  My uncle said they turned this thing around. An old man named Cab  8  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Benton turned it around with a team of horses, and they got done on  Christmas Eve. He said a blue northern blew in and there wasn   t a door  on this house that would shut. They liked to froze and had quilts nailed  to every door and, of course, the fireplaces were torn out. They were  kind of in a heck of a mess, but they survived.  Had to be hearty, I guess.  Oh, yeah. After my granddad turned the house around, of course he died  in 1917, about a year a later. They started the two rooms back there  before he died, but was finished up later. That was the main part of the  house.  It was heated by wood?  Heated by wood and cooked by wood.  What was the water source? Where did they get their water?  There was an old spring down here by the creek. It was dug out and they  would carry water from there. Then when they could afford it, they  finally   that is where the Joseph Vann family got their water and my  grandfather did too when they first moved here, but he finally dug a  thirty foot dug well right straight behind the house, right outside the  kitchen. Of course, they had a wall up around it and one of the  windlasses to pull a bucket out of there. One of the memories I have got  of that is that they would put a half-gallon of milk on a string of rope  and drop it down in there to keep it cool. Once in a while that thing  would get broke and we would have milky water for a while. I can  remember that pretty plain. I can remember going out there and drawing  that water. Of course, all the wash water, and everything, had to be  drawn out of that well.  Probably had an outhouse at that time?  Yeah. My dad finally put a hand pump in there to pump water. Then,  later on, we got electric in 1949. He bought a pump jack to put on it  which would pump the water without having to do any manual labor, but  it still wasn   t piped in the house. Then, later on, they got in here about, I  don   t know what year that was, but it was a long time before. What was  your question? Oh, the outhouse. We can talk about the buildings  outside. The smokehouse is still out there, the original smokehouse. I  have redone it and made a storage building out of it. The chicken house  and the hen house, for the eggs and stuff, was right out there and the  two-hole toilet. It hid the two-hole toilet. It was on the back side.  9  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  It was a two-seater?  It was a two-seater. Yeah. Later on we had a single-seater out here.  Moving on up. It was a WPA  Works Progress Administration  built  toilet. I mean, it was according to spec ification . (Laughs)  We have had a few people tell us about that but not many. So that is  good to know.  They were the same with the brooder house. My mom built a brooder  house and they built it to specifications. OSU Extension furnished all  that information back then.  Okay. That is good to know, too.  So anyway, she had a brooder house out there. She ordered 150 baby  chicks through the post office, and a mail carrier would deliver them or  we would go pick them up. Now I have got two houses out there four  hundred foot long and forty foot wide, sixteen thousand square feet, each  of them that hold 40,000 birds. I am a contract grower for Tyson.  Still doing chickens.  Still doing chickens.  Well, did your mother belong to a homemaker club?  Yeah. Nettie Sykes, I believe, was the home demonstration agent. A lot  of ladies in the community would get together on a regular basis for a  home demonstration program, or something of some sort.  Do you happen to remember the name of the group?  No, I really don   t, but I remember Nettie Sykes.  That is pretty good.  I don   t remember exactly what the     What about the county agent? The ag agent?  Harold Nelson. He came down here and helped my dad graft pecan trees  and do terracing, that kind of type thing.  Were you in 4-H yourself?  10  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  No. I was in FFA  Future Farmers of America  for four years. I was a  Junior Master Farmer.  Did you participate in county fairs?  Yeah. Mayes County Fair when the old fairgrounds was north of town  and nothing but a pile of junk. We got a nice one now, but that was in  the    50s,    51 through    55 was when I was showing hogs. I showed hogs,  Hampshire hogs. We went from there to Muskogee Free State Fair, and  it was a big fair at that time. Then on to Tulsa State Fair.  So you went to high school here in     Locust Grove. I went to grade school in Cave Springs, a mile west of me  here. It was an old country school.  How many were in your class?  About seven.  Was it one through eight?  It was a two-roomed schoolhouse. It had one through four in one room  and fifth through the eighth in the next one. Then we graduated and went  to Locust Grove. Big town. (Laughs)  About how many were in your graduating class as a senior?  Thirty-six, I believe there was.  That is pretty decent.  It has grown a lot since then.  What year did you graduate?     55. My dad had about seven or eight in his class in 1926 when he  graduated. He and my mother both went to this Cave Springs school,  too.  Is the building still standing?  Well, they made a home out of it and you can   t tell. The only thing that  is noticeable now is the cellar. The cellar is still there, of course.  How would you get to school?  11  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Well, most of the time we walked. Sometimes an old man by the name  of Bill Breedlove drove a bus for Locust Grove. He lived way down in  Yonkers about twenty miles down there, I think. He let us ride the bus  anytime we needed to. If it was raining or something like that we could  ride it. Then later on I got to ride a horse to school, later on drive a little  Ford tractor.  A tractor? (Laughs)  A little Ford tractor. Yep. Me and my friends up the road here, Granvil  and Pete Bates, we would race them things. They had one, too. We  would race them to school or up and down the road. We was a little  mischievous back then.  Tell us a little bit more about that. What else did you do for fun?  Well, I can   t think of anything. I will say this. We didn   t have a lot of  things to play with. I did when I was a little kid. I have got pictures with  boy, bright new toys and stuff out there on top of the cellar. They would  be worth two or three hundred a piece if I had them now. I don   t know  what happened to them; new tricycle. Grandma probably bought all of  them, I would assume.  But anyway, later on grew up, didn   t have nothing. We had what we call  a bean flip to shoot birds and stuff with. The Ross Boys, the neighbor  boys around here, we would all get together, go off down to the creek  and stay all day knocking wasp nests, walking up and down the creek,  getting into anything we could. (Laugh) Stay all day. I guess folks never  did worry about it. Shoot snakes and, of course, we would be barefooted  all that time.  Bee stings.  We grew up. Kids nowadays got their cell phones and texting. That is all  they got to do.  I know. Sad isn   t it?  It is. I will never get into the texting, I don   t guess. I do use the phone.  I am assuming you had chores assigned to you around the farm.  Yeah. The main thing we done was, my dad put a dairy in about    48 or  somewhere along in there. It started out in one of the cow lots down  there, and all we had was about three or four number three wash tubs  12  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  sitting out there. We would throw the feed in them and those old cows  would, hopefully, stand still long enough to get them milked. We usually  did. Then later on the Pet Milk Company came along and talked him  into buying some more cows and selling to Pet. We done that for a  while. Cooled it in a half barrel with water in it. That is all the cooling it  got before they picked it up.  Then Meadow Gold came along and decided that we ought to go Grade  A. I think they loaned my dad money to buy cows with and take it out of  the check. I think a lot of the dairies   there was a lot of dairies that  started up about that time, early    50s, late    40s. Anyway, we added on to  the old original barn down here. Added the shed on to it and put  stanchions in there, and we milked in there by hand, poured it in a milk  can and the truck would come around and pick it up.  Well, I graduated from high school and left. He put in a vacuum milker,  but they still had to pour it in a can. Well, my brother graduated and left.  Then he got a vacuum tank. (Laughs) Every time somebody left he   d  add better equipment. (Laughter) They finally wound up with that as  long as they milked. Of course, my mother and my uncle helped us milk,  too. There were four of us that milked. Mostly the men, but Mom would  do a lot of milking, too. We had an uncle that lived here. I had two  daddies when I grew up. (Laughs) When my dad inherited the place, my  uncle had lived here all his life so he stayed here, too. We grew up, me  and my brother and I had a little sister, with two daddies, so to speak. He  helped us a lot.  Didn   t have to have any hired help then if you had     Well, yeah, we did. My uncle, he had a place down here south here  about a half a mile. We used a lot of our Cherokee neighbors around  here. Most of our neighbors were Cherokees. They would come to work  for us. Way back there it was fifty cents a day and then it finally got up  to five dollars, I think. That was high pay. (Laughs) There was an Indian  lady, she used to come here, that would help Mom when she was  canning and hog killing and all of that. She just worked for food,  anything to eat. She had a big family and didn   t have a husband that  helped her much.  So your dad did dairy. Did he have a job off the farm?  During the war he worked at a fire station over at the Oklahoma  Ordinance Works near Pryor where the industrial area is now. They had  a German prisoner of war camp over there. They had a fire station there  by it. He worked there some and then later on, in his later years, he  worked in Tulsa sometimes at the Philtower Building, but most of the  13  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  time he farmed.  Most of his money, income, was from farming then?  Yeah, and from the dairy. Most of our income was always from the  farm. In 1948 he bought an old   we had mules, a corral full of mules  and horses down there, teams to work with. Wagons and all the horse  drawn equipment you can think of. In 1948 he bought an old F-30  Farmall tractor. Boy, that was something. He was proud of that. Got the  drawing equipment to go with it.  Was it new or used?  Oh, no, it was used. It was used then. Probably a 1920 model or early     30s something like that. Anyway, we got to farming with that and it  wasn   t long until we didn   t use horses for anything except to ride. Then  in   48 or    49 he bought a little 8N Ford tractor. Oh, that was mine.  (Laughter) I helped him farm with that and used it for every other thing.  That is the one that I talked about running to school with. Let   s see, we  have talked about these out buildings. I think we have covered all of  them here. The barn, the original barn down there was built by Joseph  Vann back in 1829-   30, somewhere along in there, right after he came  here. It was all logs and probably built by slaves. Of course, they used it  when they came here, but in 1928, they built that new barn that you can  see down there. The little main part of the barn was new in 1928 and, of  course, the shed has been added on to it later. I don   t know what  happened to the old barn. It probably rotted down. I   ve got a good  picture anyway.  They had a granary out north of it to put corn and stuff in. There was  another granary of Joseph Vann   s down there. A two-room granary that  they used for years, and it finally got burned down. The new barn had  four double stalls so you could put eight horses or mules in there, feed  them. Had a feed trough plumb across one side of it; of course had a  forty-ton hay loft. The mangers, or hay racks, were built along top of  that main feed trough. I still left part of the feed trough and the mangers  in there. (Laughs) I was thinking people down through the years could  see how that was built. Anyways you could get up in the loft and throw  the hay down in there. You didn   t have to take it anywhere else, feed the  horses right there, and then there was two granaries and a saddle room,  or tack room, in the new barn.  Do you have any favorite stories of things that happened in the barn?  Yeah. Of course we played down there, and that   s another thing. We  played down there to have something to do. Climbing up in that old loft  14  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  and playing up in the hay. Of course, I thought I was helping them put  hay in there, too, when they would bring it. I can remember climbing.  It   s got two ladders, one in the back and one in the front. I climbed up  that ladder one day and a wasp stung me right on the end of the nose.  My eyes swelled shut before I could get to the house, screaming and  squalling. (Laughs) I thought I was ruined. I used to dream about being  down there playing. We always had cattle around here. White face bulls  with horns. I would dream about them bulls chasing me, and I would just  barely make it to that ladder. Barely get out of the way. (Laughs) Never  did have one chase me, but I would dream about it.  Well, they were bigger than you at that time, maybe.  Oh, yeah. Another thing we done down there was a lot of wood bees,  carpenter bees they called them. Of course, we would get a paddle and  try to kill them. That was another pastime. We would do that for hours.  When you got stung on the nose, how did they treat it, or was there any  treatment?  Probably put coal oil on it. (Laughter) That was the main thing we  doctored with then. You step on a nail, you would come to the house and  Grandma would put a piece of fat meat, salt pork meat, and kerosene on  it, or coal oil we would call it, wrap it up and that took care of it.  Did it work?  Didn   t worry about no tetanus shot. It worked. Yeah, you could feel it  going to work right immediately, drawing that out of there.  I know some people used tobacco juice on bee stings.  Yeah. I don   t know. They chewed back then. Smoked, too, but I don   t  ever remember doing that, kerosene was the main thing. If you cut  yourself or anything, kerosene. When I went to work for the Public  Service Company the first thing we did was had first aid classes, and I  told them how we doctored stuff. Oh my God, they liked to blew up.  Said,    That   s poison     (Laughs) So anyway I shut up about that. I didn   t  talk about it anymore. I didn   t ever know anybody that got hurt or died  from it, but they said it was terrible.  Lets back up a bit. When you graduated from high school then what did  you do? Let   s go through your career.  When I graduated there was a county agent from here, west of Ponca  City. I don   t remember what   might have been Pawnee County, west of  15  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Ponca City, anyway. He came and got me and one of his nephews to go  out there and work on some farms. I thought, boy, that is quite a deal. I  went out there and I don   t think there was a tree anywhere around there.  I stayed with an old couple there. Probably wasn   t all that old, but I  thought they was at that time. They would put me on a tractor in the  morning, and I would stay out there all day long. Them fields was big,  I   d never seen fields that big before.  About a month of that is all I could handle. I got homesick, away from  my girlfriend. It was terrible. (Laughs) But they were real nice people.  We just didn   t have anything to talk about. So I came back and went to  work for my cousin over at Tulsa, Phillips Transfer Company, moving  pianos and appliances and all that kind of stuff for about a year.  Then a friend of mine here at Locust Grove worked for Public Service  Company, he was a service man here. They said there was going to be  an opening for a meter reader at Chouteau and wanted me to apply for it.  I think I was making  289 a month over in Tulsa and this job paid  195,  so I said,    I can   t live on that.    My daddy-in-law at the time said,    Well,  go ahead and take it. I think it would be good for you to take it, and I   ll  help you until you get on your feet.    Well, I took it and stayed there  thirty-eight years. Started out as a meter reader, company rep, service  rep. Went into the line construction part of Public Service Company and  wound up as construction superintendent over the whole thing in Tulsa.  When did you retire?  1994. Fifty-six years old.  Was that about the time you took over running the farm, or had you been  doing that all long.  Me?  Yes.  No. I came back and let   s see   I had been here about four years I guess  before I retired. My dad, my mother died in    91, I believe it was. I had  lived here about four years. Of course, just messed with hay and I had  some steers. Run some steers and a lot of hay, but then when I retired,  worked for a contractor for two years and then somebody around here  was building a chicken house. I asked about it and wound up with two of  them. I   m still farming  You are not retired yet, then.  16  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  I am not retired yet. I had full retirement at fifty-six years old. I had  enough years in, and they also gave me what they call an enhanced  retirement. They paid me the same thing social security would have paid  me if I was sixty-two. So I drawed that up until I was sixty-two then  social security took over.  It was hard to say no to that, wasn   t it?  Yeah. They were wanting to get rid of several people, cut down, cut  back. A lot us retired then. A lot of people jumped on that.  How many children to do you have?  I have three and my wife has four, so we   ve got seven between us. This  is not my first wife. Lea is not my first wife.  Of these children, are any of them planning to move right in and take  over the farm later?  I   ve got one that thinks he wants to. They all want a part of it, but I don   t  know if that will ever work out or not. I imagine it will be sold and  divided up. That is the way I see it, to be honest about it.  You   ll just let them deal with it later.  Yeah, they can deal with that to their own satisfaction, I guess.  So are any of them farming?  No. My youngest son has been helping me, until he got another job. I got  one fifty-three, a daughter fifty and one twenty-three, so one is younger.  Keeps you young.  He is the one that thinks he wants to take over the poultry business, and  he may. I just don   t know.  What does that entail, the poultry business? What all do you have to do  for that?  It is a daily thing, kind of like a diary. You are tied down for seven  weeks is what it takes to grow them. Then you are off about ten days,  but you spend all that time getting ready for the next bunch.  Do you spend a whole year rotating like that?  17  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Yeah. One year you will have six flocks, and the next year you will have  five.  And they come to pick them up or do you have to deliver?  No, they come and get them. They bring them on a semi-truck. When I  first started they brought them on a school bus. (Laughs) Now they   ve  got a big air conditioned semi-truck. When they come and pick them up  they bring about eight or ten catchers that that   s all they do is catch  chickens. Forklifts and semi-trucks with the coops and everything on  them, they do that. All I got to do is get the equipment up out of the way.  Everything cranks up in the chicken house, out of the way. Cranks up to  the ceiling.  Technology is great for that, at least.  Oh yeah, computers to run the thing. Of course you have to make sure  your computers are working all the time, too. (Laughs)  If you don   t have electricity does that impact what   s going on out there?  Well yeah, but I have a backup generator.  Okay. So you have got that covered.  You have got to have a backup generator, because it automatically starts  and if I am not here, it goes. Yeah, you would just suffocate a whole  flock of chickens.  I know there is the byproduct. What do you do with it?  The litter?  Yes.  I sell it. I have used it but I almost got to the max on it now. You can sell  it easily. There is a real demand for it.  A long way from a dairy farm. You learn different things. It is a whole  different setting.  Yeah, the litter used to be a problem but now there is such a demand for  it. The contractors that come to clean your house out don   t charge you  nothing for that, and they pay so much for the litter. Some of mine went  to Weatherford, Oklahoma. Almost all of it is getting hauled out of the  watershed district. That is good, that it   s getting hauled out. Of course  18  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  we have all got the federal regulations and state regulations that we go  by. Everything is pretty well regulated. I know there is a lot of  resentment, people who don   t like chicken farming. Hog farming is the  same way. We got to produce food but people don   t want to worry about  their drinking water and all that. They shouldn   t have to worry about it.  If we do our part then they don   t have to worry about it. It has been  abused in the past, I am sure.  When your dad was running the diary did he have to deal with federal  regulations or was that too early on?  I don   t think there was federal regulations but there was state health  regulations. There was an inspector who would come around every thirty  days at least, at random.  How did your father keep records, or did he?  Oh, they jotted a lot of things down in books. I have got some old  records out there where they used to keep track of the cattle and cattle  brands, whether they belonged to my uncle, my dad, my grandmother or  another uncle. I got all the cattle brands out there, and I can show you  that after while, that was on this place. I still got all the branding irons.  (Laughs) Of course, he probably threw all of his records in a cigar box  until tax time and then dug them out. I do file mine then I dig them all  out and go through them at tax time. I don   t really keep a lot of records.  I keep all of my settlement papers and everything on my birds that I  grow, where they have paid me and all of that. That will last a lot of  time. My wife is a stickler for checkbook balancing all the time. I ain   t  never balanced a checkbook. I tell her,    You keep enough money in  there, and you don   t have to worry about it.    And my bank is real nice.  If I overdraw, they call me. (Laughs) Let them do the bookkeeping. I  don   t keep books. I am not a detailed person in that area. (Laughs) I very  seldom even look at a statement. If I want to know something, how  much I got, I call.  That works.  Got the cell phone right there.  Well, let   s talk about the farm a little bit more too. How many ponds are  on the property?  My dad built one, and there are a couple of them north of here. Both of  them were soil conservation ponds, built where they picked the spot and  everything. There is two up there and then I built these two. Well, I built  three. One of them is on my brother   s down there but there are three  19  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  different ponds here on this creek. Probably fifteen to twenty years ago I  bought an old dozer, and I played around and built them dams. (Laughs)  Oh, we   ve got nice bass down there. My boy caught a nine and a quarter  pounder this week. Last summer they caught two seven pounders. They  catch a lot of bass, but they love them big-uns. There are some nice ones  down there.  Do you stock them?  I did when I first built the ponds.  But not since.  No, I haven   t stocked them since, but them bass have really taken over. I  have stocked channel cat fish  in there, too, but nobody has ever caught  one. I put two hundred of them in there. Never put crappie in there yet. I  should. I keep planning on it, but I haven   t.  Do you swim in the ponds? Did you swim in them?  No, fishing is all they do.  When you were younger?  No, the ponds weren   t there then. The two creeks run together down  here, and they go on down and run in Spring Creek. We played up and  down that creek all the time. We went on down to Spring Creek where  the swimming hole was. This creek never had enough water in it for a  swimming hole. You could wade.  Well, the two that the soil conservation built were probably more for  cattle, too, not for playing.  Yeah, they were for cattle.  When you were younger, how did they do bath time? Did you have a  number two tub?  Oh, we had a number three tub. Now I remember that. In the wintertime,  Mom would heat water and put in that old tub. Me and Jim would take a  bath in it. I don   t know how in the world we got in it, but we did. I  couldn   t now. If I did I couldn   t get out. (Laughs) Anyway, I remember  bath water sitting there and the next morning it would be froze in the  cold, cold winter time. We took a bath about once a week. We didn   t  take a bath everyday like they do now. It was a once-a-week deal. Mom  and Dad, they done the same thing, and my uncle. Summertime we  20  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  would set that old tub out there on the walk in the back by the cellar and  the well, and Mom would draw water to put in it and sun would heat it.  We would have a good warm bath.  Who got to go first?  Well, I did. (Laughs) We didn   t worry about who was first or second in  them days. Now, the old cellar house was where Mom had   first she  had a pot out there in the yard. She washed out there in the yard, in her  wash pot. Built a fire under it and heated the water and everything. Later  on, well, she still heated the water but she put it in a squeaky clean  washing machine Daddy had bought. She would go out there and stomp  on that thing all morning trying to get it to start. It had a flexible hose  stick out the door so she wouldn   t suffocate from fumes. But anyway,  she would wash out there and get the washing all done. That was another  time we took a bath, was in the bluing water. It was the cleanest.  (Laughs) We would go out there and take a bath. It   s amazing how  people lived back then.  It is interesting, though.  I know it. I tell them stories. Some of the stuff I shouldn   t tell, but that is  the way it was.  What would she usually fix for breakfast?  Oh, there never was such a thing as a bowl of cereal back in them days.  We had sausage, biscuits and gravy or bacon, called it tenderloin then, or  ham. We cured all our hams and everything out there. We would have  that old ham and red-eye gravy, maybe a bowl of rice or a bowl of  oatmeal. It looked like you were feeding an army. They had everything  in the world on there.  Did she make her own sausage?  Yeah. My dad made the sausage when we would butcher. Usually in  December we would butcher. We killed about eight or ten hogs.  Did they ever can the meat? I have heard people talk about meat  canning.  They killed a beef one time before they got electricity and everything.  They thought they would can it and that turned out to be disastrous.  Everything was roast beef. I think they finally threw most of it away.  When we got a freezer we started butchering the beef. Most all ours was  pork, because you could cure it.  21  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Smoke in the smokehouse? You actually used the smokehouse?  Yeah, had the smokehouse. I can remember stopping up all the cracks,  cutting green hickory wood, and building two or three little fires in the  floor and having all those hams and stuff hanging up. Smoking it, that  was the best smelling stuff in the world. Of course, they salted it all  down before, in salt out there, and done all that.  Was anything traditionally done for holidays like Christmas or July  Fourth?  Back then we would start out, I guess, maybe Mother   s Day. Celebrated  that. All the kin folks came and went to church. Then, let   s see,  Memorial Day everybody came for decoration. We have our own  cemetery out here, family cemetery. They would go there and to Hogan,  and then there was a Markham Cemetery over here that was my  grandmother   s family, so it   s a family cemetery too. After Memorial  Day, I guess, would be the Fourth of July. We would get together and go  to the creek down here on Spring Creek and a big family group,  everybody went. Then didn   t do nothing Labor Day. Thanksgiving. Boy,  that was the next big one. Everybody came to that. Then Christmas is the  same way.  Came here to this house?  Most of the time came here but I had an uncle that lived in Tulsa.  Sometimes we would go over there and have the Christmas over there,  instead of here. If we had Thanksgiving here, we had Christmas over  there. Kind of share the trip.  Cut a tree from the farm?  Oh, yeah. I remember when I was little old kid, we never did buy a tree  when I was growing up. Me and my mom would go down here. There  are cedar trees all up and down this old creek. We would go down there  and pick out one that we thought was the prettiest thing there was, bring  it back, put it up. By the time Christmas got here, the limbs were all  hanging down, green was dry and, of course, well, that was the best we  had. We thought that was the greatest thing in the world. Make all the  chains and stuff. Mom would get the red berries and string them on a  string. Decorate the tree. Somewhere back, we finally got electricity.  She bought some of them bubble lights that bubbled and put on them  trees. We thought that was something.  They still are pretty cool.  22  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Yeah, they are antiques now, if you can find them. Kind of look like  candles. We always cut our own tree, down here.  In the days you were heating with wood, would it be cold when you got  up in the morning, like in the wintertime?  We never kept the fire overnight. When we went to bed, the fire went  out. If it went out during the night, Dad would get up the next morning  about five o   clock, come in here and start stoking that stove up, poured  some kerosene in there and get her going. I would wait a while until it  got warmed up a little bit. We had to get up early to go milk. I would  finally get up. Boy, I can remember crawling out from under them  covers. We had comforters, big old heavy tack quilts. A lot of times we  had feather beds. We would be nestled in down in them, with the  comforters over us, to stay warm. Get up in the morning. We didn   t have  carpet then. Linoleum floors. Boy, it was like walking on ice. I am  telling you. (Laughs) Grandma did make some throw rugs, hook rugs, I  guess, they call them.  Yes.  Different material sewed together. Anyway, we would try to step on  them. They were scattered through the house. We would step on them to  stay off that damn linoleum. It was cold. (Laughter) Come out here and  crowd around that stove and it   I don   t remember it ever heating the  house plumb up. You usually had to get around the stove to stay warm  or pretty close to it. We didn   t run around in our underwear back then.  We wore clothes. Even put a coat on, if we wanted to.  Get dressed in a hurry.  That   s right. Didn   t terry around. (Laughs)  Well, did the farm survive pretty well through the 1930s?  Well, I think my grandmother lost most of her money in the bank. I  don   t know how much she had, but they did lose some money in the  bank. We never done without anything, because we raised all of our  food, and what have you. It was rough times for them, but they raised  most of their food. Just staples are all they would buy, flour, something  like that.  In the    50s was another rough time for farms and farming.  Yeah, but I don   t remember it being too severe.  23  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  And then the    80s were tough?  I don   t remember that being severe either. Back in the Depression, we  was talking about land a while ago, this land was always free range,  unless the owner fenced it. So your cattle could run anywhere they  wanted to. Our cattle ran to Peggs and Yonkers, halfway to Salina,  plumb out to Rose, anywhere they wanted to. But what I was going to  say, during the Depression, a lot of farmers just left. This land could be  bought for taxes. A lot of it was available for taxes, because they just  went off and didn   t pay their taxes. My uncle told me, said,    We could  have had all the land we wanted. Hell, we didn   t need to buy it, we used  it anyway.    Cattle, horses and hogs all ran outside.  How would you round them up then?  Well, the cattle they would drive them in. The hogs, you   d go down with  some corn, they would follow you in.  You had to make sure they were yours.  Yeah, but if somebody else didn   t claim them I guess they was yours.  Hogs was marked just like cattle were.  Oh, were they branded, too?  No, they weren   t branded but they split their ears. Yeah, they would  have splits in their ears. That is one way they marked hogs. Now, the  cattle were all branded, and everybody had their own brand. Some of  them registered them and some of them didn   t. I don   t think any of ours  were ever registered. Anyway, they branded the cattle and then they  marked the ears with either, they called it under slope. They might slice  off the bottom of the ear or they would split the end of the ear. Right ear  or the left. The owner may have used the left ear. They would brand on  the hip, usually.  So the neighbors had to agree on the sides for the ears?  No. You marked yours however you wanted to, and then you put your  brand on there, too. So there are a combination of things that identify  yours. You put your brand on there. That was the main thing.  Well, for the pigs.  For the pigs, I don   t know if they ever got mixed up. There wasn   t  anybody around close to us so I don   t know.  24  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  They probably don   t wander as much as a cow would.  Not as far, but the cattle, they were all branded and marked, and what  have you. That was probably my, that and thrashing time was my  favorite times on the farm.  Really?  Rounded up the cattle. I have helped gather the cattle a lot of times. My  uncle, he rode a horse all the time checking on these cattle. He knew the  cows. The old lead cow would have a bell on. Everybody   s bell was  different. He knew everybody   s sound, whose cattle they were, when he  heard them. He knew his, when he heard them. He knew about where  they was going to be, watering holes, the pastures they would go to,  because he stayed on top of it all the time.  So the lead cow, the other cows would follow, I take it?  Yes. The group would be with the lead cow. They called her the lead  cow, or bell cow.  A little smarter than you think then?  Oh, yeah. There was always a boss cow in a herd.  You always see groups of them so you figure they are at least social  beings. I mean, they like being around other ones. Where would you  have to take them to market?  Well, a lot of times the steers would   back then you kept cattle two or  three years instead of selling them when they were less than a year old.  Cattle buyers would come here and we would, of course, corral the cattle  and then some way or another get a hold of them and tell them we had  them corralled. They would come here and make an offer for them. Of  course, you were always getting beat that way. No competition. Later on  they had a little sale barn up here at Locust, they   d take them up there  and that was competitive bidding. Then they went to Tulsa stockyards  after that. Haul them over there and at first that was private treaty. Had  all the commission companies and you signed your cattle or hogs to a  certain commission company, and they secretly went and got bids from  different buyers. (Laughs) That   s the way it was handled.  I would go over there with them sometimes, and while we were waiting  for them to get sold, and what have you, we would go to Mock Brothers  Saddlery company and the caf   right next to it. That was the first time I  25  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  ever ate a meal away from home, was at a little caf   at the stockyards.  Then we went to Mock Brothers and looked at saddles, and all that kind  of stuff, to kill time. Then later, of course, the Tulsa Stockyards went out  of business over there at Sand Springs. They built the new stockyards on  the east side of town. Still call it Tulsa Cow Palace, I think, is what they  call it. Run them in there and it was competitive bidding. So that is the  way. A lot of cattle, or not a lot of ours, were shipped. They had an old  stockyard here at Locust and some of the cattle was shipped out on that.  The big cattleman Walter Markham, who was my grandmother   s  brother, was a big rancher. His place is west of town there. They drove  the cattle to Chouteau, penned them over there and shipped them to  Kansas City.  By train?  Yeah, by train. They had the stockyards right there by the tracks, and  they   d load them up right on there and haul them to Kansas City. My  uncle said they   d take a packed lunch, him and his uncle, ride in the  cattle car to Kansas City, stay all night, watch the cattle sale, get their  money and come back home. I have got correspondence between him  and the commission companies up there, about shrinkage and different  problems with the cattle, you know. Letters he wrote and they wrote  back to him. Mark, Oklahoma, which was back before Locust Grove  was founded.  Has Locust Grove changed much? Did it have a theater back in the day?  Oh, yeah. I am doing a lot of research right now on that, getting ready  for the centennial next year, 2012. Yeah, Locust Groove had a post  office up towards Salina. Started out just Locust Grove Post Office and  then it moved on down to the Jerry Koelsch farm, which is north of  Locust. In the meantime there was a Mark, Oklahoma, which was just  west of Locust about to two miles, that my grandpa named after my  grandmother   s dad, C.D. Markham. There was a little town out there.  Well, in 1912, O.W. Killam had bought Locust, bought the land up here  and started a town, founded a town. Of course, there were some  businesses already there but then Mark moved in there, too. They kind  of joined together there. The railroad came in there, the KO G. That  was a big deal but, of course, towns were founded on railroad tracks  back then, more or less. Don   t think there was a highway of any kind at  that particular time. However, I have discovered there was what they  called the White River Trail that came through Locust. Then it turned  into State Highway 11. Then it was State Highway 33. Now it   s 412, US  412. (Laughs) So that   s the change in the highways.  Main Street in Locust Grove used to be north and south, and I will show  26  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  you some of the old buildings after while. When the highway came in, it  moved it down to the highway. That is the main part of town right now.  Of course, when the turnpike came in, everything is moving out that way  now, and they have a lot of empty buildings downtown. It has changed  over the years quite a bit. Like the theater, you said. My dad told me  about a theater that he went to when he was a kid. Silent movies, you  had to read things up there. Well, my granddad, Howell, my mother   s  dad, had a cream station there in town, produce, eggs, bulk cream and all  of that kind of stuff. I thought that old building looked kind of strange,  but nobody ever said anything about it. Later on I found out that was the  Broadway Theater that my dad had been talking about. Of course, it is  gone now.  There was a theater right there at the stoplight, the Grand Theater, that I  went to the show at. Ten cents a whack back when I was a kid. I think it  was twenty after you got sixteen, or something like that, or adults. That  was the entertainment on Saturday night. All the families around this  country went to town and parked on the street. They might have went  and got groceries during the day but come back to town on Saturday  night. The kids would go to the show. All folks visited up and down the  sidewalk with each other. That kind of thing. Maybe everything would  break up about 10:30-11:00, everybody would go home. It was a social  deal, Saturday nights was.  When did that start to change, roughly?  Probably the late    50s or    60s, early    60s.  When TV came in, I bet.  Yeah. We got our electricity here in    49. Of course, we didn   t get a TV  for a while. Our entertainment, before we got a TV, was an old battery  radio. Me and my uncle would sit and listen to the Grand Ole Opry on  Saturday nights, or try to, all the static and everything else. Man, it was  the best we had. We hadn   t heard anything better so you didn   t think  anything about it.  Good old days.  Good old days. Enjoyed every bit of it. (Laughs) I wouldn   t want to do it  again. I don   t have no regrets. I am glad I lived through that and can  appreciate how things are now.  Well, do you have any theories on how your family decided to keep the  land as long as they have? What has contributed to that, to keep it in the  family along the way?  27  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Of course, they have deep roots the same as I have. They had kept this  land all that time and through the Depression and all kind of hard times.  What else was they going to do? It was more or less this was it. They  were damn lucky to have what they had and they took care of it. My dad,  he would have never thought about getting rid of it. Of course, he passed  it on down to me and Jim. We both got deep roots.  Was there ever an equipment shop? If something broke down, how  would you fix it?  I don   t know how my granddad fixed it, but my dad would drag it under  one of these big pecan trees down here and put a chain around a limb up  there and find a come-along of some kind to pick up whatever he was  working on. Worked out there in the shade, drug what wrenches he had  down there. That is the way he done it. He never had a loader tractor on  the place to pick up anything. I don   t know how he got by without it. Me  and my brother both got them and use them every day. Hell, you  couldn   t get by without one. But anyway, that is the way he worked on  things. Very seldom ever took anything to town to get it worked on. He  would try and do it here. I can remember he would have hay down, all  his equipment broke down and the hay burning up out there in the field.  You just didn   t worry about it. You just got it when you could. That kind  of thing. I built a little shop down by my poultry houses where I work on  things down there. My brother Jim does most of our mechanic work. He  built one fine shop up there. He worked with iron, cutting, fitting and  welding and all that kind of stuff. He is a master at it. He really built him  a fine shop. He   s got everything in the world in it.  Well, let   s talk about him too, then, because part of his land was also  part of the original. What is he doing with his land at this point?  He runs Angus cattle. He has about sixty-five or seventy head of Angus  cows, two or three bulls. Of course, all of them has got a calf, usually.  On his land, and mine too, he bales. I got some hay fields here and he  bales them, and I let him use my pasture so he uses the whole thing for  cattle, except for in hay season. He raises hay and bales hay. Contracts,  bales hay for others, too. He stays busy all the time. He can build  anything. He   ll go to the farm show in Tulsa and see something he  thinks he might want and comes home and builds the thing a lot better  than he has seen, I guarantee it.  Has he done that all of his life?  Yeah, he has spent a lifetime doing that kind of thing. The barn that is up  there, the big fine barn, you can look at, he built it. Never built one in his  28  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  life. He built that and it is perfect.  How did he learn to do that?  Well, I don   t know, but he is a perfectionist. Just by doing things, I  guess.  He is a couple years younger than you?  Four years younger. I think he passed two grades twice in school. He is  pretty sharp.  Has he always farmed though or did he do something else and come  back to it?  Well, he   s like me. He worked away from home in different places like  Tulsa, Odessa, Texas and they have sent him to Africa to do  maintenance on tanks and that type of thing down there. I don   t  remember what year he came back here, to build a home up there. My  dad gave him some land to build a house on. Of course, he inherited the  land later. So he has been doing both for quite a while.  But he chose to come back, too.  Yeah. He is like me. He wouldn   t go anywhere else. People talk about  going here and there, visiting some other country. That is the least of my  worries. (Laughs) I   ve got everything I need right here.  Distance-wise between where we are now and where he is, is not very  far? A mile maybe or not even that?  Oh no, about a half a mile, quarter mile maybe. That is the first house up  the road there from me. His land starts right there on the north side of  the barn.  So if anything broke down, he fixes it.  Yeah. There isn   t any use in me trying. I am not mechanically minded.  (Laughter)  That is a good quality to have for a farmer.  That is right. I had some equipment around here. He said,    Why don   t  you just let me take that up there and use it, and if you need anything  done, I   ll do it,    and he does.  29  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Well, did you keep your original tractor? The one you talked about that  you drove back and forth to school, do you still have it?  No, I don   t. I had a big auction down here. I   ve had two big auctions,  and when my dad died we had an auction. I sold it at that auction. Since  then I have bought a loader tractor, a long loader tractor, and I have an  old Massey Ferguson. The same size as the 8N but it is a Massey  Ferguson, diesel.  Do you still have your dozer?  No, I bought that old dozer for  3,500, used it for ten years and sold it  for  2,400. (Laughs) Now my brother just bought him one, a nice one.  He is planning on doing a lot of fixing up and stuff around. He don   t  have anything that really needs to be done but cosmetics, he said.  Playing in the dirt.  Playing in the dirt. Fixing in the humps and the holes, stuff like that,  clearing some of the underbrush and stuff out.  Do either one of you keep a garden now?  Not now. I never have. He did for a while. I think he got so busy now he  ain   t got time to mess with that garden. Grocery store has got everything  I need. (Laughs)  That is something we don   t do much anymore anyway, canning and all  that.  We may want to talk about the cemetery, when you get around it.  Well, go ahead then.  Joseph Vann started the cemetery. They started burying their people  there in, I believe, 1833. There was two boys buried there that came here  from England to live with Joseph Vann. I don   t know just exactly how  they were related to him. They lived there two or three years. They were  sick when they got here and they died, and they   re buried out there in a  grave house, a brick grave house, which was a rich man   s gave house at  that time. It has a roof and door on it and everything. Poor man   s grave  house was logs about three foot high with a little wooden roof on it. I  have got one of them out there, too. But anyway, his wives are buried  there, some of his children. Both of his wives are buried there. He died  in 1877.  30  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Family lived here a while and my parents bought the improvements. All  of the graves out there are related to him, in the old part of the cemetery.  Then the Cavaliers started burying on the east side in 1900, a little baby.  We have been burying there ever since. Cavaliers have all been buried  right there. My grandma and grandmother, great-grandmother and her  husband, my mom and dad, my little sister. We had a little sister named  Marilyn that had heart trouble, born with heart trouble. Wasn   t supposed  to live six months and she made it ten years and died during heart  surgery, back when heart surgery first started. She was too weak for the  surgery. So she is buried out there.  Are there any particular regulations? I mean, do you have to do  anything special to be buried on your property?  We have never done anything special, other than just bury them.  Other cemeteries you have rules you   ve got to     I don   t know what they are. Maybe the depth of the grave. I think we  have always dug them six foot deep, and all that. Funerals have changed  since then. You have vaults and all that kind of stuff. You can almost  bury on top of the ground if you want to, I guess. I think back, what that  must have looked like when Joseph Vann was buried out there, and my  granddad, with all the buggies and carriages, horses that would have  been out there. Ain   t that amazing? I would like to have had a picture or  something like that, but I can imagine how it was, because they were  both real popular people.  And why they picked that spot. Why that spot?  I don   t know why he did it.  It was probably a peaceful place for him.  Yeah, there used to be an old barbed wire fence around it. Of course, for  years cattle got in there, some of the stones got broke, then we finally  started taking care of it. Me and my brother put a chain link fence  around it. The whole family donated money, and we put a chain link  fence around it and fixed it up and take good care of it now.  About how many people are buried there, roughly?  I   ve got a count of all of them, I believe there is forty-some. If you just  look at it, it doesn   t seem like that many, but there is. There are  unmarked graves all over that thing, and we don   t have a clue who they  are. My great-great-grandmother came here the same time Joseph Vann  31  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  did. She was his sister. She married a Robert Webber. They had  Margaret Webber and that was my grandfather   s mother. My great-grandfather,  they were coming back from somewhere down in the  southern part of the state and bushwhackers killed him. My granddad  was one year old sitting in his mother   s lap and his sister was three years  old. They just made them come on, and they never did go back and bury  him or nothing. That is the story that   s been told. His sister went on and  married the Landrum and they all was up around Vinita. There is a big  family of the Landrums, too. Sally Cavalier was my granddad   s sister.  Outside this cemetery is, one of the slaves are buried out there, Joseph  Vann   s slave. His name is New Years Vann. That is the only slave that  is buried around, that I know of. And I   ve heard that rumor all of my  life. Grandma said that was New Years Vann   s grave, and we   ll look at  that if you want to. A lot of rocks piled around there and, of course, trees  have grown up there around everything. I finally put a marker up. One  day I was down in Muskogee at the library and I was looking at some  other things, family things, and I run across freedmen of 1866. I just  threw that microfilm in there, and I just about quit looking. I thought I  would see some of the names and stuff in there and there it was, New  Years Vann. I thought that name couldn   t be possible, that somebody  was named New Years Vann, but he was.  Most have been born on New Years.  He was ten years old. He was just a slave kid. In 1866 is when they done  the census. I don   t know when he died. It listed all the other slaves     names.  His mother had to be around somewhere.  Well.  Maybe.  They might not have died right then.  True.  They could be buried around here somewhere, I don   t know. He was  buried outside the cemetery, not in the cemetery. That is how blacks  were treated back then. When the slaves were free some of them stayed  around their masters    places, or what have you. A lot of them went to  different settlements around the country. They had a Negro settlement  west of Murphy, and they had a cemetery down there, a black cemetery.  When they put Fort Gibson Lake in, they had to move those cemeteries,  32  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  because the lake was going to take them. All the black graves they took  to Brushy Creek, south of Chouteau, to another black settlement. They  are all reburied over there in that cemetery. The whites from down there  were buried up here on this mountain here, west of me. That was another  brother to Joseph Vann. That was David Vann. He was the Secretary of  the Treasury for the Cherokee Nation. Joseph Vann had been a chief of  the Cherokee Nation.  I have got a lot of information on him. I have researched. Now, don   t get  him mixed up with the rich Joe Vann. This is Joseph Vann. There was a  rich Joe Vann that came from Georgia. He was a wealthy man in  Georgia, Spring Place, Georgia. He had about three hundred slaves and I  don   t know how much land down there. He came to Eufaula, and he had  steamships. He was quite a drinker, and they had a steamship race. He  was on the ship, and he had a black guy stoking the fire, the story goes.  He told him to throw another slab of bacon on, they were burning bacon,  anything he could to get a hot fire with and that ship blew up, killed him  and everything. That was the end of him. He was a rich man. Joseph  Vann was, he wasn   t a poor man I don   t guess, but he didn   t have the  means that that one had.  I have met Joseph Vann   s great-great-grandson Joseph Vann Budd. He  lives in Fort Worth now, but his grandmother grew up here. Was Joseph  Vann   s daughter. She told him that when they came from Georgia,  Joseph had a carriage, a pretty nice carriage. The girls would ride a  while, then they would get out and walk a while. But they came here in  style. They didn   t come over from no Trail of Tears. They came over  about eight or nine years before the Trail of Tears. He said his grandma  said that they would have company come and take them in the grave  house out there, lock them up in it. Trick them into getting in there and  lock them up. He said they had a lot of fun that way. She talked about  going to the slave houses. They were all along this creek, south of the  house here. Couldn   t have been many, maybe two or three. Go down  there and they would get to telling stories late in the evening. The girls  would all get scared and run home. (Laughs) That was part of their  activity back then.  You had to make your own fun.  I need to tell you something I love. I have got more of them stories. You  may not want them all. (Laughs)  Go ahead.  Right where my chicken houses are, I dozed out a timber thicket down  there. On the east side of it, next to the field, there were some indentions  33  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  in the ground, dug out places. Grandma told my dad those were black  baby holes. That isn   t what he said but anyway they were black baby  holes. That was the nursery for the kids, babies, while the women were  working in the fields. They had to dig out a place in the ground and they  would put logs or brush around them, kind of contain them. I don   t guess  anybody watched them unless there were some little girls or small kids,  because all of them big enough to work were out there working.  Kind of like a playpen then.  Yeah. Playpen, nursery, whatever you want to call it.  That is interesting.  Yeah, it is. And it makes sense.  It does.  It really does. It makes sense. It probably happened.  Under a good shade tree.  Yeah, there was shade trees and everything, in a thicket there.  Anything else coming to mind?  No, but I will probably think of something later. (Laughter) No, unless  you have got something else.  The stories are great.  We have talked about the barn, and we might talk about the house a little  more. These two rooms, do you see them posts there? That is the studs  in the walls. They are about four, five inches square, hued out with an  ax. That is all the studs in the walls of these two rooms. This particular  room here has got brick, double bricks, in the walls as high as your head,  like for protection, plumb around the three sides. They are still in there.  When they put that double window in there, they got a truck load of  bricks out of that. Those bricks and the ones from out at the cemetery,  around those graves I was telling you about, probably came from Joseph  Vann   s dad who settled out at Rose, Oklahoma. He had a brick kiln out  there. I don   t know that to be a fact, but he did have a brick kiln. I don   t  know whether the bricks came from there or not, but it makes sense that  they would have.  Have any reason for them using them to begin with?  34  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Finchum  Cavalier  Well, it was right after the Civil War, unless that had something to do  with it. 1866 is when they built this. The old log house burnt and they  built this. So it could be they didn   t know whether the trouble was over  or not.  So bullets wouldn   t come in?  The Indians fought amongst themselves here a lot, not just the Civil  War. These Indians, they tried to kill all of them that signed the treaty  down there to move up here to start with. See, there was a treaty party.  John Ross didn   t sign. He went to Washington and while he was gone  there was a treaty party signed and agreed to come here, and the United  States accepted it, and there was bad blood between the two factions all  them years. They killed, I think it was Tom Starr. They killed four or  five. That was Indian law. Give land away or sell it or do anything with  it. That was the Indian Blood Law. So they killed all of them but Stand  Watie. He survived. Somebody warned him and he survived and, of  course, became a General for the Civil War, for the South.  That is another thing. I remembered something. Joseph Vann and his son  out there fought for the Confederates, for the South. His dad fought for  the North. His dad and brother-in-law fought for the North. They always  said brother against brother during that war, and it is sure enough a fact.  The David Vann that I said came from Murphy and is buried up on the  hill over there, the Pin Indians killed him. They were the full-bloods. Pin  Indians mostly fought for the North and were John Ross people. That is  another strange thing. John Ross was one-eighth Cherokee, but he had  all the full-bloods following him, because he was a shrewd man. I think  he was an attorney, well educated. But they did and to this day,  generally I am speaking, the full-blood Indians are Republicans, mixed-bloods  are Democrats. The North and South still exist. Right here.  Interesting. You are about to have company so we probably need to  wrap it up.  Okay. I am done. I am ready to wrap it up.  Well thank you very much.  You are welcome.  -------  ------- 
