 Finchum  Today is May 31, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Juliana  Nykolaiszyn, and we   re from the OSU, Oklahoma State University  Library, part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. We   re  here today in Strang, Oklahoma, to speak with Mozelle Stockton and this  is part of our Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families Oral History  Project. Thank you for having us today.  Pleased to meet you.  Let   s start by having you tell what you know about how your family  came to own the land that   s the centennial farm.  Well, my grandparents lived here during the Indian Territory days and it  has been passed down from generation to generation. After they passed  away, my mother and father acquired this land.  What were your grandparent   s names?  My grandmother was Joanna Scraper and she married a Ross so, Joanna  Scraper-Ross. And all I know about my grandfather was he was referred  to as W.L. Ross, which stood for William Larkin Ross and he came here  from someplace in Arkansas. My grandmother Joanna was a  schoolteacher in this area. How they met, I really don   t know because he  was, you might say, homeless. I don   t know anything about him. He just  lived in Arkansas and just started this way, I think, to be a cowboy.  (Laughter) She taught school and it was called Lynch back before  statehood. This was kind of known as the Lynch Prairie area so, the  school was called Lynch.  And do you know where she had come from?  5  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Yes. She came about half a mile from here, across the field. There was a  family called West. His name   I always referred to him as Uncle Bill  so, it had to be William, and his wife was  Leona .  That   s okay. It will come to you later.  His wife was   I think that   s where Joanna came from, too. I think that  was from that family. Oh, dear  It   s been so long. (Laughs)  How many children did they have, your grandparents?  They had a bunch. I think there were probably six. But, the only one I  remember in my past seeing was, she went by the name of Ellen Taylor  and she is the one that had the six children. I can sometimes think of all  their names. They move around and I kind of lose track.  As we trace the ownership of the property, from there it went to...?  Well, my grandparents were Ross. So, they had this property and then  my mom and dad acquired it. My dad was Henry Clay Cochran and my  mother   s name was Willie Louise Ross. Then my husband and I  acquired it from her. So, that   s the reason I qualified for the Historical  Society  Centennial Farm   Ranch Program .  It appears that it   s following the female side of the family then?  Yes.  From you to your mother, okay. Was it originally Indian?  Yes, I think it was my grandmother   s Indian allotment and my mother   s  allotment was across the road out here. They all acquired land.  Do you know how much each allotment was?  Eighty acres.  For each one?  Yes.  So, it was 160. What do you own now?  I have eighty acres here. I have acquired more land, but it   s in the next  section. But this is the eighty acres.  6  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  When they first had the land, what kind of crops and things did they  have?  Well, I remember my father having wheat, corn, and cotton. Then, when  the thrashing machine came in, he started going from farm to farm with  his thrashing equipment and doing the harvest for people. I don   t know  how they made their living. I would think it would be from cattle, hogs  and chickens. You can   t have chickens around here for the varmints  now. I was in the chicken business when my husband and I first came  here. That was a disaster. I think he saw where eggs were going to be a  dollar a dozen. So, he ordered a thousand chicks and then when they  started laying eggs, I think the eggs were twelve cents a  dozen . We had  all these chickens and I started cleaning chickens and selling them. I  could dress them out for fifty cents. Now, I thought,    Man  I   m never  going to do this anymore if I get out of this.    (Laughs)  I   ve always lived here, but I never did do any farm work or anything.  My husband,  Sherman Dwain Stockton,  never did live on a farm so,  we just learned everything from scratch and it was kind of a disaster a  lot of times. I remember when we first got those chickens. We had two  breeder houses with 500 in each house. It was just a house that we built  from scrap lumber and just put it up. I went out there one day and I had a  bunch of chickens dead. I didn   t know what was wrong. So, I picked up  one of the dead chickens and at that time, in Pryor, they had a kind of a  little hatchery and they   d all contracted what they call coccidiosis. We  lost a lot of them but they gave me medication to save some of them. It   s  where they would just pick themselves until the blood came and then  another chicken would peck. So, we almost got out of the chicken  business then.  What kind of work did you do?  I became a schoolteacher. I finished college at Northeastern State and  my first job was near Kenwood, Oklahoma, in that wooded area in  Delaware County. I had no transportation, but I got a job in a rural  school. I was paid fifty dollars a month and if I did my janitor work,  which I did, I got five dollars extra. My biggest problem was trying to  get to school. Where I boarded was about three miles from the school.  During the middle of the year, we were able to get a lunch program and  the lady came that cooked, she lived nearby so, I got to ride with her.  She would leave at about 1:30 and most of the other time I had to walk  back.  Three miles, too. That took a while.  Yes, but what I learned to do   it was kind of on a downhill slope and a  7  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  lot of trees with leaves and I   d just start running down the hill. I made it  okay. I just cut through it, didn   t go around the road.  And how many children did you have in your class?  On enrollment day, I had fifty. I was sitting there thinking, as school  started early, and only had that many for about two weeks. Then they  started going to Salina and Little Kansas. That was the only reason why  I think they took off because it was the largest school and they had a bus  that picked up a lot of them. At the end of the school year, I think I only  had about fifteen or twenty. (Laughs) I was glad of that.  And how long did you stay there?  One year. That was enough for me. (Laughter) At that time, it was the  war days and they had this powder plant in Pryor. They called it a  powder plant, south of Pryor, where they made ammunition. So, soon as  I got out of that school, I started working there. I worked there, I think  about a year and a half. My parents had gone to California to work in the  shipyards and so, I followed them out there and I worked in the  shipyards in the office for about five years. Then my husband and I  came back to Oklahoma. I   ve been here ever since. My husband passed  away in 1960.  Did you teach school again when you came back?  Yes ma   am. I was an elementary teacher. That   s what I majored in, but  my minor was in High School Business, is what they called it at that  time. I got a job at Adair, teaching all the business subjects; typing and  shorthand and general business was one of the subjects. I had several  classes of typing and I taught at Adair for thirty-four years.  And lived on the farm during those thirty-four years?  Yes.  When your parents were in California, what was going on with the  farm?  They rented it out. My home here, at that time, wasn   t very much. With  renters coming in, it was a mess. When I moved back here, the back end  of that house, which was the kitchen area, there were cattle in there and  they had broken through the boards. It was just demolished. It was a  little four-room house, three rooms and a bedroom off to the side. So,  when we came back here, we used what we called the living room and  the bedroom. The rest of the house, we just left it until we could do some  8  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  work on it. The snow would sift in during the winter. It was in bad  shape.  A rough few years then?  Yes.  Did your parents stay in California or did they come back too?  They finally came back, but they got a divorce while they were in  California and my father came back here. He had property in the  Greenbrier area. So, he remarried and lived there. My mother stayed in  California several more years. I forgot how many, but she had     (Crying)  It   s okay.  I bubble up every time. My sister was killed in an auto accident and my  mother came back and raised her two kids.  Did your mother have sisters herself?  Yes.  And they weren   t interested in the farm themselves?  No.  No?  Her sister had gone to the business college in Tulsa and so, she started  work there and married an oil man, which didn   t last too long. My mom  had a brother and she always referred to him as a Prodigal Son because  the Oklahoma Military Academy at Claremore was where he was  educated. So, she was the one that took care of the kids and everything  because her mother died at twelve and there was another sibling. It was a  boy and when he was twelve, there was an old Model-T coming down  the road and I guess he was trying to outrun it or running along with it.  His pants leg caught in the wheel. It had those outside spokes. He was  just beat to death before they got it stopped. So, he was twelve when that  accident happened.  So, did you actually grow up on the farm.  Yes.  9  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Your childhood was here?  Yes.  Did you have certain chores?  No, I had my sister and about the only chore I had was washing the  dishes, drying the dishes. (Laughs) I never cooked. Mom taught me a  little bit about sewing because she was a real good seamstress. I just  went to school at Strang. Strang had a nice high school here and it was  large, at that time, because Spavinaw did not have a high school. Also,  the rural areas around Welch and Requah and Greenbrier, they were all  up to the eighth grade and then they all entered into the Strang schools.  So, at that time, I thought it was a big school.  How many were in your graduating class?  There were twenty-one.  And what year was that?  It was in 1938.  So, a little after the Depression?  Yes. The Depression was pretty bad. I don   t know how Mom kept me in  college.  Education was important it sounds like, to the whole family, from the  early days.  Oh, yes. We never dreamed about getting married right out of high  school or something like that. (Laughs) No, it was just something that  you did. Yes, my mother   I think she was more like a tomboy. When  they laid out the town of Strang, put in the streets and everything, Strang  used to be a pretty good sized place because of the railroad that went  through here, through Strang. They had a bank, ten or twelve businesses  going on, and I kind of think it might have been the depot agent they had  at that time that laid out the land into streets. She was the one that  carried the chain to ensure that was done right. (Laughs) And she was a  hard worker. My dad did a lot of trucking. We had cows. Mom had to  milk the cows while he was gone and take care of the farm and us.  We didn   t have a car here at the house. We finally got a jalopy, but I  mean it didn   t have a top to it and you had to sit on a board. (Laughs)  Somebody stole it. Just drove it off. (Laughs) And I think it went to  10  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Tulsa but we never got that old jalopy back. There   s a hill just south of  Strang here, and it was really rocky and scary. It looked like a big gulley  on one side and she got us in that thing. One time, we were going to visit  someone on down the road and we came to that hill. That old jalopy  would not pull that hill so, she went up it backwards. (Laughs) She put  it in reverse and went up that hill backwards. I never was so scared in all  my life   That   s pretty smart though, to figure out another way to do it.  Yes, she was smart, yes.  Did she belong to a homemaker club?  Oh yes, Ladies    Home Demonstration Club. And she learned a lot from  that, the canning. I remember she learned how to make marshmallows.  (Laughs) One time, my sister and I didn   t think we were going to get  anything for Christmas and she had made us dolls.  I think they taught how to do some of that with the home demonstration.  Yes, they had the pattern and everything. All she had to do was buy the  head and of course, the fingers. It was all cloth.  What was a favorite thing that she cooked, that you liked? Fried  chicken?  I would say it was because we always had chickens. (Laughs) I  remember one time we had company here and I think it was just a young  child, and somebody had brought squirrel and she had to cook that  squirrel. And that child did not want to eat squirrel and she said,    Well,  I   ve got some chicken in here.    So, she went to the kitchen and brought  back another piece of squirrel and he didn   t know the difference.  (Laughs) She was always doing things like that.  Did she quilt?  No, but she made all of my clothes and my sister   s clothes.  Where would she get her fabric?  We had stores here in town that handled fabric at that time. I think there  were three stores that handled fabric and if a new bolt came in, that   s  where she would get it. She would sell some eggs or cream. She was  always separating the milk and getting some money that way.  11  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  You said your father trucked?  Yes, he would take a load of lumber, say to Colorado, and I always  thought that was odd, with all their trees, pine trees and everything. But  apparently, I questioned that one time because I   d heard of Colorado and  its pine trees and all that stuff. And anyway, it didn   t have the hardwood  like we have back here. So, he would haul lumber out there and sell it,  then come back through Texas and fill his truck up with vegetables or  whatever was in season, watermelon or oranges or apples, and he would  come back in here and then peddle them out so much a bushel.  That   s how he supplemented the farm? Doing that?  Yes.  Did he have hired help?  Yes, during the harvest he did because he had the thrashing machine.  When that came out, then he would do other farmers    thrashing. He  would start here at home and I remember one year he went as far as  Claremore. Then after that harvest, he started baling hay and it would  take him over toward Claremore.  Did he get paid for that or just do the barter system?  He got paid. So, he put in a lot of long hours doing the harvest.  Well, tell us a little bit about the house that you grew up in.  Well, we had three rooms in length and off the side, I called it the living  room, it was a bedroom. So, it was four rooms and kind of L-shaped. It  had a front porch that went across the two rooms. We had a back porch.  I guess my parents had trouble getting well water that was good because  there is an open well, right now, in the front yard and then there was a  dug well when we moved here. But that dug well, my mom had just  about filled it up. Then they were able to get a well   you can   t hardly  see it, this little white building way down there   and that   s where we  got the water, was from that well when I was growing up.  How would you get it from there to here?  They had two water buckets and they would pack it, go down there and  get two buckets of water. If they were filled, by the time they got here, it  was sloshed out. (Laughs) But that   s where she got all her water. But  during the wintertime, during the rainy season, she would save her  rainwater for laundry and she wouldn   t have to go carry that water down  12  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  from up, from that well here, to do her laundry.  And do you recall when the place got electricity?  Well, we did not get electricity until   seems to me like it was in 1960,  I   m not sure. It came from Vinita so, it was after I think the Grand River  Dam was built. I don   t know, I can   t recall when that dam was built.  What had you used for light until then?  We had kerosene lamps.  And how was the house heated?  Well, it usually had a big stove that contained wood and I remember we  had another stove and we burned coal. I think the coal came from around  Claremore, Catoosa, in that area.  Was that particular house the first house on the property?  As far as I know it was.  So, your grandparents had lived somewhere else?  Yes, in the Greenbrier area. My grandfather was living there and he had  acquired a lot of land and he also financed the Strang First State Bank.  He backed that up. He was not well educated, but he was good with  figures. When I knew him, the railroad was through here and he would  buy the farmers    grains, like corn and wheat and would ship it out.  That   s how he got some of his money. He also had an elevator where  they can load the wheat into the boxcars and things like that.  His name was R.A. Smith that established the bank and had this land.  When he married my grandmother, his initials were R.A. Smith and my  grandmother was Nannie Vinita Smith, but she was a West. Right across  my field here, there were a lot of Wests, and she was a part of that  family. A lot of people in those days   and some still do   give their  heirs all the land. Maybe they got married or when they were twenty-one  or something like that. So, my grandmother had two children and I think  my grandfather had three children when they married, and then they had  three children.  Oh, big family.  They all got land from him, the R.A. Smith. In the Greenbrier area was  where Mom and Dad first lived. They had   I think it was eighty acres. It  13  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  might have been sixty, but I kind of think it was eighty acres and it was  located right across the road from the Greenbrier Church. Are you  familiar with the Greenbrier Church? And also, the Greenbrier School at  that time. I think that it was the Greenbrier School and then it  consolidated with other schools in the county    Let   s see, I think, yes,  that   s right. Greenbrier finally lost their school like Welch and a lot of  the little towns. They had buses then that could bus the kids from the  area into the larger schools. And a lot of them came to Strang. It was a  large area, but some of them lived near Pryor and they were transferred  to Pryor.  So, when they got married, did they get this piece of land at that time or  later?  Yes, I think Mom had acquired this land. I really don   t know for sure.  But she lived on my dad   s property until she acquired this. I think it  might have been after my Grandfather Ross    death or something that she  came over here.  Well, how many ponds are there on the property?  Well, on the property here, there was one pond and it is right north of  here. It is right at the end of the property. There   s a branch that runs  through it, the corner of it. Then I remember Dad   I think there was  only one pond at that time, but when my husband and I bought it, we  built another pond, down here by the corner, and a small one just right  up the road a little ways. Anyway, we built two ponds but the first one is  the biggest pond.  The first one, was it a natural one or was it manmade, the one with the  stream going through it?  It was manmade because I remember the high banks.  Were the other two that you built part of the soil conservation efforts?  Yes, I   m sure it was.  Probably didn   t do much terracing.  I know we did some terracing, my husband and I did. I think it   s through  the   what is it? The FFA, the FHA, whatever it was, what was it, FHA?  Federal Housing Authority or   ?  There were different ones. I think the Soil Conservation Service is  through the USDA, isn   t it? The Department of Agriculture maybe. FFA  14  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  is Future Farmers.  Yes.  FHA is Future Homemakers.  Yes.  And then 4-H, of course, were you a member of 4-H?  Oh, yes. I got to go to Stillwater one year.  Oh, to Roundup? What was that like?  It was a good experience. (Laughs) Yes, I had a cousin. She and I both  earned the right to go. I was several years older than her.  What was your project that got you there?  I think my dress. And well, we had a county fair and I had won on  muffins and cookies or something or other. I don   t remember now. Yes,  I was in 4-H.  Where was the county fair?  At Pryor. I think it   s just about the same area it has always been, Mayes  County Fair. Then we would have our vegetables we would take in and  show them. We would be thrilled to death if we won fifty cents or a  dollar. (Laughs) We might be all swelled up at the end of the fair, but  over there judging, they looked pretty good. I remember one time we  had some   I call it hygear   so, we took a bundle of that in.  I   m not sure what that is.  Let   s see, it   s a small grain. I was trying to think of another name for it.  But anyway, it bushes out and is full of little seeds, like kaffir corn.  Have you heard of that?  I   ve heard of that, yes.  I think it   s about the same thing. I know Mom always fed chickens, no  corn, she   d feed them that hygear. There   s probably another name for it,  but that   s what she called it. (Laughs)  Did they use tractors or horses?  15  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  When I was growing up here, we had a pair of horses and a pair of  mules. One horse was white and his name was White Man and the red  one was called Dodger and he was mean. (Laughs) You were trying to  ride him and he   d just take off. You could hardly hold him back. But my  grandfather, who was living at that time, he had a horse that he rode  every place and so, my sister and I would always like to ride his horse  when he got here. It was tame.  So, first tractor, were you allowed to ride?  I think I might have been afraid of it, the noise and everything. (Laughs)  I don   t ever remember riding on it. I know he had a disc out here in the  yard one time, with no fence. A neighbor   s bull got out and my sister  and I were out there where we shouldn   t have been I guess, around this  disc. Anyway, that bull hooked her right in the corner of the eye, just  barely caused it to bleed. But man  We thought she was ruined, lost an  eye or something.  So, what were some of the fun things you did on the farm as a child?  We always had a playhouse. This road out here, just about took most of  our yard. We had two big old maple trees in the yard and it seems like  every time they widen the road or anything, they would take it from this  side. So, that   s the way we lost the maple trees, was doing the road. We  would play house out there, under those trees and of course, we had our  paper dolls or dolls, we called them baby dolls that we played with. We  would cut up a catalog and would have cut out pictures in it of  somebody that would represent the father and the mother and the kids  out of those catalogs. We did a lot of playing with that. But I don   t  remember.  Later on, we played basketball. Of course, that was when I was in high  school. The year that I finished high school, in 1938, that   s when they  built the Strang gym and we had a real nice gym. It served as the  community building and they made good use of it there for a while until  I think people got to talking because they would have dances in it,  square dancing. I remember one time Bob Wills came over and played in  that gym. That was a crowd. It was the only one around, not much  entertainment going on that I remember.  But before we got this gym at school, what equipment we had, it was  very scarce and the boys would always get the ball and the bat. You  either had one ball and one bat and I took a golf ball down there one  time, playing with it with a board, like we were playing baseball. One of  the girls hit that golf ball and it hit the pitcher right between the eyes and  she keeled over. I thought we   d killed her. (Laughs) Knocked her out  16  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  cold and of course, we had to stop that. But the boys always got the bat  and the ball. So, one day I went by the office, it was always turned into  the office at Strang School, and there was nobody in the office and the  ball and bat was laying there. So, I just dropped it into one of the rooms  that didn   t have a class in it, in their wastebasket. Well, we got out early  that day for some reason or the other and the janitor burned it when he  picked up all the wastebaskets and everything. (Laughs) So, nobody had  a ball and bat. But they did find the ball out there because all the strings  in that ball had not burned. I was the cause of the ball and bat getting  burned, but I didn   t let anybody know about it. (Laughter)  I always walked to school unless my parents took me in a wagon or  something. One coincidence, one time, I still don   t know what was  wrong, but anyway, my sister and I were walking to school and there  was snow on the ground. She always followed right behind in my  footsteps and there, right in that snow, was a quarter, just a shiny quarter  right on top of the ground. And I stooped down to pick it up and she  butted into me. (Laughs) We both fell to the ground. I don   t know,  unless a bird had found it someplace   money was scarce, but there that  quarter was.  And what did you do with it?  I picked it up and showed it to Mom when school was out. She couldn   t  believe it either.  Did you get to spend it?  I don   t recall. I noticed that in my first job that my sister and I did, we  had a cotton field out here in front of the house, and he was paying a  penny a pound for the cotton. So, Mom fixed us up a pillowcase or  something and we went out there and picked cotton all day. We earned a  quarter and Dad wouldn   t pay us the quarter so, we never got out in that  field again. (Laughs) We worked all that day for that twenty-five cents  because we had twenty-five pounds of cotton.  Total or a piece?  A piece, yes. So, we didn   t work too much for my dad.  Where there any barns on the property?  I remember at one time, we had a pretty nice barn and then we had one  that just had kind of slats in it, on the sides to hold corn. I think they call  it crib corn or crib, maybe that   s what it was. But, Dad built a nice barn  and I was at Strang School one day and they said,    Oh, Mozelle look,  17  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  your barn is on fire.    And anyway, the barn burned. I looked up and saw  it just as it was falling in. It had a big hay loft in there and I guess it was  green hay or something that caused the combustion. I don   t think they  ever built a barn. But when my husband and I acquired all these  chickens, we built what is the barn out here now. And then I think we  added to it later.  Was there a smokehouse or any other type of building?  No, but we bought some property about a mile east of here and a mile  north. On that old place, yes, there was a smokehouse. It had a cement  floor in it and it still has a cellar but I don   t. I still own the property, but  I never did put a door on it. So, it looks like a swimming pool. (Laughs)  It   s full of water when it rains. It had this old farmhouse on it and then  somebody set it on fire and it burned, maybe fifteen years ago. It was a  sturdy old house, built well.  In that house, the lady that   well, her husband I guess, built the house  and he was a large man. And she was a little woman. I bet she wasn   t  four feet tall. He had put cabinets in there for her, but the top of the  cabinets struck me right about here. (Gestures) She couldn   t have  reached them. Maybe the bottom shelf of her cabinets   I mean, the  lower one. But the cabinets went clear up to the ceiling and there was no  way she could have ever gotten up there, even standing on a chair  because everything then was twelve-foot ceilings. But that old place was  always interesting.  Well, on this place, was there an outhouse?  Oh, yes.  A one-seater or a two-seater?  It was a two-seater, and one day, I went out there, having to use the  catalogs for toilet paper. I looked over in the other hole and there were  worms, maggots I guess. It kind of scared me to death. I thought they  came out of me. (Laughs) Anyway, I think Mom got rid of them by  getting some lye and pouring it down in the hole. Yes, we had a two-seater  and we used that two-seater when I first came back here, too.   There was a large hole for adults and a smaller hole for children.   In the    50s?  I think it might have been in the early    40s. Let me think. Yes, I think it  was. We probably dug a different hole, but I think the outhouse was still  there when we got here.  18  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Well, do you know of any WPA  Works Progress Administration  help?  Did your parents participate in any of that?  The only thing I remember about that is that the WPA built the gym that  we had at Strang. It was to be used as the community building. But I  don   t remember. I don   t think we acquired anything from the WPA.  We haven   t talked about church. Was church a factor?  Yes. We had three churches here at one time. The Baptist church, the  Methodist church and then the third one, I would say, we just referred to  as Holy Rollers. I don   t know what they called it. (Laughs) Mom and all  of us went to the Baptist church for Sunday school or things like that,  but if there was a revival at any of the churches, we always went. You  get to go some place, that   s a revival.  We had a vacant building down here one time and there was a couple  coming through, evangelists. They had church services. I think they  were there maybe a week or two, a few days. Anyway, my dad helped a  guy there in town kill some goats to eat. They brought one of the goats  here and Mom didn   t want to fool with that goat so, she took it down to  the church, to these evangelists. At the church service, they thanked the  Good Samaritan that brought them the beef and it was that goat.  (Laughter) She was a pretty good kidder.  Did they butcher hogs too?  Oh, yes. Yes, my husband and I had experience with that hog  butchering. We had hogs here one time and he was gone to a school.  After World War I, there were schools in the community that would help  the farmers. One of the classes that he attended was on butchering hogs  so, he knew how to do that. They saw it on film. Well, he finally got this  hog killed and had the barrel of hot water. He was going to douse him so  the hair would come off and then between the two trees out there, he had  a post on each   well, it was just two posts and then this other one went  across the top and he had wires, I think, hanging down from that.  He proceeded to get this hog out of the barrel to hook up his feet so he  could finish it off. It came out and he hollered for me to come and help  him and that slick hog   we had the most awful time trying to get that  thing up. (Laughs) But finally, I think he had to put the wire down a  little bit lower. Anyway, he could not hang that hog and it was pretty  good sized. We finally got it butchered and we had enclosed this back  porch with what we called windows, but they were just kind of like  plastic siding sheets, and we had the screen door.  19  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Well, one night, we were asleep. We heard all this commotion on the  back porch and I told Sherman, I said,    Go see what that is.    He said,     Well come on, aren   t you going to go with me?    He was scared too.  (Laughs) So, I got up and it was dogs. On that screen door we had that  plastic siding and they were raking that off because they smelled the  meat on the back porch. But thankfully, we chased them away. I thought  that was so funny. He wasn   t very brave. He didn   t know what was  going on. Oh, shoot  (Laughs)  Did you do another one after that one or was it the one and only?  I think that was the one and only. His sister and her husband, years  later   this is kind of away from my story   but anyway, they moved to a  farm and they were going to raise hogs. And I don   t know, I would say  they had about fifty hogs and I think they got a loan for that or  something. They went to inoculate them and I think when they  vaccinated them, you kind of gave them the, oh, like the cholera, and  then you immediately gave them another one that was the antibiotic.  Well, they didn   t do the antibiotic so, they killed all their hogs. We went  down there and they just had them raked up getting ready to burn them,  just pitiful.  Sounds like there   s a lot of learning by trial and error.  Yes  And I wouldn   t have thought that   d been, when they bought it that  somebody wouldn   t have said something.  Was there a veterinarian in the area?  We had a veterinarian by the same of Steve Sellick and he lived in the  Greenbrier area. I don   t think he had any education, but he just did it. He  did a lot of vaccinating or helped with the vaccinations and      Sometimes the county agents would come out and teach and do some of  that.  He wasn   t a county agent. If you got something sick, you just called him  and he would come out and give a shot or something.  Well, speaking of calling, when you were a child, did you have a phone  in the home?  Yes. I don   t know how old I was when we got the phone, but I think you  had to go through the operator. They had the operator there in town, the  phone operator. At the time that my sister got hooked in the eye or near  20  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  the eye, we had a country doctor. He lived south of Strang but then, you  had to go through the operator. This operator, she was about a four by  five, short and fat, and we always referred to her as a lady wiggle-woggle  because she could hardly get up on that stool in front of her  system that she had. You had to plug them in and everything. Well, my  dad got all excited and he just tore the phone off the wall. (Laughs) And  I don   t ever remember getting another one. He couldn   t get her so, that  was the end of the phone business.  Had it been a party line? Was it a party line?  Yes, I think so.  Did it have certain rings, two rings   ?  Yes, one ring, two rings, and three rings, yes.  And what did you refer to her as?  Wiggle-woggle.  Wiggle-woggle, okay. (Laugher) And how far from town are you here, a  mile or two?  Yes, it   s about a mile. This corner down here is referred to as a mile and  then up, I think we   re less than a quarter mile. This house is less than a  quarter mile.  You cut through the fields and get there a little quicker?  Oh, yes. I could cut through this field across here. We used to own it,  too. I mean, my mother did. And yes, we could cut off quite a bit when  the weather was nice so, you could cross it.  So, you bought the land or did you inherit it?  Well, I had a sister and we bought this land and we paid her. I don   t  remember how much we paid her, but she acquired some land up near  Ketchum. Well, it was mostly closer to Langley and it was still an  amount of acreage and it had a pretty nice house on it at that time. I  think there was a milk barn. She and her husband bought that, but she  lacked a little bit of education at Tahlequah to get her teaching  certificate. She could have taught if she had finished   I think she had  this job at midterm so, she was going to Tahlequah to finish up. It was  during this time that she was involved in a car accident and it killed her.  So, she never got to teach.  21  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  So, you taught and your mother taught?  My grandmother.  And do you have children?  Yes, I have two daughters and they both became teachers. Then I   ve got  grandkids and I said,    Don   t be a teacher.    (Laughs) I think it was a bad  mistake because they like what they   re doing, but as far now as  retirement that the teachers have, it   s pretty good now so, I probably  shouldn   t have stressed it because yes, they became teachers. My two  daughters became teachers.  Where did they earn their degrees?  Same place, at Tahlequah.  Tahlequah?  My oldest daughter, when she finished, she was living in Tulsa and  married. She taught English at Tulsa Junior College and then she went to  Rogers State and taught English there. She doesn   t like politics so, she  got out of there and the Vo-Tech school at Pryor was established. So,  she went there and was more or less a councilor until she retired. Let   s  see, I think those were the only two places she taught, were in Tulsa. I  can   t recall   Tulsa Junior College and then Claremore College. But  anyway, when she was old enough to retire, she retired. My other  daughter, she taught at Pryor School for twenty years and retired and  went to teach in Arkansas. She taught in Arkansas at least ten years. I  think this might have been her eleventh year, but she    (Crying)  That   s okay.  Last Monday she discovered she had cancer. She signed her papers  yesterday, I think, to retire from Arkansas. So, she has those two  retirements.  That   s pretty good, thirty years of teaching. And what was her subject?  Elementary. She taught third grade in Pryor and when she started in  Arkansas it was the fourth grade. She   d already signed a contract to  teach other year in Arkansas and that was going to be just science and  math for the sixth grade, I think   fifth and sixth grade.  Do you envision either one of them coming back to the farm to live?  22  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  No. (Laughs)  Grandchildren?  I don   t know. I have two pieces of property. This one and I wanted the  one that just retired   her name is Linda   to have it. When she became  ill, she asked that I deed it over to her two children. So, they   ll get this.  She   s got a husband, but you might say they   re separated. It has been  that way for a long time.  Are her children boys, girls?  Girl and a boy.  So, it still could pass female to female to female then, at least part of it.  Yes, and Mom had two daughters, see, and I had two daughters. It was a  long time before I ever got a grandson in the family. (Laughs)  And you were saying he   s named after you?  The great-grandson, yes.  Keller, do you know the story behind that? How you came to have that  as a first name?  Well, this Doctor Hollinsworth that we had here, that was a doctor in  this area, he had two nieces that would come and visit him. They   d be all  decked out in fancy clothes, I guess very attractive. One was named  Keller and the other was Mozelle. So, that   s who I   m named after.  So, you   ve got both names then? Keller Mozelle, it   s pretty.  I   ve always liked it. I like Mozelle better than Keller.  What kind of things would you do for holidays, growing up? Like for  Christmas or Easter?  Well, Mom always managed to get my sister and me new Easter outfits.  So, we   d always get a new dress for Easter. And then my mom   s sister  that was in Tulsa, she usually came over and brought us our hats so, we  were always decked out for Easter.  Did the town have an Easter parade?  23  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  No, we were just at church. I remember one time, Mom got up real early  and I think she cooked two or three chickens and fried them and had a  lot of stuff to eat. We were having a dinner at the church and here, we  had that old pickup, jalopy thing, and the dogs got in there and ate all her  food while they were in church. That just about killed her I think. There  were a lot of dogs in town during that time.  Sounds like it. And then Christmas?  Yes, we always made it to the Christmas tree at church. Sometimes I  didn   t think I was going to get anything but I always got something,  besides candy.  Did a circus come through town ever, or a carnival?  Let me think. I just kind of remember sideshows would come through  here once in a while and put up a tent. That   s about all I remember about  that. But at that time, we had a movie on Saturday nights down in  Strang, I think fifteen cents.  There was a movie house or   ?  Yes, but they only showed movies on Saturday nights. There was this     his name was Roscoe Carlton and he and his wife, they had kind of a  novelty store. You could buy most anything in that store and Mom used  to   if we didn   t have any dessert or anything, she   d give us a penny and  we could go downtown and buy those chocolate drops. Well, if you got a  chocolate drop that was pink, you got another one. So, I learned to put  my fingernail through the bottom of one of them to see if it was pink or  not. (Laughs) I know that lady knew what I was doing, but a lot of times  I   d get two. (Laughter)  Anyway, she had this BB   we called it the BB racket. It was kind of  like the dollar store is now, I guess. Her husband put up this movie  house deal. We had seats in there and then he would show a film. All I  remember was that it was on Saturday night. We just went on Saturday  nights. And then he got out of that business and he put in a kind of an ice  cream shop, where you could buy ice cream and malts and shakes,  which was good. We had the bank and it later turned into a drugstore  and you could get an ice cream there and coke in a cold glass, peanuts,  but that was later on in years. I was older.  Yes, we had a lot of stores. We had the hardware stores, Watkins had a  dry goods store. Part of the post office, at one time, it was a shoe store.  There was a meat market and Miss Fairbin   s Caf  . I remember the first  time she got in the nickel slot machine. (Laughs) I always wanted a  24  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  nickel to put in that slot machine. We had several small businesses  where you could sell your cream, your eggs, and chickens in town and I  don   t know how they stayed in business. Thinking about it now, to have  about four, I don   t know how you would pick   how Mom picked. The  one where she could get the most money, I guess. But we finally got a  grocery store down here and Craigs put it in. You could buy most  anything in there, dry goods, hardware, and they bought chickens and  eggs and sort of ran the other people out of business. We just called it  the Craigs General Store and then they sold. I don   t know when they  finally closed up.  Was there a cotton gin and an ice plant?  There was a cotton gin and it was about two blocks south of the main  road that   s in Strang now. R.A. Smith, he would handle flour and meal  but I don   t think he did the grain then or anything. I think he went to  Southwest City, Missouri with the grain and stuff and then brought flour  back in sacks. I don   t remember too much. I know he had feed, livestock  feed. He handled that.  When did the train go out? Was it here when you were in your youth?  Yes.  Was it here when you came back from California?  No, I think it was   the depot agent had a daughter about my age when I  got out of high school so, it happened soon after that, in    38.  I   m sure that started the town to change after that.  Oh, yes, because there would be people from the Spavinaw area that  would come to Strang with their   I call them railroad ties   and sold  them. The guy at the store usually bought them and then he sold them.  They were shipped out. I never rode on that train. I remember Mom  telling when the World War I, the railroad was here then. The boys that  were in service would come to Strang on the railroad. This railroad went  down to Muskogee. I think I was out of school one time   it was  probably   well, when I was working at Pryor, after I   d got out of  school. I taught one year and then I went to work at Pryor. A bunch of us  rode that train to Muskogee, spent the night, and then came back. I did  ride it one time.  I should back up and ask what Indian tribe did the land come down  through?  25  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Cherokee. I   m a Cherokee. I am three-eighths Cherokee Indian but my  coloring, I took after my mother. She had less. She was Cherokee too,  but I think she was only about a fourth. Then most of it came from my  father   s side and my sister looked like the Indian. Her skin was just a  shade darker and she had black hair, curly hair, and mine was straight as  could be. (Laughs)  Had they come across with the Trail of Tears?  Yes, but I didn   t get deep into that. I   m sure there was. I   ve heard people  who have checked the records,    Yes, you   re so and so came over on the  Trail of Tears.     Do you know why they chose this particular piece? I mean, it was an  allotment, but do you know if they got to choose?  Well, I think the grandparents, they chose. They had theirs and then the  other land with their kids was nearby. My mother   s mother, which is my  grandmother, she died I think I said a while ago, when she was twelve,  and my grandmother   s sister lived on a piece of land. I could see her  house but you can   t see it now, right across this field here, maybe a half  a mile. Well, because Mom was the oldest and so young, she came and  got all of my grandmother   s records and things. She didn   t get to keep  any of them because she knew that they would just be torn up, thrown  away. But there are still a few pictures floating around because I got a  picture this last summer from a niece that   s in California. It is a picture  of my uncle and my grandfather together.  I remember by grandfather as being short, but I didn   t know he was that  short, compared to my uncle, who was huge. Mom called him the  Prodigal Son. (Laughter) I came in one day and she was talking and she  said,    Well, guess what? I got my inheritance.    I said,    What  inheritance?    Anyway, this uncle had bought several lots at the  Spavinaw cemetery and he gave her one  (Laughs) Anyway, I didn   t  think she would be buried there, but she said when she was ill,    Just  bury me at my inheritance lot.    (Laughs) Oh, shoot  But I had bought  five burial plots together at Spavinaw, thinking I might use them. I  didn   t know in the future, but she chose that one. It is nearby. It   s just  four or five graves from where my husband is buried. She was a  character.  What   s going on with the farm today?  I don   t know. I   m ready to move to town. (Laughs) I just don   t know.  Well, do you lease it or   ?  26  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  I have some cattle here and I have, as I mentioned, some more land up  the road here. I have cattle. I have leased the land up the road to a guy  that has got cattle and he takes care of my cattle. He feeds them and  hauls off the calves. He also pays me cash, some cash for the use of that  land up here. I have 153 acres up the road so, I get an income from that  and he takes care of my cows.  Still working it then?  Yes. (Laughs) It   s not much to live off of. If I didn   t have my social  security and teacher   s retirement, I   d really feel    I   m comfortable.  When you say moving to town, what town?  I think Tulsa.  Tulsa?  Yes. Most of our grandkids are there, and the others are in Bartlesville  so, that would be close for them to come.  Any connections to Oklahoma State University?  My two grandkids. Linda, the one that   s discovered she had cancer and  had cancer surgery last Monday, her son and daughter both finished at  Stillwater, yes. And then my other daughter, one of them went to Kansas  State   I don   t think it   s Kansas State. They have Kansas State and  Kansas University, don   t they? I think it was the university. One of her  kids graduated there and the other one just lacked a little bit, graduated,  and she decided to finish up at Tahlequah. So, her last quarter, I guess  you   d call it, was finished at Tahlequah.  Following the tradition then.  Yes, and she has a son and he got his master   s at OU. I think it   s through  the Schusterman   s, that is a branch of it, that   s where he finished up. He  is a physical therapist in Fayetteville. He has two kids, two cute little  kids, that Keller is one.  But my two daughters have college degrees, and  so do my five grandchildren.   We   ve covered a lot of ground today. Is there anything else you want to  add before we sign off? Good memories of the farm. Indoor plumbing  and indoor water, now.  Yes. (Laughs) It   s something isn   t it? I always have Thanksgiving here  27  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  Finchum  Stockton  and those that are married, they usually go to their husband   s folks at  Christmastime, but some of them end up here too. When my mother and  father divorced, he remarried   I   m trying to think of how many kids he  had by this woman. She was a lot younger. I think it was five. Anyway,  I   m really close to them and their families. Well, I think my girls are a  little bit jealous of them because when they were little, when his other  family was small, I   d have them over here for Christmas. They weren   t  dressed, my dad didn   t have too much for this family, but they were  always   clothes and everything and he did all the caring for them. They  weren   t spic and span like their daughters and there   s a little resentment  there.  His family, they   re always calling me or coming by and doing things.  Somebody dumped some tires out there in the ditch the other day, two  weeks ago I guess it was, and one of Dad   s grandsons came in here,     What are those tires doing out there?    He said,    You want me to haul  them off?    I said,    Well, I think they   re working on the road. Maybe  they   ll come along and pick them up.    And sure enough they did.  They live close enough to check in on you pretty regularly?  Yes, they can do that or I can call them. He had all boys except for one  girl. Yes, they   re always calling me, keeping in touch. I got a call  Sunday and   yes, it was Sunday   and one of them lives in Texas and  he said,    I   ll see on you June 24.    He   s coming in with his wife and son.  They   re having a school reunion at Strang and he wanted to come to  that. There is no school now, but they have it at the fire department.  There   s always a big turnout.  Still connections to the place and to the land, aren   t there?  Yes.  Well, if there   s nothing else, we   ll say thank you for having us and it   s  been a pleasure learning about you.  Well, thank you.  -------  ------- 
