 Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Today is July 22, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum along with Juliana  Nykolaiszyn. We   re with Oklahoma State University Library, and today  we   re in Gould, Oklahoma, Harmon County, to speak with Jimmy and  Mary Paul Williams. This is part of our Centennial Farm Families  Project, so thank you for having us today.  Thank you.  Let   s start with having you tell us how the family came to own the land  to begin with.  Okay. My grandfather is Harry W. Payne, and he homesteaded this land.  Actually, he first filed his papers in 1901. Then, of course, they have to  improve it and all, and it   s finalized five years later. An interesting thing  that we found when we were kind of preparing for the interview is that  my granddad was born in 1881, and on the homestead affidavit he says  that he is a male and so forth and that he is at least twenty-one years of  age.  At least.  Yes. He says here,    over the age of twenty-one,    I guess he says in his  writing there. Of course, at that time, if you do the math on it, he was  only twenty. I don   t know whether twenty-one was a requirement and he  fudged just a little bit, or, you know, I don   t know exactly what the deal  was. That came up in our research, and I thought it was kind of  interesting.  Do you know how he chose this particular piece of property, any idea?  You know, I really don   t. He was originally from, he used to say,  Fauquier County, Virginia, which is just right south of Washington DC,  5  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  Mary Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  I think. His family moved to Texas, and then he came on up here in  1901. I really don   t know why he chose the area. I guess he was  interested in ranching and farming, and it was available.  Was he married at that time?  No, he was not, no. He got married during the waiting time between the  time that he homesteaded and the time that his papers were actually  finalized while he was improving the property. He got married in 1905.  To a local girl?  Yes, she was. Her family had moved up and homesteaded a little ways  south of where my granddad had homesteaded. Her maiden name was  Richardson. They got married, then, in 1905.  Well, on the original property when he was first living here, did he  produce crops or livestock? How did he make his living?  Yes, both, I think: crops and livestock. When it talks about the  improvements that he had made, it indicates that he had dug a well and  built a pond and planted a small orchard and put a fence around the  property. I think he was producing small grains and maybe had a milk  cow, at least. I don   t know how much more livestock he had, but later he  got real active in the livestock business. He had quite a few cattle.  Any idea what type of fence?  I think it was a barbed wire fence.  Okay.  I think it was.  Some had been bodark trees.  Bois d   arc.  Bois d   arc.  Yes, he may have use bois d   arc posts. I don   t know. He could have.  Some of the buildings as time came along, what was built?  As far as I know, he had a small home, and it faced the west there on the  county road. Then he had a shed behind it that was more of a shop or  6  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  probably some storage shed. Then there was a small shed that was more  for horse, livestock, milk cow, that sort of thing. He dug a cistern. You  can still see the cistern where the homestead location was, today, and he  dug a windmill. I know of those things that were there, and I really  don   t   oh, he built a pond, also. I really don   t know of other building  structures that he had there.  Take us through the ownership to this point.  Okay. My mother was born in 1917, and in 1938, when she was fixing to  turn twenty-one years old and she and my dad were talking about getting  married, he gave it to her as a birthday present. We got to noticing when  we were doing preparation for the interview that Granddad had put a  loan on it with the Land Bank Association in 1923. It was a long-term  loan. I think the loan, the best we could figure out, was for thirty-six  years, wasn   t it?  I think so.  Thirty-six years, payments twice a year, and so it still carried quite a bit  of payments on it whenever he gave it away. She assumed that loan that  was against it, also, when she inherited it in   38. Of course, he had been  paying down on it. He had been paying on it for fifteen years, so it was  paid down quite a bit. The original amount of the loan   I was surprised  at the amount. The original amount of the loan was  4,500. In 1923,   4,500 was quite a lot of money.  What did she do with the farm then?  She and my dad farmed it for years and years. They gave it to us in  1993. Is that right?  I   m not sure.  I   m not sure, either. They gave it to us later, but it had some grassland  on it. It was, the majority, a wheat farm.  And at that point that it came into your hands, were there any more  buildings?  No.  No.  No, no.  7  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Any more ponds?  Yes, there were additional ponds through the years. There were two  more ponds.  Did you participate in some of the conservation efforts?  Yes. As a matter of fact, it was placed in the CRP  Conservation Reserve  Program  program in, I believe,    87, 1987. It   s been in the CRP program  ever since. There   s been opportunities to re-sign into the CRP Program,  so it hasn   t been in wheat production for several years, but it   s been in  grass.  Were you born on the farm?  No, I was not. I was born in a hospital.  Did you remember coming out to the farm and visiting grandparents?  No, no I don   t. Actually in 1933, they built a new home up on what was  then going to be the highway, Highway 62. They were a mile and a half  or a mile and three-quarters south of the highway. Their home was  small, and they had four children. My granddad liked to acquire  additional land, and every time he   d get a few dollars together   it was  pretty hard times between 1929 and 1930, along in there, but every time  he would get a few extra dollars together, he would buy an additional  farm. My mother used to laugh at this story. He came home one day and  said,    Linnie, I bought another farm.    She said,    Now, Harry, if you   ve  got money to buy another farm, you can build me a home.    So that very  afternoon, my mother used to say, he went up and staked the location for  the new home. In    33 they built a new home up on the highway.  And what year were you born?  I was born in    44.  We don   t know anybody that can remember the house or barns actually  being there. Tell them what you think may have happened to it.  My granddad believed in salvaging and using everything, and when I  was a kid and we moved out to the farm, to the new home, in 1957, my  family lived in Gould. Granddad was moving to California, retired, and  he was fixing to move to California. We moved out to the farm in 1957.  When we moved out there, there was some old barns and stuff out there.  I just feel like maybe perhaps that he salvaged the home and some of  those other barns and built those barns at the new place.  8  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  That happened a lot, too     Yes.     or they moved them, completely moved them somewhere else?  Yes, yes, yes.  So in    57, you would have been thirteen-ish?  Yes.  Did you have chores?  Oh, you bet, yes. We all had chores, and we were active in FFA  Future  Farmers of America  and 4-H and stuff, so we had our own cattle and  hogs and showed the livestock and stuff. We were operating machinery.  My dad used to say that I started driving a tractor when I was seven, so I  was pretty young when I started driving a tractor. We were the only  hands he had.  What more do you remember about that first tractor?  Well, it was an old Moline, just kind of step-on and step-off type of old  Moline. You moved pretty slow. You had time to jump off and chase a  rabbit if you needed to. It moved pretty slow. There was three boys. My  mom and dad had three boys, so we were the farm hands.  What were some of the chores you were required to do, specifically for  yourself?  Take care of my projects, and then through the years maybe I   d have my  own patch of cotton or my own wheat or something. It didn   t take many  patches of cotton to know that cotton wasn   t my love. We had our own  projects and stuff.  You said you had to clean out the chicken sheds.  Yes, I had to clean out the chicken house.  You didn   t like that.  Yes, yes.  And who got the chore of slaughtering the chickens?  9  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Well, I would help. We   d raise some broilers and stuff. We   d wring their  heads and hang them on a clothesline.  That   s what Juliana   s usual question is:    What was your method?     Yes.  Everybody has a different method.  Oh, yes, we   d wring their necks. You twist them and then pull, and hang  them over the clothesline and let them bleed. Mary Paul would never do  that. She was a city girl.  No. (Laughter)  Well, what would you do for fun?  We were real active in community and church stuff, and so there was  always church dinners and all that kind of stuff, and then, of course, high  school sports and so forth. We weren   t far from the school. I can  remember there was a big rodeo at Vernon  Texas  in those days, the  Santa Rosa Roundup. That would be a big deal if harvest didn   t  interfere, if we got to go down and watch the parade or something,  maybe not go to the rodeo, but go down and watch the parade. Then, on  occasion, we got family vacations. I had grandparents that lived here on  both sides, and so there was lots of family get-togethers and that sort of  thing and plenty of cousins.  You rode your horse     I rode a horse a lot, yes.     down the railroad track to Gould.  Yes.  Tell them about that.  In those days, when we lived out on the highway, half a mile behind the  house there was a railroad track, so we had a gate going out to the  railroad track. You could stay off the highway that way while riding  your horse to town. We   d ride our horse to town on Saturday afternoon  or Sunday afternoon or something, a lot of times. There   d be other  people there, too.  1 0  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  Town of Gould?  Yes.  Was it called Gould then?  Yes it was, yes.  I read somewhere it   s changed its name several times through the years.  Yes, it has. It was Gibson, originally, I think.  And was the school close by, then, at that time?  Yes, school zone.  Gould?  Yes.  And was religion or church an important part of     Yes, it was. It certainly was, yes. We went to church every time the door  opened, I guess. Involved in RAs  Royal Ambassadors  and GAs  Girls  in Action  and all that kind of stuff. So yes, it was very important. I was  saved at the church there in Gould when I was nine years old during a  revival service. It was always very important. The church itself is not  there now. It closed in     Two thousand two?  Yes, I believe it was 2002.  No five, five, after your dad died.  It was after Dad   s service.  It was one of the last things they had.  My parent   s passed away   Mother passed away in 2002, and Dad  passed away in 2005. His funeral service may have been one of the last  things that was there. After it closed, they took the building down.  Well, can you describe the house that you lived in in the   50s when you  came to the farm?  1 1  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  Before I came to the farm     Yes.     when I lived in Gould?  No, when you     Oh, when I came to the farm?  When you came to the farm.  It   s still there.  Yes, it   s still there. It was a large, stone house made out of native stone.  It had a full basement underneath it. The floors and the ceilings were all  hardwood.  Beautiful, beautiful ceilings.  It   s really pretty. My parents lived there until Dad passed away, and  since then it   s been vacant, but the home is still there.  And did you have to share a room?  No, I didn   t. When I was young we did, because we preferred to share a  room, but later, the boys all had separate rooms. In the summertime,  sometimes we   d even sleep down in the basement because it was so  much cooler.  How was it heated?  It had a gas furnace that was a full-furnace type gas furnace. Then later  that was done away with, and it was central heat and air from the time I  was probably in junior high, high school.  Well, by the   50s I would assume they had running water     Oh, yes.     and electricity.  Electricity, yes. Sure did.  When you would take things to the market, would it be Gould or a  different town?  1 2  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Generally, it was Gould. In those days there was actually two elevators  in Gould in the   50s. One of the elevators was burned, and another one  was built. When the new one was built, it kind of consolidated the two.  And for the cotton?  Cotton, there was a gin. I don   t remember when they started closing, but  there was two gins in Gould, too, so there was lots of business in Gould.  You were talking about electricity. Did have electricity. Gould got  electricity in 1937, I think was what Mother used to say. Granddad was  kind of involved in the local co-op grocery. When Gould got electricity,  there was a large icebox that they had been using in the grocery store.  My grandmother was real big in canning, and so Granddad took that  icebox out and put it in the basement out there in the home for her to put  her canned goods and stuff in. We have that there in the entryway now,  that old icebox.  The good part of the story is that they later added onto the house. When  you came up out of the basement, that old icebox would no longer come  out because you turned a corner then to get up into it. That was stuck  down there forever. He had varnished it no telling how many times, and  the wood just looked purple where he   d varnished it so many times. For  my birthday in   I   ve forgotten what year it was.  Late   90s.  Anyway, he had a man come down and surprise me. He took that icebox  apart, piece by piece, brought it out, refinished it, put it back together.  We   ll show it to you in a little while. It   s just amazing, but it   s quite a     Quite a story.     quite a story, yes. It was quite a project.  So she did a lot of canning.  Yes, my grandmother did a lot of canning.  Was she a member of a homemaker club?  Yes, she sure was. We have a quilt out there that is a community quilt  that had all the ladies in the community put their names on it and all that  kind of stuff. It was a big part of their life, the community, in those days.  Your community, if the area was populated enough, you didn   t have to  go far to find another farm home.  1 3  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Do you happen to remember the name of the club? There   s some unique  ones out there.  I don   t. No, I sure don   t.  Well, did your father or you use the county agent     Oh sure, yes.     of Cooperative Extension?  Yes. We   ve always used them for information. We even had wheat plots  on our land through the years. We   d partner with them in a lot of  different areas.  And took part in county fairs?  You bet, yes, when I was a kid and when my children were growing up.  When we got married, (we got married in 1967) our oldest son came  along in    68. We got married in January of    67, and he was born in  March of    68. Then by    76, we had four children, and we were living in  Hollis. In the summertime, especially in the summertime, I   d leave when  it was still dark and come home when it was still dark. We started  talking about building a new home.  It was a good deal. (Laughter)  So Mary Paul said,    If we   re going to build a new home, we   re going to  build one out there closer to where you work, closer to where you are.     That   s when we came out here and built our home out here. The kids  were always, being out in the country where we could do it, they were  always really involved in show animals and that sort of thing.  So your entire career has been on the farm.  Yes.  Have you had supplemental jobs out     You know, really, I haven   t much. When we came home     There   s no    much    to it. You haven   t. (Laughter)  No, I really haven   t, no. Served on some boards that pay a little bit or  something like that, but, no, it   s been agriculture.  1 4  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Did your father and grandfather have jobs off the farm?  No. No, they were full time farmers, also.  So let   s back up a little bit. You were born in    44, graduated high school  in     Sixty-two.     then continued to farm at that point, or did you go to college or     Well, in    62, I went to Oklahoma State and finished a BS in agronomy  with a major in small grains in spring of    67. Mary Paul still lacked  about a year, so I started working on my master   s and did about thirty-two  hours on my master   s in ag econ. Pretty well had it finished, but you  had to take a comp exam that I never did. We got ready to come home  and start farming, so I never did finish the comp exams, but I did all the  coursework for it.  And did you finish?  I did. Yes.  And what was yours?  Accounting. Accounting major.  And what year?  I graduated in January  1968 . I graduated a semester early from college.  Robert was born in March, and he finished his work in May, and we  came home.  And life got busy.  Yes, yes.  And you passed your CPA after Robert was born.  Yes, it was a busy semester. It was.  Did you live on campus?  Right off campus. We lived in Scholars Inn, which was right there by  Gallagher Iba. They just tore it down about two years ago and made a  1 5  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  M. Williams  parking lot out of it. Couldn   t believe it. (Laughter) They   re fixing to  tear down my Business building   They already     Is it gone?  Yesterday they started, Hanner Hall.  Well, we saw where Hanner was going down. They haven   t started  taking the Business building yet.  Oh, no, you   re right. Hanner started yesterday, so Business not yet.  His dad stayed in Hanner Hall when he went to OSU.  I should have snuck you a brick.  Yes, you should have. (Laughter)  He was there in 1932, I think, wasn   t it?  Or three, somewhere around there.  Yes,    32,    33, along there somewhere.  Did he graduate from OSU?  No, he did not, no. He didn   t graduate, but he went to school there for a  little while.  And your mother went to school there for a little while.  Yes, she did. Sure did.  They didn   t either one graduate, but     Well, why did you decide to go to OSU?  Well, I was always interested in agriculture, and that was the place to go  when you wanted to study agriculture, so I went to Oklahoma State.  The county agent and those offices have always been real important in  the county, in an agriculture community. Just a lot of kids went there. It  was just kind of the place to go.  1 6  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  Did you go to Roundup when you were in high school for 4-H?  You know, I didn   t. I went to state FFA conventions at Stillwater and  some of that kind of stuff, but I don   t think I ever went to 4-H Roundup.  Now, our kids did.  Yes, our kids did.  Melinda did a lot.  Most of the time in summer I was tied up. We didn   t take many   trips.  Well, while we   re talking about children and OSU, do you want to go  ahead and say about your children a little bit?  Go ahead. You   re doing good.  We have four children, and the oldest three are all OSU graduates, and  all of their spouses. Then we have our baby who was an OBU   Oklahoma Baptist University  undergraduate, and his wife. Both are  OBU. Then he went to OU med school. Those three children and their  spouses were OSU graduates. Now we have one grandson who   s  graduated from OSU and three grandchildren who are up there right  now, and there will be several more until we get down to that baby   s  kids. They won   t make it to OSU, but    (Laughter)  Well, you never know, maybe.  Anyway, we anticipate having some more, but we   re pretty well an OSU  family.  When you were on campus back in the   60s, did you have a favorite  hangout spot?  I was an AGR  Alpha Gamma Rho , and so we kind of hung out there  and so forth, but of course the Ag Halls were there. You had North and  South in those days and so a lot of activities there that you tended to and  stuff. Actually, we knew each other a little bit in high school, but that   s  where we actually connected because Mary Paul had a class in Ag Hall  of all places.  I had a sociology class over there.  You didn   t venture to the library?  1 7  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  Oh, yes, we went to the library on occasion.  We did. Yes we did, but he found it a lot more after he met me than     My grades got better after we got married.  His mother was thrilled. (Laughter)  It   s funny how that works.  And it happened with our kids, too, the same thing. Our boys, they  married girls who helped them find their way over to the library. I can   t  believe they   re tearing down the Business building. It was state of the art  when I went. I went to OBU for a year first, and then I transferred to  OSU. That business building was just fabulous and they had the new  IBM Selectric typewriters, which we thought were just unbelievable.  Times have changed.  Well, growing up, you went to school, you studied agriculture. Was it  always your intention to come back and work on the farm?  When I first started, I don   t know as I knew that   s what I was going to  do, but as it went along and I met Mary Paul and we knew we wanted to  have a family, we thought this would be a wonderful place to raise kids.  Then we decided that we would come back and get involved in the  farming operation. Prior to that, I had done some interviews with, oh,  Purina and Wilson and some of the companies of the day that were good  and could have gotten jobs with them, but we chose to come back home  and go into farming and raise kids.  And were you in partnership with your parents?  Yes, yes. When we came back, we kind of formed a partnership and  farmed it that way. Then we added quite a few farms through the years.  In 1979 we formed a family corporation, and they continued to add some  land through the corporation that way.  So the original acreage of the centennial farm was     The original amount was just eighty acres     Okay.     but that place now under one fence is a half section, 320 acres.  So your grandparents added approximately how many acres to their  1 8  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  operation?  How many acres that joined that farm?  Yes.  They bought a quarter that joins it. Then later when my dad had it, he  bought an 80 that joins it. They actually expanded that 80 to 240. Then  Dad later bought another 80 that joins it, so it kind of lays at an L.  And your siblings weren   t interested in farming?  No, one of my brothers we lost in a farm accident in 1965 when he was  fifteen. Then my other brother went into pharmacy. He and his wife are  both pharmacists. He wasn   t interested in going into farming.  But they do own some land.  Yes, they own quite a lot of land, and the family corporation  farms it .  Inherited some.  We   re an LLC now, but the family farms it.  And the total acreage in your family business is approximately     In the whole business     Yes.     acres and everything? We operate about 9,000 acres.  Okay. So you   ve seen lots of changes in agriculture through the years.  Oh, yes. Yes, there   s been lots of   whenever I was young, we cultivated  it all. You plow it over one time and you get a shower or something, you  just start back over. You spend all summer plowing with ten-, thirteen-foot  Hoeme plows or something. Just takes a while to do, and you ran  several of those. Then when my children were younger, the equipment  was much larger, but we still plowed it all. Spent most of the summer  plowing over and over.  For the last six years now we   ve been completely no-till. We don   t plow  any ground. We spray it, generally, about four times during the summer  season and then plant it with a big air seeder, no-till drill. The  conservation benefits from it are much greater. We don   t have any soil  1 9  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  erosion. We don   t have any wind blowing. This area is just coming out  (I hope it   s coming out, anyway) of a four-year drought. A lot of the  people who study that sort of thing say that actually this drought has  been worse in this area than it was in the   30s. Without so much no-till  in this area, it would have been a dust bowl like they experienced, I feel,  but because of the modern farming techniques and so forth, we   ve come  through it, and the soil and everything is still in good shape. If we could  get into a more normal rain pattern, we   ll get back into the business of  producing wheat.  When we first started this, our oldest son farms with us, and he was  anxious to go to no-till. When wheat prices were cheap, we made a  living off of cattle, grazing cattle in the wintertime and grazing out  wheat and growing the stockers to a large size before we shipped them  in May or something. That had just been the way that we made a living  through the years because wheat prices were below the cost of  production. Robert was anxious to go to a no-till operation, and I was  real reluctant to do that because I thought that the pasture benefits would  not be near as much. We have been pleasantly surprised that our  pasture   s probably as good or better. Our cattle have gained better  because when you do get a wet spell, that no-till doesn   t bog and so forth  like plowed ground does. We   ve been real, real pleased with the benefits  of no-till. It has really worked well for us.  Have a lot of your neighbors started moving to no-till?  Yes, they have. Actually, the majority of this area now is no-till. It sure  is. I think most people have been real pleased with it. It has been very  good.  When you were younger, did your parents and grandparents participate  in rings, harvesting rings?  I   m sure they all worked together when it came harvesting time because  I know Granddad had a thrashing machine that you had to bring the  wheat to, but I don   t really know as they called them rings. I don   t really  know. He always had some help. I know they used to tell the story about  when they lived in the new house back in World War II. Granddad   s  son, he had one son and three daughters. His son and my dad were both  involved with the farming operation, and they both went to war, so he  had a couple of sixteen-year-old boys from Hollis that came out and  lived in the basement and worked there all summer during harvest. One  of them is still around today, and every time I see him he tells me the  story about staying out at Grandmother   s. Actually, I was a baby, just a  few months old. He said,    I helped take care of you when your...     2 0  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Your mother was living there with your     Yes, yes.     with your grandparents while your dad was gone.  While Dad was gone to war, Mother was living there. He actually was,  later on, superintendent of schools at Hollis for several years and  involved in the banking in Hollis. Mr. Cummins still likes to tell me  about staying out at Granddad   s house.  I think the equipment has changed since I   ve been involved in it. The  first summer that we were going together and pretty serious   I was a  city girl. I lived in Hollis. I came over here and was going to go watch  him cut wheat the first time. His mother, this is another one of her  favorite stories. I came out all fixed up and had on some white shorts,  and we went out there. Of course, the combine he rode didn   t have a cab  on it. It was just an open-air cab, and the wheat had a lot of smut in it.  His face was just black, and all you could see was the white of his eyes.  She said I got out of the pickup, and I said,    Oh.    She said,    I didn   t  know whether you were going to stay then or not,    but since then     Yes.  Tell them the difference. The equipment since your dad has died in    05  has changed so much.  Yes, all of our equipment now are combines and tractors, and it   s all  satellite-driven auto-steer and computers. The combine, it   ll tell you  what it   s making in a certain area and maps the production as you go  along. The tractor is auto-steer. Basically all you do is turn it around on  the end. You set the length of whatever you   re pulling, whether you   re  pulling an air seeder or whether you   re pulling a sprayer or what you   re  pulling. It lines itself back up and goes back again.  Everything has gone to what we call precision farming, which means  that we   ve gone out and taken soil samples on all this land in very small  locations, five to ten acres, taking mini-samples on each quarter and  mapped all of those of the soil type and production capabilities. Then we  take those production maps through the years, and we overlay all of  those together and put them in a computer on the air seeder. Then the air  seeder varies the rate of fertilizer and varies the rate of seed according to  the capability of production of the land.  We   ve been really pleased with that. It   s actually lowered our fertilizer  costs because we were putting a given amount of fertilizer on the whole  2 1  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  thing and some of the areas weren   t capable of producing as much as our  goal was and some of them were capable of more. Our overall fertilizer  use has actually gone down since we started the precision farming part  where we vary rates and vary amounts of seeding. It   s just modern  agriculture, and as much as it   s changed in the last ten years, what   s it  going to be like in the future?  I can   t imagine.  You can   t imagine it.  And having to keep up with those changes financially and mentally.  Yes, yes.  Yes.  It   s good when you   ve got a young partner. (Laughter) We   re actually  kind of semi-retired, and Robert does most of the biggest part. This  week he   s gone to Nicaragua on a mission trip, he and his family, but he  does the majority of that sort of stuff.  Well, I understand the   80s were tough in Oklahoma for farmers. Do you  have anything you want to say about that time period?  They were very tough. Commodity prices had risen pretty sharply in the  late   70s, and with the commodity prices, land values had gone up. We  were still in a growth mode, and so we had bought additional land. Then  you got into the early   80s when commodity prices fell and, hence, land  values fell. Land values in our area probably decreased about 50 percent.  We were not over leveraged, so we didn   t have any difficulty, really, in  making our land payments, but many in our area did. There was a lot of  land sales and a lot of foreclosures and a lot that sort of thing, so it was  really, really tough. When you have land and you   ve leveraged some  land to buy other land and then it breaks in value by 50 percent, it makes  it really, really tough.  In those days, the increase in land value was based primarily on  commodity price increases. It was mostly farmers buying land and  pushing up the prices. In today   s land market, in the last three, four, five  years, we   ve seen land just about double again in the last five years in  this area. This time it   s based a little bit differently, I feel like. It   s based  more on investment dollars. A lot of outside investors are purchasing  some of the land, and farmers who have the money and want to invest it  in land are doing so. It may decrease in value somewhat when  commodity prices fall, which they are in the process of  doing . Cereal  2 2  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  grains are breaking in the last few weeks, but I don   t think that we   re  going to see a break like we did in the early   80s. We definitely will  probably see a cooling down of land values, but I don   t think we   ll see a  situation like we did in the early   80s.  Was there a point at any point in time when you thought,    Let   s get out  of the business   ?  I don   t really think there was. We adjusted our farming somewhat in  those days. We tried to cut down the expense as much as possible. We  ran cattle and tried to put gain on cattle, buy them lighter and grow them  larger. We just made adjustments in our operation, but I don   t think we  ever   we really never did consider selling out or doing something  different. We just made adjustments.  Probably the worst shock to my system was the first summer we came  home. We were still living in Hollis, and this was before the days of  crop insurance. We had our wheat crop in the field. We had one quarter  then that was ours, and stood on our front porch in Hollis and watched  the hail cloud go over and wipe out your wheat crop. That does make  you kind of think about it again, but the ability to have insurance has     Has made a tremendous amount of difference.     made a tremendous amount of difference in your ability to survive  from year to year.  Large farmers today, risk management is one of the main things that  they spend time on, whether it be hedging or buying options on your  feeder cattle supply or whether it be marketing your grain or whether it  be just deciding what level of insurance you want to cover on crop  insurance, that sort of thing. You know in those days, in the late   70s,  early   80s, we didn   t have many of those options. For modern day  farmers that use that sort of thing, (and most of them who are large  farmers do) it   s a completely different world than it was then.  Keep an eye on the weather at all times?  That   s right.  Well, these last three years have shown that, four years. I mean, you all  are seeing it at its height and beauty right now. It has not been this green  in years, and it   s just so refreshing, the rain we just had.  Are the ponds almost full or     2 3  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Many of them are. Many of them have filled up. Now, some of them are  not. Some of them are not full yet. I think it   s partly because of the no-till.  We don   t get the runoff on some of those ponds that we used to get.  The water stays more where it fell. There   s good benefit from that. Yes  there is.  You mentioned the drought conditions over the last four years. Can you  think of any other weather conditions that have impacted the farming  over the last, say, twenty to thirty years?  Well, by impacting you mean other than weather? You mean, like, farm  programs, government programs, that sort of thing?  No, I   m thinking weather. Have you seen these drought conditions  before?  Yes. Yes, we   ve seen these drought conditions before. As a matter of  fact, we built our home out here in 1976. We built it in the summer of     76, and we were getting ready to start harvesting wheat. We were living  in Hollis, and it hailed big time. Our hailstorms usually move from the  southwest to the northeast. This one moved from the northwest to the  southeast, and it wiped out everything we had. The windows that we  were fixing to put in this home, the upstairs windows, were leaning  against the walls upstairs, and it hailed so that it beat the windows out  before they were even put in. It was just one of those bad hailstorms. We  get those, and we   ve sat out on the patio a lot of times and watched  tornadoes. Like you said earlier, it   s flat out here, so you have the  benefit of being able to sit and watch what   s coming lots of times.  And do you have a cellar to get in?  Yes we do.  Basement. In the basement. That   s all it is, is a   fraidy hole.  In a rural area like this, all you see is   Rural Electric is a great, great  thing, but in the ice storm of    10, we were without electricity for  seventeen days.  And it was cold. It was really cold.  It was cold, and we didn   t want to   well, we had cattle to take care of,  for one thing. We couldn   t go somewhere and get a motel room, but we  didn   t want to leave our home, too, because we had to keep it warm  enough for the water wouldn   t freeze. We still had water, which was one  great thing. We had a little generator, and we could kind of put a little  2 4  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  heat in here once in a while, enough to keep from getting too cold.  Seventeen days, though.  It was a long time. It was a long time. We had a generator. We could  hook up two little electric heaters, so each one had a little heater that we  would carry around. (Laughter) Then if you wanted to make coffee, that  drew a lot of electricity. Of course, it did keep our deep freezes running,  which was good news. You   d have to unplug a heater or something in  order to plug in the coffee pot. You just kind of learned to     We   re all electric.     maneuver. Yes, we didn   t have any choice but to be all electric.  You could turn everything else off and turn one water heater on when  you   d need to take showers every morning. It worked pretty good. We  just had to get a little routine, you know. It worked good.  That ice storm took fences out. Cattle were out all over the country. It  was     It took weeks to get all the cattle straightened out and back where they  went and that sort of thing. It was nothing unusual to have a hundred  head of cattle on one place, and you go down there, and you had six or  eight or something left. Everything else had strayed and gone south. The  wind and the snow was coming from the north, so they all went south. It  just takes a while, and everybody works together, one of those kind of  deals.    I   ve got a number of your cattle over here,    and when you get  them lotted, you take those home. It works really well.  Community still works together?  Community works together. It   s wonderful to live in a rural community.  Yes, there are great things about it. In times of need, sickness or death or  family, this whole county, (it   s countywide, one school) everybody pulls  together and helps and calls and lets people know if somebody needs  help. If someone has passed away and they need help harvesting a crop,  they still do that, do a lot of that and help if we need them.  Where do you do most of your shopping today, in Altus or Eldorado or     Mostly Altus.  We go to church at Hollis, and we may stop there at the grocery store on  2 5  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  the way home from lunch, but normally we go to Altus for major  shopping.  When Gould was in its prime, did it have a movie theater?  You know, I don   t ever remember it having a movie theater. I can  remember in the summer sometimes on the side of the community  building, everybody would meet and they   d show a movie outside on the  side of the building, but they never had a movie theater. When my  mother and dad got   well, before the war, they were in the grocery  business up there. They had WP Grocery, so they bought eggs and milk  and that sort of thing. There was a lot of businesses in Gould. There was  a little drug store, there was a barber shop, there was a hardware, at least  three grocery stores, a bank. There was quite a lot of business up there,  couple of elevators and a couple of gins, but I don   t ever remember a  movie theater. Had a variety store.  Had to go to Altus to the movies, then?  Yes or Hollis. Hollis had two theaters.  But we weren   t near as mobile     No, in those days, no.     back then. You didn   t just jump in the car and go to Altus, used to, or  even go to Hollis.  No.  For that matter, when we started going together, it was long distance to  call from Gould to Hollis. Cost a dime. (Laughter) That was in    66, I  guess, or    65.  Well, in the   50s when you were living on the farm, what were holidays  like?  We always had big family get-togethers on Christmas and Thanksgiving.  Dad, especially, had six siblings in his family, and Mother had one sister  she lost during the Dust Bowl of    29. Was it    29 when she passed away?  The others would all get together on holidays, and of course there were a  lot of cousins and stuff, especially on Dad   s side.  Favorite dishes that she would fix?  She always fixed, of course, a turkey or something like that. A lot of  2 6  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  times in those days we   d have some quail, even. My granddad was an  avid hunter. He enjoyed hunting a lot, so she   d always fix some quail  and desserts and so forth. Do you remember special dishes whenever  you started coming?  I remember his mother   s sister Vivian, who   s older, always used to make  plum pudding for Christmas. You had to eat it. It was   I mean, I like  sweets, but it was just about not edible. (Laughter) We always had to eat  some of Aunt Vivian   s plum pudding.  You   re going to be in trouble. (Laughter)  I know. (Laughter) Don   t let any of her kids see this. They know it. They  had to eat it, too   Would you have a Christmas tree?  Yes, we would, yes.  Cut on the farm or bought in town?  No, sometimes we   d go up in the Sand Hills and cut one, but generally it  was a bought tree. Then later it was actually not even a real tree. Mother  for the last several years didn   t have a real tree, did she?  No.  No, but there was always a tree.  They always had most of the family gatherings at their house, though,  because his dad was the baby and the other ones didn   t have many  children. I don   t know why. His family was the family that had the  children, where everybody just seemed to gather at his mother   s house.  She was used to cooking for a lot and doing, so she always had. As far  as I know everything was at her house.  Yes. Maybe Dora   s a few times, but not very much. It was always a  special time.  Did she sew, your mother?  Yes, she sewed. She   d make her dresses, and I got some shirts and stuff  like that sometimes. Then when our kids were little, she did a little bit of  sewing for them, didn   t she?  She made me some maternity dresses. Course, all she   d ever had was  2 7  Finchum  J. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  boys, and I was kind of a different person. We always thoroughly just  loved each other, and she made me some maternity dresses. I don   t  guess she made any   little grandsons, but our daughter is the third child.  We have three boys and one girl, and when she was born, then  Grandmother La Verne sewed for her, too. She made a lot of cute outfits  and things.  Would she use a pattern or make her own?  She usually used a pattern. She probably could have made her own. I  don   t know.  Yes, I don   t know either.  She canned and always had a garden.  She did that up until the year before she died.  During wheat harvest, it was always just our family working in wheat  harvest. My daddy might drive a truck, too, or one of the uncles. It  would be our family. We   d take meals to the field, and she and I would  take turns. We   d alternate meals. We   d put in each one, take them all.  We   d share, but the best treat was corn on the cob out of her garden.  She   d pull it and bake it and wrap it in foil, hot, and, oh, everybody  wanted Grandmother   s corn on the cob...  Good eating.     yes, and green beans. She canned.  Tell them about Steven helping your dad.  Oh, yes. One day Steven, our second son, was pretty small, and my  daddy was helping us. We were all sitting out on a blanket eating lunch,  and Steven looked over, and he said,    Papa, can I help you eat your  corn?    Papa hadn   t eaten his corn yet. Of course, Daddy was like,    Well  sure, yes.    (Laughter) He didn   t really want to share. (Laughter)  Was homemade ice cream a regular thing or not?  It was pretty regular. We had homemade ice cream pretty often.  It was pretty much a treat, though. It was usually a birthday or  something special.  Yes, everybody had a freezer, though. We   d make it every so often. On  2 8  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  birthdays and stuff, it was usually angel food cake. Mother always made  angel food cake with sugar icing. Sometimes it   d be fresh strawberries,  and sometimes it   d be frozen strawberries.  She had a Fostoria cake dish that stood on a stand, and it was round like  this. We   ve got pictures back when he was little bitty of the angel food  cake on top of the Fostoria cake dish. We got that one, and then we  collected three others, and we   ve given those to our families. Each one  of them has got one of the cake plates like Grandmother used to have.  It   s really special to them I think.  Passing on traditions.  Yes.  Well, bookkeeping has probably changed a lot through the years. Can  we talk about it     It has.     from what you remember from your father   s time through today?  Dad usually did a lot of his bookkeeping at the breakfast table in the  morning with a little pencil about that long. He   d do figuring and stuff.  Then at the end of year he   d go to his tax person and take his checks,  and that was kind of the extent of the bookkeeping. When we joined the  operation, of course, Mary Paul was an accountant and had her CPA and  everything, and so after we formed a partnership, she began to keep a  really good set of books. For the last twenty, thirty years, we   ve been  computer. I don   t know how long we   ve had computer books. At the end  of each month, we know exactly where we are, and we can mark it and  tell where we are on our inventory. It   s just completely different than it  was. We even have, in what Granddad called the new house, in the new  house in the basement, he had an old safe. We   ve dug in it several times,  and we   d find little books where he wrote down expenses, where he  bought supplies, and all that kind of stuff. His bookkeeping was kind of  like what my dad   s was, I think.  But he did keep     He did keep some books. He did.  He knew. He knew where he was.  Yes, he knew where he was. Yes, he sure did.  2 9  M. Williams  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  M. Williams  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Even back then it was important.  Yes. It sure is.  And, Mary Paul, do you keep the books today on the farm or     Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  Robert   s told me when I retire he won   t miss me very much. When Mary  Paul retires, it   s going to be a bad deal. (Laughter) Bad deal.  So you   ve had to keep up with a lot of new things and changes, as well.  Oh, yes, lots of changes continually in all the tax laws and different  things that we need to do. We want to do it right. We hope we   ll leave  things in a good shape for someday to come, but I don   t know how he   s  ever going to be able to find everything. (Laughter) I think I   ve got it  filed where it   s reasonable, you know, where it   s logical, but I don   t  know. It   s going to be tough.  Through the years we   ve always depended on stocker cattle. We buy  lightweight calves and either carry them through commercial feed yards  or sell them as stocker cattle. Here about three or four years ago, cattle  numbers were getting down, and you could see that cattle numbers were  going to be short here for an extended period of time. Cattle prices on  lightweight calves were going to be pretty expensive. Robert and I  decided we thought we   d like to get in the mama cow  cow-calf   business again. We had been in it a little bit years ago, and we were  talking about. I said,    The first one you need to convince is your  mother,    because that   s a completely different set of books when you  start depreciating mama cows than it is in the stocker business. She  wasn   t a big fan of going into the cow business too much.  I didn   t have any choice.  We still run some stockers, but we do run a pretty nice set of mama  cows anymore.  It helps having your CPA in-house.  It does. It does, yes.  It sounds like, though, you   ve got to stay up on things: stock market,  everything, technology     Oh, he   s got his DTN machine back there that he sits down at every  3 0  Nykolaiszyn  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  morning and keeps up with what   s going on. Really, he   s in charge a lot  of the risk management, does most of that. Robert does a lot of the day-to-  day. He does risk management, too, but a lot of the manual labor and  actually overseeing a lot of the stuff that goes on. He does a lot of that  anymore. Tries to keep Jim from being out in the field and heat and keep  him from getting kicked as much as he can.  Well, let   s talk a little bit about what y   all remember from the area back  then, and I   m sure it   s seen many changes, as well.  Like what do you mean exactly?  I read somewhere where initially Gould was initially Cora Lea, called  Cora Lea.  Cora Lea, that was Granddad   s original address, yes. Cora Lea was  actually north of Highway 62. I don   t know, I guess there weren   t many  post offices closer to where his homestead was. Then later his address  was Looney, which is only about two miles south of the homestead  location. Then later, that area was under the McQueen post office and  then Gould.  Now our post office has been cut back to four hours a day.  Yes, four hours a day.  Well, did the town actually move or just the post office?  No, just the post office. Just the post office, yes.  Did you have a rural route mail carrier?  Yes, yes. When I was a kid we had a mail carrier out of McQueen. Y   all  came by it on Highway 62, which is about four and half miles east, well,  four miles east of Gould on 62 there. It   s kind of just an old   you can  tell where there used to be something there. There was a McQueen High  School across the road from that. My mother actually went there for a  while.  We saw a sign for Martha. (Laughs)  Martha? Yes, it   s on the other side, too.  Oh, yes, by Altus.  We figured maybe she was the sister to Cora Lea.  3 1  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Oh, could   ve been, could   ve been. (Laughter)  Didn   t your granddad   when he would record this, yes, he   d go to  Mangum     Yes.     in Greer County.  Yes, because Mangum was the county seat of...  Old Greer County.  Harmon, Jackson, and Greer were all Old Greer County, Oklahoma.  And were never a part of Indian territory. We   re not in Indian ground  where you got accelerated appreciation if you had land or property that  was in Indian territory. We didn   t qualify for that at all.  When the centennial farmers first homesteaded, it was Old Greer  County, Oklahoma, and in Harmon County and what is now Greer  County was a part of the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. Then from 1860 to  1896, Harmon County was part of Old Greer County, Texas. Then in  1896, we became a part of Texas that seceded from the state of Texas  and became Oklahoma territory. Then when Oklahoma became a state in  November of    07, Old Greer County was part of that, but it included  Harmon County. Harmon County was not formed, and then Harmon  County was formed as a result of an election held on May 22, 1909.  Governor  Charles  Haskell issued a proclamation in August of that  year, declaring the result of the election and formally created what is  now Harmon County, Oklahoma.  It was named after a guy named Judson Harmon who was an Ohioan  who happened to be Attorney General of the United States when Greer  County case came before trial in Texas. They left Texas then. He was  real involved in that, so that   s where they picked up the name of Harmon  County. The original post office for my granddad was Cora Lea,  Oklahoma, and when the final certificate was issued, it came through the  land office in Lawton, Oklahoma. Then in 1907 when that was finalized,  when they sent him the letter, they sent it to Looney, Oklahoma. It was  still part of the Old Greer County in those days. Later, it was McQueen  and then Gould. My granddad farmed the land until 1938, and I think I  mentioned that he gave it to La Verne Payne on her twenty-first  birthday. Then in September of 1938, my mother and dad got married,  so it was kind of her birthday present and, I guess, wedding present, too,  3 2  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  maybe.  Was she an only child?  No, she was one of four children.  Did the other three get property?  They did, I think. Yes, I think they all got property. The Cochran family  still owns a lot of property that at one time was my granddad   s. Then my  uncle, Granddad   s son, he was killed in a pick-up wreck years ago, and  his family sold the portion of the land that was his. We own part of that.  We bought part of that at auction, so we own part of that today.  The oldest daughter died in 1929     Yes, she was never married.     so she was never involved in the land.  She was working at the Gould bank at the time and got dust pneumonia  and passed away.  While we   re talking geography, when we first got here you were  explaining where we were.  Yes.  Can you do that for us again on tape?  Sure. Harmon County is located in the far southwest part of Oklahoma,  and the part of Harmon County that we   re in is kind of the south and   east  portion of Harmon County, or the southern portion, at least. We   re  only about ten miles from the Texas line to the south, and only about ten  miles from the Texas line to the west. We   re in southwest Oklahoma.  And yet you came all the way to OSU. (Laughter)  And we may be the only county in the state that just has one school. We  were for a while. I   m not sure whether we still are or not.  There may be another county northwest that just has one school. In  1990, Gould school closed. At that time, Gould and Hollis were the only  two schools. From that time, there   s just been one school in Harmon  county.  3 3  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  And has that been a big impact on this community?  Course, when you lose your school and begin to lose some of your  churches and stuff, yes, it   s a huge impact. We still have a bank there,  but it has branches in other locations. There   s not much business left in  Gould. We have a wonderful rural water system down here, and during  the drought, if it hadn   t been for the rural water system, there wouldn   t  have been any cattle in this area because all the ponds were dry. Their  home office is located in Gould. Other than that there   s just not much  businesses there.  Well, when your farm equipment breaks down, do you fix it or you have  to take it     Generally, we fix it. Sometimes we   ll have a repairman come out. We  run mostly John Deere equipment, and our dealer   s in Altus. There was  a John Deere parts store in Hollis until about six or eight years ago, and  it closed. Now Altus is our closest dealer.  What about for a veterinarian?  There   s veterinarians in Hollis. There   s a couple of veterinarians that do  a good job.  There   s a young, new OSU graduate.  Just came about a year and a half ago.  Do house calls?  Yes, he does.  Yes, he does. As a matter of fact, we do some AI  artificial  insemination  work, and he came out and did some AI work for us here  this spring.  We built our house out here in    76. We already had the four kids and  were living in Hollis, and so we were concerned about the school, how  long the Gould school would still be here. We went and talked to all of  the teachers. They had excellent teachers, just outstanding neighbors  who lived here. All of them assured us, yes, they were going to stay. Of  course, they couldn   t promise how long the school was going to be  there. We went ahead and built over here, and our kids started. The  oldest one started the third grade, and one of them started the first grade.  They had gone to Hollis their first years. They all graduated then at  Gould except for the baby. Our daughter was in the last graduating class  3 4  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  of 1990.  At that time, our youngest son finished his freshman year here, and then  he went to Hollis and graduated from Hollis in    93. It was a really  smooth transition. The people at Hollis made the Gould school kids feel  really welcome. We especially had gone to church over there since we  lived there first when we moved back here, and so our kids knew those  kids really well. Gould had a really strong athletic program for as small  a school as it was, and they wanted our athletes, too, so that helped. It  was a good transition.  For Mary Paul it was okay. She   s a Hollis graduate, anyway     Yes.     so now we have two in the family.  Yes, me and my youngest son.  Pretty long bus ride?  Well, by the time he was a sophomore, he was driving.  He was in high school, so he drove.  Now, when we moved over here   the school   s just a mile up the road,  and we were the last ones they picked up. They   d pick them up, so the  kids rode from here to Gould, and we were the first ones they   d drop off  in the afternoons. It was like having a private chauffer. It just couldn   t  have been any better.  If somebody was late getting around, you didn   t have far to take them.  No. The second son, he was continually late. I   d find him asleep in the  shower back there or something. (Laughter) He missed the bus more  than once. I finally told him, I said,    You know, the next time you miss  the bus, you   re going to walk. You can just hot-foot your little body up  there.    Sure enough, the next time he missed it, I sent him on his way. I  stood and watched him. As he got up to the highway, there was this old  beat-up looking car coming from the north going south. It came to that  turnaround and went back and picked him up, and I just about died. I  didn   t know who it was or who had picked him up. Of course, I was just  in a panic. I called the school, and by that time he had let him out. It was  some people up there that had just given him a ride to school. He didn   t  have to walk again. (Laughter) All there was to that.  3 5  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  You mentioned today that you   re semi-retired and you spend a lot of  your time in risk management. Take me through a typical day today on  the farm, in the business.  Well, it depends a whole lot on the season of the year. Right now, we   ve  got a mama cow herd that we   re taking care of, so we check water and  stuff on them every day. We still run some stocker cattle. When you  have fresh calves, you go through them at least once a day for sick and  for problems. You do that, and you try to get those kind of things done  early in the morning before it gets too hot. Then, of course, Robert   s not  here this week, but last week he was spending all of his time spraying.  We were kind of getting everything sprayed over.  We   ve had some wonderful rains, and so we were getting some weed  and grass problems on some of our stubble ground. He got everything  sprayed over and cleaned up. You spend most of your time doing that.  Periodically during the day you either get the report on your iPad or  come by and check the DTN or something on the radio about what the  markets are doing. You   re always interested in what   s going on there.  Grain prices seemed to indicate that they were fixing to trend lower, so  we got some of our wheat that will be harvested next summer already  priced on the futures board.  We do that. We   ve got some cattle in commercial feed yards that come  out next February, and so we   ve got some options against those for any  break in prices for some unknown reason. You   re always interested in  checking on the markets. Then you just have normal business things in  the afternoons that you have to do. We   ve got government programs that  you try to keep up with. You   ve got government programs right now that  are going through a sign-up period.  After we   ve gone through this severe drought, the new farm bill had a  program in it for livestock forage assistance, and so in the process now  of getting stuff together for those, paperwork for those. There   s always  something to do on the farm whether it   s working on equipment or  working on fence or taking care of cattle or doing the normal paperwork  that comes with it or what it is. There   s always something, something to  do.  And how often do you check in at home?  I   m by here pretty often, usually at least once a morning and once in the  afternoon.  For lunch.  3 6  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Yes, I eat lunch at home. We carry cell phones all the time, so you know  we   re always in contact.  Back in the day when you didn   t have those, though     It was a different deal. Even when we lived in Hollis we had radios. We  put up a tower in Hollis where we could talk out here, but those weren   t  very dependable.  No, when we first married and I wanted to talk to him, I had to call his  mother who lived out there on the highway. Hopefully he would come  by there, and I could leave a message. Cell phones were unheard of to  start with.  It   s completely different. When Robert   s spraying stuff, he carries an  iPad, keep up with stuff and carries a phone.  Do you use the Mesonet very often?  We do. Yes, we sure do. We look at it real often, especially if we   re  away from home, and we   re wanting to know what it   s doing here. We  can check the Mesonet.  If it   s showering, the first thing, he gets up and goes and looks at the  Mesonet to see how much it says Harmon County got.  Harmon County   s station   s out here about three miles from here. It   s  fairly accurate in what it says they got and what we got, and the colored  map that they use is wonderful. You can tell that the south part of the  county maybe got a little more rain or something. It   s pretty accurate.  We like the Mesonet. (Laughs)  Yes, we like the Mesonet. (Laughs)  We   ve pretty much covered our questions except for the very last ones. Is  there anything else you want to add before we sign off, or maybe we  skipped something you think we need to include?  Well, that   s kind of interesting about how this area around the farm has  changed, about what it used to be like when your granddad was there.  Oh, yes, when he homesteaded, to hear Mother talk about it   of course,  all of our places, all of our farms have names. We got the Coble place,  and the Jordan half, and the Harkins place, the Hendricks place.  Everything   s got a name. It goes back to families that owned it years and  3 7  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  years and years ago, and there was people on every quarter. There was  just people everywhere in all communities. At one time, Harmon  County, the old-timers say, had forty-one schools. Some of them were  just grade schools, but there was forty-one schools. There was just  people everywhere.  Nowadays, Harmon County has a population of, I don   t know,  depending on who you talk to, probably 2,500 people at the most and  one school and not very many people living in the country. Lots of  things have changed that. CRP, there are proponents and there are  opponents of CRP because they took so much farm land out of  production, that land didn   t need the inputs to farm it. It hurt some rural  businesses perhaps, but it benefited a lot of people, too. It benefited the  long-term usability of the land. It   s just been tremendous, tremendous  change from the time Granddad homesteaded and shortly after he  homesteaded.  Do you still retain the mineral rights, or is that even and issue here?  Oh, yes.  Yes, it   s gotten to be an issue. We do have mineral rights on the majority  of the places, maybe not all of them but from half to all of them. We  bought, I don   t know, two or three farms in the last few years that   used  to buy a farm, and you   d say,    I assume the mineral rights go with it.        Yes, you can have them.    But nowadays it   s no mineral rights change  hands. Everybody   s hoping someday the boom will get into this area.  So far, it hasn   t on what you have?  Five years ago, we had a little rush, and everything leased up, and we     It brought a lot of money into Harmon county     Yes, it brought a lot of money.     all the new fences, you can tell. Helped a great deal.  Nearly everything in Harmon County, everything in the southern half of  Harmon County did lease. I think there was some, maybe, in the  northern part of the county that didn   t, but everything in the southern  part did, and it brought a lot of money into Harmon County at a time  when we needed it. They came in and drilled about three wells. I  suppose they didn   t find what they were looking for, so there   s not any  activity here now. Most of those leases are beginning to expire, so most  of it   s available. If you know anybody that wants to lease some land,  3 8  Nykolaiszyn  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  (Laughter) I   ve got some available.  Yes, we noticed there wasn   t a lot of activity driving through     No.     as in other parts of the state right now.  Kingfisher is really busy.  When you get down   yes, Kingfisher, big time. It   s getting to be pretty  active up there in Stillwater.  Yes.  You get down southeast of Eldorado, there   s some activity, but it   s  limited. Course, that   s in Jackson County. We   d like to see it get it  again.  One of the questions was,    Were there times when the farm did not  make money?     Sure. (Laughter)  I thought he   d like take that question. (Laughter)  From the CPA. (Laughter)  You could share more, if you wish.  I think there were lots of times even way before then.  There were lots of those times, yes.  When it did have difficult economic times on the farm, did government  programs help?  Certainly they helped. Many of those, well, they weren   t disaster related  in the earlier days when we started farming. They were just price support  type. The insurance nowadays that we use, and most people in this area  use, is called revenue coverage. It takes into effect your base yield  estimate plus your price, and that   s based on, what, five-month period  and what the price of the commodity was. It   s much better than just a  per-acre guarantee, or it   s better than a deficiency payment when prices  get cheap. I think we   re all seeing that our commodity programs are  headed in that direction where insurance is going to be the basic  3 9  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Nykolaiszyn  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  program for agriculture. That   s what this new farm deal is headed  toward evidently, and it   s working quite well for this area, really. You  have skin in the game, yet it   s still subsidized somewhat. It   s working  well, and it   s a good way to manage risks. Farming for the insurance  doesn   t make you money, but you get your cost of production back,  keeps you in business.  Right.  Keeps you in business. We had much rather sell a crop, but on the other  hand it   s good to have that insurance when you don   t have a crop to sell.  It   s been good for that.  Have you worked with the local politicians in terms of the farm bill? Do  you take steps to make sure your voice is heard?  We do communicate with Frank Lucas on occasion. Frank   s done a real  good job, and I   m involved in some boards that together we share our  voice on occasion. So yes, we get involved a little bit.  What is it that has kept you wanting to stay on the farm and keep the  farm in the family? What   s the pull?  Oh, I don   t know. Farming just gets in your blood. It   s a good way of  life. It can be as fast or as slow as you want it to be. It   s very rewarding  as far as the community and getting out and working with livestock and  crop production and stuff, and being there when the fresh rain smells so  good. It   s just a gift to be able to do that, I think. It   s a blessing to have  been able to be involved in production agriculture. Hope some of our  kids continue to. We have a lot of grandkids. We have thirteen  grandkids. One of them has finished college already, but he wants to go  into law, and the others have not. Don   t know what direction they want  to take yet, but someone may be a producer one of these days.  I think it   s in his blood. That   s what I think. When we were at school at  Stillwater, he just had to get out and ride around and feel the dirt and dig  in it. I didn   t really see the advantage of that, but that   s just what he  wanted to do. He couldn   t wait to get home in the summers and go to  work, get out and do the physical labor and be a part of it. I think there   s  nothing like seeing your family work together. Harvest has always been  one of my very favorite times of the year, see our family work together  and be together and be so tired. Then when you get through, there   s such  a feeling of accomplishment. I just think there hasn   t been any better  way of life that we could have had.  I   d say the unique smells are     4 0  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Yes.  Yes.  Mornings are the best time?  Yes.  We just sit out here a lot of mornings and drink coffee in amazement of  God   s wonderful creation, how blessed we are to live where we do.  That means a lot to you.  It does.  Our usually last question is what do you expect for the next one hundred  years for the farm     Oh my goodness, I don   t know what I   d put it at but        hope, expect, or see?  Agriculture today is big business. You risk a lot every time you put in a  crop because the cost of production is so high. You risk a lot every time  you invest in livestock now because they   re high. I guess agriculture  today is run by profit and loss in so many cases, as other big businesses  are. There are a lot of other factors besides our economic factors in  relation to the land, such as caring for the land and trying to leave it for  the next generation, and caring for wildlife and enjoying that. I mean  nature   s a balance. Our wildlife has suffered a lot in the last three or four  years. I noticed the last few weeks, I   m beginning to see a lot more quail  than I   ve seen in years. Maybe some of those are coming back.  The majority of the land in this area is a soil type and capability class of  producing small grains and cotton and that sort of thing. I would think  that a hundred years from now that there   s still going to be a need for  food, and I would think that in some way or another it   ll still be  producing food. The tractors may not take an operator. You may sit in  your office and do it all on computer and manage things in that way, but  I would think that there will still be food being produced and crops being  grown and livestock being sold. My goodness, the way it   s changed in  the last ten to twenty years, there   s no telling what it   ll be like.  Things your dad couldn   t have even   he died in 2005. Things he  couldn   t have even dreamed of are going on now, so I don   t know what  4 1  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  we could even start.  You   re seeing embryo transfers, and you   re seeing one cow produce  dozens of calves that are all genetically equal. You   re seeing tremendous  improvements in the quality of beef and in efficiency in the production  and so forth. I   m sure that   ll continue to get better. They   re working on  genetics now in wheat to where wheat will produce in droughty  conditions, drought-resistant wheat. I don   t know how it does that, but  some wheat will produce so much better with a very limited amount of  water. We may see tremendous production. I don   t know. It   d be  interesting to see. I hope I get to hang around long enough to see what  happens in the next ten to twenty years.  Just not cotton anymore, since you learned that lesson early. (Laughter)  Yes, just not cotton anymore. There   s some good cotton farms in this  area, though. There   s some guys that can raise that cotton, do a  tremendous job. When I was young, you had two-bale cotton, a thousand  pound cotton, was tremendous yields, and, my goodness, there   s some of  these guys now that are producing four-bale cotton. I talked about the  high-tech stuff in the wheat where we specialize in our inputs and so  forth. They   re even more so in cotton. It   s very specific on how they  treat it and growth stimulants and so forth. It   s great.  Well, and now you have air-conditioned cabs.  Oh, yes. We   ve had those for a while.  They just kind of need him to turn the corners anymore, turn around at  the end of the rows, and that   s about it.  Do you ever get in one and drive one?  I don   t drive one, no, but I do ride with him some. Now they   ve even got  the buddy seat built into them. Used to, you used to sit on the top of a  water can or something and support yourself the best you could. It   s a  different world.  Have you ladies seen any modern equipment?  We   ve seen one combine that was brand new, like, delivered the day  before we got there. It was a huge step to get up into it.  Yes, we   ve got some.  They hadn   t figured out how to operate it at that point. (Laughter)  4 2  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  Finchum  Oh, it   s quite a deal. All your changes are on the go. You don   t stop and  make adjustments. You just change. It   s very interesting.  So you don   t have to buy your meat at the market, do you?  No.  You get prime selection, huh?  I do. (Laughter) I   m pretty rotten, too. That   s for sure. (Laughter) It   s  amazing. Not our immediate relatives but our distant relatives who know  we   re in agriculture, you get the feeling, sometimes think you   re not  quite as educated or quite up to par on things as some of them are about  different things. We   re not in their fields. I think some of them come  down here, and they   re astounded when they see what goes on or they  get in some of that equipment and they find out how much the risk  management takes and the things you have to know and the things you  have to do.  You have to be pretty educated, and I think my guys are pretty sharp and  pretty good at what they do. They are professionals. You can   t fly by the  seat of your pants anymore and be successful in agriculture. His  granddad, I think, had to be very smart and very wise in what he did  because he was able to buy land at a time when some people weren   t  able to and was very wise in his decisions and the way that he farmed. I  think he handed that pride and that knowledge that he had down through  the generations. You   ve been able to see his family, all his family, still  have that pride in being a farmer.  He brought in one of the first tractors in Harmon County. Mother never  did know for sure if it was the first or not, but she called it a Titanic. We  googled that to see what kind of tractor that was, and we never did find  out much about it. She said it was a Titanic tractor that he brought in. He  was on a conservation board back in the    30s, even. He was real  involved in conservation efforts, and then my dad was on the  conservation board for over thirty years. We   ve always been in  agriculture but yet been conscious of the fact that we need to conserve  the soil and leave it better than we found it.  Were there gender roles? Did your mother and grandmother do similar  things as your father and grandfather, or were they     No.     house and farm?  4 3  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  M. Williams  J. Williams  Mother always talked about taking care of her chickens or turkeys and  all that kind of stuff. I   m sure she had some household duties, but I don   t  think Mother ever drove a tractor that I   m aware of or anything like that.  And I never heard of your grandmother doing that.  No, I never heard of my grandmother doing that. I think they had their  things around the house that they took care of, the garden and the  animals and some of that kind of stuff. I don   t think they actually ran the  farm as such.  Didn   t do the bookkeeping?(Laughter) Well, do you have a garden and  can today?  I don   t.  I was just curious.  I didn   t inherit that ability. (Laughter)  What led you to apply for the centennial farm status?  My mother had talked about this for a long time about when the farm  was a hundred years old. She got sick earlier before that, and Mary  Paul   s the one that spearheaded the application and all that kind of stuff.  Mary Paul wanted to rush it through as soon as we could after we  reached the centennial status because Mother was taking cancer  treatments. We did. We got it approved, and she got to     See it        see it and everything.     before she died.  Do the ceremony or presentation or whatever they did to     I think they really just mail it.  I think they just mail letters and the     Signage        yes, certificate and the signage and stuff.  4 4  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  Finchum  M. Williams  J. Williams  Finchum  She helped me with all the application. She had all the information and  knew where things were, so she was able to do that. We were just  thrilled to be able to get that done while she was still alive.  A gift.  Yes, it was good.  That   s a good place to stop, I guess.  Okay.  Sounds good to me.  Thank you so much for sharing. It   s been a pleasure.  -------  ------- 
