 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  library. Also with me today is Tanya Finchum, and today is Monday,  April 4, 2011, and we   re in Noble County, Oklahoma, interviewing  Wayne Speer of the Speer Farm as part of the Oklahoma Centennial  Farm Families Oral History Project. Thank you for joining us, today.  Thank you.  Well, let   s begin by learning a little bit about how your family came to  Oklahoma.  Okay. My father came from Iowa, Madison County, Iowa, near  Winterset, in 1893, with his family. They came with three covered  wagons and he rode ahead and found places for them to camp every  night. My grandpa, his father, had bought a place down south of the  Cimarron River, south of Perkins, that was Iowa, Sac and Fox country  that had opened two years before. Then on September 16, him and his  older brother started about where the airport is at Stillwater and rode  north. My father staked the northwest fourth of Section Twenty-Two,  Twenty-One North, Range Two East. His brother went on a quarter of a  mile north, or half a mile, and staked a place but it was school land.  They wasn   t wanting school land. They was wanting deeded land, so he  didn   t stay on that. But my father lived there the rest of his life.  Now, before we move on, were they riding horses or something else?  Well, I think he rode a horse down from Iowa, but he rode a mule when  he made the race for the farm out here. Mule   s name was Mike, and he  kept him the rest of his life. That   s mainly what I can tell you about him  getting the farm, and it   s been in the family ever since.  Well, can you tell me about some of the early structures on the land?  5  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Yes. I think it was probably the next spring, or in the winter that they  built what he called a bachelor shack. It was, probably, about fourteen  foot square. I think one by twelve   s with a one by four nailed over the  cracks. I   m not sure how many acres of the land, but they broke part of  the land, and he built some kind of a little shed for his horses, and the  granary, I think, too. That was up on the hill and they never could get  water there. A few years later, after he was married, they moved down in  the lower ground and dug a well there where they got water.  And early crops or livestock?  I think to start with, they farmed mostly small grain, I think. They may  have tried corn, too. They came from Iowa and that   s a corn state, you  know. I think it was mostly small grain, because in 1906, green bugs  came and ate up all their small grain. That   s mainly what I can tell you  about that.  Now, did he get married after moving?  Yes. My mother   s people, they took the place that cornered that place on  the southwest. They didn   t come in until the spring of 1894, and they  traded a grey mare and fifty dollars for that place. My father and mother  wasn   t married until 1901, February 1901, I believe is right. And so they  lived in that bachelor shack approximately two years, and they built a  two-room house then. The story I got is my dad said they could probably  have enough money to build maybe a four-room house or they could  make a two-room house with plastered walls and stuff, which would be  warmer and everything. So, my mother settled for the two-room house. I  suppose it   s probably the best house she   d lived in to that time, maybe.  So they lived in the two-room house until 1920. They built it in 1903,  and so that would   ve been seventeen years that they lived in the two-room  house then.  Wow.  And my sister and brother, which was older than me, were both born in  that house, that two-room house. I wasn   t born until 1922, so I got the  privilege of living in the bigger house then.  Well, tell me about the bigger house.  Well, let me tell you, before I get to the bigger house, they bought the  eighty across the road in 1906, and mortgaged their home place to buy it.  In 1907, the green bugs eat out all their crops and then they turned  around and planted cotton and corn in the spring. They thought they was  going to lose it all, and they skimped and saved and they made the  6  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer   payments . They didn   t lose their farm, but after that they never went in  debt, after they paid that off. Everything they done from then on was  paid for as they went.  They built the new house in 1920, and at that time they put in a Delco  thirty-two volt light system, was one of the few people that had them at  that time. They built a cistern on the porch, there on the house, for water.  I suppose they was a little more progressive than a lot of farm families at  that time.  Why do you think that was?  I don   t know. I think my dad had a third grade education. My mother  about a fifth grade education. And later on, they dug a different well and  put in a windmill and a tank up on a tower and had running water by  gravity feed. And we had one of the first radios in that country, too. So  maybe they was a little more progressive than some of our neighbors. I  believe.  Well, outside of the big house, what were some of the structures they  added along the way?  Well, the barn was built in 1916. That was before the bigger house was  built. I think a lot of farmers done things that way. They had to have  shelter for the livestock. Oh, they had hen houses and they always kept  quite a few chickens. They built what they called a smokehouse, which  was really never used for a smokehouse. It was, probably, twelve foot  square. The reason they built that, the one year, my mother asked the  grocery man what crops she could raise that they   d need, that there   d be  a market for, and they told her onions. So, they put out two or three  acres of onions the next year, and then they hung them in this little  building to dry out. I guess the next year the market wasn   t very good on  the onions. They didn   t stay with that.  Well, that   s pretty interesting how she was trying to fill a need.  Yeah. Well, she helped in the fields a lot when they raised cotton,  chopped cotton, picked cotton. Helped him pick corn and whatever  needed to be done. I think when they still lived in this two-room house,  her brother would come over and he   d say,    Well, we ought to have a  dance Saturday night,    and they   d move the furniture out in the yard and  have a dance and invite all the neighbors and things that way.  Well, did she keep a pretty large garden?  A big garden. I used to have in the old trunk a list of her groceries she   d  7  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  order. They   d take eggs or butter or cream to town, and the only things  they   d buy would be sugar and salt and coffee and things that way, that  they couldn   t raise. I don   t suppose they ever bought a can of vegetables  or a can of fruit. I never remember them buying any fresh stuff like  lettuce or any fresh vegetables that way.  My mother would put out what they called a hot bed and start her plants  real early. That way they   d have a longer season of garden stuff, you  know. They planted a big garden, and I got to help hoe it sometimes     (Laughs) And I remember my dad would say,    You get over there and  hoe those cucumbers.    He didn   t like cucumbers, and he   d tell me I was  the guy that had to hoe those cucumbers. And we did it all with hoes.  We didn   t have any cultivators or things that way.  Well, big gardens always equal lots of canning.  That   s right. And they had a nice cellar that was a concrete cellar, and  they stored all their canned stuff down there. They didn   t have any  refrigeration, so that cellar served as that. They   d keep their eggs and  cream and lard and everything that went down there. As well as a storm  cellar, too, we used it in storms.  Did she can meat at all?  Yeah. Pork sausage, they   d fry off the sausage and then put it in big  crock jars and cover it with lard and it would keep that way. And set it in  the cellar, and then they   d take like half a gallon fruit jars and can beef,  like steak and stuff that way. They   d fry it off and can it that way.  And they raised a lot of chickens. Then, when I was a kid they   d have  company. They never called ahead saying they was coming or anything.  They   d drive in at ten o   clock in the morning. By that time, my mother  had passed away, but I was living with my sister and her husband. She   d  ask me to come and help her and we   d dress two or three chickens and  have them ready to go for dinner, then.  Well, did you have a trick? Everybody seems to have their own  technique when it comes to killing the chicken.  Well, some of them could wring their necks, but I always took an ax and  chopped their heads off. Then we   d dip them in hot water where we  could pick the feathers off.  Well, growing up, what were some of your chores?  Well, we had to tend to them chickens, feeding chickens and watering  8  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  them and gathering eggs and milking cows and feeding. We separated  the milk, and they   d sell the cream. We   d use the skim milk to feed the  calves and pigs and farm animals that way. And they always had a few  hogs, too, we   d have to take care of. Then they had quite a few horses.  We   d feed the horses. Every night and morning we had to feed the  horses, and if they was working them, they fed them at noon. It was  enough to keep you busy.  And that was before school?  Yeah. So then when you   d go to school, well, part of the time I   d walk  and part of the time I   d ride a horse. And when I got home from school,  I had to change my clothes and put on my chore clothes, instead of using  my school clothes.  How far away was school?  Two and a quarter miles. Little country school.  Do you remember its name?  Windy Center, district forty-four. One teacher taught eight grades. And  they didn   t pass a kid until he had learned the lesson. I mean, there was  some kids that was fourteen, fifteen years old that might only be in the  third or fourth grade.  Did you like school?  I can   t say that I did, no. (Laughter)  Well, did your father have a job outside of the farm?  No. Oh, little things, like he  was on the  township board and school  board and cemetery board. In the Depression there was a lot of thievery  and he belonged to the ATA lodge. It was the old Anti-Horse Thief  Association, and then later they called it the ATA lodge. They worked  with the sheriff   s office and stuff. No job that paid anything to speak of.  So he made his living from the land?  That   s right.  Well, you mentioned taking some things to the grocery store to sell.  Where would you take some of the other crops to market?  Well, like wheat, you   d either take it to Sumner or Morrison from where  9  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  we was located. Sumner was four miles and Morrison was close to five  miles, and we   d haul it in a box wagon with a team of horses. You could  haul around fifty bushel, fifty, fifty five bushel in a box wagon. So,  that   s where they   d go with it. And their produce, like cream and eggs  and stuff that way, every little town had several produce houses that  would buy things that way, and some grocery stores would too.  Well, if you weren   t terribly excited about school, when you were  growing up, what did you want to be growing up? Did you want to  continue on with the farm?  Well, that was a good question. I didn   t know what I wanted to be. I  went to the army in World War II, and by the time I got back, that farm  looked pretty good. (Laughter)  I bet.  Yeah.  You mentioned your mother passed away. How old were you when your  mother passed away?  I was eight years old. Been nine that summer, after. At that time, it was  just Dad and me there. My sister was already married. Her and her  husband, they had one little baby then. They moved in with us. I always  had a good home.  So you   re the youngest?  Yeah.  Okay. So you get back from the army and you   re back on the farm.  Yeah. I got out of the army on the third of October and my wife and I  got married the eighteenth. We lived in Perry a couple of months and  moved out there the first year. I lived there until she passed away, a  couple years afterwards, I guess.  Well, if you don   t mind me asking, how did you meet your wife?  Well, we was kind of raised in the same area, pretty much. She was born  about a mile and a half down the road, but as we grew up they   d moved  to a different farm out probably six, eight, ten miles over. Us kids  running around, I was running around with her cousin, and then her  brother too, and that   s kind of the way we got acquainted more.  10  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  So growing up, you did not get into any mischief on the farm, did you?  Do we have to talk about that? (Laughter)  Surely you got into a little trouble.  Well, I can remember going to school, and I think I must have been in  the fifth grade. The teacher caught three of us boys smoking out at the  outhouse, the toilet outside, and she kept us in after school and she said,     I don   t know what to do with you. I think I   ll just call your folks.    And  I was hoping she   d give me a spanking or something rather than call my  dad. That night, Dad and I milked the cows out at the big barn. I was  scared of the dark and he got through and went on to the house with his  bucket of milk. I stayed awhile out there and I finally decided I didn   t  know which was worse, stay out there in the dark and be scared, or     And when I got to the house, he was talking on the phone. When he got  through he said,    Was you smoking up at school?    And I had to admit it.  And he said,    If you   re going to smoke, smoke here at home.    He said,     Well, you   re liable to burn that toilet down up there.    And that was the  end of that. And I heard him say later, he chewed tobacco, and he said,     I couldn   t punish a kid for something I   d done.    He was using tobacco,  and so, I don   t think I smoked anymore. Not until after I was out of high  school, probably.  Well, I   m sure you had some fun times in there, too. What would you do  for fun growing up?  Well, after my sister and brother-in-law moved in with us, his sister and  her husband was caretakers of Yost Lake. I don   t know whether you  know where Yost Lake is. They had a boy about my age, so I   d get to go  down there a few days every summer, and that was a good place to go.  My brother and his wife, at that time, lived in Oklahoma City. He  worked for the post office, and I   d get to go down there and stay a week  every summer, and that was a good move. So that was mainly it. And  Dad would go to town probably once a week, and sometimes I   d get to  go with him. He   d give me like fifteen, twenty cents, maybe, and I   d go  get me a nickel hamburger and I had a dime for the show then, usually  double features, westerns and stuff that way. So that was kind of the  highlights.  The theater in Perry?  Yes. At that time they had two theaters. The Roxy and the Annex, both  on the east side of the square.  Going to the square must have been a big thing on the weekends,  11  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  maybe?  Yeah, usually on Saturday we   d come to town. So yeah, that was kind of  a highlight of the week. You would get to go to town.  And did you eventually go on to Perry High School?  Went to Sumner High School. Little town at that time, out there. And we  got to ride the school bus too, sometimes. At first, I had to walk to the  corner north, I believe, and wait on the bus.  Well, how did the farm change when you were in high school? Were new  crops introduced or new livestock?  They had a variety of crops, alfalfa and some corn and stuff that way.  They got their first tractor. It was a Fordson on steel wheels. They come  out of the Dust Bowl in the panhandle. There was a trucker there that  would go out there and haul that machinery back. See, a lot of the  panhandle people had abandoned their places out there. I think they used  that tractor two or three years, and then my brother-in-law bought a new  tractor, a small one. They   d use the tractor more in the heat of the  summer when it was hard on horses, the heat was, and the flies was real  bad, too. They   d bother the horses, so otherwise we kept horses too. A  lot of the farm work we still used horses, you know, especially row crop  and stuff that way.  Did you prefer horse over tractor?  Well, really, the tractor could accomplish more, but I liked horses  though, too. Most all that time we kept a saddle horse as well as work  horses.  Do you remember the first time you rode a tractor?  Well, one of the first times I remember we was harvesting, and my  brother-in-law, usually, he   d drive the tractor and I   d have to ride on the  binder and dump the bundles off and stuff. For some reason, he was  riding the binder and had me driving the tractor. Them tractors, those  steel wheels, if you hit a wet spot and them wheels ever spun, they   d dig  a hole real quick like, see? And your tractor would be sitting on high  center, then. So that happened, I remember, when I was first driving it.  And part of the harvest time, before we got the tractor, my brother-in-law  would work four head of horses on the binder and make bundles out  of the small grain, and my dad and I would shock. Shocking, we   d be  setting those bundles up about ten or twelve in a little  bunch , till they  12  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  dried out and the people would come in and thrash them, you know.  Anyway, that   s when I first got to drive a car across the pasture. My dad  would to take a chance on me driving the car across the pasture there.  (Laughter) I guess that   s the way he got me to the field to do the  shocking, too.  Incentive. (Laughs)  Yeah, there you are.  What kind of car did he have?  Well, by that time he had a Model-A. 1928 Model-A, two door. And he  had had a 1917 Model-T Ford before that.  He let you go out there and drive them?  Well, I never did get to drive the Model-T. He got rid of it after he got  the Model-A, within a year, at least. But I did get to drive the Model-A a  lot. And then he bought a used Buick car. It was, I think, about a 1927  model, I believe is right. It had the wood spoke wheels and the steering  wheel was, outside rim was made of wood, and it was a nice car, a nicer  car. It was an old car by the time he bought it there.  I remember him, by that time I was big enough to drive on my own, he  always advised me not to drive over thirty miles an hour, you know. I  and another boy was trying that Buick out and we got it up to sixty three  or four miles an hour. When we did and slowed back down, the  speedometer hand didn   t go back down. It just stuck up there, and it was  there from then on. And so I know my dad knew what I   d done, but he  never did say. (Laughter)  Well, back on the farm, looking at the farm house, did you have a  favorite room?  No, not really. We lived, even after they built on the last part of the  bigger house, the front room, or parlor, whatever you call it, we didn   t  use it, only when we had company, see. We, otherwise, I guess, our  dining room was really our living room.  And how was it heated?  With wood. Yeah. We had a wood cook stove with a warming oven  above and what they called a reservoir on one end that you   d put water  in that you   d get warm. And then we had a heating stove in the other  room, too.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Stay pretty warm in the winter?  Yeah, it was, I think, warm enough. I remember in real cold weather,  though, we   d put extra wood in the heating stove. We   d call it banking  the fire for the night, but if the fire went out by morning and you had to  get up and build a fire from scratch, we had linoleum rugs. If you  happened to be barefoot on that linoleum rug, that was pretty cold, I  remember, if it was down towards zero, you know, outside, until you got  your fire going. Might take thirty minutes or so to, or maybe longer.  How did your father go about record keeping on the farm?  Well, I don   t think there was near as many records as there is now. We  didn   t make enough to pay income tax or nothing that way. He had a  little cabinet deal built into the chimney on the new part of the house  that what little bookkeeping he had, he kept in there. That was kind of  off limits to the rest of us. So anyway, he didn   t do a lot of bookkeeping.  He obviously went through the Depression. How did he feel about  banks?  Well, the banks are safe now. President Roosevelt closed them in 1933.  And it was closed, I think, about two weeks. Since then they   ve been  insured with FDIC, but before that time, they failed quite often. I mean,  it wasn   t unusual to   in this little town of Sumner, they had a bank  there. Some of them small banks, if they got in financial trouble, the  banker would probably leave during the night and they   d never see him  again, you know. I remember Dad had a cousin that had a few dollars in  the Sumner bank when the banker came up missing with the money, and  they used to kid him a little bit about losing his money there at the  Sumner Bank. I don   t think he had over four, five, six dollars in it, but,  which amounted to quite a bit more then than it would now.  So he didn   t have a stash anywhere in the house? He kept everything in  the bank?  My dad, where he kept what little bookkeeping he did in the chimney, he  kept a little money in there at times. I remember one night after my  mother died, I was sleeping with my dad. We   d already went to bed and  a man came to the window and he was a neighbor, or had to have been a  neighbor. He was older then, but he   d worked for Dad some, and he told  him, he said,    My wife   s in the hospital,    and he said,    I need fifty  dollars.    And Dad said,    I   ve got thirty five.    He went and got it.  So being a neighbor was a lot different back then than it is now?  14  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Yeah. On the farm, they traded work a lot, especially in the Depression.  There wasn   t any money much to be handed around. They had a  thrashing crew. They   d be, probably, oh, I   d say like maybe twelve  different neighbors would go together and they   d thrash everybody   s  grain, move from one place to the other, and haying, well, they   d trade  work some. Growing up through, in my teenage years in the Depression,  I   d be glad to get to work for one of the neighbors if he needed help, you  know, in haying or anything that way. The going price was a dollar fifty  per day, at that time. It was like, probably, ten hour days, some of them.  Did you hire a lot of outside help on the farm?  They hired some, just in season, that way, like haying or things that way.  And a little bit in thrashing. These thrashing runs I was telling you  about. And from the time I was about, I think, ten years old till I was  probably sixteen, I carried water for the thrashing machine with a horse  and buggy. I had a five gallon milk can with gunnysacks around it to  keep it cool and a couple of jugs, and I was to water all the crew, keep  them watered. They   d usually run, oh, they   d probably be eight bundle  wagons, and then there   d be four pitchers. Each pitcher covered two  wagons, so there   d be eight, four is twelve, there   d be about three men  scooping grain, fifteen, and the people running the thrashing machine.  There   d be about eighteen people, eighteen or nineteen on a crew that  you had to keep watered. Every hour or so you had to make the rounds,  get it, take them all water.  Well, what were holidays like?  Well, Christmastime we   d get one or two or three toys, maybe, and the  family, they   d get together for a big meal, for sure. Kids now, it   s all the  difference in the world. I mean, it   s how much, how many toys and  everything they get.  Did you have a school program?  We did. Literary program that, oh, they   d, most of the time the children  of the school would put it on, and different poems and stuff they   d recite  and singing and probably a little skit of a play and things along that line.  Then I remember one year, the literary program for that year was the  women in the district would put on the program one month, and then the  men the next. They   d alternate that way, and they had some pretty  interesting programs at that time, too.  Another thing they had was Sunday school, union Sunday school, in the  schoolhouse for several years. Undenominational, so a lot of the  15  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  neighbors and especially the kids went to that. Fourth of July, they   d  usually have a picnic, or sometimes they would have celebrations. The  whole neighborhood would, too. One time, before I can remember, they  had it in my grandmother   s pecan grove. They   d have, I guess it was a  big neighborhood affair, you know, like fifty, seventy-five people would  be there. So that was mainly it on holidays. Well, Easter they   d usually  have a big family gathering, too. And Thanksgiving, they   d get together.  Did you have any favorite meals?  Favorite meals? Well, I guess I liked to eat. Most of them was favorite.  (Laughter)  Whatever was put in front of you?  I can remember in the Depression, most of our meal was what was  raised at home, which kind of gets old. I remember one time, some of  the relatives were coming, they brought in a can of pork and beans, and  so I had my eye on them pork and beans. There wasn   t enough room  around the table for all of us so the adults ate first. By the time us kids  got there, the pork and beans was all gone. (Laughter) So I missed the  boat, there.  You had to be quick.  Yeah, yeah. So that was a luxury, anyway, them pork and beans or like  bologna or anything that we didn   t have.  Well, could you tell that there was the Depression going on? Since you  were kind of sustained by the farm.  Well, probably as a kid, I guess that   s all I knew, mainly. Well, I was  about eight, ten years old when it started, probably eight years old. I was  born in    22, and by 1930 it was going pretty good, and it lasted until  1942, I went to the army. That   s about the end of the Depression, along  there. But I   m sure my folks knew there was a Depression, but what  saved them, they didn   t owe nobody anything. We raised what we ate,  but a lot of our neighbors were, several of them was wiped out because  if they was in debt just even two or three hundred dollars it might have  meant the end of their way of life there.  So how did the farm come into your hands?  Well, we inherited it. My father died in 1939. I was still at home there,  and I still made my home with my sister and brother-in-law. So we was  all heirs in it, the three of us kids. After I came home from World War II  16  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  in, I believe it was, 1946, we divided up the farm between the three of  us. I guess all of it   s been in the family ever since. I mean, our three  families have all shared in it.  So everybody split up the original hundred sixty acres?  Yeah, well, I took an eighty and my brother took an eighty and my sister  got an eighty. By that time there was a forty added on that my mother  had inherited from her people, and then there was a school land lease,  and I had got that. Eighty acres of deeded land and a school land lease is  what I got. And some of them didn   t farm, so I would rent their part too,  at different times, depends on different years, how it worked out. From  1945, yeah, I lived on the farm, this eighty acres of the farm where the  buildings was till 1996, I believe. And since then, everybody that   s lived  there has been relatives, you know, next generation or two, second  generation.  Well, when the farm came into your hands, did you grow anything new?  Pretty much the same. We made a trench silo and a few years and raised  ensilage, or feed for ensilage. That   s good cattle feed, and a bunch of us  neighbors went together and bought an ensilage cutter and shared kind  of like a thrashing run. We worked together and, but after a few years,  there was quite a bit of labor to that, and so as time went on, the labor  got higher and we kind of phased that out. As time went on, we went  more to cattle, raising cattle and less crops.  What was the main reason for that move? Just a little bit easier to  handle?  Yeah, and really, I guess there was a little more money in the cattle.  Some years, if you had a bad year, well you had to sell a few cattle to  pay the debts. I mean, that   s what we depended on more, then, and I  think it, the last few years, has got worse yet. On a lot of the farm land,  cultivated land just went back to grass.  Over the years, have you taken any conservation efforts to the land?  Yeah. We terraced about all the rolling land and things that way. And  then they came in, part of the land I farmed, they put one of these  upstream flood control dams in and that backed water up on two  different places, on the low land, those two different parcels of land I  had. I couldn   t farm them fields in there anymore, we had to go to grass.  These upstream flood control lakes would back water up, and then in a  few days, it would move back down. Your Bermuda grass would stand  some water, but most crops wouldn   t. The water killed them.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Mary Ellen  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  And you mentioned that the acreage that came into your possession had  all the buildings on it.  Yes.  Are the buildings still standing today?  The barn   s still there. We built a new house, and after, well, the old  house sat there for a few years, and I gave it to my nephew, and they  moved it across the road up on the eighty my brother had. It   s sitting up  there. My brother   s grandson has it now, doesn   t he? And he   s done a lot  of work on the inside. Put in central heat and air and a bathroom on it  and all that. It   s right close there. It   s on across the road and up on the  hill from where it was.  So do you remember when electricity finally came to the farm?  Very well.  What year?  1948. REC, or CREC  Central Rural Electric Cooperative  came in and  anyway, that was a big day. I can tell you a little story. Mary Ellen and  my wife, when they finally turned it on that day, turned the electricity  on, they run around in the house and turned every switch on, and  laughing and going on, you know. I told the guy that was turning the  electricity on, I said,    They don   t usually act like that.    Remember that,  Mary Ellen? (Laughter)  Yes. We were excited.  Yeah, so, at that time they had, what did they call that, oh, vacation. Out  of the army, I never had a furlough or a vacation, so they finally paid us  on that. That check came in 1948, so we got a refrigerator out of that.  Probably not too big of one, but that was a good day when they turned  that electricity on.  Probably made a world of difference.  Oh, yeah. Yeah. Between rural electrification and rural water, they  brought the farmer out of the boondocks, really.  Well, you mentioned, you know, some pumps and other things you did  for your water. Did you have running water in the house?  18  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  The trouble with our water back through the years, we   d have good  wells, but in two or three years, they   d fail. We had several different  wells that failed, and then part of the time we   d have to haul water and  stuff. So, when rural water come in, well, we got on that at the  beginning, and that   s been a good way to go.  So before that, what was bath time like?  What?  Bath time.  Oh, well, it was a galvanized tub. I   ll tell a little story on my son. He  was four, five, six years old and his mother had a tub in the kitchen there  and set him in there to take his bath. We could hear him splashing away  and she finally went in to check on him and he was sitting outside the  tub just splashing the water to make her think he was taking a bath.  (Laughter)  As the wells kept failing (that was before rural water) I made a farm  pond that was above my house. Up on the higher ground, I had a farm  pond made, and put a cistern deal on it with a sand channel. Water had  to feed through this sand and filter, and piped it down to the house and  we had water from that pond. We filtered it again at the house. We drank  the water, and then after that, two, three, four years later, well I finally  put a bathroom on the house. So that was in    59, we put the bathroom on  the house and we got there in    46, so what   s that? Thirteen years before  we had a bathroom, after we was married.  So what catalogs did you keep in your outhouse?  Sears and Roebuck and Montgomery Ward. That was two popular  catalogs then. (Laughter) There you are. And talking about outhouses,  when I was a kid at home, the folks had their outhouse right on the edge  of a little creek that run around there. The door went just level with the  land where you went in, but the back side of the outhouse, this creek was  back there and every time there come a big rain, flushed it out, so that  was pretty much automatic. Of course, they wouldn   t pass on that now.  Then in the    30s, the WPA  Works Progress Administration  would  build outhouses. You had to furnish the material, and so my dad had  them  build one . They came around wanting to build an outhouse, and I  think he paid them for the stool and the slab. They had a stool and slab  made together. Then he bought some lumber for them to, they made an  outhouse. That was a WPA outhouse, anyway, we had for several years.  19  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Is it still on the property?  No. I give it to my nephew and he moved it over on the rental property  and anyway, they left it there. So it   s gone.  Well, you mentioned building the one pond up above the house. How  many ponds are on the property?  Well, there was one other one besides that one on that eighty that I  inherited. And on ponds, up until, oh, up until in the mid-   40s, all the  ponds in that area was made with just horses and what they call slips or  fresnos, they called them. They moved a little dirt behind a team of  horses, or they might even put three or four horses on to pull them. So  they was little flat ponds and they   d usually, most of them would go dry  every summer, see, or a lot of them would. But then in 1946, I believe,  when we first moved out there, after World War II, I had a bulldozer  make the first farm pond. It was government surveyed and everything,  and said if they made them eight and a half foot deep or deeper, they  shouldn   t go dry in this country in the summer. And that pond   s never  been dry.  Toads. Tell me about toads.  Toads. (Laughs) Well, she   s reading my story over there. (Laughter)  Well, the folks had this nice cellar and kept everything down in the  cellar, they had the door above, and then originally there was a screen  door down at the bottom of the steps and I was probably three or four  years old. In the mornings they would open the top door. They   d be  going in and out, occasionally, and they   d leave the top door open. So,  when I was three or four years old, I   d slip down there. But they had  trouble with me breaking eggs down there, and they was trying to keep  me out of there, but one morning I went to leave down there and there  was a big toad between me and the steps. I guess I really was a  squalling, and so anyway, they came and got me. They had trouble with  me running off down to the little bridge there, which was about a block  away from the house, or a little better, and so they told me there was  toads down there at the bridge, which probably there was. So, I didn   t  run off down there anymore either. (Laughter)  All right. So now I   ve got some good background on you. Tell me about  the Hindenburg.  The Hindenburg. Well, that was, I think that was 1928, maybe, along in  there sometime. Folks got me up early one morning after daylight and  here was this big airship traveling from the southwest to the northeast  and went right over our house, and I think it was the Hindenburg. It was  20  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  a German airship, I know. We   d never seen anything like it, and even at  that time, airplanes was kind of a rare deal. I understood that people  from Perry and up in this area had went to Oklahoma City, thought it  was going over Oklahoma City to see the Hindenburg. But they pretty  well missed it down there, but for some reason, it went right over our  house, and so that was a rare occasion, I guess. But even then, back in  that time when I was small, when you   d hear an airplane go over, we   d  all run out in the yard and watch it until it went out of sight because that  was a fairly rare deal, too.  Now what about politics?  (Laughs) Well, my dad was a Democrat, and my mother a Republican.  Uh-oh.  So I heard both sides and there never was any anger in it between them.  They enjoyed it, I mean, they made a game out of it. One thing that,  when I was small, I was probably six, seven years old, we   d eat in the  dining room and the water bucket was in the kitchen, which wasn   t any  further much than from here to that coffee table. When I   d run out of  water, I   d try to get my mother to go get me a glass of water and she   d  say,    No, you   re young, you can go get it.    And I   d sit there and, too  lazy to go get it, I guess, and pretty soon Dad would look over and say,     Well, are you a Democrat or a Republican?    I   d say,    I   m a Democrat.     And he   d get up and go get me the water. (Laughter) Then they   d have a  good laugh out of that, too.  Well, tell me about your kids. How many kids do you have?  Well, we had a boy and a girl. Our boy   s deceased now, and Jeanie over  here is our daughter, so, I impose on her pretty much. She kind of keeps  me lined out here. Takes me to the doctor and all that, so     Take any interesting vacations?  Yeah, we   ve taken a few vacations over the years. (Laughs)  Early vacations.  Yeah, the first one I remember was that, this was before my sister was  married. She   d been teaching school though, and I was probably five  years old. I can remember part of it. We went to Colorado Springs and  Pikes Peak. That was in the T-Model Ford. We had a tent that hooked on  the side of the car that would give us a little shelter. We camped out all  the way out there and back, or, in a lot of places. They would stop at  21  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  rural school houses. That was a public place. You was allowed to camp  there.  My mother was raised in Sumner County, Kansas out west of  Wellington, west of Milan, and we went by there. She was born in a half  dugout deal, and it wasn   t there anymore, but we found little pieces of  dishes and stuff where it had been. We went by Lakin, Kansas. Old  neighbors of the folks lived up there. They   d homesteaded there later  and we visited with them a day or two. I believe pretty near all the roads  was dirt roads out there, graded dirt roads. Might have been a few little  places that was paved.  We went to, I think it was, Colorado Springs. They hired what they  called a jitney, was a three seated car, three rows of seats, with an open  top. It was a Pierce-Arrow car, and it took us up to the top of Pikes Peak  and back. That was an all-day deal, to go up there and back, at that time.  I think they was gone, I think maybe the biggest part of two weeks, but  I   m not sure about that. So I guess that was the first trip we took,  anyway.  Do you remember, did you have train tracks running near your property  at any time?  No, no train tracks. No.  No. So you really had no encounters with hobos or     Oh, yes, we did. Most of our people that came was off of Highway-64.  Our house was about a quarter of a mile off 64. In the Depression, my  folks fed a lot of people, I mean, over a period of years. Most of them  was down on their luck. Some of them was real hobos, and a lot of them  was trying to get back to where some of the relatives lived or heard  about a job. Might be a job in some other state or something. Most of  them was traveling light, just the clothes they had on their back. They  never turned anybody away at that time. They fed them all.  Did they put them to work at all, or just fed them?  I remember one old boy, they happened to be in haying or something,  and they let him work two or three days, and he came back to see us  again, then. His last name was Berkshire. I remember because it was  Berkshire hogs, see? I think he was a drifter, he probably wasn   t  anyplace too long. Some of them they even kept overnight. I guess you  wouldn   t do that now, for sure.  Then if it was somebody walking on the road, they wasn   t doing it to  22  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  lose weight, they was wanting to get someplace. Dad picked up all the  hitchhikers he had room to haul. So, I remember, probably a couple  different times, old Model-A Fords with a mechanical brakes, which,  you didn   t stop on a dime. If you was driving twenty-five, thirty miles an  hour it   d probably be pretty near out to the street by the time you   d get a  Model-A stopped. And there was a couple times I   d be with him and  he   d say,    Boy, that guy looks pretty tough.    He said,    You get in the  back seat and if he gets out of line, lay that tire tool over his head.    We  never had to do that, but anyway, I suppose I would have. I don   t know.  We didn   t have no trunk on the car, and so all the tire tools was in the  back floorboards. Then it wasn   t unusual to have a flat tire, you know.  Tires wasn   t near as good as they are now. Wasn   t unusual to have a flat  or two just going to town and back.  Probably got real good at changing those tires.  Yeah, I did.  Well, do you remember any interaction with county agents?  Not a whole lot. I remember the county agents, some people was  bothered with prairie dogs. They   d get in their pastures and they   d  multiply. I was a big kid. We didn   t have any prairie dogs on our place,  but our neighbors did. The county agent come out with a deal that they   d  take poison grain and we   d go and throw it down the hole of each prairie  dog and got rid of them. And my dad and I both helped on that, on our  neighbors    places. I think they wouldn   t do that now. I mean, they   d  probably want to keep the prairie dogs around, but at least we got rid of  them then.  Do you remember any homemaker clubs?  My sister belonged to a club out there. A bunch of the neighbor ladies  had a club going. Another thing, they would have, I don   t know whether  that was through the club. Probably was. They   d have card parties,  maybe, every week or two, probably on a Saturday night that the  neighbors would get together and have a card party. They   d have  probably three or four tables. They   d play pitch, four to a table and have  a prize for the one that won the high and the low. A lot of the prizes was  homemade prizes, mainly. Some of them might have been little trinkets  that was bought but didn   t amount to too much. So that was partly their  entertainment for the farm community.  Were you involved with 4-H or FFA  Future Farmers of America ?  23  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Oh, a little bit in high school. What I do remember about that, I had a pig  that I took to the county fair, and seemed like there was sixteen entries.  Mine was fourteenth or fifteenth when they judged them, see? (Laughs)  So, that was 4-H what they had in our school at that time. FFA come on  a little later, I believe.  Did the oil companies ever come out?  Oil companies? My dad, my parents leased for oil several times back  there. In fact my dad told me before he died, if it hadn   t been for cattle  and oil, he says he probably would have starved out. They was the two  things that kept them going.  So he held on to his mineral rights?  Yes. The mineral rights are still intact out there, and they   ve got a good  lease this last year.  Good. And you returned to the farm after the war. Did you have to have  an outside job, or did you just farm?  I made my living farming for six or seven years, then I started working  out for part of the time. We still farmed, too. I worked out probably three  years and then I went back to farming and farmed a few more years.  Then Swan Rubber came in Stillwater and I went to work there and we  cut down on our farming a little bit. Still farmed.  And what year did you retire from farming?  Well, I run cattle up till, what, three or four, five years ago? About that.  Well, I had cattle on the farm from 1938, probably, or    39 till about  2005. So, that would be over sixty years.  A long time.  Yeah. Sixty some years. Close to seventy years, maybe, huh?  So you have seen a lot of changes, especially with government  regulation.  Yes.  Has that been helpful or more of a barrier?  Well, farmers didn   t like the restrictions that come with them, but really  it was, in a way it was a blessing because when I was a small kid, they  24  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  had no price supports or nothing. So, President Roosevelt, I guess he  came in in March of    33. Shortly after that they went to telling you how  many acres to plant, and stuff that way, and you got a little better price.  There was a lot of complaints, and a lot of people appreciated it, too. It   s  been with us ever since, I mean, government programs.  Oh yeah.  Which, I think they have helped a lot more than they hurt, but people  don   t like to be told what to do though. I mean    (Laughs)  This is true. Well, I   m sure you   ve had tough times farming.  Had what?  Tough times being a farmer?  Well, yeah. Dry years is bad on farming. We had Bang   s disease in our  cattle at one time and had to get rid of them, and different things that  way. It got hailed out pretty much one year. Green bugs pretty well eat  up our crops one year.  But overall it   s been a good living?  Yeah, it was a living, and I enjoyed it. If you   re wanting to make money,  you need to get in a different field. The ones that   s left farming has  probably got an oil well in the back side of their place and they   re  farming big, like, ten, fifteen quarters or more, probably most all of them  now. That   s fulltime farmers.  Well, did your father pass down a good piece of advice to you when it  comes to farming?  Well, I don   t know. He told me to do what I liked to do, I mean, what I  enjoyed doing, and not to make money my goal, necessarily. As long as  you can make a living, well, do what you enjoy doing rather than to be  trying to get rich, and so. And I guess that must have been what I done. I  didn   t   I pretty well enjoyed farming, but I   ve never got rich.  (Laughter) A long ways from it.  Well, what   s happening with the farm today?  Well, I believe all the land is some of our relatives. Generations on down  is using it now, and they   re running cattle. There   s none of it being  cultivated, or very little, if any, is being cultivated. My grandson lives on  the eighty where we lived and they run cattle and he works in Stillwater,  25  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  Nykolaiszyn  Speer  him and his wife both. And my nephew, I believe, uses the rest of the  land. He runs cattle. So, that   s what it   s used for now.  Well, what do you hope to see happen to the farm in the next hundred  years?  (Laughs) Well, I guess they   ll do what they want to with it. I   m not  going to have any say-so, I don   t believe.  But if you did, what would you like to see happen?  Well, I guess pretty much what   s went on here in the past, only whatever  makes my relatives that use it happy, I guess. I think, in another hundred  years, probably it   ll mostly be sold up in acreages. I think it   ll be the  outskirts of Stillwater by then, probably. And originally it was twelve  miles from Stillwater. Twelve, something like that.  Well, is there anything else you   d like to mention that we haven   t asked  you about today?  No, I don   t know of anything. I think you   ve pretty well covered it. I  guess I   d say I enjoyed farming and I   ve had a good life out of it, too.  Well Mr. Speer, we appreciate your time and adding to our project.  Thank you very much for the interview.  Well, thank you for having me.  -------  ------- 
