 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Also with me today is Tanya Finchum. Today is April 19, 2011,  and we are here with Velva Rence to interview her as part of the  Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families Oral History Project about the  David H. and Emma V. Rence Homestead. How are you doing today?  I   m doing good, thank you.  Well, let   s learn a little bit about the homestead that   s located in Noble  County. If you could, tell us how the family came to Oklahoma.  My husband   s grandfather, David Henry Rence, lived in Missouri and  the story is that he was tired of farming where the trees were, and he  wanted to go where there weren   t trees, and he heard about the Land  Run. He left the city west of Ark City, I can   t think of the name of the  town, but was in line for the Run. With his horse and he got as far as a  mile inside of Noble County and homesteaded. They had, which I   m  sure you know, to stay on the land for a period of time and register it.  When they settled onto the land, do you know of any of the early  structures that were there, that he built?  He built a dugout. There was nothing. They lived in the dugout for, I  don   t know, a few years. Then he built the house up on top. He gathered  rocks and in fact, the rocks on the fireplace here are from the basement  of the rocks that he gathered. He lined the basement where they lived  with those rocks.  Early crops, or what did he do to help sustain himself on the land?  He built two ponds, and he fenced it. I think he planted some grain,  probably wheat or corn, and they had an orchard. That wouldn   t be right,  5  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  that would be after his wife and children came, but they had an orchard  and a garden and always a garden to raise their vegetables and food for  their family.  Did he come married? Or did he meet his wife in Oklahoma?  He was married and they had, I think, four children.  Were they all born on the homestead?  No. There was one for sure that was born here on the homestead, I   d  have to think about that, but the others were born in Missouri, probably.  On the property today, what are some of the original structures still  standing?  The house used to be, but it   s been dozed down. The ponds are still there  that he built. That   s amazing to me that he built these two ponds that are  still there. That   s about it. There used to be a shed and a nice cave. He  built a cave for a tornado shelter. We have pictures of the house.  Tell me about the old house.  Well, there was the back porch with the, what is it, rain boards that   gather rain . That was in the kitchen and the back porch. They had a  cistern outside of the house, and then they even had a pump inside the  house where they had a dug well. I think the dug well there is about fifty  feet deep. That was there and it was lined with the rock from the area. In  the basement was like two big rooms, and there was a stairway from the  outside going down into it and also from upstairs. After they put the  house on, there was a stairway leading down to the basement. There  were two rooms in the basement. Upstairs, let   s see, there was the porch  and the kitchen and the living room and two bedrooms.  Do you know how it was heated?  Originally I don   t know, but there was oil produced on the farm. There  was gas and they had gas, then, to heat the house.  Did they use the drip gas?  Well, I don   t know. Natural gas.  Oh, okay. You mentioned water. Did they have a windmill to draw it?  No. I remember Dave   s aunt telling us that they had the well, originally  6  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  where they   d get their water would be at the east end of the quarter.  She   d have to walk clear down to that well to get their drinking water.  Water was rather scarce in that area and it has to be deep.  Of the two rooms in the basement, was one of them a cellar for canned  goods and that type of thing?  I suppose it would naturally be. I don   t remember any shelving or  anything. They had the cave, which probably kept their canned things. I  know that they had to can a lot of fruits and vegetables.  Did your husband grow up on the farm?  Not on that farm. His dad did. The oldest daughter, she came down, but  she married a local person and so she moved out. I guess all of Dave   s  aunts and uncles lived on that farm until they married and actually until  the    20s, early    30s when the Three Sands Oil Boom was going and  Dave   s grandmother thought it was too rough of an element to be  staying out there. Her two sons built a house in Tonkawa for her and  them to live in.  So what was David   s father   s name then? So we get the right lineage  here.  My husband   s? His name was Guy Arnold. Arnold is the family name. It  would be the great-grandparents. She was an Arnold, and she married a  Rence. Emma Victoria.  You mentioned that it was a rough time in the area. What was going on?  Well, the Three Sands. You had shootings, and there were all kinds of   trouble . Surely you heard about that. Of course, they had some wells  on their property, and Three Sands would have been a mile, at the most  two miles, from their house, because they lived just inside the Noble  County  line . The farm was just inside the Noble County line.  Over time, when Guy was living on the farm growing up, did they  change what they were growing or crops produced or livestock?  They had livestock, and I hesitate to say if they had pigs. I don   t  remember that they did, just a story that I remember is his granddad, the  food was very scarce, and he   d gone to, I think, Ponca City and there  were some hogs somewhere, and he thought about stealing one to  provide food, but he didn   t. (Laughs)  Yeah, it was a rough time growing up in Oklahoma.  7  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Yes.  If it was your husband   s grandfather, then his father had siblings? I   m  trying to figure out how the farm came to be in your husband   s hands.  It   s never changed hands. It   s always been in David Henry. It   s actually  owned by my two daughters and then there   s a cousin in Oklahoma City  that owns like twenty-some acres, twenty-six acres, I guess. Two-thirds  of a forty. There   s three daughters of another one of the sons. One lives  in New York City, and the other two live close to Minneapolis. They  still own their forty acres, and they have very strong attachment to those  forty acres. Of course, with Dave, I have his forty acres.  So it began with 160?  Yes.  So each sibling got some?  Yes, and I think it was in the    It was after the oil production. Some of  the siblings were given the opportunity to either have an interest in the  farm or there was property in Tonkawa that Dave   s grandfather bought  and also in Blackwell. Two of them decided they wanted to live in  Blackwell, and they gave up their interest on the farm, and one of them  in Tonkawa gave up her interest of the farm. I   d have to write down  who.  No, that   s fine. We   re just trying to decide how it was split between the  kids, grandkids     Yes.  We find that it sometimes is a hairy situation through the years with  dealing with family and land and the property.  It   s been amazing. There   s not been the strife within the brothers and  sisters. And still, with my daughters and their cousins, everything is still  okay.  So why do you think your family has decided to hold onto the land for  this long?  Emotional heritage. It   s a part of the Land Run, part of the history of  Oklahoma, and it   s very important in their memories. I think just the fact  that how the land was gotten, their great-granddad made the Run and  8  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  staked the claim. In 1993, which would have been one hundred years,  we had a family reunion, and we all went up to the Kansas line with  Dave and his horse and bicycles, and we re-enacted the Run. (Laughs)  We didn   t make it clear to here, but it was just a lot of good feelings.  One cousin brought a gun and shot the gun and started the Run.  For great-grandfather and grandfather, was farming their sole source of  income or did they have to have jobs outside of the farm?  Of course the grandfather didn   t. He died early. He was kicked by a  horse. Then the oldest son took over the responsibility of keeping the  farm. Dave   s dad bought the farm out southeast of Tonkawa. He had a  clothing store in Tonkawa at one time, but farming was his love, and  cattle.  What about grandma throughout all this?  Grandma Rence?  Yes.  I didn   t know her at all, because she was gone by the time Dave and I  married. All I know is that one cousin thought she was pretty strict. So I  don   t know really, I don   t know much about her, other than she came  from Missouri.  So we don   t know if she did much quilting or canning?  Oh, she canned, I can tell you that. I don   t know about the quilting, but  her daughters were beautiful quilters. I mean tiny, tiny stitches. So she  must have taught them.  Any idea of how recordkeeping was done on the farm throughout the  years?  I have no idea.  It   s kind of a hard question.  Dave   s grandfather, early on, he had the post office in his basement.  Bliss, I think it was Bliss Post Office, and continued it until one of the  neighbors had scarlet fever, I think, one of the life-taking diseases. They  came to the post office and exposed the baby at that time and, of course,  the baby died. So that closed the post office. That was the end of the post  office there. Dave   s granddad was, actually I don   t know that he was  ordained, but was a preacher at the Baptist church. The area out there  9  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Nykolaiszyn  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  built a Baptist church. Dave talked about his granddad made the arched  windows. He could do that. We drove around trying to find the building,  but never could.  Do you know if there was lots of helping of neighbors during that time?  Yes.  Did they help with the crops and the combining, or was it just as  needed?  There was not any combining on the    It   s all this grassland now. Any  help would have been labor, physical labor.  Did they ever employ anybody outside of the family?  If you   re talking about the granddad, I   m sure, no. I just know that some  of the neighbors were real good friends with Dave   s dad and his brother.  I don   t ever remember them talking about hiring anybody.  Once the land came into ownership by your husband, what did he do  with it?  He had a cattle operation and we ran cattle on it, rented from the cousins  and paid them pasture rent.  Is anyone living on the land now?  No.  It   s been a while since someone actually lived there?  Actually, that would have been probably in the    50s and it was a  preacher of some church in the area.  Of those original six or seven children, did any of them go to college?  Do you know?  Of the original? Let   s see, there was a university preparatory school  here, and I know of three of them did that. The oldest one that got  married, I don   t know about her, and Aunt Lita, I don   t know about her.  Aunt Lena, which is closest one to Dave, married George Wooster, who  was the building supervisor of the buildings out at Northern  Oklahoma  College (NOC) . He was from Iowa. I don   t know that she went to   college . It was a high school at that time. It was like the high school.  One of the aunts taught grade school with the certificate she received  10  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  from NOC.  So education was important to the family, obviously, if they went  somewhere     Yes. In fact, of course, David is a graduate of OSU, and our youngest  daughter is a graduate of OSU, and the other one didn   t know where she  wanted to go, so she ended up at Weatherford. She had scholarships to  different ones and she chose Weatherford. The wives of the cousins, we  were real close and our children played together. Anyway, the middle  daughter is with the New York Philharmonic in New York City,  Manhattan. Lisa went to school at OSU, I think, for a couple years, but  college wasn   t for her. She got married and then the oldest, Margaret, is  a graduate of OSU. She was at the University of Virginia. I think she  probably has more education than just the bachelor   s from OSU.  Are any of those involved with farming or agricultural type jobs?  (Laughs) No.  But they still hold onto the land, some of them.  Yes, they own the land, and that   s just the sentimental value of the land  and the history of it.  Were there any stories passed down generation to generation  surrounding the old farm?  Other than the story about Aunt Lena having to walk clear across eighty  acres to the well to get water. They all had to work hard. Well, Aunt  Lena married the builder out here at Northern. He contacted TB   tuberculosis  and they moved to Phoenix, Arizona, and lived on the  canal. It was very, very tough. I think that would have been in 1911,  probably. Early 1900s. Of course, he wanted to come back to east of  Oklahoma City, to the home where his sister lived. He wanted to come  home to live out the rest of his life there. I have letters that they all wrote  to them, to Aunt Lena when they were in Phoenix. You know, missing,  and the grandpa was kicked. He was buried right close to Christmas  time. There   s very touching letters that were sent to her, because she  couldn   t come back for the  funeral , you know.  Do you remember any favorite dishes, cooking wise?  There   s a story about Dave   s grandmother always cooked, had the  preacher over for Sunday dinner. Fried chicken and the, I   m trying to  think of the story. Anyway, the boys were hiding in the closet. And I   m  11  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  trying to think, why were they hiding? I   ll have to think of that story.  Anyway, they were     A little bit of mischief sometimes.  Mischief, yes.  So if they had fried chicken, they raised chickens?  Yes. I   m sure they raised everything, probably. The only thing they  would buy would be possibly some bananas or something that wouldn   t  grow here. I don   t even know that there were bananas in the area then.  Well, if they were going to go to the grocery store, where would they  have to go?  They would either have to come to Tonkawa or to Perry. There is the  one aunt, of course, would take the wagon with the horses and they  would wait at the Black Bear or Red Rock Creek until there was more  than one wagon to go across to make sure they made it across to go to  Perry to buy their groceries. We don   t know any of the hardships like  they endured.  Any stories about the country schools attended when they were growing  up?  Let me think. I   d have to think about that. IXL, and I   m trying to think  what that is. I   m sure all I know is that the one aunt that got her teaching  degree taught in one of the schools out there with these Three Sands big  boys. They were nineteen, twenty years old going to school. And of  course, they were big tall guys. But they were, I guess, going so that  they could learn.  Well, tell us a little bit about your background. Are you from Oklahoma?  Yes, I   m from Oklahoma. I was born in Kansas, but that was because  my mother and daddy were doctoring there. I grew up in Lamont, which  is fifteen miles west. Graduated from Lamont High School. I worked in  the State Exchange Bank over there when I got out of high school, for  about a year and a half or two years.  They have the Watermelon Festival every year over there. It was a big  watermelon growing community. I don   t know if you know that. They  used to sell watermelons all over. I even remember one of the big  watermelon growers, he   d have the seeds out on the screen and we had  to pick out    It was probably, I have no idea how much we were paying,  12  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  but we got to do that.  They always had a queen. It was a Watermelon Day. The water tower  over there had a big cement base around it, and they filled it with ice and  watermelons and served cold watermelon free to everybody. I was  queen, I   d have to think about what year, but anyway I was elected  Watermelon Queen one year.  I went to Girls State. I   ve gone some out here to Northern. I don   t have a  degree from there. I worked in Wichita at Boeing for a couple years and  came back to Tonkawa to work in the bank. That   s where I met Dave,  because this is his stomping ground, Tonkawa. Anyway, we met, I think,  in February and were married on December 25, 1956.  At that point, were you going to live in town?  I was living in a garage apartment, and we lived there, probably, for six  months or so. Then we moved in with his dad, because his dad was a  widower. We moved out there so I could cook some for him, to help. We  lived there five years, and our first child was born out there. She was  three when we bought a house that used to be just across the fence here.  Lived out here and then in    75, we built this.  So by out there, you mean the original acreage part of the farm?  His father built this log house, and so we lived out there with him for a  short five years. Then I guess I wanted to have my own home with the  child. We just had one  at that time .  This is a farm here, too?  Its 160 acres. And his homestead, Dave   s dad, is in between the  Chikaskia River and the Salt Fork River. It   s in between the rivers out  there. And the original house that he lived in, and actually it was where  Dave   s mother and his father were married, and they lived out there, and  his mother died when he was two. This would have been, evidently, in  probably    40-   41. Must have been    41. The house burned down, so his  dad then built the log cabin house. It   s a house, two-story.  Is it still standing?  Yes. Our youngest daughter and her husband live in it. In fact, our oldest  daughter, he   s a retired Air Force person and when they got out of the  Air Force, they moved out there. So his dad built the house and then  lived there, and then Dave and I lived there. Well, Dave, of course, lived  there for several years before. He would have been from    41 through  13  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence     48,    49. I don   t know, I   d have to figure that out.  Dave and I lived in it for about five years, and then our oldest daughter  had dreams of living in it, so when they came back, they moved into it.  It   s the chinks in between the logs. They didn   t have the material like we  have now. It was dried and so the wind would blow through and the  insects would come through. My oldest daughter really didn   t like the  insects at all. My granddaughter, their baby, lived out there probably  close to a year. Then the youngest daughter and her husband are in it  now. So it will be in the family, too, as long as they   re able to work and  pay the taxes.  Well, are you actively farming this 160 now?  I have it rented out. It   s pasture land.  So they never really got far from the land. Always doing something with  it.  No. No. There   s some other land that is cultivated that we bought while  we were married, and his dad, of course, had. So it is rented out to a  friend. She   s a hairdresser. Her husband farms it. He   s a very good  friend, and he   s very helpful, and he   s a good farmer.  Farming sure has changed a lot, even since you got this place I would  think.  Oh, it has. Yes. I used to help. I did about anything except I wouldn   t  drive a combine. I could drive the tractors and Dave    We used to have  hay grazer planted down here and he was so allergic to it, so I got to  swathe the hay grazer. (Laughs) So I was able to help him in that way.  Any stories about holidays?  Of course, we never had a wedding anniversary. It was always  Christmas. I would have family for Christmas. The one aunt that was a  school teacher, she would have some holidays, but usually it was up to  when we did it. I liked doing it, enjoyed doing it, and they enjoyed it.  Infamous cedar tree or artificial?  Oh, well we used to, Dave would take the girls and go out in the timber  and cut a sticky pine tree or whatever    I don   t know what they are, but  anyway. One year it was really exciting, because there was a bird nest  right up close to the trunk and while they were out getting the tree, I   d  pop popcorn and they   d bring it in and we   d have a good time together.  14  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  After the girls left, it fell up to me to decorate the tree. I had an artificial  tree because we finally realized that at Christmastime there was always  colds and coughing, and they were allergic to the trees. So we bought the  artificial tree. I still have it. They don   t make them like that anymore, I  guess, because we   ve had it a long time. I still put one up. Last year it  was a chore, but got it up. I   ll keep trying to do it.  Do you have a favorite chore on the farm over the years? Something you  liked doing the best?  (Laughter) Let me think about that.  How about the worst, then?  I loved living out. Neighbor had these peacocks when we lived the first  five years out with his dad, the neighbors across the river. One evening,  I thought somebody was yelling for help and it was the peacocks.  Anyway, the neighbor had these peacocks and had a hen that was sitting  on eggs and Red said,    You can have those eggs if you want them.    So I  went and got them, and I still have a scar on my hand from where when  she left she scratched. But I got the eggs and I had an old white hen, just  a real fat gentle white hen and she hatched those peacocks out.  So I   m sure they   re not original anymore, but I   ve always had peacocks  since then. We had some Muscovy ducks. You know what Muscovy  ducks are? They   re black and white. I put some eggs under them, and I  had a bathtub in my yard for a pond. Actually, it was the Muscovy duck  eggs and this white hen hatched them out. These little ducks would get  on that water, and that hen was so fretful, because chickens just don   t get  on the water. I enjoyed that.  Were your girls involved with 4-H?  No, they helped with the farming. They both knew how to drive the  tractors. Maryanne, before she was old enough, she would fix  sandwiches for us around harvest time. So she was real good at fixing  sandwiches. It was a team effort from all of us.  Was your husband in 4-H when he was in school?  No, no. They were kept plenty busy with his dad   s cattle operation. He  started driving a tractor when he was six years old.  Any interaction with county agents or home demonstration agents?  I belonged to the home demonstration club when we were first married.  15  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Finchum  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Of course, he would seek information from them, but that   s about it.  Do you remember the name of your club?  No.  (Laughter) Long time ago.  Yeah. I know that we had to make a dress, and one of my friends helped  me make the dress. I did sew for the girls. I could sew.  Farming is definitely a family team effort for sure.  It   s so different now. I don   t think there   d be any farmer that could have  160 acres and be able to survive on it. They have to have a job away  from the farm.  So how many total acres do you have now?  I don   t know.  At least 160 plus forty?  Yes. And then of course this is 160 and there   s the homestead. There   s  some land there.  Enough to keep you busy.  Enough to keep me involved in it. Only the bookkeeping and Larry will  say,    We need to do this,    and he before he does anything, he always  asks me. He wants to tell me what he   s doing, which is very, very nice.  It keeps me up on it. I don   t have to physically do it. I used to mow the  yard, the girls used to mow the yard, but I don   t do that anymore either.  Well, you kind of touched on this earlier in the interview, but looking at  the next hundred years, where do you see the farm?  I think it will always be with the girls. Just one granddaughter. She will  be thirteen in July and I don   t know what her feelings will be. I   m sure  it   s up to her mother and dad. I   m sure she   ll keep it. I don   t know. I can  just only imagine she   d be influenced to keep it.  Is there anything else you   d like to add that we haven   t asked you about  today?  I had the letter with all these questions and I was going to review it     16  Nykolaiszyn  Rence  Nykolaiszyn  If you think of anything, just let us know because we can always add it  into the transcript. We definitely appreciate your time today.  You   re very welcome.  Thank you.  -------  ------- 
