 Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Also with me is Tanya Finchum. Today is October 7, 2010, and  we are near Pawnee, Oklahoma, on the Nimerick farm, interviewing  Elton and Ken Nimerick as part of the Centennial Farms Oral History  Project. Thank you for joining us today. We   d like to get started and  have you tell us how your family came to own this land.  Well, in 1893, the Land Run, William Sapp, which was my  grandmother   s brother, made the Run. I   ve got the documents that   ll  show when he sold it to his sister and her husband, which were our  grandparents. That   s how it started.  You had to live on the land so long before you could claim it as yours.  What was that first original structure like?  Well, I   ve got a picture I can show you. I brought you a copy of that  letter that my uncle wrote a few years before he died, and it kind of  summarizes this whole thing. It said,    Our housing on the farm was  quite primitive at first by tent, then sod house, then later a log cabin in  which three younger brothers were born.    But like I said, Marion, I   ll  write his name on here, we were going to have a historical book out of  Pawnee County twenty-five or thirty years ago, but it fell through. So he  wrote this kind of thumbnail sketch of his life in a sense, kind of  condensed. We were going to put it in that, but it fell through.  Do you want to read anything more from that?  You ought to just read the whole thing.  That   ll give us a good snapshot.  5  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  I think he   s got it pretty much documented with the starting history. I   d  start in the front and just read the whole thing.  (Reading)    My father, James William Nimerick, was born near  Belleville, Illinois, October the seventh, 1857. My mother, Elizabeth  Sapp (maiden name) was born near London, Illinois, on May 6, 1866.  They were married in Pittsburg, Kansas, in 1890. My father had a fourth  grade education and followed the farm labor circle for a livelihood in  order to exist. His jobs of any kind were far between and hard to get in  those days. My father, mother and two older brothers, Charles and Ray  Nimerick, migrated by covered wagon from Kansas to the now known  farm five miles south of Pawnee in May of 1894. My father had five  sons. Besides the two above mentioned, who were born in Kansas,  myself, Marion and two younger brothers, Frank and Lawrence  Nimerick, were born on the farm or homestead, where Frank and myself  were delivered by midwife, and my younger brother, Lawrence, was  delivered by Dr. Waters, another pioneer, at a cost of ten dollars.  Life was quite rugged during those times, and it was difficult to survive,  but we as a family were close and lived close to the land. My father was  a very successful and wise farmer who provided wealth for his family.  He raised hogs, cattle, chickens and so forth, and farmed the land with  corn, cotton, and small grains, et cetera. We always had plenty to eat of  our own growing management. They usually had to buy such items as  coal oil, kerosene, flour, sugar, tobacco, salt and our clothing was made  more or less by our mother. The farm was homesteaded by my uncle,  William Sapp, a brother to my mother, in 1893, and was sold the  following year to my father for a hundred dollars. Our housing on the  farm was quite primitive. First a tent, then sod house and later a log  cabin was added in which the three youngest brothers were born. Our  log cabin was constructed from oak trees, harvested. It   s roof by slabs  stripped from choice oak, blocks for shingles. The spaces between the  logs were filled with a mortar composed of slack lime and sand. We had  outdoor privies, or we simply headed for the brush.    (Laughter)  (Reading)    I remember my father telling me as a young man that he  worked in the fields for one dollar per day, and a man and team received  one dollar and fifty cents per day. You could purchase a good pair of  work shoes for fifty cents. We walked two miles and sometimes further,  depending on the weather, to school, and in snowy weather wrapped  gunny sacks around our shoes to protect from the bitter cold. I remember  during my very young years, about 1905, our homestead was surrounded  one hundred percent by Indian land. Today it is bordered on two sides  by Indian land. About this time in my life I would see a white person,  except for my family, about once a month. Especially during the times  6  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Finchum  that schools were not in session but for the Indians. I saw them about  every day while crossing our land from camp to camp. They say those  were the good ol    days, or were they? Hogs were three to four cents per  pound on the foot, and you had to haul them to Perry as that was the  nearest market at that time. Chickens were five cents per pound, eggs  five cents per dozen, and sometimes not even sellable at all. For twenty-five  cents, you could purchase enough round steak to feed a family of  six.  Yes, I remember Pawnee quite well with its dirt streets and the lamp  lighter whose duty it was to lower, clean or repair the lamps and raise  them by cord or rope to the proper street height. I also remember some  of the old merchants such as the Old Pooch General Merchandise, Wise  Grocery, Katz Department Store, as well as many others. That was some  of the early local stores in the City of Pawnee. After the death of my  parents, it was owned and operated by my younger brother, James  Lawrence    Bill    Nimerick,    (who is our father).    James Lawrence was  born January 2, 1908 on the homestead. On December 31, 1931, Bill  married Elma May Sneed,    (who is our mother).    To the homestead they  added an extra eighty acres of adjoining land. They also raised three  boys and a girl: Elton W. Nimerick, Kenneth H. Nimerick, James L.  Nimerick, and Shirley J. Nimerick. Bill and Elma       (my mother and  dad)       lived on the homestead until the time of their death. Our  homestead and farm has been owned and operated for nearly a hundred  years. Presently, it   s owned by my nephews, Elton and Kenneth  Nimerick. I have a copy of two documents concerning the conveyance  of the title of our farm, one signed by Teddy Roosevelt and the other  signed by Grover Cleveland.     This story was reported by Marion Nimerick, Chowchilla, California,  the only survivor of the five Nimerick brothers. He was the oldest one.  No, Charles was the oldest. All the younger ones died before. He was  ninety-five or ninety-six, something like that, when he passed away.  Had a good life.  So, both of you were born on the farm?  No, I was born in Selma, California. I was part of the results of the  Grapes of Wrath. (Laughs) There was a period of time that my parents  didn   t live on the farm here. They sold all the livestock and their  material goods, except they kept the land and the property, the house and  everything else, and they tried their luck in California. I was born in  Selma, California in 1937.  And how long did they stay there?  7  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Not too long. I would say three or four years at the most.  Yes, because they were probably back here by 1940, 1939.  Yeah. It wasn   t quite what they thought it would be out there. They  figured it was better back here trying to survive on this land, and that  wasn   t home to them, so they moved back to this area.  Elton, were you born on the farm here?  Yes, I was born in that bedroom back there. I   ll show you pretty soon.  It   s a den now, but it was a little ol    small bedroom.  In what year?  February the 11, 1935.  Both of you probably have memories growing up on the farm. What do  you remember from your childhood? What were some of your chores?  Oh, milking. We had cows. My dad always had pigs. Man, I   ll tell you.  He loved to raise pigs, but he had plenty of help. He had three boys  around here, see, so.  Yeah, there was always a lot. My dad had one philosophy: if you kept  them busy and they were tired, then you didn   t have any problem with  them going to sleep. He did very well at implementing that, and like I  said, we cut our own firewood. Our house was heated by wood.  Everybody had chores to do, and it usually ran from the time you got up  in the morning and during the school year, you left for school, but as  soon as you got back you started into the evening chores again. It   s  pretty much labor intensive. A far cry from today   s society, that   s for  sure.  During your early days on the farm growing up, what were some of the  structures on the property?  Well, the barn was here, and there was a corn crib right south of the  house. It sat down there, but it fell down several years ago. And then  there was a chicken house. We always had chickens, we always had  eggs. I can remember my mother actually candling the eggs and grading  them before she took them to town. All the grocery store had to do was  put them out on the counter and it was already graded. There was a little  chicken house out here.  8  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  Yeah, that   s where we   d get the baby chickens. That   s where we started  because they were small, we could put heat lamps back when we got  electricity. This farm didn   t have electricity until 1949 when REA  Electric laid their lines in here. That was a significant improvement to  the way of life, I   ll tell you.  The first thing my mother did, she went to Jennings, Oklahoma, and  bought an electric range. She cooked on wood up until then. That was  part of my job, was cutting the kindling. She bought one of them, and  it   s never been anything but electric in this house since they put it in.  Did you have an icebox?  Yeah, we had one of the first Servel kerosene ice boxes. It used to sit  right there in the corner. We were really uptown because we had ice  cubes. (Laughter) I   ve still got some of the old trays, the porcelain trays  that came out of it. It was one of the first Servel kerosene ice boxes. It  had to be about 1942, somewhere around there, because we were living  here. Before then, we had springs over on the school easement well and  we put our milk and butter in a gunny sack and put it down in the water.  That   s where we kept our milk and stuff. There wasn   t no going to town  and getting a block of ice.  Since we   re on kitchen appliances and your mother, do you have a  favorite meal she used to cook that brings back fond memories?  Fried chicken.  Well, that makes me have to ask this question. How did she slaughter the  chicken? Everybody seems to have a different technique.  That was my job. I was the head man at helping her. I could cut up a  chicken pretty good when I was ten, twelve years old.  Well, walk me through the process. What would you do to the chicken?  Well, I   d usually pull the head off. I   d have chickens running around the  yard out here, and my mother would be hollering,    Stop, stop, I   m about  out of water     And she said,    I can   t scald them and pull the feathers off  of them.    We always kept chicken in the ice box in the spring and  summer. It   d be nice to get a chicken like that now at the grocery store.  Weighed about two-and-a-half pounds, something like that, instead of  these ol    big four pounders that   s got some globs of fat on it. That was  part of my job is to help her process the chickens.  Is there anything else you really enjoyed that she cooked?  9  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  She   d never bring us to the table in the morning until she had a stack of  homemade pancakes. They   d be almost as big as the plate. Of course,  she made her own syrup, too. We had three boys and Dad, well you   d  better have a pretty good size stack when you bring them in there.  When you blew the whistle, it was time to head to the table, and it was  pretty swift. Everybody had a fork, and everybody had a good appetite,  let me put it that way.  Did she have a garden?  Big garden.  And what would she grow in the garden?  Well, she had peas, green beans, tomatoes, and then we had a  horrendous potato patch down here west of the house. One time she  didn   t think I was running the double shovel right through the potatoes,  so she said,    You get on the double shovel and I   ll lead the horse.    Well,  that was reversed, so I led the horse too fast and she couldn   t keep it in  the row, and it was out jumping in the potato row, and she was throwing  clods at me. (Laughter) Yeah, I made up my mind, I wanted to stay on  that double shovel, you know. So she said I wasn   t doing it right.  I haven   t heard that term before, double shovel.  Well, it was a piece of equipment with two scoops on it about like this,  and you   d just run them down between the potato row.  It was an old horse-drawn piece of equipment. There   s listers, and  you   ve probably heard of a lister.  I   ve heard of that.  What about a go devil? You ever heard of a go devil?  No.  That had three blades on each side. We always planted our row crops  with a lister, and so you had your deep furrow. So this go devil had  fenders on it, and it had three cutters on each side. You   d pull it back up  and it pulled the dirt around your plants, your kaffir corn or whatever. Of  course, we always planted a lot of kaffir corn when I was a kid. Now it   s  maize. I   ve got a big scar on my foot where I accidentally    We always  went barefoot in the summertime. As soon as it got warm enough, it  10  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  didn   t make any difference where you were at. You went barefoot, that  was the whole thing. A lot of times you wore your shoes out by the time  school was back. And since I was the oldest, I always had to wear bigger  clothes because it was handed down. I   d buy them overalls and my mom  would always buy them a size or two too big because she knew that  somebody would grow into them.  If they survived. (Laughs)  Do you remember the first tractor?  Yeah. Do you remember that? That little B Farmall.  Yeah. I think there was one when we lived over there when this place  was leased out for a few years, we had that old Fordson. An old Fordson  tractor, but then a B Farmall was really the basic first one here.  Do you remember when you got to drive it for the first time?  Yeah, I wasn   t very old. It had a place to sit on the left hand side, and it  was a fantastic row crop tractor, because the driver sat right over the  row. He   d ride on the side when we were laying corn behind. We   d  never stop at the end. It didn   t have a hydraulic system, it was run by leg  muscle and arm muscle. When we   d come to that end, he   d raise the  front cultivator up and I have my leg riding on the right panel on the  right hand side. As soon as we   d hit that, I   d raise the back cultivator up  and hit the brake and boy, we were back down going the other way. We  could really move.  What were some of the crops you remember growing on the farm?  Well, when we first started, we basically grew kaffir corn and cotton. If  you   ve never spent any time in the cotton fields     Quite a bit of corn, too. Corn, you drew it out as basically that was it:  kaffir corn, cotton, and corn. Later years, as we kind of got away from  the farm and our own dad   s health went downhill and everything, and  got changed over to wheat, it was more wheat. Those grow crops are  labor intensive, because they have to be cultivated. They don   t do that  now so much, but back then the rule of thumb was you cultivated and  maintained wheat control. Now they spray chemical.  Did you have to pick a lot of cotton growing up?  More than I liked.  11  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Finchum  Yes. There wasn   t anything worse than   I used to get kept out of school  for a couple weeks in November so we could pick the cotton. Down here  west of us, we would have ten acre plats on the Indian land and oh,  about Thanksgiving, my dad pretty well got it mostly out of there. He  said,    If you boys want to snap that, you can have it.    So we went over  that whole ten acres, and we got enough to buy that Remington Bolt  Action .22. I   ve still got it up there in the closet. Man, we shot more  squirrels with that thing. I was going back to the cotton. On June 9,  1943, our sister was born. In November, my mother went to the cotton  fields and she put her in that sack, and she drug her down that cotton  row picking cotton with the rest of us. That   s why these older farm  ladies like this was just wore out. When they got older in their sixties  and seventies, most of them didn   t make it to seventy, but they were just  literally worn out.  Tough life.  She started her day in here in the kitchen, and she finished it in here.  Whatever come in in between, that was just added on.  So she was a big partner in the happenings of the farm. She went out  there, too, and     It   s kind of the way it had to be. There was nobody waiting to hand you  something. If you wanted to eat, you grew your own, pretty much. You  could depend on some help from your neighbors, we weren   t totally  isolated. There weren   t the programs there are now to maintain you.  Now did your father have an outside job at all, or did he just farm?  He worked a little bit for the county, but he was mostly involved in the  farm. It was so labor intensive that he just didn   t have time, really. But  other than that, no. He worked at keeping us busy.  (Laughter) A very good pointer. Very good pointer.  Did he differentiate between the three boys and the girl?  Much less. Things had changed. During the time period from the forties  to the mid-fifties, things were changing an awful lot. Things become  more modern, and she didn   t really see the opportunities that we had.  Things had changed. And she was a girl. They didn   t expect her to work  like we did.  She helped with the canning and that type of thing?  12  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  She did some of that, yeah.  How would you get to school?  Feet.  We walked. The school was about three miles through that field.  Pretty close to three miles if you cut through that timber, as straight as a  crow flies, west. You had to take the axle road. It was probably around  three miles.  Was it one room?  One room schoolhouse named Star A Star.  Well, our folks went to school there. It   d been there since about 1909, or  somewhere around that     Somewhere in that time frame.  When Oklahoma became a state.  Yes, it was consolidated I think in 1956,    57,    58, something in there.  Pawnee or Glencoe, whichever one you chose. Where ever you lived at.  What   d you typically take for lunch?  Usually a piece of pork, a couple pieces of homemade bread and either a  piece of shoulder or piece of ham. We didn   t butcher much beef,  because we didn   t have no way to keep it, you know. And then some  homemade cake or a cinnamon roll.  It was pretty much the basic. Fortunately, after a few years, they got the  hot lunch program at the school, and that worked out very well. A lot of  times, I would never make it to school with my lunch because we   d cut  through the timber, and there were grass and weeds. My mom would put  it in a paper bag, and I wasn   t tall enough to get above the weeds and the  wetness of the stuff, and my bag would deteriorate. I   d take a bite or two  of what I had and ditch the rest, and I didn   t eat again until I got back  home in the evening. So those hot lunches, they were very good. We all  participated in the serving of the lunch. The students over there, they had  this sign sheet where we had to wash the dishes, dry the dishes and all  that stuff.  We had an excellent teacher. Her name was Mrs. Schmidt. She taught all  13  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  eight grades, and there was probably seventeen of us there. Teachers  complain now about school size. Well, look back at what some of those  teachers did back in the early days. But anyway, we had a lot of beans  and stuff. She   d actually put on a pot of beans on the great big old wood  stove, or it was coal fired, and she   d get those beans started early in the  morning and they   d be done by lunch. We   d have beans and some other  things, and when we got done, the students all washed our utensils and  plates and stuff. Taught you a little character, I guess. Nobody really  complained. They were all glad to get the meal. Nothing wrong with a  trade out.  When you were growing up, were your grandparents still alive?  On my mother   s side, they were, but my granddad Nimerick died in  1934. Mrs. Nimerick died in about 1938. We were out in California  when she passed away. But the older folks on my mother   s side, he  passed away in 1950, and she lived until 1981. She died right after our  mother died.  So did you celebrate the holidays?  Well, we had to, because his birthday is the Fourth of July. We could  always plan on whatever we was doing, haying or wherever we was at in  the field, we took off the Fourth, being Independence Day, and because  of his birthday. Our mother always made homemade angel food cake,  and she   d put a big old button in there. Whoever got the button had to  get him some. You don   t find anybody that   ll make a homemade angel  food cake now, and boy, it was good.  What about Christmas?  Yeah, we usually went to Grandma   s didn   t we?  Yeah, we usually went to our grandparents. We usually had a real nice  program over at our school. The one room schoolhouse and all, and that  was really a neat thing. Earlier in the year in the fall, they   d have a box  supper and the girls would all bring box suppers. The guys would bid on  them, and the moneys from that would be used to buy candies and fruit.  That   s what we got as a Christmas gift at school. Everybody got a bag of  assorted goods, fruit. Usually an apple, an orange and an assortment of  candy and stuff like that, which in those days was pretty hard to come  by. People didn   t really have a lot of money. Things were very tight.  Not too many fruit trees either, I don   t think.  Well, a lot of pear trees, not too many apples. There was quite a few  14  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  peaches, I guess, that we were growing in here. We used to have a pretty  nice orchard of peaches.  The neighbors over to the south had apricot, cherry and peaches. They  never sprayed them with any chemicals to keep the bugs off. You could  wait until those things would ripen on the tree. They   d pull those  apricots off, and man, they   d just melt in your mouth. Now you can go  to the store and they   ve been picked green, so they   re mushy.  Would your mother can some of those?  Yeah, when she could can them.  She canned about everything. We   ve got a cellar that   s right off out there  and like I said, when she passed away, that thing had I don   t know how  many jars of canned fruit down there that we finally had to dispose of.  Some of them had been there quite a while. She   d make beets, canned  beets. She had the best beet recipe. I   ve tried to find them somewhere in  the store. I   ve tried a lot of different brands, and nothing ever compares  to the way she fixed them. I don   t even know where the recipe went.  She used to put those pork sausages in a half gallon jar. She   d pour in a  little bit of hot lard, and then she   d put in a layer of sausage and put  some more lard in. It   d just be layered all the way to the top. We   d come  in from the cotton field, and she   d say,    Elton, go down to the cellar and  get me a jar of sausage.    Boy, you talk about good. Of course, it was  loaded with cholesterol. (Laughter) Man, packed in that hog lard. But  boy, when you   re hungry, you   re going to eat.  You work it off too, though, in those days.  There was quite a bit of difference back then. Everybody was so  physical that you could eat those high carb, high fat meals and never  gain a pound. I was a pretty skinny kid. You wouldn   t guess it now, but  when I was growing up, I was definitely not overweight.  In the farmhouse, where was your bedroom?  Upstairs. We had those two bedrooms upstairs. In later years, he added  this room here and he added a room on the back. Anything west of that  partition up there has been added. We had a separated room and sit out  there while we processed the milk. Then when he did the expansion, he  just kind of kept going west.  How would you stay warm in the winter?  15  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  Oh, that big old wood heating stove in there.  Upstairs, there was no heat where we slept, so it was pretty much the  same temperature it was outside. We used a lot of blankets, let me put it  that way.  There   s been times that water buckets sat right there about where that  microwave is. On the real cold winter nights, we   d get up the next  morning, we had a wooden bucket and we   d have to take the dipper and  there   d be a skim of ice on it. That   s how cold it got in the house. There  was no insulation in these houses. Windows and cold air. They   d always  fill the stove full of big chunks of wood before we went to bed, but by  about four o   clock in the morning that was pretty well burned out. It was  pretty cold, but you   d get acclimated to it.  It   s amazing that you do. Your body can do some amazing things with  hot and cool temperatures, once you get acclimated to what you   re living  in.  Did she make the quilts?  Yeah, she did that.  Yeah, she had the same living room suit for years. The younger boys  fought all the time. They were about the same size, so it wouldn   t be  nothing to see that divan go over backwards in there because they     (Laughter)  Rough and tumble was the word.  She became a member of the women   s home demonstration  club . She  learned how to tie those springs. She   d turn that divan up, and she went  through there and retied all those springs and attached them to the frame,  just like a new one. My dad always bought farm equipment. She didn   t  get to buy nothing in the house. It was tough.  So she belonged to a homemaker club?  Yes. She belonged to this home demonstration club and boy, she really  enjoyed it because they got a lot of information up there. The county  agent was running through, and then they had    I don   t remember how  many years ago that they started putting the women in there as home  demonstration in with the county agents.  Do you remember county agents coming out to the farm?  16  E. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Yeah, I can remember the county agents coming out and looking over  the crops and making recommendations on them. One of the big things  was my dad was one of the first ones to terrace. All this land was his.  We   d grow row crops and the erosion was terrible on it. He was one of  the first ones. Even the school lease where we lived on, he had it in  terraces and he was one of the first ones in the county right after, the  contour farming, to hold that water.  You   ve mentioned school easement a couple times. Is that extra acreage  added to your 160 or what?  No, there was 160 acres of school land that sits kind of there where Lone  Chimney Lake is now. It   s on the east side of that. My grandparents had  the lease since statehood. That was the place that when we came back  from California, this property here was under lease when they went out  there, and the lease wasn   t up so we lived over there. That   s what we  were talking about. We lived on that school land for probably three  years, something like that. Then the lease came up on this, and we  moved back over here.  So they owned a total of 160 acres?  Right, there   s 160 acres. There   s 160, and as Elton said there, they added  another eighty down here in about 1904.  The state of Oklahoma set aside so much land, and every area with a  school had to support the school, so there was one, two, three, four  quarters of school land over in that block.  I believe it was, yeah.  And then my grandmother and granddad had that one quarter, and we  lived on it. The thing I really have a problem with now is back in the  forties there was almost a house on every quarter, and everybody had  kids. Now, in the early fifties people started moving off     That   s probably true, yeah.  Then the big farmers started conglomerate, getting bigger, and the first  thing they did was come in there and tear the house down. The barn and  all that you put hay in, you know. It   s just amazing how the population  has dwindled.  Well, you have a resurge of population now, but these people really  aren   t farmers, they   re just people out living in the country. That   s fine  and all, everybody   s got the right to live, if they can afford it, where they  17  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  want. But it   s different times. Farming now is not like it used to be. The  main difference now is people will buy their milk and products that we  used to raise. Big difference there, I guess, is that we were self-sustainable,  and now people have to go to the store to be self-sustainable.  Well, you mentioned the terracing on the farm. Did your father institute  any other improvements? Build ponds   ?  Yeah, he had several ponds. Also, he was big on the Bermuda grass.  Taking those sorry hills and going back with Bermuda grass. Then he  gradually got rid of his farm land and bought more cattle.  Yeah, I   d say that was a major trend probably starting in the sixties,  when his health started failing and we were working elsewhere, was  converting all the tillable land to Bermuda base. Instead of having crops,  then you went to more beef.  So when you graduated from high school, you stayed in the area, or did  you go off and do something and come back?  Well, I went up to Tonkawa and went to Northern Oklahoma Junior  College for two years. I guess I considered I got all I needed after two  years, so I started working again, and I never did go back. After seven or  eight years, I went to work with Conoco, and I worked for thirty years  for Conoco up there. Then fortunately, I was able to retire, but I had to  put enough money aside that I could retire.  Well, I kind of followed him up to Northern Junior College up there  about three years later, and like I said, my primary interest wasn   t   studying . When I went up there, I was a jock. I was a pretty good ball  player, and I played football for two years up there, same as Elton. Elton  did the same. Of course, my grades weren   t one of my strong points, but  I did like chemistry. I laid out for a few years, and I went down to  Central State and finished my degree in chemistry. Then, I went to work  for Dowell, and then it evolved to Dowell Slumberger. I spent probably  about thirty-six years, maybe a little longer, working as a research  chemist for them. So, I had a good career.  So you had no desire early on to continue the farming?  Oh, I loved it, but I realized that if you couldn   t start with several  hundred acres, you might as well forget it. I worked with a farmer up in  Tonkawa quite often, because they were tickled to death to get  somebody to work. But it   s the same way today. It   s hard to find people  that will work and know how to wire something together to keep on  18  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  going. But no, I would have loved to. I   d have been broke, though,  because I have a bad habit of putting money back into land. You better  be making good money. Since we   ve been running this, we   ve added  three ponds. That   s what we do, anything that   s made off of it, we put it  right back into the land.  We   ve probably cleared twenty, thirty acres of timber. Not all of it. We  leave enough along the creek lines and certain areas, but the open areas  that we wanted cleared, we cleared those. Then we maintain them  mostly by chemical spray.  What year did the farm come back into your hands?  It was about 1985. Our mother passed away in 1981, and so about three  years later, the younger brother and sister really weren   t interested in it,  so we purchased their part from them and it   s been tended by hands  since probably about 1985.  So when you took over the farm, what did you have in mind? What did  you start doing to the land, start raising, or did you keep going the way  of cattle?  Yeah, we   d run summer calves, that   s what they   d call them, grass  calves. Basically, we didn   t change a whole lot. A friend of Kenny   s had  been renting it for several years, and so it was in    94 that we started  running.  Right. We effectively started running the operation ourselves in    94. We  run forty to fifty steers throughout the spring and summer and fall every  year. We   ve done that since that period of time. We put on probably  18,000 to 20,000 pounds of weight in steers every year.  At least 300 pounds per steer on there.  We had a lot of Bermuda  grass . The Bermuda is really an excellent  protein builder, and the livestock do very good. They do really good.  Well, in the early days, was there a well? Where is your water source for  the house?  It   s right down there, and it   s still there. It   s a well. It   s been a good  well.  So you   re doing this in retirement, right?  Yes.  19  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  You   ve got to have something to do.  That   s a lot of work for retirement.  Well, it   s fun.  Do you have outside help that you hire, or is it just you two?  It   s very limited. If we   ve got some special needs for a welder or  something like that, that   s about the main thing we need is some welding  done or something.  How many acres do you own today?  It   s 240. There   s this 160 and the eighty that joins it down here on this  side.  How often do you check the fence row?  We have to do it every spring before we put calves out. (Laughs) Deer  run through them, you know, and trees fall on them.  It   s always something that breaks.  A lot of these wires have been here    Some of the posts, I help put them  in in 1952 when I was in high school. It goes around this fence line  around the outside, and some of those posts are still there.  Yeah, those were creosote posts that you could get. They were warranted  for forty years, and some of them have been there sixty. So, they were  well worth their money. Prior to that time, we used to cut native trees  like post oak and split them. Put those in the fence line and replace a  post with those. The terrible thing about that, they   d last three to five  years and they   d rot off. It was just a constant labor struggle, you know.  You   ve got to get rid of that. When you run out of help, as Dad did when  we moved away and started other jobs, he figured he better put  something that would last a little longer, so we started replacing all those  posts with creosote.  How long would that take you to check the whole 240?  We usually break it up in segments. We do a little bit until we get tired.  Out in the open areas is not bad. On the back side, it runs a mile that   s  on the side of a creek bank. That   s the tough one.  20  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  That   s a lot of up and down hills, so we   ve got a lot of four wheeler  trails in there that we   ve cut so we can ride up to the fence line, we don   t  have to carry our supplies in. I   ve gotten passed that carrying stage here  in the last ten years, you know.  Well, I guess back in the day you   d do it by horse?  You can do it horse, or just physically carry them in. When you were  younger, you could throw them over your shoulder and carry them back  in there.  There was one thing that I didn   t mention. The neighbors around here in  the winter time, November, they   d all start cutting these oak trees about  this big around, or this big around, pile them up. Since Dad had three  boys, and he had a buzz saw that went on the back of the tractor, we   d  drag that thing around on Saturday morning around the neighborhood  and cut these people   s wood for them. When we   d leave, there   d be a  pile of wood almost as tall as this kitchen, piled up out there. They may  have given him a chicken or something like that, but there was never any  money that changed hands.  Yeah, that was very dangerous work, because the blade was open blade,  no protection. Just an open blade. The blade was what, about three foot  across? About two and a half foot across, the open blade, and you just  worked the wood through it, you know. Elton was one of the primary  catchers in that. The guy that catches the wood on the other side of the  blades, when they   d cut it in length. You get in that blade, you   re  history. People took a lot more risks back then. It was a lot of jobs that  were very dangerous that we did around here, but we   ve still got  everything pretty much that we started with, so I   d say we were very  fortunate.  Well, it sounds like you did a lot of work growing up on the farm. Did  you have any time for fun?  Saturday afternoon was about the only time.  And what would you do?  Dad would give us a quarter and send us up to the local theatre to have  an afternoon of fun.  Was it a dime to go to the show?  About ten cents would get us in the show.  21  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  And then the popcorn was what, a nickel a bag?  A nickel a bag, or something like that.  And then you could get a little Coke for another nickel, and that left you  with a nickel.  (Laughs) Yeah.  And that would be Pawnee?  That was Pawnee, yeah.  Do you remember a couple of the movies?  Oh, boy. I   ll tell some of the cowboys.  Roy Rogers, Gene Autry, Lance Larue  So Sunday afternoons, you   d have to work, too?  Oh, yeah. That   s pretty much the    These cattle, the milk cows have to  be milked every day and twice today, whether you   re milking them by  hand or if you   ve got a machine, they still need to be milked. That was  part of the cycle of self-sustainability.  I used to be amazed that these farm ladies would go to grocery store.  That   s usually where they went first, because they   d take their cream  and eggs to town and get their money and go to the grocery store. When  they   d get done, they just set their groceries over there and write their  name on them. There   d be an area with nothing but just sacks of  groceries. Nobody was worried about somebody stealing their groceries.  They didn   t have stealing back then.  Then they   d go to the dime store or the dry goods store if they needed  something else. About three o   clock in the afternoon, those farm ladies  would just start going back to grocery stores. They   d have their  husbands drive up front, and they   d carry the two or three sacks of  groceries out and then head back to the farm.  Do you remember any hobos or gypsies coming through?  I can just remember some people looking for something to eat in the  early forties. Everybody thinks the Depression was over with in the  thirties, but it really wasn   t in the rural areas. It was in the fifties,  22  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  because it was pretty tough in the forties and even the early fifties. There  wasn   t any money, and these people didn   t have a whole lot of money to  spend, so it was still really tough.  Well, I think a lot of the things that we hadn   t ever addressed is that a lot  of things were rationed during World War II. I guess the most  memorable thing that I remember that my mother used to do is you  couldn   t get sugar. We raised a lot of watermelons. I   d see her take the  watermelon hearts and she   d render those. Just cook them down to kind  of a syrup, and she   d use that to make cakes and pies with, and that was  her sugar. Pretty creative on her part, really.  We used to rob bee trees, too.  Oh, yeah. We used a lot of honey, wild honey. I call it wild because it  came out of trees. My dad was really good. He   d get around water  somewhere in the spring, and he   d watch the honey bees come in to get  water and he   d watch what direction they flew. He   d trail them down to  where their home was, and a certain time of year we   d just cut the tree  down, split her open and take the honey. That   s another way how we  wound up with some sugar source.  How did your father learn how to be a farmer?  I guess he grew up being a farmer. He was born into a farm. His dad was  a farmer and being the youngest one, he was the last one to leave, so he  wound up with the place, I guess. His older brothers left and went other  places and never came back much.  So he really felt tied to the land.  More or less, yeah.  Elton, I want to take a little detour. How did your family travel to  California? Did they have a car?  Oh yeah, they had an old Model T, I think is what they went out there in.  Model A, it was a Model A, I think.  Do you remember the trip?  No. The only thing I can remember about the California trip was when  my grandmother Nimerick passed away, I can remember pulling myself  up on the casket and looking in. That   s the only thing I can remember.  It   s amazing that something like that would stay with you all of your  23  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  life. I remember the flag at the front of the casket, but that   s the only  thing I remember about her, really. And then we brought him home.  (Laughter) I was what they call an add-on.  Well, your mother sewed, did she have a treadle? A foot pedal     Foot pedal, yeah. A Singer foot pedal.  Tell her about your experience on that.  I had this bad habit. I used to like to get in there and play with that thing.  I   d get on that treadle and boy, I   d wind her up and just have her  jumping. My dad finally got enough of that, so he got him a switch and  he said,    Okay, you like to run it, let   s see how long you can run it.     Boy, every time I   d try to stop, he   d whip my rear end with that switch. I  never did do that again. I never messed with that machine again. He had  a good way of breaking your habits.  What were some other discipline tactics he had?  That switch worked pretty good.  He wasn   t afraid to use that switch. We were talking to a neighbor kid  our age and he said,    If the DHS  Department of Human Services  had  been around when we were kids, they would have locked our dads up  because they believed in whipping.     We didn   t have a choice because the family, if you want to look at it,  we   re just a bunch of employees. Really, I mean, for sustainability on  the farm, everybody had a job to do. If you didn   t do your job, there was  a break in the chain and things didn   t get done. People don   t understand  that, and that   s probably why the discipline was so strict back there  because it was a necessity that these jobs be done. If you   re goofing off,  they didn   t get done, and you   d wind up with a kick in the rear end or a  cuff upside the head or a switch across your rear end.  Did your mother do any of that, or was it mostly your father?  It was mostly my dad. If it got to be excessive, she would stop it.  Did she make homemade ice cream?  Oh, yeah.  We always had to wait until wintertime to do it. We   d go down to the  24  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  spring over here north of us and carry back a couple five-gallon buckets  of icicles.  Those icicles, there was some neat ones over there coming over that  little falls there. They   d be long and slender. You   d break them off and  put them in a five gallon bucket.  We   d sit around that wood stove and just chatter.  Eat ice cream.  That   s basically the only time we got to make ice cream, because it was  in the early fifties, late forties. There was no way to preserve the ice.  Also, we used to raise a small patch of peanuts. We   d put them up in the  hay loft and let them dry, and that was another real tasty wintertime  treat, roasted peanuts.  Did you have any home remedies that they would use if, say you got  stung by a bee or if you got sick?  I   m not sure exactly what, but I remember kerosene and sugar.  Whenever we slept upstairs, Kenny had a lot of problems with croup.  Boy, I tell you, it sounded like he was choking to death. Here mom  would come up that stairway and she   d mix up some, sometimes she   d  use turpentine and     I don   t know what it was, but it wasn   t very much. Very little.  All of us had to have a teaspoon full of that sugar and turpentine, but it  dealt with the croup. I don   t know whether he was afraid to croup or if  he was afraid to get some more.  (Laughter) It didn   t sound like a very good deal once I got older.  I think I was probably about eleven or twelve years old before I ever  went to the doctor for a physical, and that was because of 4-H club. I had  to take a physical for one of their contests. But other than that, you got  treated at home. You just didn   t run to town to the doctor. Those older  ladies were pretty good at concocting some kinds of treatments.  Sometimes psychology worked better than the treatment itself?  Could have been some of that.  So were both of you involved in 4-H?  25  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  Yes.  And what were your projects? What did you show?  I had pigs, sheep and that was it. We never got into beef.  Well, the other thing was we did some grains. At the county fair, we  showed corn and kaffir corn and stuff like that. Basically it was hogs.  My dad, like I said, he really enjoyed and he had some top quality hogs.  He generally ended up with a grand champ or champ. He did pretty well  with them.  So when was the last time you went to a county fair?  Oh, it   s probably been ten years or longer. When you get to where you  can   t walk too good, you kind of avoid those places. I loved to go to the  ones in Oklahoma City and Tulsa. The county fairs are just about faded  out because they don   t have any more money to pay the premiums and  this and that. The smaller counties really have some hard times. The  county fair is not what it used to be, and it   s all because of money.  Did your parents trust the bank, or did they try to keep their money  hidden somewhere on the land?  As far as I can remember, they went up here at the First National. I  believe they put it there.  Either they didn   t have anything to lose     Didn   t have a lot to put in anyway, probably. If I remember right.  We talked about various things, but we haven   t talked about plumbing.  An outhouse versus indoor, or was that an issue?  What was that, 1957? 1956 when they put water in the house?  Yeah, I think it was pretty much outhouse until    57, something like that.  We were away from home, the men, and Shirley, our sister, was growing  up and he felt like she needed a place to take a bath, you know.  A galvanized tub.  (Laughter) What number tub did you use?  26  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  It was that long. It wasn   t as big as this table, but it was one of those  oblong ones. Since I was the oldest, I always had to carry the water and  then I was last. They started with the little one, the next one and then the  last one.  We got plenty of use out of that water.  Yeah, you only use one change of water, as bad as it sounds.  Where would the tub be? On the porch or in the house?  In the wintertime, it would be sitting here in the kitchen where it was  kind of halfway warm. It still wasn   t too warm in here, but it was better  than being outside.  Was that a daily experience or once a week?  Once a week, wasn   t it? We usually got a Saturday night bath, whether  we needed it or not.  Before the movie or after?  After. Everybody got acclimated to the order.  A lot of us were in the same boat.  In the outhouse, what catalogs were out there?  Monkey  Montgomery  Ward.  Yeah, Monkey Ward, I   d have to say.  Did you try to leave the shiny pages for the younger kids?  Yeah, you try to do the best you can.  Can you talk a little bit about how the area around the farm has  changed through the years?  Well, most of it was row crops. In the forties, everybody raised row  crops, and then gradually they started going to wheat, vetch and finally,  the row crops pretty well disappeared. Corn, a lot of corn. Corn  disappeared here for, what, thirty years? Then all a sudden they started  raising this upland corn and made tremendous crops out of it, because of  improved seed and drought resistance materials. Of course, we never  had it per bushel or acre like they   ve got today.  27  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  I guess in the early days, you had a lot of Indian land surrounding you.  Have your neighbors changed a lot over the years?  No, they really haven   t.  I think just people died off. All the people my parents    age are gone.  Most of that land is new ownership, except for some established people  like the guy across the road over here. But a lot of the people in the  south and nearly all these people, except for the Indian land, some of the  Indian land is still owned by people in the family. There   s a lot of people  out here that are just out here. They   re not farmers, they   re just out here.  They   ve got horses.  It   s more recreational than it is true farming.  So what do you see happening coming up now, in the future, and into the  next one hundred years?  I think we talked a little bit about that earlier. I think the next generation  probably doesn   t have as much desire maybe to maintain as what we did,  because they don   t have the time or didn   t spend the time on the land  during the time it was developing. So I don   t know. I have mixed  emotions about that. It may be more of what   s going on now with the  rest of the area, people living out in the country and not tilling or  utilizing the land other than hunting or fishing.  What do you see happening to the Nimerick farm in the next hundred  years?  I wouldn   t even want to speculate really, because I just don   t have a  good feel for it.  Do you have kin that you plan on leaving it to?  Yeah, I have a boy and a girl that I plan on my share being left to them.  Are they interested in the farm?  Well, they are, but they are away from here.  Yeah. I have a daughter and I   ll be leaving my part of it to her. She   s the  next in line, you know, so    I think they realize that we   d like to see it  kept.  28  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  That   s our input. That   s been my input, anyway, that it   s been a  hundred-plus years, and it   d be really nice if we kept it in the family for  some time. They all love to come up. Everybody comes here and just  loves it. There   s plenty of fishing, and we have plenty of really neat  ponds and some good hunting. Just to get out and drive around over the  place, to me, it   s invigorating. Especially the sunrise and sunset, it   s just  a beautiful place to be.  In a few more years, it   s going to be even less isolated because of people  moving from the heavy populated area. In the last ten years, you  wouldn   t believe in a radius of five or six miles in Pawnee how many  people come from California and built nice homes and bought forty,  maybe eighty, maybe twenty because they want out of the rat race that  they   re in.  They can sell their land out there for a very good price. They come back  here and buy twice what they had out there. That   s the reason that a lot  of them are getting out of there. The taxes are humungous in these other  states, and they   re getting this way here, but everybody is trying to get  away from where they   ve been in some of these areas. I   ve been from  the city myself a quite a bit of the time. I can understand what they   re  saying. I   ve been both places. I am both places every week.  How often do you get back to this?  I spend about fifty percent of my time up here.  That   s why everything is still hooked up. This is still equipped just like  our mother had it. Cook top oven. It   s basically just like it was when she  passed away. We just maintain it. We never turn the utilities off.  Everything still works and we try to keep it that way.  Like I said, we have our families come up. We try to have a family  reunion up here once a year on Memorial Day. Our clan is diminishing  in numbers. In May, we usually get most folks up here, and they always  have a lot of fun. There are a lot of places to fish, and it   s nice to see  everybody. It used to be the old saying, it seems like the only time we  got together is only weddings and funerals. The weddings are fine, but  the other part is not much fun.  Before we got started you were telling us some memories about the  window. Do you want to say that on tape?  Like I said, basically our mother was always in here working in the  kitchen. This was her domain. She   d always come to that window and  holler one of our names and say,    Dinner is ready     or    Dinner is on the  29  K. Nimerick  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Finchum  E. Nimerick  Finchum  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  K. Nimerick  table     Man, your mouth would just start watering. You knew whatever  she fixed, it was good.  Very fine cook.  She really perfected her cooking. And like I said, belonging to the home  demonstration clubs, she learned a lot of new techniques and she applied  them.  How did she do her laundry?  There for a while, I can remember the first Monkey Ward washing  machine they bought. It would have been about 1941, because we were  living over here and it had a little gas ring motor on it. I stuck my hand  in the ringer, not knowing what a ringer was. I soon learned. The dryer  still sits out there now. We got rid of the washing machine. The dryer is  still out there, the electric dryer.  I guess back in the day though, she probably hung things on the line?  Oh, yeah. Clothesline is still out there.  Winter, it didn   t matter?  They   ll freeze dry.  Well you   ve gone off, you   ve had careers and you   ve come back to the  land. Why was it important, in closing, to make your way back to the  land and keep this going in your family?  Well, my intention was, I took early retirement with the idea that I was  going to move back up here and live. Spend my last years here. My wife  has rheumatoid arthritis real bad and that didn   t work too good, because  we spent all of our time going to the Stillwater Y MCA  and it was just  better that we moved back to where we could get back to the water  exercise and doctors without spending the half a day. So, I had to give  up that dream, but it was a good one. Like I said, it   s such a pretty place.  Over the years, we   ve done so much stuff to improve it that I just hated  that. I just can   t stand to see it rented out, because people don   t take care  of nothing. They just try to destroy it.  Ken, you could   ve gone anywhere. Why did you decide to come on back  to the land?  Even though I was working in Tulsa all those years, I really never got  away from the farm, because my wife and I were up here early on. My  30  Nykolaiszyn  E. Nimerick  K. Nimerick  Nykolaiszyn  dad always had this unique quality that come about Friday evening, I   d  get a phone call from my dad, and I knew what was coming. He said,     What are you doing tomorrow?    I said,    Well, what have you got  planned?    He   d already have something planned. We   d have some cattle  we need to work on or something. He always had these chores, but I  didn   t mind that because I knew that I was going to get a great meal. My  mom made great fried chicken, so it was a trade out. I was up here pretty  much on a weekly basis most of the time, and I enjoyed being up here,  basically. Whether I   m working or if I   m sitting out there taking a nap  on my four-wheeler or something, it   s just a great environment. You just  can   t get the country out of the boy, I guess.  Well, is there anything that you   d like to add before we look at your  pictures? Elton? Ken?  I think we pretty well covered everything, unless you want to add  something.  Right now, I don   t have anything that jumps out. We had a lot of the  neat stuff anyway.  Well, I appreciate you spending some time with us today and  participating in our project documenting the history of your land here.  -------  ------- 
