 Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  Today is May 26, 2009. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma  State University Library, and we   re conducting an oral history project  entitled Centennial Farm Families. Today we   re in Guthrie, Oklahoma  with Pearl and Leon Jarred of the E.E. Birch Farm. Thank you for  having us today.  Thank you for coming.  Thank you.  And Leon is Pearl   s son.  My son.  Oldest son.  Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about the land, how your  family came to have it.  They bought the land. It was after    89. It had to be after    89. My dad   s  mother wasn   t born until    89 so it had to be after that. But he  accumulated this Birch Farm, right here, and this 160 acres we   re on.  And he also acquired 80 acres across the road and then on the other side  of it and then another one south here. It just stayed in the family and  went from E.E. Birch to her dad Hal Birch. It was what, Harry?  Harry Earl.  Harry Earl Birch. And it stayed in that family. Then he gave 80 acres to  all his daughters and 160 to the son here. This 160 here.  So how many daughters were there?  5  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jared  L. Jared  Finchum  L. Jared  Five.  Five daughters and one son.  So the total acreage at one point was     Altogether would be two, three, four, five, six, 480   510 acres all total.  But the original was just 80?  We   re not sure, but I think this 160 came as a package. It was originally  bought as this 160. He acquired the other 80s around it.  And then how many brothers and sisters did your father have?  He didn   t have any, did he?  I don   t know. You didn   t have any uncles?  Well, I don   t think so. There   s several of the Birches E.E.   s.  But your daddy, Grandpa Birch.  He was the only child I think.  Okay.  That   s how most of the land stayed with him then.  Right.  Well do you know what was raised on the farm early on?  They had corn down here. I can remember having corn and cotton down  here in the bottom. Quite a bit   .  Cotton I think early on because this house was built later. The original  house (and she   s got some pictures of it), this porch that   s out here on  the west side of the house was the original porch for the original  building that was built here. So they stacked their bales of cotton all over  this porch out here. And when they tore that house down to build this  house, they kept that same porch and just put it all together.  That   s neat.  But they raised cotton, and then they went to corn when they started  6  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  milking cows out here and ran a dairy, a small dairy. They raised corn  and put up in silage out here in this east lot, east of the barn there. And  then over the years as that kind of dwindled and the restrictions were put  on everybody with the dairies then they went to wheat farming and to  this day we   ve got wheat and alfalfa and various things around. Used to  be a lot of barley and oats planted but now it   s mainly wheat.  What   s the water source for the property?  We   ve got a well out here for this house here. But then of course this  creek runs through here.  Probably why they picked it then if it has a creek.  Yeah, oh yeah. But this well, we run cattle and water cattle all year  round here and it   s still pumping water.  Is there a pond?  Jim said he remembered when that windmill up there, you know there   s  that concrete wind mill up there, they   d fill that and it   d pump clear  down here to the cattle.  Okay, before my time. Where the well is for the water for this house,  there is another windmill up there, and I guess there would have been  another well up there at one time. And clear over on the far corner of  this 160 there   s an old well over there that   s just lost in the brush.  Whether it was a wind mill or a pump well I don   t know plus this well  out here in the front of the house there   s   if I get it just right and get it  going good I can get a little bit of water out of it.  That was here with E.E. Birch, now.  Yeah that one was.  That one was.  That pump is still out there. I   ve got a picture of him standing by it.  When they were raising cotton, did they have workers that came in to  help?  Oh yeah, they had a lot of colored people come in and pick cotton.  Did they live on the land too, or just pass through?  7  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Just people that granddad knew. He always loaned money to colored  people. I   ve got a lot of notes where he signed them, where he had given  them money and stuff like that; a lot of papers on that.  He moved houses for a living also. He was a house mover. And it was  all done with mules. My dad, if he was alive he could tell you all about  the mules because he liked the mules, you know.  Do you have any mules on the farm today?  No, sure don   t. They went with the time, you know, when they moved a  house there were mules. And you don   t see many houses moved  anymore.  When you would take cotton to market, you would go to Guthrie? Would  that be the closest town?  Oh yes. They had a cotton gin.  Yeah, there was a cotton gin down there south of Oklahoma Street in  Guthrie, down here. And they   d take it to Gooch   s cotton gin, wasn   t it?  Uh-huh.  Gooch?  Uh-huh.  Gooch.  And in fact, the county treasurer is Gooch. The same family. Her  husband   s granddad had that, I think it was.  So when you were young, you lived here? Not in this house but on the  farm?  Oh, no I didn   t live out here. I came out here and stayed.  Where did you live?  Up there. 414 South Pine, I think.  Your daddy and mom lived up there?  Yes, that   s where I was raised. Born and raised.  8  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Okay, okay. I thought you were born out here.  No. I was born at 414 South Pine.  Did you spend a lot of time out here?  Yes, I did. I did.  Did you have any chores that you had to do out here on the farm?  Not that I know any special ones. I tried to do what I could. But I don   t  know. You know after 88 years, I don   t remember a lot of stuff.  Well do you remember what you might have done for fun?  No     Sure you do. How about the camp?  The camp? Oh well that was a   .  Didn   t you do that for fun?  Yes. We used to have a   there were the four B   s. Birch, Benson   I  don   t know, two or three Benson   s and two or three Birches. We had a  big camp up on the Cimarron River. They   d go up there on the  weekends and camp out and play croquet and stuff like that. Go  swimming. Then we finally moved it down across the creek here. It used  to be all in timber but then we had a man come and cut all the timber off  of it.  But originally, originally this down here there was a gray building set  down there. The fireplace is still setting there and they kept that in  Bermuda grass. It was always shaded some and everything. In fact I   ve  got the old roller out here. Granddad loved to play croquet. He had the  roller out here and they   d go down there and roll that until it was level,  over and over and over. They played croquet down there. In fact when I  was born   I was born in    44. You know I can remember staying down  there as a kid. They had bunk beds on either side of the room, they had a  wood stove in the middle and they had a fireplace also. And they would  meet down there. With her having five sisters and a brother, when we  had a family picnic we had a big one.  A lot of people.  A lot of people would show up and get down there and pitch horseshoes  9  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  and play croquet and stuff like that. But early on   I   d forgotten about  the camp up on the Cimarron but yes, I had heard about that. Sure had.  Anything else you   d do?  I remember going swimming up in the river up there and lost my  birthstone ring. I had my amethyst and I lost it off my finger and never  did find it.  Hadn   t heard that story.  I remember that because it broke my heart. I think Mom and Daddy gave  that to me for my birthday.  Well, where did you go to school?  I went to Capitol School up here in Guthrie. And from there I went to  Fogarty. And then I went to high school, graduated from high school in     38. Then I went to OSU one year to college. And then got married and  have been working ever since then.  You never went up here to school at the corner?  No, I never did go up there.  Was it up there when you were a kid?  Mm-hmm.  Was it? Okay.  Yes.  How did you get to school?  I suppose they took me. I didn   t walk or anything. But then I know when  I lived up on Pine and went to Fogarty   now Capitol school was closer  to where I lived. But when I went to Fogarty I skated. We   d skate to  school. A bunch of us out there, we always skated to school. We didn   t  have bicycles or cars or anything like that.  You graduated in    38, so you managed to get through the depression  without too much trouble?  No, I didn   t have any trouble. (Laughter) Got married in    42. Been  married 56-some years before he passed away four years ago.  10  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  On the original farm, what other buildings were there?  Oh I   ve got the pictures of that. Well out here there used to be a corn  crib. A little shed that they built out here, they kept all their corn in it  when they got it picked down there in the field. And then they had  another one where they   d hang their pork and beef. They always did  their own butchering here. My husband, they butchered all the time.  Even after Granddad Birch passed away he always did the butchering.  They had a smokehouse?  Yes, we had cows.  Smokehouse?  Yes, they had a smokehouse.  I remember there was a guy up here that lived up on the corner and over  a little bit. He was along about Dad   s age, maybe a little bit older. He  was from Arkansas. He and his brothers ran around with Dad out here.  And they would butcher eight or ten hogs at a time. Not just for this  family, but for other people. Yes, butchering was a big thing.  Did you have to do that in cold weather? Cooler weather?  Yes, January 1st.  January 1st.  Right around there. We did it until 15 years ago we still butchered. I  love it, I really do.  In fact I   ve got a grinder, a saw and everything out here in the shed.  Make sausage?  Uh-huh.  Do you have your own recipe?  Oh, I don   t know whether I have it or not. Probably had. But I think I do  have that recipe.  I know you do.  I think I do.  11  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Well, I noticed there   s an old building right behind the house that looked  like it may have been a cellar or     There   s a cellar underneath the house. I can   t remember whether that  came off of the old house around here or where that came from. I   ve got  pictures like I say of the old house here. I don   t know when you want to  look at them.  At the end she said.  At the end.  Yes. While Daddy was building this house, it   s my understanding and  you correct me if I   m wrong. Dad lived in that house and off to the north  side of it was another little building there   it   s no longer there. But they  kind of lived in this house as small as it is. He lived out back of that until  they got this one built to move in here. And then after the family moved  in here, her and her dad and her brothers and sisters and then Dad got the  bigger part of that above the cellar.  The other part was moved over to my brother-in-law   s over here across  the creek where he has a lot down there with cattle and stuff.  But the original barn is still out here, the original building. And it   s, of  course, had tin put on it and various things like that and added on to  where they put the milk barn on. The old part of it is kind of a lean-to to  the side of that, that   s gone. Another building that was here originally is  the chicken house and unbelievably it was moved here years ago. I can   t  imagine anybody moving a chicken house. And they moved it from up  on 400 block of Pine where she was talking about she was raised. And  the granary out there, we   re not real sure about when it come to be,  about whether somebody built it here or whether it was moved in. Do  you recall? Still don   t recall.  But the original barn out there, like I say, we put tin on it. But when you  go in there there   s a stairway up to the loft, that   s where they always  kept the hay. And then there   s an opening at the west end there that they  could throw the hay off or pull it back in there when they loaded and  unloaded it. But it   s closed up now with that tin over it. But you can still  go inside and climb up the steps to the loft. His grandkids, when they  come out that   s the first thing they do is play up in that loft.  They also raised a lot of grain around here that they shocked   oats and  stuff like that   with the old binder which pulled behind the mule and  picked up and that had a string wrapped around with twine, you know.  And then you   d go out   I remember doing that as a kid. Go out with  12  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  pitchforks and put these shocks and just lean them together until it was  all over the field. You   ve probably seen that at other farms, haven   t you?  Not yet.  Oh really?  And they go around in the wagon and pick them up? And then do what?  Feed them. That   s what fed your   well you put up hay, you didn   t have  balers back then.  Okay. No squares or round bales?  Oh no, you used a binder. We still see them in pastures around put out to  rest, you know. The old binders.  We see some equipment and we   re not sure what it is. So with four or  five sisters, where did they get the help? Just one brother couldn   t do all  the chores.  And this brother had both his legs amputated at the first of the year and  he passed away about a month ago.  Well what about the sisters then?  Well I have a sister over here that lives in a trailer house with her  grandson and she   s 96. Then I have one down at Wynnewood and she   s  the youngest one. And me. And that   s the three that   s left.  So does the original property still belong to all the family members  then?  Uh-huh.  Except the 30 acres north of town and 180 south of town. That was sold  a few years back.  That   s right.  But the rest of it, this 160 and the two 80s there and the one south here  are all still in the family.  And what do you raise today. Just cattle?  Wheat.  13  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Wheat and cattle. And chickens or guineas?  Guineas.  Guineas. Well I had an operation two years ago. And I had chickens.  I   ve always had chickens here. I wasn   t able to do anything and I sold  the chickens. And then he raised guineas. So I go up there every night  and shut them up now. But no, I had cancer of the bladder and they  removed half of my bladder. I just was under the weather. And then my  knees   both of them swell so big I can   t hardly stand up on them and  walk.  But she always had chickens, I mean from the time she was little.  Always had chickens.  Even up on north Pine, they had chickens. I can remember butchering  chickens out here. You know, hanging them up on the clothesline and..  Cut their necks.  Yup.  Did you make chicken and dumplings then?  Oh, yes.  Chickens and noodles more. We always had more noodles.  Yes, noodles. I don   t think I ever made any dumplings to speak of. I  don   t think I   ve ever eaten any chicken and dumplings.  She still makes a good noodle.  Yes, I still make noodles. But my daughter lives in Stroud and she brings  me chicken eggs, so I have plenty of chicken eggs.  If you raised them, did you sell them? The eggs?  No. Never did.  Just enough for your own use.  Just to use.  And she would scramble them and give them to dogs and cats all the  14  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  time. Yes. Never went to waste. I   d come in the back door and there   d  be a skillet of scrambled eggs there that wasn   t eaten and I knew the  dogs were going to eat it or the cats. And then Mom got started on the  Guineas.  They say they make good guard dogs.  They are. Last year I hatched 50 or 60 at my house. The owls have got  them down to 16 now, that   s all I got left. The darned owls just get the  guineas and I don   t know why but my fertility rate on the eggs is not but  about 50 . I found a nest out here now that I told her while ago I was  going to bring some eggs in here. I   d hate to put them in an incubator  and wait four weeks and none of them hatch. Their shell is so hard that  you can   t hardly crack it. So consequently it   s real hard to be able to  candle them to see if there   s anything in them. But I like to fool with  them, I like to watch them. And they   re good. They get more ticks than  anything else. They   re just good, guineas are. They   re crazy, but I like  them.  When you were younger did you participate in 4-H or FFA?  Nope. You know, I didn   t. Out here we were always told if you   re going  to participate in any school projects then you walk home because we got  a dairy to milk and farming to do. So we didn   t participate in any sports  or anything like that. Just get on the bus and get right after it.  Do you remember when electricity came to the farm?  No, not really. I remember using coal oil lamps, I know that. But I don   t  know when electricity came down here.  Well how would they heat the house before?  We had wood stoves. We had a wood stove sitting right there in the  corner.  When we moved out here, her and Dad, me and my brother, not the 80  across but the other 80, that was the one that her dad gave her. I  remember living over there and I went all through high school and we  didn   t have a bathroom over there until my senior year. And then after I  got out there, why then I went into the army. I remember living there  and when we lived in town we didn   t have hot water or anything like  that. You   d boil it on the stove to get it warm.  How would you do your laundry in the early days?  15  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L, Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  I went in town and did them there. I had some friends, the Fagans, and I  always went there and did my laundry. She   s still alive but he passed  away. In fact she still goes to our church.  I don   t remember all that.  Yes. I   d go down to the basement to wash. That was a mess. You know,  carrying your clothes up and down the     Was it the old ringer washer?  Yes, it was. You know, it wasn   t nice all the time, but then it   s been a  long time.  When you and your husband were farming, did he have a job off the  farm?  He was a carpenter a lot. He did a lot of carpenter work.  He worked in the oil field early on.  To start with, then he did carpenter work.  This Hill addition, he built like 90 houses in there. And her brother, he  was a carpenter and then her brother-in-law was a carpenter. So all three  of them took up carpentry. When they saw that farming was going to get  rougher and rougher, they all turned to carpentry to make a living.  But kept the land.  Kept the land, you bet.  That   s right.  When you went to OSU what was your major?  Stenography. Business. I don   t know how come I didn   t go on with it.  But I got a job in town I guess it was, working for a lawyer. So I just  took it and I worked in town with the bank and as a teller and I worked  at the children   s home, the Masonic Children   s Home, and as a  secretary. Just different jobs.  The print shop. Masonic Print Shop.  The Masonic Print shop.  16  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  And then came home and did more work?  Yes, that   s right.  Put out a garden just for yourself?  Yes, that   s right.  What were holidays like back in the old days?  Just another day I think. I don   t think we ever did anything. You know,  just the same old thing. Just like another day.  And how many children do you have?  I have three. This one, and another son and my daughter lives in Stroud;  she   s a school teacher. She lives out in the country there and she raises  chickens. Oh, she has over 150 layers. She gathers eggs every night and  just has got every one of them sold. I don   t know how many eggs she  does get every night.  So farming   s still in her blood.  Yes it is. That   s right. I talked to her last night a while. Had all of her  kids there at home and his too over the weekend so she was real busy.  But she was up here at Mother   s Day and brought dinner, her and her  daughter.  Do you remember having any county extension workers come out to the  farm to show you how to do anything particular?  No, not that I can recall.  Did you have to do any conservation efforts like terrace the land or  anything like that?  No, not since they   ve been over here. You know, they were still in the  process of doing a lot of terracing. Like this creek here, this all floods  down here and you can   t get any assistance to straighten this creek out,  and it   s totally prohibitive to hire someone to do it. They started projects  and then just quit. And part of it was when they came in with I-35 the  land on the other side of us over here, they straightened the creek out. So  it   s straight right there and Interstate-35 crosses it. Well when it gets  here then it starts this and then it wants to cut across and it does that all  the way around to the Cimarron. And now you can   t even go and get  anybody to talk about it. It   s one of those things. Yes, we   d love to have  17  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  this straightened out. It   d make farming so much easier. But we can   t  afford the  200,000 or  300,000 to get that done, if you could get that  done for that, I don   t know.  But I can   t ever remember   we might, as far as going into the county  extension office, ask questions you know. It   s just like I took soil  samples there this year. First time I ever did that to see what the soil is.  But other than that we   ve called and asked questions occasionally. What  is this weed or what is that weed, you know. Sometimes they can tell us,  sometimes they can   t. Like the chemical company spread those, the  weed seeds. Because every year there   s a new weed you hadn   t ever  seen before, here it is in force. We don   t know where it comes from.  Well is there enough product or whatever on the farm to make ends  meet? Or do you have to supplement it?  I   m retired from the post office. And her and Dad, they   ve got most of  the first five cents that they made so she   s all right. I just look after her  cattle here and everything. And you know, I just gotta be doing  something all the time. So when she   s gone, I   m going to get this south  80 and my brother will get this north 80. It will stay in the family again.  That was my next question, what happens the next 100 years?  Yes. And hopefully at least this 160 and the 80 over where my brother   s  at, that will be in the family. Because my son wants this and Chuck   s  kids want his.  That   s good.  Yes.  Good to hear isn   t it?  Mm-hmm.  Yes, it will stay right here. Probably won   t be able to make a living off  of it. But you know kids aren   t interested in gardening so this garden  will probably be, when I   m gone it will be the last of the garden. I don   t  know what he   ll do with it, but he says,    I want it.    And he   s got a son.  So you know we   ve got two more who   ll keep it.  Well, how many cattle do you have now? How many head?  Oh just 12. Well 12 cows, a bull and nine calves right now.  18  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  How long were they in the dairy business then?  I don   t know how long they were.  I   m going to guess 10-15 years.  Probably something like that.  But then they started where everything had to be pasteurized and all this.  We   d just run it through the strainers and strain that milk and put it in  cans. Pick those ten gallon cans up and set them in the cooler out there  and a truck would come by the next day and pick up so many cans and  leave so many cans. And they just did that every day, you know. Of  course at that time we had two dairies out there in Guthrie and we just  took it up there and they made ice cream and what have you, like that.  And then you made your own cottage cheese here?  You can. Yes, I have made it.  I don   t remember cottage cheese.  I made cottage cheese. And I remember Mom making it quite a bit too.  I remember making butter all the time. I   ve got at my house in Edmond  the old cream separator. When they sold Grandma   s stuff I bought the  cream separator and the milk churner to make butter. So I   ve got both  those at my house. I   ve refinished the old cream separator. I don   t  know   do you have any idea where it came from, if they bought it new  or anything like that?  I don   t know.  It   s only got one piece missing. But I refinished it all and made it pretty  and it sets in my kitchen.  Those are nice heirlooms.  Mm-hmm.  Would you go to church?  Yes, I went to church all the time, we did, the United Presbyterian. And  then when it dissolved, we went over into the First Presbyterian church.  It didn   t really dissolve, it just merged with the   we call it the First  19  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  United.  Now my husband didn   t go much. But then he had a glass eye and he  was always ashamed of it. I   ve been a member of the church.  Well then Sunday afternoons were just a day of rest or would you  actually have to work more?  That   s right. No, we never went anyplace, go out to eat or anything.  I can only remember once or twice they ever went out and ate. It   s just  like now, it   s been a year ago I brought an avocado out here and  guacamole mix and she   d never eaten any of that before, see. Now she  eats it quite often. But a lot of stuff like that. And Dad, he would eat  nothing charcoaled. He didn   t like the taste of burnt fat or anything. He  didn   t want any drippings dropping in the fire and having a burnt taste.  He   d eat one thing at a time.  They would not go out to eat. Absolutely would not go out to eat. You  cooked at home, everything. It   s totally new when we take her out to eat.  He wanted to go get his eye tested. He was in a wheelchair anyway so he  couldn   t walk or get around so we had the Logan County Agency come  out with their van and had a colored man driving it. Leon had fixed a  place in the front porch there, a ramp for us to take him out. And he said,     No, I can take him down those steps.    Well he took him down those  steps and dropped him there and fell on top of him. Fractured his brain,  you know. And that   s what really killed him. He was in the hospital and  drained his blood off of his head. A long time he was in the nursing  home then. That   s just been three years ago.  Turned him over backwards going down those steps.  Leon tried to get him, he said,    Let me help you.    He said,    I can do it, I  can do it     And he did. He dropped him and fell on top of him.  It was a nightmare.  I can imagine.  Cause he had told me to just hold the door open. He started out there and  they just    bump bump bump bump.    And they just turned over  backwards. There just wasn   t any place where I could stop any part of it.  When I got him off of Dad, I thought Dad was dead then. But he wasn   t.  And this guy had cut his shin and he was worried about that more than  20  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  he was about getting Dad up and I finally said,    I can   t get him by  myself, you   re going to have to help.    So they took him and he went on  to the eye doctor. And he said,    I just can   t stay up like this, I have to lay  down.    So we brought him back home and took him down two days  later and they don   t even put you to sleep to drill a hole in your skull.  Drilled a hole in his skull and drained four ounces of fluid off his brain,  just instantly, just squirted out of there when they screwed that thing into  his skull. Just squirted out of there, it was unbelievable. He never made  it out. But this farm was his life. That was in his blood. That was all he  wanted to do. And he was good at it. He was good at it. He made a  living off of it. Everybody out here has the same feeling for the land.  People   now they didn   t farm quite as heavily or intensely across the  road as my aunt over there. As far as having the equipment to farm, he   d  just as soon rent it out and do carpenter work.  Did your dad help in rings? Like the combining ring where they   d go  neighbor to neighbor and do any of that help?  No. They didn   t have that so much around here. I don   t ever remember  any of that, I sure don   t.  How about his first tractor?  We still have it. We got a 1953 International Super M over there. And  oh, about ten years ago, maybe, my brother had located it after Dad sold  it and bought it and we took it over there and refinished it and gave it to  him for Christmas. My brother   s got it up over in the barn right now.  And it   s just   just decals on it and repainted and the whole nine yards.  It still works?  Oh, yes. We can go out there and start it. Sure thing.  That must have been a special day, when he first got it and when he got  it the second time around.  Yes, oh yes. Because he loved that tractor. I mean if he caught one of us  boys starting that tractor and not checking the oil first (low whistle).  I   ve got a picture of that tractor setting on the back of that truck and  when Charles had his daddy go out and see it, it just floored him. I   ve  got a picture of him looking at it.  Yes, he could take pretty good care of his equipment. Over the years,  why this place has deteriorated so much and he just didn   t put the time  and money into keeping everything up around here. He was more intent  21  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  on them getting the ground done. As you get older you can do less, so  then you have to prioritize which is either going to bring you the most  money or give you the most joy. And some of it has to be let go and  some of it gets done. And that   s just the way   it   s what I find myself  right now.  Are there many fences left from the old days?  Yes, some. Mainly on the other side of the creek. That   s the worst thing  about it, where the property line is over there it comes down and crosses  the creek for like a 100 feet and it goes back and there   s no way to get  around the other side of the creek over there. There is no fence over  there. But I put up this here and then we put it up here and down the  other side. And over between the east property line, it   s not too old. I  can   t remember when it was done, but it   s not that old.  Are the posts from the land itself or did you have to buy them?  Oh no, we had to buy them. We put in a steal post.  But from the original ones.  The original? It   s mostly all wood post over there. But I don   t know     yes, I think it was because in the far corner down here they have got a  Catalpa stand that was planted for fence posts. So they were originally  growing fence posts, putting Catalpa fence posts in.  Did you quilt or sew much?  No, I haven   t ever quilted any. I did a little bit of sewing, but...  You used to make a lot of shirts and stuff.  Well, I guess I did maybe. A long time ago.  Yes. She used to make a lot of shirts, and make her own dresses. Sure, I  remember that.  Yes, I guess I did. I still got that old machine in there. Treadle machine.  Singer?  Mm-hmm.  Did you use flour sacks? Feed sacks?  22  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  No, I don   t think so. I   ve got some in there though, some sacks in there  that I don   t know where I got them. But there   s some feed sacks in there  that I cleaned up.  They didn   t throw away anything, see.  No, I don   t throw anything away.  This is what she does constantly.  All I do.  Crochet or knit?  That   s crochet. I   ll tell you what. That   s just part of    em   I   ve done  almost 50 of these things  pot holders . Just, you know     One for you and one for you. Unless you want a different color?  Yes, there are just different colors. I made my sister   s daughter   s  grandson an afghan here last week like that. I never heard from them. It  takes me about two days to make one. I   m just now finishing up this.  I   ve got so much crochet thread. I just had to do something with it. But I  made all my great-grandkids an afghan. Made my niece one that almost  fits this floor. Well, it was a bed size. This year, took me two months to  make it. So anyway, that   s about all I get done. That and my puzzle  books.  And she goes out and works in the garden as she can. She   s been picking  asparagus, but bending over has been getting harder and harder for her.  I just can   t do it anymore.  I   ve been coming out each day. But I   ve learned now that the corn and  stuff like that, she   s got a Kubota  tractor  out here that she rides around.  See what my knees look like? See how big they are?  I make the rows wide enough periodically that she can ride down there  and pick the corn from in it or stuff like that, you know. That way she  doesn   t have to get out to go down and pick three or four ears of corn to  eat. She likes sweet corn.  That   s the way I picked tomatoes last year.  She picked a lot of tomatoes that way.  23  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  All the tomatoes that we sold and I sold a jillion to one man who made a  picante sauce. Oh and it was good. I don   t have much idea how much I  did, over  300 worth of tomatoes to him. I had a John Deer Gator at the  time and I could just drive along and reach and pick the tomatoes off the  vine, you see. Sometimes I   d have to get out and reach over but then I  don   t do any walking or anything like that. But I don   t know whether I  can do it this year or not, my knees are so bad.  Do you do any canning?  I   ve done some tomatoes this year. Last year I put up 30-some pints of  tomatoes and quite a bit of picante sauce and some okra and some beets.  That   s about all I put up. That   s all I need, just me.  Any fruit trees on the property?  Got a lot of fruit trees. He set them out, but they haven   t done any  producing yet. They   re not big enough.  Most all cherry trees. I like tart cherries. Other than that, I   ve got two  peach trees, but they haven   t ever produced.  Were there any trees on it when your father was here?  No.  I don   t know how old that old tree was out here.  This old house in this area right here had cedar trees all around it. And  this barn of course wasn   t here, this metal barn right here. And  Grandma   s garden, there   s a big lilac bush out here. It seems to me like  there was one like this also. And you went out there and her garden was  just aside the chicken house at that time. But this was all in shade here  because of these great big cedar trees. They   re all gone now. And this  retaining wall had a fence all the way around it that we   ve taken up  since. The whole garden was fenced in. Did you keep your dog in here?  I don   t recall.  I don   t think so.  I don   t remember seeing a dog in here.  Huh-uh.  But I don   t think  there were  fruit trees on the place. I   ve got three,  four, five, six, seven   I   ve got eight cherry trees out now and two peach  24  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  trees. And now I   ve put out three blueberries this year.  Pecan trees?  One right there, and one around the back. Otherwise no pecans. There  were always a lot of walnuts, black walnuts. There were two right down  there along the road, there   s just one right now. And then down here  where we had a guy come in and cut a lot of timber there was a lot of  walnut trees. But I can remember busting walnuts. They   re hard to pick  out.  They are. They stain your hands.  Yes. That   s what the Indians used to stain stuff with, is black walnuts.  And black walnuts kill the soil around the tree, too. There   s not a lot of  stuff that will grow around black walnuts.  A lot of cedars do that, too.  Now cedars are just so dense they don   t get sun. I don   t know if there   s a  chemical. But I see they   re really having a problem with cedars across  the state, it   s been on the news. I guess Oklahoma State is involved with  that.  They   re doing something, but I   m not sure what.  What you need to do is, I don   t know why, but CREC is over there at  Stillwater. They have a bunch of Mexicans the last time I seen them that  walk these roads and find cedar trees and spray under the high lines. But  we can   t find out what they   re spraying those cedar trees with. If you  ever find out, let us know. Because they spray those trees with  something and that cedar tree is dead, I mean quickly. And we cannot     we talked to CREC and they   re kind of evasive about it.  A heavy dose of Roundup?  Well I put a pretty heavy dose on them around here and I can   t kill them  like they do. I mean they just carry a backpack with a pump up spray.  And no matter how big that cedar tree is, it just kills it. I mean with  Roundup, when I sprayed it I could kill one half of it, but the other half  stayed green. But this, they   re just walking in the road and spraying that  sucker and it just kills the whole darned thing. I don   t understand what it  is, and I can   t find out.  Well did you have any home remedies? If you got a bee sting what would  they do?  25  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  I don   t know what I   d use for a bee sting. But I had something itching on  my neck here.  You didn   t used to have anything that you used to do?  No, not that I know of.  Tobacco juice?  When I   d get sunburned they   d take heavy, heavy cream and smear it all  over my back. And boy, it relieved a burn like you would not believe. It  really worked.  Cream like from the dairy cream?  Oh yes. Yes. It   d be so thick that you could lay a knife on it or a spoon  on it and it wouldn   t sink in. It just set up real solid. Just smear that on  your back.  Back when we had cream.  Boy that was the best sunburn remedy that you could find. I don   t  remember any other home remedies that they used to do.  I don   t either because I never was stung with anything that I know of.  Well anything. Upset stomach or anything that your granddad or your  mother or anybody might have done?  Well what was your favorite meal that your mother cooked for you?  Oh, I don   t know. She always was a good cook, I know that. I liked her  meatloaf better than anything. And usually the Sunday meal I really  liked.  What was it?  Oh same old thing, mashed potatoes and gravy and usually green beans  or something fresh out of the garden.  Biscuits?  Very seldom. But then she did make biscuits once in a while, too. She  liked to make cakes and cookies and pies. That   s what I like to do, too.  But I can   t do it anymore with diabetes. You know you just can   t eat that  stuff. I know they always went to church. You could always bet on that.  26  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  Did you visit the library much when you were growing up?  No, I don   t think I ever did.  The Carnegie Library in town?  Oh once in a while I   d go up there. But I never did check out any books  or anything like that.  How has the town changed? It got a little bit bigger, I guess?  I think that   s the opposite. The town is getting smaller. The town is  getting a lot smaller. And you don   t know any changes in town? I mean  there   s no store. You can   t go to town and buy a pair of shoes or any  clothes. Everything   s antique stores in Guthrie. No, there are no stores.  There used to be a JC Penney, and a C.R. Anthony and a Lloyd Lentz,  and     Lentz, Lloyd Lentz and Fred Lentz.  But they had all kinds of stores, numerous grocery stores. Now E.E.  Birch, he also had a grocery store in town besides this farm.  No, E.J. Birch.  That was E.J., that was his brother.  That   s right.  Okay, different. Okay. So it wasn   t E.E. I thought the one man owned  the whole thing.  So how many brothers did E.E. and E.J. have?  Well hand me that book right there on top there. Right there. I   ve got a  bunch of stuff there that Mom wrote down. Well there was Ernest  Emanuel and William Walker and Eugene Robert and Ermina Harriet  and Edgar James. So evidently they were all his brothers way back in  1864 and 1870 and 1873 and 1873 was when they were born.  We might rethink this about whether they acquired this land in the Run  in    89 cause those are all   they would have been in their 20s at that  time.  They all lived here in the area too?  27  P. Jarred  Finchum  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  P. Jarred  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  Finchum  L. Jarred  I just don   t know if they did or not.  But you know where your grandfather came from? From Missouri or  Kansas?  Well, there are pictures there.  Yes. We just got through having and got a book   where   s your book  The Corngables?  I didn   t get one, you got it.  Okay. We just had a family reunion a few years back and one of the  family members who lives   where does Ned live?  Texas. Dallas.  No, Ned lives in Idaho or somewhere up there. Anyway, he has been  back and traced our lineage back from Germany clear back to   was it  the 16th Century? He   s got pictures and he   s gone back and looked up  when all these people came to the United States. He   s been over there  and seen where they were born and raised over there. The buildings are  still standing. I guess she didn   t buy one, I bought one. But anyway it   s  about this thick of family history. It goes all the way back to Germany  from the Corngables to where they married the Birches and all like that.  It goes way, way back.  Started out as Corngable and then finally ended up as Congable.  But see here   s E.E. Birch. Here   s a receipt dated October 18,, 1960, so  she   s got some of this stuff here and the handwriting is really pretty.  This is a certificate of transfer for something. And so those may be the  type of things that you can scan and copy or stuff like that. But I think  Germany is where most all the relatives came from.  Well let   s close the interview off and then we   ll look at your pictures.  Thank you for having us today, it   s been fun.  It has. I wish we would have had more information for you. Here   s some  of what the Corngables, where that history started and everything.  That   s an unusual last name.  It was Corngreeble originally.  -------  -------  28 
