 Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Today is March 9, 2012. My name is Tanya Finchum along with Juliana  Nykolaiszyn. We   re with the Oklahoma State University Library, and  we   re conducting an oral history project called the Oklahoma  Centennial Farm Families. Today, we   re in Lawton, Oklahoma to speak  with the Watkins family. We have John, Frances, and then Mary  Crawford Johnston. Thank you for having us today.  Thank you.  Let   s get started and have someone tell us how the farm, the land came  to be in the family to begin with.  Well, my grandfather traveled from  South  Gorin, Missouri,  northeastern part of the state, down to St. Louis where he was employed  down there for a time and then came on down to El Reno when he heard  of the lands being opened. And so, in August of 1901, why, he came  down for the drawing here in Lawton, and he ended up in the lottery and  drew this place when they opened it for settlement.  We haven   t had too many farms talk about a lottery. Do you know how  that worked? Do you have any idea?  No, not really. The government set up a lottery system when they  acquired the land. Then they advertised it as to be homesteaded by  people, and so I guess he heard of that. And so, he traveled down here to  homestead some land and have his property.  Do you know if he got to pick which property he wanted or if it was your  turn, you got what they had?  5  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  He got to pick his property in the lottery. They drew numbers   and I   m  going back from some articles that I   ve read about him   and his  number   they had over sixty-five hundred applicants for the drawing  down here, and he ended up being 332 or 333. And from the story I read,  they drew 150 names a day, and so he got his number drawn on the  second day. I think there was twelve that didn   t show up. I   m not sure of  the number, but his number ended up being 313. Prior to the drawing of  the numbers, he and some other fellows got together with a surveyor and  came out and surveyed the land. He heard where the best land was, and  so they came out and found the boundaries of the land. So, he had had in  mind of the places that he wanted to choose, should his number be  drawn. So, whenever his number was drawn, why, he got his first pick.  He was lucky enough to get his first pick of the property, and so that   s  this current place.  Do you know what about the place he wanted? What was he looking for  when he chose this place?  Well, he wanted a fairly level ground for farming and a source of  water   or close to a source of water, at least. And that was his main  requirements.  And that was 1901?  1901.  Was he married at that time?  No, he wasn   t. He was single.  And he came in a wagon across the creek with some other guys. You  remember that?  No, I don   t remember that.  You could tell that story, then. Go ahead.  Go ahead.  They wanted a survey and the surveyor had a wagon, and they had to  cross the creek, Cash Creek, and they did. And then they found this   or  he chose this. (Laughs)  So, did he have to build something to claim it?  He had to build, prove up on it. It   s what they call proving up on it, and  6  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  he built the first house, the one-room house that he built, whenever he  settled here. He put it on the west side of the place because the place  right next to us, to the west, had a flowing spring, and that   s where he  could get water. And so he had his first house over there on the west side  of the place to be near that.  And it   s still standing, is it?  The one-room house is still standing.  Made out of wood?  Yes. It   s showing its age, but it     I would say 100 years old, it probably is.  And tornados and everything.  What other buildings did he build then at that point and as he grew with  the farm?  Well, later on, he built a big barn. And I had just noticed that it was  standing in 1924, and I   m sure it was built prior to that. I don   t know   I  talked to my aunt out in California and she didn   t recollect when the  barn was built, but I know it was standing in 1924. But I   m sure he had  at least that. And others, I don   t know of at the moment.  Well, what was he growing on the farm, or what was his product?  Well, I think in the early days he had to plow at least ten acres to be able  to claim it and show that it was being farmed. But in the early days, he  was a water well driller, and he drilled water wells around all over the  country. I had heard once that he drilled some in Lawton. Now, where  about, I don   t know, but I know that he drilled several around in this  area. In fact, he drilled the source of water that is for the current farm     two wells, here.  That supplemented his farm income, then?  Yes.  At what point did he get married?  1907.  And was she a local girl or did he go back to Missouri?  7  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Well, the reason I know that is my parents got married that same year,  too, but not here.  He married somebody who had come down at the same time and  homesteaded in the Roseland community, which is a little bit west of  here. So, that family was over there and I guess they met. He used to  attend church, I guess, over there, and I guess that   s how they met.  One book said he was the song leader and she was the organist, I think.  Oh, yes.  Yes.  At that church and the school.  And his name was   ?  William Jackson Watkins.  William. And the wife was   ?  Edna. Mary Edna?  Edna Wimer, W-I-M-E-R. My husband   s  mother   s  last name was  Wimer.  And how many children did they have?  Four, I guess. I don   t know of any that they lost.  One still living, a hundred years old.  Yes, and the first one, her picture is in there. They interviewed her, from  Cameron, here several years ago, and I   ve got that. But in fact, they  called her and asked her to   she was in nineties then, but she   s one  hundred now   but they called her to ask for her to give  information   and she told them,    Well, I have a lot of records, but I can   t put my hand  on them right now. But could I e-mail them to you?    (Laughs) And at  ninety-something she was able to do that, and she still has a good mind.  She was a teacher. Both of their girls were teachers.  Education was important then.  They taught around in several of the neighboring schools, around over  8  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  the country. I don   t recollect which ones or anything.  But when they got old enough so they could go to school, he rented this  farm and went to town so the kids could go to school. And then when  this oldest girl came, then she finished high school at fifteen. And then it  was the first year that Cameron had a   not a college. What do you call  it? Agricultural college, I guess, and she went there the first year and the  second year. They just had two years, then. And she graduated from  there and then she went to different other schools. Where   d they say?  I don   t remember the schools.  In the article, it said where she went, but I   ve forgotten.  So, they had four children. And then when it was time for the farm to be  passed to the next generation, which of those four children ended up  with it?  My dad.  Your dad. And his name was?  John Wimer Watkins.  Okay.  They called him Wimer.  Was there any issue that he would get it, or was he the only one out of  the four that wanted it or how did that work?  Well, the two sisters were living in California, and my uncle, he lived in  Lawton. But my dad ended up buying out the other kids and ended up  with it.  Do you remember, roughly, about when that was?  My grandfather died in 1966, so probably    67, possibly.  Okay. And then when it passed to the next generation, who   well, I don   t  guess it has, yet.  These two. (Laughs)  Okay, those two.  9  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  And it   s already recorded in the courthouse.  Already decided how it   s going to go, huh?  Yes. (Laughter)  Okay, so once your father got it, what did he do? What was his product?  He was mostly farming. He raised wheat and alfalfa and a few oats. I  know there was one year that he told me the green bugs got the wheat,  and so they planted peanuts and thrashed them one year. That was kind  of an odd year, I think. I know in years past he raised cotton, also.  Barley? Did he ever raise Barley?  Yes, he raised some Barley.  I know when we got married, we   d had cotton then. We had people, you  know, you didn   t have the machines like we do now, and we hired  people. And we still have them around where every once in a while I   ll  find one that still knew that they used to pick. We called it    pick bolls     instead of picking cotton, when I grew up out in Oklahoma, western. But  I didn   t want any of that after I got married. I didn   t want any bolls so he  got someone to do that. (Laughter)  Well, while we   re on that, let   s talk about getting married. When did you  get married?  1949.  And how had you met your husband?  I was in nursing school at Houston, and my brother had come overseas  from the war so I wanted to come, and they wouldn   t let me. So I just  came anyways, and I quit. (Laughs) And then they had moved, my  family moved down here, and Wimer lived down here. First time I saw  him, everybody in my family liked him, and they   d chosen him for me.  (Laughs) And the first time I saw him, he was going down the road. I  was walking down to the mailbox there and I saw him, but then he went  to church where my family came, too. That   s how I met him.  And then when did you move to the farm, here?  Well, to here?  Yes.  10  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  In 1949, but my family lived a mile north, and I worked at Southwestern  at the hospital until I got married.  So, once you became a farmer   s wife, what were some of your chores?  Milk cows. He had cows, so I could help him because I   d milked back  when I was a kid and went to school, and so I was able to do that. And  we had a cream separator, and we had cream sold in town.  Chickens?  Yes. Oh, I didn   t much like them because they make too much mess. In  fact, the old house out here   and I   m so sorry I did this, but when Mr.  Watkins came back, and we had this beautiful big bush, lilac bush, and it  smelled so good and everything. But the chickens would get under there,  and so I told him, I said,    I wish you would just cut that down,    and he  did. And now I wish I hadn   t. (Laughs) But anyway, yes, we had  chickens. They were out west of here in the chicken house. It   s still over  there.  So, you no longer worked off the farm at that point?  No. No, I worked at the hospital and then I got married. And then after  doing that, I quit and then I was asked to take a job at one of the doctors     office in Lawton. And after I did that and John was born by the doctor  that I worked for, and then so I quit again. And then after that, I had a  neighbor that had surgery and I stayed with him one night. And the  superintendent at the hospital saw me and she said,    Frances, would you  consider working from three till eleven giving medicines?    And I said,     Well, we   ll see if my husband   ,    and he agreed, and so I did that  until    I guess   yes, I was working at the hospital and the  superintendent of nurses was a woman. Another doctor, now, this is the  first one I had worked for. Anyway, this Dr. Cole was asking, this girl  had quit and he looked like he was trying to find someone. And she told  him, and so he was going to come and talk to me. And she told me that  he was so I thought,    Well, there   s stairs,    and I went down, because she  saw him coming up the stairs so I went down the stairs. Well, he beat me  down there almost, and I went to work.  That   s when I got married, and then John was  born  and I quit again.  And then after that I knew several girls that worked for different doctors,  and they   d call me and ask me if I   d fill in for somebody and I would.  And I did that for a long time until finally, I got the last doctor that I  worked for. I worked for twenty-five years, and he was out at the Indian  hospital when he went into practice. And the girl that took my place  11  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  when John was born, well, she suggested  me for the job . And so, he  called and I came out. He and his wife came out and interviewed me,  and I decided to go to work and stayed there twenty-five years   twenty-six,  I guess. He says twenty-six or seven and 1967 is when I started.  I guess having that income helped.  Well, yes, a little bit, I guess. (Laughs)  Well,  John  do you remember your first tractor?  The old M is the first one I remember. I think there were one or two  previous to that, older International models. And I think Dad mentioned  them, but I don   t remember what models they were. But the first one I  remember was the M. Dad,  I  remember him telling me that he bought  his first new tractor in late December, 1940. It was a    41 model, and he  bought it and a field cultivator for fourteen hundred and fifty dollars.  That wouldn   t go very far today, would it?  No. (Laughter) Wouldn   t even buy a lawn mower, these days.  I didn   t get the gas. (Laughs)  Do you remember when you first drove one? I   m assuming you did.  Yes. I don   t remember driving that one my first time. My first one, I  think, was our little B tractor, International. It   s smaller, and I would  rake hay with it, and so I could drive it because it was small enough that  I could handle it. And that was more or less my first experience with  tractors, I guess.  Mary, did you get to drive one?  One time. I steered it when we were digging potatoes out here in the  garden. That   s it. (Laughs) I helped drive trucks whenever they would  haul wheat or when they would pick up the hay bales with the   what   s  that called?  Loader.  Sled.  Loader.  Yes, that   s about all I did as far as with a tractor.  12  Johnston  J. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  Finchum  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Big trucks was about it.  I didn   t remember you doing that, even.  Yes.  Me either. I helped with my brother and Wimer, and they did hay on my  dad   s place. I tried to take the tractor, and he had a sled. And he didn   t  like my driving on that tractor because I   d dump him a lot of times  putting the hay on the sled. (Laughter)  So, while John was out in the field helping, what were you doing   Mary ?  Nothing, really. I was just going to school. During when I was growing  up? Yes, I just     Did you do much canning?  No, no. (Laughter)  Very little.  That was a quick no.  That   s not my job.  She worked outside the home, so she didn   t     I guess that   s true, too. Well, did you have a garden?  Mr. Watkins and I worked the garden. That   s when I got the flu, and  they stayed out here while I was sick. He and I worked together. And  then Wimer, John would help him, too.  So, if you weren   t doing the canning, if you had the garden, who was,  then? Anyone or you just ate it fresh when it came it?  Just fresh.  Did you belong to a homemaker club? I guess if you worked you  probably didn   t have time for that, either.  No, I never did.  13  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Did Grandma Watkins can?  My mother-in-law did. I don   t remember the name of it or anything, but  that was before she   of course, she didn   t do that after I was in the  family. And his sisters were out in California and the brother lived in  Lawton and he  worked  at a machine place when his uncle had a  business, and my brother-in-law worked for him in Lawton. Did you  remember that?  When the two of you were in high school, were you in FFA or 4-H?  John was.  I was in FFA, yes.  And what was your specialty, or did you have one?  Oh, really, in high school, I didn   t have a specialty. I showed a steer one  year, my senior year. But mine was just commercial cattle, mostly.  Well, and today, what   s happening on the farm today?  Pretty much the same. Commercial cattle, wheat, and I raise some  alfalfa. That   s about it for this.  Is it still the 160, or has it grown?  Well, it   s grown. My grandfather bought an eighty, and I don   t know  what year he bought it, but     Actually, he had a farm on sixty-five, and he sold it and bought the  eighty, but I don   t know when. That was before my     I   d forgotten about that. Yes, I remember now a little bit hearing about  that, but I   d forgotten it. But anyway, he had the eighty, which added to  this one. And then back in the, I think, early-   70s, maybe late-   60s, why,  a farm that Dad had been renting for years and years, owned by a couple  of elderly women, a couple of elderly sisters, they had passed away, and  so he ended up buying that quarter section, which was a mile and a  quarter south. It was right across the road from the eighty, and so he  bought that. And then back in    89, well, I bought a quarter-section less  twenty acres across the road south from our current homestead place.  That   s pushing up around 500, then, getting in there.  He rents some, too.  14  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Leases?  Yes.  Talk about what buildings are on the property today.  Well, the old homestead, the one-room shack that my grandfather built is  still standing. The first barn   large barn that he built, it got blown away  in 1951. That was before I was born, but it got blown away, and so then  they replaced it with our current Quonset barn out west of the house,  here. And then the old shop is still standing out there that Grandfather  and Dad used to use in their repairing.  The chicken coop, too.  Part of it was a chicken shed. And since then, we   ve added two more  larger barns.  Okay. I noticed one of them was covered in tin?  They   re all covered in tin.  The reason for that?  Preserve it, mostly, and probably because that   s what was available.  We   ve noticed that on other places and just hadn   t asked what spurred  them to do that. So, you grew up in this house?  No.  Well, the first one was set right south of here.  The house, we   ve got a picture on the wall. (Gestures) But actually,  when he married, Mr. Watkins, he bought a two-room little house and  moved it out there. And I guess when the kids started being born, well,  they added two more to those two and plus the old shack that he had.  And so, this is where my kids lived. Of course, they were born at  Southwestern. Yes, this is the old  house  and this is the cellar, and it   s  brick inside and then grass  over the top . (Gestures)  And that   s out here, that   s where we drove in, right  Yes, right there.  15  Finchum  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Do you still use it? Can it be used?  Oh, yes.  We   ve got the well system hooked down in there. The pressure tank and  all is down in there so it doesn   t freeze. So, yes, it   s being used.  And for tornado shelter?  We have one out underneath the...  Another one, okay.  There   s probably some jars of something down there, but I don   t like  bugs or varmints, so I don   t go down in there.  Spiders and snakes  (Laughter)  But see that pattern there, of course, it was on here. And then here   s the  old one behind that. But it was right next to the cellar and you could     well, you just have to step off the porch and get it in there. That   s before  my time.  Well, about when did electricity come to the farm?  You   ll have to answer that one. I don   t know. That was here before I  was.  I don   t remember, either.  In the    50s or    60s or    40s?  I lived out in western Oklahoma, and I can remember when we got  electricity, but it was here when I got here. I don   t know when, probably  about the same time.  And running water? Indoor plumbing?  Indoor plumbing whenever they had electricity.  Okay. An outhouse until then?  Probably. I remember an old outhouse sitting right out west of the house,  out there in the orchard whenever I was a little kid. It wasn   t being used  at the time, but I mean it was still there.  16  Finchum  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  Well, what were holidays like back when you were living in that house?  Just our family get-togethers. Have Christmas, and we didn   t do   did  we celebrate very much, except on Christmas and Thanksgiving?  Mostly, I guess, probably the most celebration probably over at church  when they had the church programs and things like that, but I don   t  remember too much at home. I do remember one time Mrs. Dayton  made me a bunny rabbit cake for, what, my fifth birthday and had a  birthday party. (Laughter)  She made one for Mr. and Mrs. Watkins    fiftieth anniversary, too.  So church was an important part of your life?  Yes.  They got married on a Sunday. She and Daddy got married on a Sunday  after church, didn   t you?  Do what?  You got married on a Sunday after church.  No, it was before.  Before church, okay.  We married, and then we went to church, and then we went on our  honeymoon down to Carlsbad Cavern. (Laughs)  Well, if you went to church every Sunday, was the Sunday noontime  meal anything special each Sunday?  We just had to eat. Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Watkins had just the four  children, but my family had a lot of kids. Well, my mom was a cook  because we, as kids, we helped in with the farming and the hoeing and  pulling bolls when we were growing kids. In fact, we had to stay out of  school to boll, cull, work in the field to pick the cotton.  Roast and potatoes. I remember roast and potatoes for Sunday lunch  most of the time. It was delicious. She   s a good cook.  It   s still good, too. (Laughs)  No fried chicken?  17  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Oh, yes. We had chicken.  Later on when Grandpa was living out there, why, he would come over  here after Sunday  service . We   d go to church on Sunday and Mom  would cook lunch, and he would come over and eat with us. We had a  TV over here and he and I would sit down there and watch TV. And I  remember him telling me, we were sitting there and watching and he  said,    They   d kneel down and pray awhile and then go to fighting.    That  was a football game. (Laughter)  And probably just one or two channels at that time, I bet.  I   m sure, yes. Black and white.  They moved back to the farm. We built this part of the house, and so  they     Was that 1960?  I don   t know.  Yes.  Is it? Anyway, they came back here after we built this part of the house,  and they moved back to the farm and stayed until she died, and then he  died.  I was talking earlier about the Roseland community over there. They had  Roseland school, I guess, and then the Roseland church. My grandfather  and my dad tore down the old Roseland school and used the lumber in  the old part of our current house.  They always recycled.  In that place they had church, too. And he was the first song leader and  my mother-in-law was a pianist. All of the kids, but Wimer didn   t, but  he could play some kind of a horn, but most of the others were real  good. In fact, I had a picture of Mr. Watkins, he used to play with a real  group of people, and     Band who played for President Roosevelt, didn   t they?  Yes, I think so. A whole bunch. The second on the front row on the left  side.  18  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  I noticed there was a windmill.  Yes.  Is there any story about it?  Back in the early days when Grandfather moved to town for the kids to  go to school, why, he rented the farm out. And the one that rented it,  they put up the windmill so they could get water out there to water  cattle.  Does it still work?  It still works. It had to have a new windmill head put on it. Years and  years ago, a storm came through. I guess when it blew the old barn  away, it kind of tore the head up and eventually, over the years it wore  out. So, we had to put a new head on top of it. But it   s still got water in  the well and we still pump.  And this windmill on the cellar is where our water that we use now.  The pump?  Yes, electric, and as he said, he put it down there so when it   d freeze, it  wouldn   t freeze down there and we   d still have water.  And we noticed there were power lines running across the property.  When did that happen?  I don   t know what year it was. I know my grandfather and several other  people got together to try to fight it. He tried to get them to go down the  side of the place, to try to get them to alter the route, but they wouldn   t  do it, through imminent domain, I guess. He and several other people,  others around, that it was going cross, they got together to try to fight it.  I guess they got some kind of a settlement, but I don   t know what. It  ended up where it is.  I wondered if they got any compensation for it coming across.  I think they got compensated somewhat, but it wasn   t enough for the  trouble they caused, having to farm around them and     So, growing up, what were some of your chores?  Well, just helping feed cattle and helping in the field. Whenever I was  big enough, I learned how to drive a combine, and so I   d drive the  19  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  Finchum  Johnston  F. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  combine while they would haul the grain off. That was eleven, twelve,  thirteen, driving the combine. And finally, I don   t know, I was about  fourteen and then we were hauling some grain to town, and I wanted to  drive the truck. So, we took the back roads and I got to drive the truck to  town to haul some grain. But most of the time I was on the combine, and  they didn   t have any cabs or anything, or power steering then, so.  And you see   what is that, it   s kind of like a combine? It   s out there.  It   s still there.  The old swather?  No, for grain or something. What do you call that great big old thing  that   s still up there, out there?  Oh, the thrashing machine?  It   s before the tractors or something. Some kind of a     The old thrashing machine? Is that what you   re     That   s it. That   s what they were called, yes. I never did see it except just  sitting out there, but I   m sure Mr. Watkins used it many years ago.  Did you have to do some of these before you went to school, or was it  mostly summer work?  Mostly after school, summer work, on Saturdays.  And you graduated from Lawton High?  I graduated from Lawton High.  And?  MacArthur.  Okay. And some of your chores, did you have much to do?  No, I didn   t. I loved animals. I was outside with the animals all the time.  She   s spoiled.  I was spoiled, yes. (Laughter) I was outside with the cats and dogs.  That wasn   t fair. I don   t know why she got to lay around, play with the  20  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  Finchum  Johnston  Finchum  F. Watkins  cats. (Laughter)  How many years difference between the two of you?  Six.  Six.  He graduated from Cameron.  And decided to come back to the farm, or did you do something else  before you came back?  No, I just decided to come back. After I graduated from college, well,  then I started buying some of my own equipment, and Dad and I farmed  together several different places and     That was the plan all along, or just   ?  That   s just kind of how it worked out. I don   t know if we had a plan, it  just kind of worked it out that way.  And what was your degree in?  Animal Science.  So, that works. And what about you, Mary?  You had two degrees. Agronomy and then     Yes, he had two degrees. I went to college, was going to be a nurse and  took one semester and said that wasn   t for me. So, I changed to music  and went for a few years in that and ended up quitting just to work full  time and then went back. I was going to go back into computers, and I  got a job where I didn   t have a chance to go back and finish up, finally.  So, I went probably five and a half years and never did finish, but a lot  of life work experiences, several different places. I work for the health  department now.  A little bit nursey, then, if it   s the health department.  Clerical, yes. (Laughs)  Nursing   s not for everyone, is it?  That friend of mine was the superintendent in Cameron for a while, and  21  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  she   s the one that talked Mary into the nursing profession. But it wasn   t  for her. She liked piano.  Well, that   s okay. So, for the next 100 years, what are you thinking   s  going to happen?  I hope the Lord takes me home  (Laughter)  Not yet  (Laughter)  Well, that   s what everybody says, but I had that stroke. I   ve never been  sick very much. I have had some broken bones, my knee and my femur.  But as far as sickness, I don   t take medication. I gave a lot of them to   patients  when the doctor would prescribe  them . But I   ve never been  like a  patient . I don   t want to. In fact, when I retired, everybody said,     Oh, you need      and the doctor that I worked for, he retired. They said,     Oh, you need a doctor,    and I said,    No, I don   t think so.     But anyway, I told Wimer, John   s fianc   worked at the rehab  place and   knew this doctor, and this doctor had a waiting list for new patients and I  said,    I   ll tell you what, if Dr. Bellino will take me, well, okay, I   ll take  it. I   ll go.    And she did, because Becky was a friend of hers. (Laughter)  But when I went to her, Becky had already told her, said,    Now, she  doesn   t like to take medications,    so she didn   t give me any. Since my  stroke, I have a baby     Aspirin.     and then Vitamin D. She said,    You need Vitamin D-3 because of the  broken bones,    and so that   s the medications I take.  That little stubborn streak has served you well, hasn   t it?  I was. (Laughs) And I am. (Laughter)  That   s from her side of the family. (Laughter)  I need to back up. I skipped one question, too. How was the house  heated? Was it wood or coal, natural gas, propane?  Propane, wasn   t it?  Yes.  There aren   t too many trees so I didn   t figure it was wood.  22  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  No.  The trees have been   I don   t know how many tornados we   ve had. The  first one was when the barn  was destroyed , and there also was a row of  mulberries over here, a lot of them were uprooted. And then this one out  here, oh, I   m so sick about it because we had an ice storm, and a lot of  the trees had to be  really trimmed , and the people that did this   it  looked awful. It still looks  bad . I   ve got a picture of when it was a little   prettier  out here of my oldest sister-in-law under a little bush, like this  one over here, sitting under that little bush as a baby.  Grandpa planted the two elm trees, the one out here in the front yard and  the other big one. He planted them whenever he came.  They   ve been there awhile too, then.  Tornado lifted the roof off of this house, lifted it up and put it back  down. That   s when they tore it down after that, when John and I were  teenagers I guess.     78.  Kids were here in the house, and my husband had gone to church. They  were here and then that tornado came, and he had to get in the     Don   t say that. Don   t talk about that.  But they couldn   t get under the table, so they got pillows. (Laughs)  Just say we didn   t make it to the cellar, that   s enough.  Until after the doors had been blown off.  It   s a good thing because when we got home, the door of the cellar had  been blown off. So, they might have been taken out of there if they had  been in it. They didn   t know it until it was too late to go.  Well, and there   s no sirens, it doesn   t look like, out here, either.  No.  It sounded like a train.  The knife board in this house from that one     They kept saying that the tornado was over at Fort Sill, so I kept looking  23  Nykolaiszyn  J. Watkins  Nykolaiszyn  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  towards the north and west. Then all the sudden I hear something crack  and all that, and so then it wasn   t. It was here.  How have your neighbors changed through the years?  Well, not really changed so much as most of them have passed away,  and the places have gone down through the heirs. My neighbor across  the road is   their family is still there. Pretty much the same neighbors,  only just generations passing on.  It seems like some developments are popping up here and there close by.  Do you feel like it   s creeping a little close to you all?  Way too close. Here a few years ago, why, there was a development, a  quarter section of land sold that   s a half a mile. Well, it adjoins my place  over here on the south, and they sold it and divided it up. And they   ve  got twenty-three houses set on it now. We   ve got a rural water system  that serves those properties. So, yes, it   s getting way too close. It   s not  near as country as it used to be. Too much more traffic, too much more  trash, and too many more dogs. I mean, good people, but you have quite  a little bit of turnover, too, when people move out from town and maybe  they split up or something happens. It   s changing all the time.  Are some of the old original fences still up?  Definitely  Definitely. (Laughter) We can attest to that. (Laughs)  Well, do you know what they were made of, the older ones?  My grandfather that owned this place, he put up hog wire because they  used to have hogs and raise hogs here. So, he had hog wire around the  biggest part of this place, which is showing its age. It   s still there, but  it   s really getting rotten and old.  What did he use for the posts?  Just wood posts, probably cedar posts and bodark. They used some  bodark posts, and I   m sure some of those are still standing. They were  hard wood. So, that   s pretty much it.  How often do you have to walk the fence line and make sure everything  is still     Well, I don   t do so much walking. I   ll drive around and make sure the  cows are on the right side of the fence. (Laughter) But every once in a  while, you   ve got to patch it up or something.  24  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  A truck or a four wheeler when you   re driving around?  Well, if I   m on the road, a truck, and a four-wheeler if I   m inside  sometimes.  No horse, huh?  No. A horse is too hard to catch.  You don   t have cattle on all of it, though, right?  I don   t have cattle on this place. I haven   t had for the last two or three  years. Other places I   ve had cattle. But with the drought, I   ve cut back  on my herd somewhat. And since I haven   t had cattle on this place, last  year I cut and baled it for hay and sold the hay off of it.  It was pretty dry last summer, so did that impact what you did or didn   t  do?  It did. It helped in that it hadn   t been grazed in two or three years, so I  had a large amount of growth. And with the fire danger being what it  was, well, I cut and baled it more than anything to suppress the fire  danger. But as a sideline, I sold the hay and gained a little bit of income  from that so it helped.  How do you keep up with the records for the farm? On the computer or  in your head?  I do on the computer the income and expenses, not so much the amount  of number of bales of hay or bushels of wheat or anything, but income  and expenses.  And back in the older days, how did your dad do it?  Just his receipts and put them down on a sheet of paper, the income on  one side and expenses on the other. And that   s how he   d take it to the  tax man or tax accountant.  Well, Frances, you came through the Depression years, right?  Yes, I   m sure I did. But everybody was in the same boat, and so I don   t  really consider that. I   m sure I did, but everybody was very poor, and so  we were just the same.  You mentioned you grew up out west. What county or what town?  25  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Johnston  Jackson.  Jackson?  El Dorado.  Almost in Texas. I lived out west of El Dorado, which is a little way on  from Altus and Olustee. Of course, we lived on a farm, too. But anyway,  that   s where we had to have a school bus to take us to school.  Olustee, I think, has a WPA library.  Yes, they do. El Dorado has a library, too. In fact, this past year we had  their, I   ve forgotten how many, school reunion. The last time is the first  time I   d been there for a long time, but we went to the library there  across from where we had the meeting, and it was the first time I   d been  in there, but it had a lot of stuff.  Hot summers and cold winters out in that part of the world, too.  Oh, yes. Just like here. (Laughs)  What is planned for the next 100 years?  It   s in trust, and it goes past us to her kids. I don   t have any kids, and so  I guess the Watkins name ends. I have a cousin up in Edmond that they  carry it on, I guess.  He doesn   t farm.  Well, it   s close enough to Lawton, do you think they   ll want to keep it  up?  Well, I   m in Apache. My kids are in Norman at OU and Missouri right  now so I don   t know what their plans are. My son   s probably going to go  into business management. My daughter   s married to a guy going into  psychology. So, I don   t     They   ve never lived on the farm or anything.  I think it   ll be the end of it at that generation.  My son had allergies, and he helped some a summer or two, maybe a  little bit. But he   his allergies, he wasn   t interested, unfortunately.  26  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  I noticed on the sign it says,    Homestead? Did much thought go into  calling it that instead of farm or ranch or   ?  When he did that after he had that sign up there, he wished he had  worded it a little better. But he didn   t, and it   s already up, and so it   s  going to stay, I guess. (Laughs)  Well, a lot of them are called homesteads, though. If farming wasn   t the  primary income source, they call them homesteads. So, I was just  curious.  Because he did homestead the place, right?  Yes.  It was called homestead.  That was the main reason I had them put it on this.  This one.  Because Grandpa, I guess he did start farming whenever he had family  and all.  Any favorite farm stories from your childhood, either one of you, any of  you?  Hmm, gosh.  Grandpa used to raise good watermelons. I remember that.  Oh, yes, that   s right. I thought about that a while ago. Wonderful  Black  diamond, was it? Watermelons. My grandmother planted this yellow  rose bush out here that   s been going every year, and it   s gradually kind  of been taken over by thorns. And my aunt planted asparagus back here  that still grows, comes up every spring.  Only this past year, the rose bushes and this asparagus, I think it   s gone.  The old bushes look like they   re dead. I don   t know, I hate to call them  dead, and I hate to cut them down because they look so awful, but I   m  hoping they will come back. And the asparagus, that has been up there  for   well, I   m sure my oldest sister-in-law went into the creek, I guess,  and got these. These are old bushes, and they would only bloom early on  when the wind started blowing, but it didn   t last very long. (Laughs) In  fact, I   ve got some pictures in there. And then the same with the  asparagus, and I didn   t take care of it because I didn   t like asparagus.  27  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Johnston  F. Watkins  Finchum  But I noticed John mowed them the other day so I don   t know whether  they   ll come back or not. I did have a couple  sprouts  that came in after,  on the north side of the     The foundation of the house.  Yes.  Well, hopefully it won   t be as dry this summer and they   ll come back.  I hope so.  I hope so because everybody liked it. Some lady stopped out at the road  one day and she came to the stairs and she said,    Where did you get the  asparagus?    And I said,    My mother-in-law planted that, and it   s been  there ever since I   ve been here.     And you don   t like asparagus.  No. I mean, I can eat it, but a lot of people did and I   d share.  Put a little cheese on it and it goes down better.  Yes. (Laughs)  She doesn   t like cheese. (Laughter)  Oh, well.  She eats cheese sausage sandwiches all the time, but she doesn   t like  cheese.  Well, before we quit, do you want to talk a little bit about what this is,  here? (Gestures)  Oh, yes. This is my father-in-law   s, and I don   t know how long he   s had  this, longer than I   ve been here. And he had to re-work it. He did a lot of  work like that, especially out in the hot. And I don   t know if probably  this is how he gave this     Made that magnifying glass.  Yes, the magnifying glass, but I guess he had to keep it together, and so  I don   t use it. I mean, I can.  So the farm had a shop on it? They had to do their own repairs and that  28  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  sort of thing?  Yes.  So did you learn how to do some of that?  Oh, a little bit.  A little bit.  Welding.  We   ve got an old forge out there that I guess Grandpa used whenever  they were using horses and mules. My grandfather used to raise and  break mules for working back a long time ago. I hear that. But since  then, my dad, he   d use the shop for tools and things. And then whenever  we built the barn, our second barn, then we kind of made it into a shop.  A lot of farmers had to be able to figure things out. How to repair     I try to do what repairs I can, but I   m not always able to do everything  I   d like.  Well, what about when you need a veterinarian? Can you do some of  that, or do you have to call in help for it?  I   ll generally try to get help. If a cow   s having a calf, I   ve helped pull  calves before. And I can do some vaccinating, and I   ve done some  dehorning, things like that. But diagnosing problems, I   m not any good  at so I   ll take them to the vet.  When you have to take them, they don   t come to you?  I guess they will, but I   d just rather take them if I can. That way it   s a  little bit less of a charge that way.  I have a nephew that is a vet. He   s retired now, but he   s been here one  time or two.  That helps.  But he   s not around so we have one, a neighbor, out here that is a vet,  out here in the country.  Where do you take your things to market, to Lawton or up to Oklahoma  City?  29  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  Johnston  Finchum  Well, I   ll take the cattle either to Apache or Comanche. I can get about  as much at Apache for calves as I can taking them all the way to the city  with a lot less expense. I take the wheat to the Walter   s elevator, but  they lease a small elevator down at Hulen, and it   s only four and a  quarter miles south of here. So, we can haul our wheat down there and  dump it, and so it works out well for us.  And what about your father? Where did he take his?  He would take his to three different places. He   d take it to Lawton or to  Temple or Walters. Just depending on which one was paying a better  price. I   ll take mine to Temple or Walters mostly because I don   t like  going through nine traffic lights to haul a load of wheat. (Laughter)  It   s pretty country out here, that   s true.  Old trucks.  Old trucks, too.  Oldest piece of equipment on the place?  Probably that    41 M.  Oh, you still have it?  Still have it.  Does it still work?  No, it hasn   t run in several years, but it could be running. My dad, after  he got it, why, he helped   whenever they built the Highway 81 over by  Duncan, they were hauling gravel from what we call our eighty down  there. They were hauling gravel out of there, and so he said that one day  that he hauled   he had the old M and his own truck, and he said one day  he hauled twenty-one loads of gravel over there and dumped it. So, that  was probably a pretty long day for him.  Yes, a lot of hard work.  He was still running in the plowed up field chasing cows at eighty, one  year. When it was in the heat of summer, Daddy was out there running,  trying to chase a cow.  Well, all this work, what would you do for fun? Either one of you.  30  Johnston  J. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  I remember in the summer we   d usually go to Six Flags and take a trip  there just about every summer.  I remember the trip to Branson.  Ozarks, yes.  Dad bought a new tractor in 1967. And with that, why, then we got a trip  to Branson, Missouri. Got three nights and four days or something, stay  over there. Of course, they were trying to sell land over there and it was  a promotional deal. Still, we got to get away, and so we did that and  went over to Table Rock Lake. What   s the name of the caverns over  there? I forget what the name of the caverns are. And Silver Dollar City.  Carlsbad?  No, not Carlsbad.  Oh, yes. That   s right.  Well, how many ponds are there on the property today, on this 160?  There   s not really any pond. There   s a small   it   s just a holding   really,  it   s just a wash is what it is, but we had it deepened and kind of made  into a little pond. But for the main source of water for this place is just a  well out there where the windmill is.  Was there any terracing done on the place through the years?  Yes. My grandfather did that early, early years. I don   t remember what  year or anything.  And are they still in place?  They   re still there.  The only reason I was asking about ponds, wondering if you   d have  gone swimming, if that was some of the     No, not in our pond. We didn   t swim in our ponds.  Maybe fishing a time or two.  We   d go fishing on the Fourth of July.  31  F. Watkins  Johnston  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  F. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  John and Wimer would go on July 4th, and they liked to go fishing in one  of the places. I   m supposed to sit on the bank, it   s hot and everything. I  didn   t like that. But I did. (Laughs)  You used to go hunting, too.  Yes, I did a little bit of hunting back when I was in better shape than I  am now.  On the property or other places?  Oh, just wherever, yes. On our property and then some other places that  I had leased.  Do you have any trouble with coyotes or that type of thing?  No, not so much coyotes. You hear them all over the place, but we don   t  seem to have that many problems with coyotes. More problem with  coyote hunters. They want to come in on you when they   re not welcome  and that kind of thing.  Trespassing. We noticed when we were driving around some of the  fences had tires that would say,    Keep Out.    Is that the main reason the  tires are hanging there or is there another reason?  Well, yes, just people coming out from town and maybe going fishing  any time they want or hunting any time they want or even just being  nosey, I guess.  I had a friend came, had me come Monday and took me to eat. And I  didn   t know it until they came to our church and she told me that she  was born on our eighty. So, when we came back from eating, she drove  on back and wanted to go in, but I have it rented, and so I said,    Well, I  don   t think we can let you in because it   s rented.    It looked like the gate  might be   I don   t know whether it   s locked or not. But anyway, he   s got  it, and I didn   t feel like that was my place to say,    Yes, you can go in.     She wanted to walk  around . She said that there was a house down there  where she was born, and she wanted to see if they could find the  foundation. (Laughs) And there is a well down there, but I don   t know  where it was. I don   t like exploring on my place.  Well, was there a school somewhere close by, one of these one-room  schools?  I attended a one-room school my first three years of school, and then  they closed it down and I had to go to Lawton. Well, we had a choice of  32  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  J. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  Finchum  F. Watkins  going to Central High or going to Lawton Public Schools, and so they  chose Lawton.  What was it called? Do you remember?  Messing.  Messing. And it was actually one room?  Yes. Well, had one room for all the classes, and then they had the  bathrooms over here and then the kitchen back in another room. But yes,  all the classes were in the same room.  About how many students?  Oh, probably thirty-five to forty in my first grade. It dwindled after that,  I think.  Is the building still standing?  It   s been made into a house, yes.  That   s pretty neat, too. That   s all my questions. Do you have anything  else you want to add before we close?  I   m sure we have a lot added that we shouldn   t have done. (Laughs)  No, you were fine. Well, thank you very much for sharing your stories  today.  Well, thank you.  -------  ------- 
