 Finchum  Zelnicek  Today is March 22, 2012 and we   re in Hennessey, Oklahoma at the  Claude-Curry Family Farm and we have Alisa Zelnicek with us today to  talk about her family   s farm. My name is Tanya Finchum with the  Oklahoma State University Library, along with Juliana Nykolaiszyn. So,  thank you for having us today.  Thank you.  Let   s start by having you tell us how your family came to own the land to  begin with.  Okay. My great-grandfather, John Calhoun Breckenridge Curry,  homesteaded the land which is just east of Hennessey and a mile and a  half north, eight miles east, a mile and a half north, in the Run of    89,  April 22, 1889. He staked the claim as the Curry homestead and eight  years later, in 1897, he paid the sum of four dollars as the final payment  for his quarter section of land. In addition, there was a one dollar filing  fee for that. He paid fifteen cents for every one hundred words that  appeared on the filing application, which totaled eighty-five cents.  That   s the amount that he paid to the government, was five dollars and  eighty-five cents.  I found all this information out as a high school student here at  Hennessey as part of my senior project. Our English teacher that year  asked us to find out historical events in the Hennessey area, either of our  family or just of the community. I had done a recording of my  grandfather when I was younger. My mom was an only child so she  thought it was very important to have the history of her family recorded,  either by word or by tape so that as the generations moved on we would  all have a piece of that history. I think I was in middle school when I did  the first recording. As I got older, I wrote out things and then as a senior,  I took that information and put it into a paper, and so that   s what I was  5  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  reading from, there. So, that   s how our family came to get the land.  Where had he come from?  He had come from West Virginia. They initially settled in Kansas and  then when the Run of    89 became available, they participated in that. So,  they came down from the north from Kansas on that side.  Was he married at the time?  I don   t believe he was. Let me look here in my notes. I am not sure, but I  don   t believe he was. Well, yes, because he married his wife in 1892.  So, he was single when he made the Run.  Do you know how he came to choose that particular piece?  Yes, I do. This is from my granddad. I   ve learned all this from him and  my grandmother. As you may know, the term    Sooners    was applied to  people that actually came into the territory ahead of the run to figure out  where they wanted to settle, and so he was a Sooner. There   s a lot of talk  about they probably weren   t supposed to do that, but there was a lot of  people that did that. He chose that particular place because of the creeks  and the water supply that was there. It was important to him to have a  piece of land where there was a water supply for the family and for the  livestock and for growing crops. So, that is why they chose that area.  Some of his early crops were   ?  Mostly wheat.  At that stage?  Yes, yes.  Any cotton?  Not that is recorded or that we remembered. It was mostly wheat. And  then of course, they had vegetables and things to sustain their family.  It was 160 acres?  It was 120 acres, a quarter-section. Well, that   s 160. That   s correct.  There was eighty acres in cultivation, and the rest of the land is pasture  area and always has been. The way it   s set up now, he initially, the north  forty acres where the dugout is near is what he cultivated first. As the  years went on and they were able to cultivate more land, then they  6  Finchum  Zelnicek  moved over to the big area. Actually, that   s twenty acres on the north  side, and the rest of the sixty acres came later into cultivation. The south  side, the creek on the south side and on the south side of the creek has  always been pasture land. There is actually buffalo wallows evident in  that area in that part of the land. You can actually see those. Of course,  they were more evident when I was a child, but you can still see them on  satellite imagery of that part of the property.  Talk us through how it came down through the different generations to  you.  Okay, so my great-grandfather is the one that homesteaded it and in  1892, he married Mary Eva Boos, B-O-O-S, and they had their children.  My grandfather was the third child. He was named after his father, John,  but his middle name was Claude. John Claude Curry. He was always  called Claude. He said he doesn   t ever remember being called John  unless he was in trouble. Then his mother would say,    John Claude      (Laughter) We called him Granddad.  He had a brother and we called him Gene. I think his first name was  actually Eugene. He had a sister, and his mother, Mary Eva Boos, was  also from the Kansas area. Okay, they had five children. Ralph Ollie  Curry, so R.O. is what he went by. Then Alma Elizabeth Curry was his  sister and then the third child was my grandfather. His younger brother  was Roy Dewey Curry and then the youngest was James Eugene Curry,  and that   s Gene. That   s my mom   s uncle Gene. When my great-grandfather     he died in 1918 there on the farm and, of course, left the  land to his wife, Mary. She died in 1934. Then the land went to the  children.  Eventually, there was a little bit of dispute between the children about  who was going to get the land. Unfortunately, my grandfather   the  dispute was between the older children and him. He did not have a lot to  do with them as an older adult. After he came back from serving in the  navy, he worked several different farms. The older son, Ralph Ollie  Curry, actually lived on the farm after the parents died. Eventually,  because of that dispute, they went to court. I   ve got some of those  documents, here. I   m not quite sure what the dispute was about. I   m sure  it was about the land. Eventually, the land then went to my grandfather  Claude and his brother Gene, the youngest, James Eugene. I believe they  bought out the other children   s portion.  My Uncle Gene, he moved back east. He became a physician. So, he  moved back east and lived most of his life in Connecticut. So, he sold  the land eventually to my grandfather. Eventually, it was all in my  grandfather   s name. He farmed the land until he was an older gentleman.  7  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  They actually lived   they had several farms. They had that one that they  owned, the homestead, and then he rented several farms in the  Kingfisher and Logan County area. They lived on the farm they rented  out at the county line, which is Kingfisher and Logan county line.  Twelve miles east on Highway 51, there was a house there on the corner.  That   s where, as a child, I remember going to see my grandparents.  They did live on that homestead for a short time, but because that house  and barn had been there for so many years, it was a little dilapidated. So,  they ended up moving into the house on one of the farms they rented. As  he got older, he asked my father to come and help him farm, both of my  parents, George Chanley Duel and Marilyn Curry Duel. She was the  only daughter, the only child of my grandparents. They were both  teachers. They both graduated from OSU, and my dad actually has a  master   s from there also, and he was in the military. They taught and  lived in Oklahoma most of their lives, except for the time that he served  overseas in the occupation, after World War II, of Germany. They lived  there for several years.  So, when my grandfather got older and didn   t want to farm full-time, my  dad quit teaching and we moved here. We would come here in the  summers and actually help with the harvest all of my childhood. When I  was in fifth grade, my dad quit teaching and we moved here to  Hennessey and he took over the farm full-time. My grandfather still  assisted him, especially during harvest, and then my dad   s father helped,  too. They   re from Marshall. My mom, since she was the only child,  when my parents and my grandparents passed away, the farm went to  her. My parents are both deceased now, and they left the farm in a trust.  The trust is meant to carry on for a hundred years after their death so that  it stays in the family. They   ve set it up very well to where the income  from the oil well and the income that the farm generates will actually be  used to pay the property taxes and the upkeep of the farm. It will  eventually go to an heir of my brother, Mike Duel. They wanted to make  sure that that homestead stayed in the family, and so they set it up that  way. I hope that answered your question.  That   s great.  That was a lot of information or a lot of talking. I don   t know if it was  information.  So, on the homestead property today, what buildings are still there?  There   s really not anything. There is a corral, of course, that my dad had  built when he was farming because he had cattle and horses there. There  is still some parts of the barn that are there, but the house was   they  8  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  cleared that area as the house fell. I remember the house vaguely, so it  must have been taken down when I was very young. I wish I had that  date, but I don   t think I do.  When you would help with the harvest, what would you do?  As a young child, I just helped with the meal preparation, helped my  mom prepare meals and kind of hung out. Rode in the truck to take the  wheat to the elevator. As I got older, then I worked. I either drove a  wheat truck or drove a tractor. I never drove the combine. I would ride  in the combine, but the combine was something that only the older men  could do and my brother as he got older. I was more of an outdoor  person, so I helped with the meals, but as I got older I wanted to be out  doing things with the men, with my dad and my granddad. So, I did a lot  of driving the wheat truck and driving the tractor.  A wheat elevator here in Hennessey or a different one?  We usually took our wheat to Marshall. As things progressed, like when  my husband was farming, we took it either to Marshall or Bison. We  didn   t always use the Hennessey elevator. The reasoning that my dad  gave me and my granddad gave me was that the lines were always too  long in Hennessey. (Laughs) So, because my parents were both raised in  Marshall, they had a strong tie to that. My dad   s parents still lived there,  and so that was kind of home to them and they wanted to use the  Marshall elevator because that   s where their homes had been.  About how far is that from here, Marshall?  It is straight east. It is fifteen miles. There is a turnoff there and it   s two  miles to the north. There   s still a little town there. There   s not a lot of  people that live there anymore, but there   s still a little town there.  When they would do their shopping, like to get other types of groceries  and things, which town would they go to?  Marshall.  Marshall.  Yes, when we lived out there. In the summers   when my dad still taught  and we would come in the summers to help with the harvest, we would  live   in 1962, the year I was born, my grandparents actually built a  house here in Hennessey. It   s over on Manning Drive. So, they moved  from the farm to town. My grandmother wanted to live in town. So they  built a house and they paid cash for it. That was a big thing for my  9  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  parents and my grandparents. They did not like debt. So, they always  saved and paid cash for things, which is completely opposite of the way  most people do things, now.  So, in 1962, they moved to town. So, in the summers when we would  help with harvest, we actually lived out on the house at that twelve-mile  county line house where my grandparents had lived. That was a farm  that we rented and farmed for years and years. It wasn   t until my dad got  unable to farm that we finally gave that up. The original owners, which  that was the Staten place, they sold, and the people that live there now  have owned it since then.  Did your grandmother have a large garden?  She did, yes. She always did, and my granddad loved gardening, too.  Strawberries and tomatoes were the key things for them. They even had  a large garden in their backyard here at Hennessey.  So, there was a lot of canning and preserving?  Yes.  Did that place have a cellar?  Yes, it did.  A storm cellar     Yes, both the places. The place on the homestead did, as well as the  place on the twelve-mile where they lived. I remember as a child being  out there in the summers for harvest. Basically, what happened was  when school ended in May, we moved. We lived in Hennessey in the  summer or lived on the farm in the summer. It was like that until we  moved here permanently. I remember several times going to the storm  cellar out there because of tornadoes. We had one tornado out there that  hit the barn. There were several barns on that property, but it hit one of  the barns. We were in the storm cellar when that hit. I can   t remember  how old I was, but I was in elementary school. I remember that because  I wrote a paper about it when I went back to school in the fall. (Laughs)  You know how the teachers would say,    Write a paper about what you  did this summer.    Mine was about being on the farm and having the  tornado.  It was so fun because my dad would hire some of his students to come  and help with harvest in the summer. This was when we were living at  Ringwood. He was coach, also, so he knew a lot of the boys that were  10  Finchum  Zelnicek  strong and needed a summer job. There were several that came and lived  there on the farm with us and worked during the summers with us. They  did that for several summers. One of Mom   s favorite stories was that  two of the boys loved pancakes. Breakfast was the biggest meal of the  day, usually, because that   s when they were still there at the house.  So, one morning, one of the first mornings that summer when these boys  were living with us, she made pancakes. They just kept eating and eating  and asking for more. Finally, my mom says,    I don   t have any more  batter. I don   t have enough. You   ve run me out of milk and eggs and  flour. Now, I   m going to have to go to the store so I have stuff for  tomorrow.    That was one of her favorite stories was that the boys Dad  brought to help with harvest had such a ferocious appetite that they ate  everything that first morning of the summer because they were just so  hungry. (Laughs)  Then we would usually make sandwiches for lunch and take that to the  field. We had water coolers that were aluminum. I don   t know if you  remember seeing those, but you know how now they   re the plastic kind,  these were all aluminum. You would get your blocks of ice, and you   d  break up that block so it   d fit down in that cooler, and you   d put your  water on top of that. They would take that with them to the field. We had  several and that would have to last them the day, for the water. We had a  pump there outside of the house and we   d go out and you   d   I mean,  the actual pump. You   d go out and you   d pump the water out and fill the  cooler up and put it in the back of the pickup for them and off they   d go.  At lunch, we   d take the sandwiches out to them, and we usually had  sandwiches and fruit. At dinnertime, it was always late after it got dark  and they would come back to the house, and we   d have a bigger meal in  the evening. So, breakfast and dinner were there at the house and the  sandwiches we took to them for lunch.  Did they have chickens?  Yes, we had chickens. My dad loved animals and farming even though  he was a teacher. That was his profession. We always had animals. At  Ringwood, there was one house we lived in, which   and it was a small  town so you could have animals and stuff. It had several barns. He  incubated chickens and we had a lot of chickens, there. He would sell  the chickens. We had rabbits. Our neighbors behind us had goats and  they would give us goat   s milk, which I hated. My dad didn   t really like  it either, but it was a neighbor and they were giving it to you so you used  it. We never had goats, but we always had chickens, pigs, rabbits, cattle,  horses. My brother and I both were active in 4-H and FFA. We showed  animals all through elementary school and high school. My brother  actually went to college on a scholarship of livestock judging. He  11  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  graduated from OSU as well. I went there for a year, but then I decided I  wanted to be a nurse so I transferred to the nursing school in Edmond.  And we don   t have nursing. (Laughs) Well, do you remember if your  grandmother ever participated in home demonstration clubs?  Yes. Yes, and my mother, too.  Even though she taught?  Yes, she was a home-ec teacher.  Oh, okay, that would explain it, then.  Yes, and until 2010, when she had her stroke, she was still active in the  Farmerettes club here. There was another club that they   kind of a  home demonstration club. CWF, she was active in a lot of clubs. My  grandmother was, too.  Farmerettes?  Farmerettes, and they   re still active here in Hennessey. You look in the  Hennessey Clipper, there is usually a little article about the Farmerettes,  where they met this week, and that type of thing.  Did your grandmother quilt?  My mother did not, but my grandmother did. I have a lot of her quilts.  My great-grandmother did. I have some of her quilts. My mother was an  active seamstress, but quilting was never   I can   t say that she never  quilted, but that was not her main thing she liked to do. She sewed a lot  of clothes for us. My grandmother and my mom   I remember having  more clothes as a child made than I ever bought. Of course, when I got  into high school I wanted clothes from the store. Easter and at the start  of school were the two times of year when we got new shoes and a new  dress. So, usually, they made our dresses, but as I got older I remember  going to Enid and getting to shop for a dress.  Well, since we   re a little bit on Easter, other holidays like Christmas and  Thanksgiving   how were those celebrated?  Usually, just a family gathering at my grandparents    house here in  Hennessey. Both my mom and my grandmother were wonderful cooks.  My grandmother was especially good with pies and everything, really.  So, that was a big treat for us to get to go over there and have homemade  rolls and homemade pie and just everything that you could imagine that  12  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  was good.  Her last name was B-O-O-S?  That was my great-grandmother, yes.  Do you know where had they come from, initially?  They were from Kansas, also.  But even prior to that?  I don   t know   oh, I do know. She was born in Iowa in 1863.  They were probably used to farming, there, too.  Yes, and then my great-grandfather was born in Ravenwood, West  Virginia, in 1854. And then they both died on that farm.  Talk a little bit more about the house you remember as a child going to?  Indoor plumbing, electricity, that type of thing.  Sure, yes. It was a two-story white frame house. A really big house. It  had a nice big front porch that faced Highway 51, faced south. I  remember one summer, we were living there and we were all asleep. In  the middle of the night, there was this terrible racket. We all jumped up  and went downstairs. We slept upstairs, my parents slept downstairs. But  we went downstairs and a truck that was driving by on Highway 51 had  had a blowout and that tire had come through the front window.  Fortunately, the window that it came through was the living room and  not my parents bedroom because they slept right by that window.  We had no air conditioning in the summer. Of course, growing up, I  don   t   until we moved into this house, we never had central heat and  air. We moved here in 1980. We had water coolers. But out at the farm  in the summers, we didn   t have any type of air conditioning or cooler.  We had fans. My favorite fan was a round circular fan that sat on the  floor and the air went out from all sides. I would play like tea party and  things like that on top of that because it was cool. It kept you cool.  Summers were hot out there, as you can imagine   Oklahoma. As I got  older, one of the treats I would get before I started working on the farm  was my grandparents would come and get me and bring me into  Hennessey to the pool. They had swimming pool, and we never lived  anywhere that had a swimming pool. So, we would come into town as an  occasional treat and get to go swimming.  13  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Were there ponds on the original, on the homestead?  Yes. Yes.  Would you go swimming in those?  Well, we waded in the creeks. We didn   t really swim in the ponds. Dad  didn   t feel like that was safe. It wasn   t a very big pond. The creeks were  the main water source, there.  Had they built the pond or was it natural?  I think it was natural. It   s not there anymore. It was on the north side, the  north side of the farm. Now, the house where they lived there at the  twelve-mile intersection, that had a big pond in the back, but he didn   t  let us swim in that because it wasn   t safe.  Well, did he do any terracing?  Yes, yes, my dad did. He terraced that place. Hired someone that was an  expert in that and they came out and terraced the homestead so it would  promote the drainage.  So, it was for drainage?  Yes, promote the drainage, yes.  Do you have a favorite memory?  There are so many.  Any mischief?  Well, I had a lot of broken bones as a child. I was telling this to one of  my patients not that long ago. I   m afraid of heights now, but as a child I  liked to jump off of things. So, we had a cow tank that was right beside  the barn, and I thought it might be fun to pretend like that was my  swimming pool. It wasn   t good enough to just play around in it, so I  decided to climb on the roof of the barn and jump. I broke   I can   t  remember what I broke, but I broke something. I was just always a little  bit of a klutz, falling off things or jumping off things, and things like  that.  But I think one of my favorite memories is probably harvest in the  summer and the interaction with my grandparents, both my dad   s parents  and my mom   s parents. It was really a family event all summer, fixing  14  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  the meals. During the school year, we didn   t get to see them very much,  and so that was kind of a special event. And then to come to my  grandparents    house in Hennessey was a real treat because they had  central air conditioning and they had a swimming pool in town. My  granddad, he made homemade ice cream and I got to be the one to sit on  it while he cranked it. He made popcorn at night for me. Sometimes I  would come into town and spend the night with them. So, it was kind of  like a big slumber party and summer event.  You mentioned chunks of ice. Did you have to have an ice plant or where  were the chunks of ice   ?  They went to Marshall and got the ice. There was somewhere in  Marshall that you could go buy     Blocks?     big chunks of ice, yes. I can   t remember where, but I remember my  mom,    We   ve got the ice in the back of the pickup. You boys go get it.     Did that place have indoor plumbing?  It did have indoor plumbing, sorry, yes. Early, when my grandparents  first lived there, it did not. There was an outhouse and it was back  behind the house. There was a large cottonwood tree. It was still there  when I was a kid, but they didn   t use it. They had plumbed the house.  The good ole days.  Yes. Yes.  How was the house heated? With wood or propane or what?  Yes, eventually, it was propane, but there was a wood stove in there. We  were never here in the winters. My grandparents moved to town in    62,  the year I was born. So, I don   t really remember much about that. I wish  I had written more of that down.  Was church a vital part of the   ?  Yes. Yes, it was.  They would come into Marshall or Hennessey?  Well, at first they went to Marshall and then when they moved to town,  they became members of the Christian church here. And they were  15  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  members there from    62 until they passed away. When we moved to  Hennessey, we joined that church, too.  And Sunday afternoons, anything special going on, then, food?  (Laughter)  Sunday church dinner   I mean, dinner after church was kind of the big  meal of the week.  And usually what would they have?  Roast or fried chicken. My grandmother made the best fried chicken and  homemade rolls. I   ve still got that recipe. I don   t make them, but I need  to. (Laughs)  Well, if you didn   t come during the winter, you wouldn   t have come at  Christmas?  We did spend Christmas and Thanksgiving with my grandparents. My  dad   s parents from the time I can remember, after he retired from  Champlin, in Enid, they lived in Marshall. But in the winter, they would  go to South Texas.  They were snowbirds.  Yes. They had a travel trailer. At first it was just a camper on the back of  a pickup and then they got a travel trailer. They were always gone  during Christmas and Thanksgiving down there. So, we always spent the  holidays with my mom   s parents here in Hennessey.  So, as far as you know, your great-grandfather didn   t do anything but  farm, didn   t have a job off of the farm.  Right. I   m pretty sure that   no, not that I   I think that   s all.  And your grandfather, did he?  He farmed, he worked as a cowboy. There   s one story, and I   ve got a  picture where he was working on cattle drives. And they would drive  cattle as far north as Nebraska and then come back this direction. He  worked on the Bar X Ranch near Hennessey for almost three years. Oh,  that   s my great-grandfather working the Bar X Ranch near Hennessey.  That   s how he knew of this area, and that   s how he knew to look in this  area for the land.  Just trying to figure out if they had to do supplemental income in order  16  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Nykolaiszyn  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  to keep the farm going.  Right, I think it was just mostly animals, cattle, and things like that. But  I think farming was the main source of income for them.  And then your great-grandmother and your grandmother didn   t work  outside the home.  No. Well, actually, my grandmother did get her teaching certificate at  the teacher   s college at   which is where UCO is now. But she didn   t  teach   she taught at Lone Star School. They   re actually doing a     there   s a gentleman from Hennessey, Richard Seminak, that   s working  on a book about Lone Star. Lone Star School was actually where my  mother went to elementary school. It was out east near that twelve-mile  section where my grandparents lived and my mother was raised. So,  there was a school and she would walk to Lone Star to go to school. My  grandmother taught there.  One-room, two-room?  A one-room school, yes.  Well, do you have a first tractor story? Who taught you how to drive the  tractor?  My dad and my grandfather taught me. That was a big deal to get to  drive anything. Pickup truck, a wheat truck, a tractor because it showed  that they trusted you to do that.  Before you were sixteen?  Yes, before I was sixteen. Yes, and that was typical. If you worked on  the farm, you didn   t drive on the road, but you drove in the fields and  that type of thing.  Had to learn how to change gears, then, I would think.  Yes, yes. One of the probably most memorable events of working in the  field was I was in high school and my brother would   ve been   he   s five  years younger than I am so he would have been in middle school. We  were living here, then. They did swath crops for hay. I was driving the  swather on that twelve-mile farm. My brother was on the farm we rented  across the road on the tractor. It was one of those days where it was hot  and being a teenage girl, the swather didn   t have a cab on it. So, I  thought,    This will be a great way to get a tan.    So, I wore what we  called back then, tube top, under my overalls, but I had a t-shirt on over  17  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Nykolaiszyn  so my dad wouldn   t know. But when I got out there and got on the  swather, I took the t-shirt off and just undid the overall straps so I  wouldn   t have strap lines.  I had taken water with me, but I was not really drinking a whole lot of  water. I was just kind of focused on the task and thinking about what  teenage girls   whatever I was thinking about. All of a sudden, I felt  really dizzy and lightheaded, and so I knew I better stop. So, I stopped  the swather, turned it off, and as I was climbing down off of it, I passed  out. My brother, he was not old enough to drive a car, he was in middle  school. But he saw that the swather had stopped, and he   s on the farm  next door just going around in the tractor disking or plowing. He  watched and didn   t see me walking around. The swather didn   t start  back up, and he knew something was wrong.  So, he stopped the tractor, got off, and ran across the road and found me.  He pulled me into a shaded area and got some water in me. I woke up  enough to drink.    Drink some water,    he said. Then he ran and got the  car that we had driven out. I had driven him out. I had a driver   s license  then, and we had driven out to the farm. He drove that car out into the  field, got me in the car, and he was small. He said that he was so scared  driving back to Hennessey, and he couldn   t see over the steering wheel.  So, he was having to pull himself up to see where he was going, and he  knew he didn   t want to drive on the highway so he drove the back roads  all the way in.  We got to the house. We didn   t live here, then. We lived here in town,  but we lived on another street in a house. My mom was home and he got  me   he ran into the house and got my mom, and they got me into the  bathtub and got me in the water. So, I was fine. But it was just one of  those things as a teenager that you do, thinking,    I   m going to get a tan,  I   m going to get my work done. Earn some brownie points with my  parents getting all that done. It   ll be a great day.    And then it ends up,  my brother kind of saves my life, you know. (Laughter)  Sunburn, too, on top of that?  Yes, sunburn, too. Heat stroke     Would they generally wear a hat or some protection from the sun?  Yes, and that was always a big thing.    Make sure you put your hat on  when you   re out there     and of course, I didn   t have a hat on.  You mentioned that you were quite adventurous as a kid and had lots of  broken bones. Did your family have any home remedies when you   d get  18  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Nykolaiszyn  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  sick or get bee stung?  One of the main things I remember   what   s the name of it? It was a  liquid, Campho-Phenique was what we used for mosquito bites and  things like that. But on cuts and scrapes, I think it was called  Mercurochrome? Is that right?  It would burn like crazy, yes.  Yes. It had a little glass dropper that came when you took the cap off,  and then you put that dropper on the cut. It was red, if I remember  correctly. But, yes, it would burn. That was supposed to disinfect and  help with healing. There was an ointment that my grandmother always  had for burns, you know like if you burn when we were cooking  chicken. As you   re learning, you always get burned because you put the  chicken in too hot of an oil or things like that. So, she had an ointment  that she made up that she put on burns.  Speaking of chickens, did you have to help butcher any?  Yes.  That leads me to the question I like to ask. I think everybody has a  different technique. What was the technique in your family?  Wringing their necks. (Laughs)  You   d be surprised how many different methods there are.  To me, it was very brutal. I didn   t like that. But, it was     It was just part of life.     just part of life. I loved watching the incubator, watching the eggs  hatch in the incubator. That was so fun. And then when we had all those  little chicks, you know, it was neat.  Did they encourage your brother to learn how to use a BB gun and rifle  and that type of thing?  No, my dad was not a big hunter. So, no, my brother doesn   t really   not  real big into guns. Now, my husband, that   s another story. My husband  and son, they love guns. My grandparents, my dad   s parents, had several  guns that they passed on to him that we have now.  Are your great-grandparents and your grandparents buried here in  19  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Hennessey or Marshall?  Marshall. Yes, everyone is out at the North Marshall Cemetery, which is  several miles north of Marshall. That road that comes off 51 that goes  into Marshall, you keep going north two miles and then it   s half a mile  back to the west. It   s called the North Marshall Lion Cemetery.  Interesting name.  And we still donate to that. I plan to do that all my life, to help with the  upkeep of it. My mom, she was very generous in that. They had some  bricks left over from building this house, and so she donated that and  labor to build an entry fence there at the cemetery with the brick pillar  and metal fence. There   s two entrances there that she had done. So, that  was very important to her. Cemeteries, visiting the cemetery, flowers at  Memorial Day and Fourth of July and Christmas and then on the date of  their birthday and that type of thing was always very important to my  mom. Even after my dad passed away, there   s pictures of her and some  of the church ladies and they would go out and decorate. They called it  decorating the grave. I remember as a kid, she kept back in that closet in  their bedroom, boxes of artificial flowers. And there was the ones that  she put out on Memorial Day and the ones on Fourth of July and the  ones on their birthday and the ones at Christmas. So, that was a big  event.  In this last year, on Memorial Day, my mom had just passed away. So, I  came back and several of her cousins were in town because their  families are buried out there as well. So, we had a lunch out at my  mother   s cousin   s house, which she still lives east of Hennessey. My  cousins were there and we got to visit with them. Memorial Day was  always a   people came to Mom and Dad   s house because this was the  closest thing to the Marshall Cemetery. My mom would cook, we   d have  a meal, and they   d all go to the cemetery.  Tradition.  Tradition, yes.  You mentioned building this house, did they have any reason why they  didn   t build on the homestead place if they were going to build anyway?  Well, my mom didn   t want to live out in the country. She wanted to live  in town. And she taught here at Hennessey, and so it just kind of made  sense. Once my brother started school, then she went back to teaching.  She taught here for about thirty years. So, it just kind of made sense, at  least to my parents, to build here in town or live here in town. We rented  20  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  several houses here in Hennessey before we built this. So, the year I  graduated, April of 1980, we moved here to this house. I graduated in  May and left to go to Stillwater in August. So, it was kind of a big year  because my parents had a new house. But this is where I always came  back to in the summers, to visit, holidays and things.  Well, it seems like education was an important part of your family, too.  It was very important, yes. When my husband and I had our kids, I told  him, I said,    I don   t know how my parents did it, but they never told me  I had to go to college, but I knew that I would go to college.    So, it was  just something that they never told us that we had to. I think because we  saw that their education was important to them, I think it was just  instilled in you. So, my sister, my brother, and I are college graduates.  My sister and I are both nurses, and my brother, he has a degree in  agriculture, but that   s not his profession. He has an insurance agency in  Tennessee. He lives in Memphis.  Each one of you have children?  Yes. My sister has two children. She   s the oldest and her children are  grown. I have two children. We both had boy and girl. Then my brother,  he has a little boy that is six. They actually lost their first child. He was  born with a heart defect. He lived fourteen months and then passed  away. They had their second child.  The reason I ask is you mentioned that it would be his children that get  to carry on the farm, even though you and your sister both had sons.  Right, right. But they wanted it in the Duel name. They wanted someone  with the name of Duel to have it, and that   s fine. My parents told us that  years and years ago. I mean, I remember that my whole life. They had a  plan, and this is what the plan was. It was not our right to question that  plan. That   s what they wanted.  I noticed the name of the farm today is the Claude Curry, rather than his  father   s.  Yes, right.  What went into your decision to do that?  Well, I think when my grandfather bought out his brothers and sisters,  that dispute, and the land became his is when they named it that.  Okay, that would make sense.  21  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  And when the centennial farm recognition came about, we had to choose  a name, and so that     And your parents were the ones who chose it at that point.  And my grandparents, too. They were a part of that decision. I remember  that was a big event, to get that.  And family farm versus ranch or homestead.  Yes.  Significance, there, too.  Right, right.  Is there anything you want to tell us that I haven   t asked about? Did the  house have a porch? The one you remember as a child, did it have a  porch?  Yes. We always sat out on the porch in the evenings because that   s  where the breeze was the best. So, after that evening meal in the  summer, we   d sit out there. My mom and dad were both avid readers  and I am, too. So, reading was a big part. Going to the Hennessey library  was a big deal for me because where we lived at that time in Ringwood,  we didn   t have a library. We had a library at the school, but not a true  library. It was a real treat. I was always, in the summers, part of their  summer reading program, here. An additional treat was to go to Enid to  the big library.  I noticed the one in town, now, is in the old high school.  It is. It is.  Where was it before that?  It was on this north end of town. The building is gone, now. But where  the park is on Main Street, there was a building there, and that   s where it  was.  So it was smaller, but still a library.  Yes. Oh, but the smell was so wonderful. You walk in there and you  smell those books. I would be there for hours. Grandma, if it was a rainy  day and we weren   t working, or when I was young enough and I didn   t  22  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  Finchum  Zelnicek  work on the farm, she   d go and drop me off at the library while she went  to get groceries and run her errands and things.  Safe enough to do it in those days.  Yes. I loved the library. I still do. I still love to go to the library and just  look at the books.  So, when was the last time you walked all 160 acres?  A long time ago.  It   s walkable, though, isn   t it?  Yes.  Are there any fences?  Yes, my parents     The older ones, too?  No, my parents updated all the fences when they were still alive, and so  no. But they updated all the fences so they are pretty well. I know that  was a big thing that my parents saved for, was they were saving money  for several years to have good fences put in at the farm.  Well, the old fences, do you have any information about them?  I just remember they were pieces of wood and strands of barbed wire. I  remember my dad taking all that down. He had a scar on his chest from  out at the homestead when before we moved here, he was helping my  granddad load cattle. Somehow, he got thrown into the fence or fell into  the fence. It was an old barbed wire fence, and it cut his chest open there  and he had to have stitches. He always had that scar. Even though he  was in the military, he   s like,    The only scar I ever got was out there  running cattle with your granddad and that fence.     Well, good memories.  Yes, it was.  If there isn   t anything else, we   ll say thank you very much.  Okay. Thank you.  23  Finchum  Zelnicek  It   s been a pleasure.  Yes, me too. I   ve loved it.  -------  ------- 
