Kay Weyen, Steve Hall, Gaynell Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  Today is July 23, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum along with Juliana  Nykolaiszyn. We   re in Chelsea, Oklahoma? Or Adair. Mayes County to  do our Centennial Farm Project and we   re with the OSU Library in the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Today we   re with Steve  Hall, Gaynell Hall and Kay Weyen. So thank you for having us into your  home today. Let   s start by having you tell us how the family initially  came to have this piece of land.  Do you want me to tell it? (Laughs) My husband   s grandfather, he was  at Fort Scott, Kansas and he met Kate Parrish.  Rogers.  Rogers. They were married and he told her one day, he says,    If I  married an Indian, I could get some land in Oklahoma.    She had never  told him that she was Cherokee. Whenever she did, she said,    We can.     Because she was Cherokee. So they came down here. He had been down  here before and knew what piece of land he liked. So they came down  here and he plowed around what he could plow around twice in one day  and then they went to Tahlequah and claimed it. That   s how they came  here. Then every time they had a child, they would plow around another  section of land and then go to Tahlequah, which was a two week trip, on  wagon and horses, and claim their land.  How many acres on the initial?  He had eight quarter sections, really, because they had six children and  he went around for each one of them.  That   s a pretty large acreage. Is most of it still in the family, today?  5  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  No, no. This is the only piece that   s here today. This belonged to   this  was their allotment, but my husband   s mother and her husband bought it  from the other children when the older ones died and the rest of them all  went to California, mostly. (Laughs)  So the first family had six children. Do you know what the early crops  were, or products on the farm?  He had fruit trees, mostly, I think. James South did, his grandfather. I  don   t know what else he raised, do you?  I don   t know what he raised, but he rented the land out to the other  farmers around because he had been injured in the Civil War. I think he  did quite a bit, but then he couldn   t do some things, because he was shot  in the shoulder and it never healed properly.  And we   re sitting in one of the original structures from the property?  This is the original part of the house.  Tell us a little about it.  Well, there   s an upstairs and there   s a basement. Same size as this room.  They had no kitchen in the house. The kitchen was out there where the  pump is. Mr. South wanted his boys up and dressed and going to work  as soon as they ate breakfast. And this part right here was   there was  windows here at one time, and that   s where they went down into the  basement. Now we go in off over here. Let   s see. I don   t know too much  more about the house, actually. That   s the original chimney over there.  And you were telling us what the walls were     The woods are one-by-four tongue and groove oak.  And do you know if they were gathered from the farm here or  somewhere around here?  I don   t know. I don   t know whether they were or not.  Basement was for the cellar, canning goods and stuff?  Yes.  I   m assuming they had a large garden, too?  6  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  Evidently, they did. Because the basement is the same size as this room.  Were there any other structures?  Well, of course, they had their kitchen out south of the house here. I   m  sure they had a smokehouse, and we do have a picture of one building  out here to the east that is not there anymore.  That was basically for the horses, and that was later.  Yeah, that was later.  Later when Clint and Connie lived here. The doctor from Adair would  leave his horse here and change horses as he had to go on a call and then  come back and change his horse and go back to Adair after to the call.  And who were they?  Clint and Connie? Connie was James South   s youngest daughter.  My husband   s mother and dad.  So there were six boys?  No, there were two girls.  There were actually four girls. There were actually eight kids, because  James had been married before and had children from a previous  marriage. Not all of them came to Oklahoma that I can find out. I can   t  prove that all of them came, but James and Kate had six children, I  believe.  Just curious if just the boys had to get up and go to work.  Well, I don   t know. Connie being the baby, you know, probably didn   t  have to do much. (Laughter) Most of the kids were born here, weren   t  they?  James and Kate   s children were all born here, I believe.  They were born here in the house, yeah. My husband was born here in  the house, too.  James died here in the living room. He went through gall bladder  surgery and died during the surgery here in the living room.  7  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  The surgery was actually here in the living room?  Yes. This was actually a hospital during the flu epidemic.  Like the Asian flu back in the  early 1900s .  They had people upstairs and downstairs and if anyone died from  upstairs, there used to be double windows upstairs, and they would take  the bodies out through the windows so they wouldn   t bring it down  through the living room.  That   s where Grandma South died, upstairs, with the flu. Took her out  the windows up there.  Different times.  Very.  Any other interesting stories attached to the house?  My husband had a cousin that used to come here and visit. He said he  could remember Grandma South sitting on those stairs over there  smoking her corn cob pipe. (Laughter) My husband, see, didn   t know his  grandparents at all, because they died before he was born.  So in the second generation that had the farm, what did they do for their  living?  They had a dairy. They had the first Grade A dairy in Mayes County.  That   s how they got through the Depression was because they had a  dairy, and the rest of the kids all went to California. Granddad Hall,  Clint, he raised   I remember him planting corn and oats when we were  first married. He always had a great big garden. I was wondering if you  could think of anything else. (Laughter)  Did the dairy have a name?  No, I don   t think so. I don   t remember it.  While we   re thinking about it, what is the farm called today?  Just South-Hall Ranch, I guess. (Laughter)  South-Hall Ranch, okay. What   s the total acreage today?  We have about one hundred and twenty five acres here. Actually, it   s a  8  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  quarter of a section, less the turnpike.  Oh, they took some of it?  Yeah, yeah.  I guess that   s a touchy subject then?  No, no. I really think it helped them a whole lot because, I mean, they  didn   t have much money and, of course, they got paid for their land so I  really think it helped them.  Then the third generation?  Dad and you.  (Laughs) Yeah. We moved out here in 1974 after Myrl   s dad passed  away in    73. His mother went to California to live. This is the only place  she had ever lived in her life except for a few years in Chelsea. We just  had cows, mostly what we did. We had an antique shop for awhile and  we restored furniture, antiques or whatever anybody brought us. My  husband worked in Tulsa for oil companies.  Supplemental income for the farm     Yeah, I think he did that for something for me to do. (Laughter)  And his parents, did they have supplemental income too? Or was it all  just the farm?  No. It was just what they got here. His dad was in World War I and he  had a little bit of a pension, because he was wounded, but that wasn   t  enough to keep them going. They seemed to make it okay.  Where would the children have gone to school?  South Branch.  And about how far is that from here?  About three-quarters of a mile. You went past it down here on the  corner.  Walking distance, then.  Yeah, Mr. South donated the land for the school down there.  9  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finichum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  So your children didn   t necessarily grow up living here, but they visited  here.  They grew up mostly in Tulsa, and we lived in Atlanta for awhile, too,  but they went to school at Adair. Graduated high school from Adair.  Steve still works for the school, him and his wife, both. Kay, she works  in Tulsa for Spirit and she graduated from OSU, so. (Laughter)  When you decided to come back here, was it a hard decision or was it  something you always figured you   d do at some point?  It wasn   t anything we really talked about. After his dad passed away, his  mother was going to California, we just decided we wanted to buy the  farm from her so we did.  Did he have siblings, your husband?  Yes. They all live in California.  So they weren   t interested in having a farm ?  No. Said they weren   t. He   s the youngest and he had no relatives here,  but he didn   t have any desire to go to California so we just came out  here to live.  Did he share memories of living on the farm, himself?  Oh, yeah. He loved to talk about it. So I got the letter about doing this, I  thought, I didn   t know whether I wanted to do it or not, but I knew he   d  be absolutely thrilled to death. (Laughter)  Share a few of the stories you remember.  I remember him talking about riding the horses and going through the  barbed wire fence with them. How they had to haul water so much. They  didn   t have electricity here until 1947 and that was after they sold the  dairy. So they had gasoline milking machines and oh, I know he always  said he didn   t want a dairy. That was too confining.  Did he talk about chores that he had?  I don   t remember him saying too much about that. I know he had chores  to do.  I   m assuming there was an outhouse.  10  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Yes.  He would have slept upstairs?  Yes.  All the bedrooms were?  I don   t know, in the olden days, I guess most of them were upstairs.  There   s three bedrooms upstairs and one of them I know was Myrl   s,  and I guess his sister and brother probably slept up there, too, but of  course, his mom and dad had built onto this house a lot. They had two  bedrooms downstairs and, of course, they slept there. I just don   t  remember him ever talking too much about when the kids were all here  at home. They heated with wood and cooked on wood, and we   ve got  the wood cook stove in the kitchen in there.  Did his mother quilt, do you know?  Some, not a lot. I can remember her and Myrl   s sister making some  quilts, but they didn   t hand quilt like they do nowadays sometimes     And when they would take their products to market, where would they  take them?  We went to Adair. Adair Co-op out there, I   ve got a book at the house. It  shows where they sold all their eggs and milk at Adair.  And that   s about how far from here?  Seven miles.  They had a big sale barn at Pryor. I can remember Myrl talking about  going there, because he liked to eat their hamburgers, and he got the  nickname of Wimpy from eating so many hamburgers. I can remember  him talking about buying bananas there, because they were always on  the stalk and they had to cut them off. (Laughter) I have to have my  memory jogged sometimes.  Do you know if they participated in any of the soil conservation projects,  building ponds and that sort of thing?  Yeah, they did. They had terraces built, and probably their ponds were  built that way, too. Most people around here did that, I remember.  11  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Nykolaiszyn  G. Hall  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  About how many ponds are on the property today?  There   s three.  Man made, too?  Yeah, they   re man made.  So today what   s done on the farm?  I still have some cows, have a garden, such as it is. (Laughs)  Any of the original fruit trees still alive?  Yes, we have some of the original pecan trees. I guess that   s about all of  the original that   s here.  When you purchased the farm in the    70s, can you tell us a little bit  about the structures on the farm in the    70s and any improvements you  made through the years?  Yeah, of course, we remodeled the house from top to bottom. The barns,  we put tin on all of them, but they   re still the original barns. We built  one new barn out here, which I use for a garage now. Most everything  else is really just about the same.  There   s twenty-two structures on the place.  One other thing, Myrl   s mother and dad belonged to a church that met in  the homes. Every fall, they would have their church convention here and  they set up tents and I guess you might just call it a regular old tent  meeting, you know. So they had built a lot of buildings around and they  used them for sleeping quarters and stuff. We tore down a lot of them.  That   s the reason there   s so many buildings around here, a lot of them.  This one building out here, they used it as their kitchen. It was called the  cookhouse and we still call it the cookhouse.  What religion was it?  They really didn   t have a name. They just met in homes and their  ministers were called workers and they went in pairs. Two women or  two men traveled together.  Twenty-two structures?  Well, there   s different outhouses scattered out. They had working  12  Weyen  G. Hall  S. Hall  G. Hall  S. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  quarters out in the fields, houses, different barns.  There was one little building out here that was Charlie   s house. He was  one of the ministers that would come by. That was his house.  There was one down here, too, called Sadie   s house. She was one of the  ladies. We called it Sadie   s house.  The last convention they had out here, there was about six hundred here  for service.  They would stay like four days.  Four days.  The house was completely turned over to their group except their  bedroom, which was back in there. That was the only thing that was  theirs.  When was the last one?     73.  It was the same year that Mr. Hall passed away. They had that fall, the  last one here. That was going to be the last one here. They were moving  somewhere else.  It wasn   t just because you took over?  No, right. It wasn   t just because we took over. (Laughs)  Well do the two of you have some memories you want to share of your  times on the farm?  I don   t know of anything. (Laughs) We had to pick up rocks. Every  weekend we picked up rocks.  Out of the fields?  Yes.  (Laughs) This is the rockiest place in the country.  What would you do with them?  Throw them in a ditch somewhere.  13  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  S. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  S. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  (Laughter) We had to take them up out of the pasture. Take the rocks up  out of the pasture.  Move them to a gulley?  Yeah. But mostly we were constantly remodeling this house by the time  we moved out here.  We worked on this house seven years before we got it finished.  They took it down to the original structure because over the years, add  room here, room here and nothing was cohesive around it. So it was all  taken off around the outside and then put on a little more symmetrically.  We started in the basement and went straight up.  Dug the basement out another foot or two. Carried it out in five gallon  buckets and then carried all the cement and stuff back down and actually  poured it down there.  My senior year of high school I had to go down the steps with   there  was a high chair there. There was no steps. You went down the high  chair to get down because there was no steps yet. (Laughs)  We made our kids work. They learned a lot, but they really didn   t realize  how much they   d learned until they got out on their own and started  fixing their own houses. We   ve got another son, and they all three know  how to build.  As opposed to cutting hay and hauling hay?  (Laughter) They did that too.  Involved with any 4-H or FFA?  FFA.  The boys were in FFA.  I had hogs. Pigs. Yeah, show pigs. When we were in school, that   s about  it.  Take them to the county fair?  Yep. There, Tulsa, Muskogee, Collinsville, different places.  14  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  So Mayes County Fair would be where?  At Pryor.  It   s the biggest town in the county. They   ve got one of the best fairs.  Yeah, it   s one of the biggest around.  Pigs especially. They have lots of pigs down there.  So FFA, if it wasn   t 4-H, then you didn   t go to Roundup in Stillwater?  I did that. I was in 4-H forever. I don   t know how many times I went to  Roundup in Stillwater. All during high school and grade school, too.  Probably from the time I was about twelve years old, I guess.  So you grew up where?  About five miles south of here.  So close to home. Did that play into coming here? You didn   t have to  move from across the state.  Yeah. Yeah.  And you chose to do all the remodeling stuff instead of just bulldozing it  and starting over?  Yeah. We were told we might as well burn it down, but we decided we  weren   t going to. I just thought it was kind of neat to   I   d always had  this idea in the back of my head that I   d like to remodel an old house. So  we did.  So if electricity came in    47, then indoor plumbing would have come  shortly thereafter?  Yeah, they put in a bathroom shortly after that. It was in probably    56 or     57, we got rural water out here, which helped a whole lot. When my  husband and I were first married, we built a house up here on the hill  going out the driveway. When they dug the turnpike down here, they hit  a spring that run really, really good and the water was so good. So they  built a tank down there to catch the water in and we piped that up to our  house when we built it. We moved into it in 1956.  Halls used this too,  here, until rural water came.   Been on the property     15  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  S. Hall  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  A long time.  A long time. Was there a cistern at some point?  Yes, Granddad South dug the cistern out here. It   s still out here. Where  that pump is out there. You can probably see it out the window there.  It   s a hand dug cistern, I think. Times when we needed water, we would  use that water. If the water wasn   t on or cut off or something, we   d use  water out of there.  Did your husband ever talk about the first tractor that they would have  had?  No. I don   t remember, but I think we   ve still got it. (Laughter) See out  there, I think that   s the first tractor that Granddad ever bought.  If they worked, worked, worked, what was fun? What did they do for  fun?  (Laughter) Well, they didn   t have any electricity so they didn   t have a  radio. They didn   t believe in radio.  They didn   t believe in radio and TVs out here.  No. And they didn   t even have a telephone either until after we got  married.  Connie played the piano by ear, and she was taught by her mother. What  she said was that all of them could play a musical instrument of some  sort.  I was thinking about that yesterday. I guess that   s what they did, they got  together and played music. But she played the piano every day. She died  when she was ninety-two and she played every day that she felt like it.  That was just one of her things. She taught music, too, I think. I don   t  know what Granddad did. All I can remember him doing was sitting out  in the yard either reading the newspaper or reading his bible. Of course,  in the spring, he had his garden and looked after his cows, mostly.  Well, since they participated in the soil conservation and terracing, did  county agents come out and do the   ?  I don   t know. I wasn   t around here, then. (Laughter)  Well, even when you were living here, though, were you involved with  16  G. Hall  S. Hall  G. Hall  Weyen  Nykolaiszyn  Weyen  S. Hall  G. Hall  Nykolaiszyn  S. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  home demonstration or homemakers clubs?  No, I never have been. Mrs. Hall wasn   t either.  She never drove.  No, she never drove a car. She didn   t drive because somebody once tried  to tell her how to drive. She did drive at one time, but then she  decided   then when Myrl   s sister got to be sixteen and got her license,  she just took over the driving and Mrs. Hall never drove again. Mr. Hall  was a mechanic when they were first married, when they lived in  Chelsea awhile. He worked in one of the garages up there. He was a  good mechanic.  He   d gone to Wilburton and went to college down there on the GI Bill to  learn how to be a mechanic.  When you moved here, you were talking about remodeling the home  when you all were attending high school. Did you have other chores that  you had to do?  I raised bottle calves. I had to get up and feed them in the morning. Mom  fed them at noon, and I fed them at night.  I was messing with hogs, is all I did.  Pigs mostly. They were already in high school when we moved out here  so they went right into FFA, and we got them some pigs and some  calves.  Was Adair a smaller high school from where you came from? Was that a  hard transition for you?  Yes.  Very much. Very different. I came from a high school that had six  hundred in my class to one that had thirty-six.  Big difference.  (Laughter) Yep.  In a good way, I guess, too.  Myrl graduated from Adair, too. He went into the army. This all  happened before we were married. He got out in    55 and then he went to  17  Finchum  G. Hall  Nykolaiszyn  G. Hall  Nykolaiszyn  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  Finchum  school on the GI Bill, too, at the Oklahoma School of Accountancy in  Tulsa. He also went to a farm school that they had after we moved out  here that the veterans had at Adair. He went over there for awhile. He  refereed basketball. We are big sports fans, all of us. When the kids were  little, they played ball and my husband played ball, and I just got them  where they had to be. (Laughs) Steve played football at Adair and our  other son played basketball, mostly. You played basketball, too, didn   t  you? Kay played basketball, softball. I   m just a fan. I   ve never played  anything.  I know a lot of farm kids couldn   t do that because they had to get home  and do the chores and they had to ride the bus so there wasn   t a way to  get home. They couldn   t participate.  My husband played basketball at Adair, and he either had to walk home  or hitch a ride home or they had maybe practice set where he could ride  the bus home. He had friends, too, that brought him home. One or two of  his friends had a car. I   ve heard him talk about that.  What were holidays like?  Big. (Laughs)  Where would the family get together?  After we moved out here, a lot of times, they came here. I have a brother  and a sister that live down the road here, and they have families, and we  would all gather here. I think there   s about fifty of us now and the last  few years, we   ve gathered in Adair at the community center. We used to  come here to the house or we would go to my mom and dad   s. We  always have big dinners on Thanksgiving and Christmas.  Cut the tree on the farm? Cedar, probably?  Yes, we have. Don   t anymore, but. (Laughs) We have     We butchered a cow one winter or fall. I was really little. It was the only  one I ever saw and Dad butchered it.  When you were younger, you would be coming here for your  grandparents.  About every weekend, yeah.  Do you remember much about your grandmother in the kitchen?  18  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  S. Hall  She baked on Saturday mornings. She baked cinnamon rolls and bread.  Cinnamon rolls had about a half inch of brown sugar in the bottom of  the pan that you could just pour. (Laughs) Then bread, I don   t know, she  made about half a dozen loaves of bread. That was their sandwich bread.  She did her wash on Monday, and Tuesday I think she ironed. Friday,  we went to town. We took turns. We would stay two weeks out here at a  time in the summer time. We   d go to town and we could buy one toy  and that was basically our Christmas toy in the middle of the summer.  That was it. But she stayed at the house and the house was hers. She  cleaned, she had flowers. All the way around the house, any place she  could put a flower, she put a flower. I know she had seventy or eighty  different kinds of African violets in this house so flowers were her thing.  A big thing for the boys to do is Granddad always took them to the sale  barn at Vinita whenever they   d come in the summertime.  Granddad had tea time at nine o   clock in the morning.  Was it actually tea?  Coffee. He saucered his coffee, but it was tea time. And then at three  o   clock he   d come back in from whatever he was doing and have tea  time.  He used instant coffee and he would put the coffee in and make the  coffee, then he poured Milnot in it until it poured over the cup and then  he saucered it. (laughs)  Interesting technique.  I always thought it was. (Laughter)  And would he share any pearls of wisdom if you got to tag along with  him?  Oh, I don   t know.  He called him Jerk-a-leg.  Jerk-a-leg?  That was his nickname, was Jerk-a-leg. (Laughter)  What all did you do with Granddad?  Whatever.  19  G. Hall  S. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  S. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  Nykolaiszyn  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Whatever he did, you did, didn   t you?  Yeah. Always working on something.  Teach you how to do anything in particular?  Drive the tractor, I guess. Got tractors, raked   it was all hay   baling  hay and stuff.  Seemed to me, didn   t Granddad always want you boys to come out when  he was baling hay? Because he just thought you needed to know how to  do that. (laughs)  I didn   t want to and I didn   t need to know.  He paid us one summer for hay. We got  1.74 a piece for baling hay.  That was the only time he ever gave us any money.  Total?  (Laughter) A piece, yeah. That was total. Dad said we ought to be glad  to get that, because he didn   t to give money out. I guess some of the old  timers called him the Old Dutchman because he was very     Stingy is the word. (Laughs)     stingy with his money. Very stingy.  Would he ever hide money anywhere? Did he believe in banks? Trust  banks?  I don   t know.  They had a bank account, that   s all I know. I don   t know, it seemed like  Mrs. Hall always had money to get whatever she wanted. Which, she  didn   t want very much, but whatever she wanted.  Did she sell cream and eggs and   ?  At one time they did, yeah. One time they had chickens out here and  that   s when we were first married, they had chickens out here. I can  remember him taking care of them and separating the eggs and stuff and  getting them ready to sell. I don   t think they ever sold cream, because I  don   t remember them ever separating the milk.  20  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  I did hear once Granddad had all that milk during the war and something  about he couldn   t sell the milk and left it out on the road or something?  If it disappeared overnight, it disappeared because he couldn   t sell it but  he didn   t want to throw it away. I don   t remember the whole story. He  wanted to give it away, but he wasn   t really allowed to because of     Yeah, I think that   s what it was. He couldn   t give it away. The  government wouldn   t let him. But he set it out there and if it disappeared  he knew it went to somebody that needed it.  Did they have hired help or was there enough in the family?  I don   t remember them every hiring anybody to do anything unless it  was like to bale the hay or something, but most usually, when they were  here the neighbors all got together and rotated around to do the crops  and stuff. The hay and     The workers were here, too. The missionaries would come for a week,  two weeks at a time, and help them out too, when they needed help.  If a piece of equipment broke down, would he know how to fix it?  Yeah. Oh, yeah. He did all his own mechanic work.  I wondered if that was something he had passed on?  Oh, I can   t remember all that. (Laughter)  Well, you do anything now. He can work on anything he wants to.  With these new ones, I don   t know. It   s probably harder.  No.  Just last week, you came out here and fixed four things for me, so.  (Laughter)  Back in the Depression days, did they tell stories of hobos coming  through or anything like that?  Yeah, I   ve heard Mrs. Hall talk about that. People come by and want,  beg for food or do something for them. No, I don   t think too much. After  they put the turnpike in, a lot of times it was people stopping here if they  had trouble. Then they got CB   s and nobody did that anymore. Now  with cell phones, nobody does it. It   s been a few stops since we   ve been  out here, but it   s been a long time since anybody   s came.  21  Finchum  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Weyen  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  When did the turnpike come in?  It was 1957 when they finished it, I think.  As kids, we used to sit out in the front yard with Connie, our  grandmother, and play the game   watch the cars go by the turnpike and  we   d get one side and she   d get the other and count the cars. We could  sit there a long time without seeing a car go by. Now you couldn   t count  them if you tried. (Laughter)  One of them would take buses and one of them would take cars or  trucks, each one of them had their thing they were going to count.  She seemed to always have a couple of pet squirrels that she fed out  here. Sammy and Sambo, I think was the name. She would name them.  Come down off the roof every day to eat and she got them to where they  would even come up in her lap. They sat out in the yard a lot in the  summertime, because it was cooler.  No air conditioning.  No air conditioning. I remember when they put the first air conditioner  in this house. Myrl   s brother was here from California, and Myrl and  Bud decided they were going to get their mom and dad an air  conditioner. Granddad wasn   t going to have anything of it.    It costs too  much,    and    It costs too much to run.    Well, they put the air conditioner  in, anyway. The next time we were out here, Granddad paid Myrl for the  air conditioner. But he still didn   t really like it, he   d go outside and sit,  but his mother really liked it.  Would they sleep outside some in the summer?  I imagine they probably did and back before then, I don   t remember his  mom and dad doing that. I remember doing that when I was a kid,  though.  Bath time was probably interesting, too, back then.  Oh, yeah. (Laughter) I don   t know what they did here, because after I  came, they   ve always had a bathroom, so. Yeah, I imagine once a week  at least.  Any major struggles with the farm that you had to work through?  22  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  I don   t remember anything particular or anything that I   ve heard them  talk about anyway.  When they stopped the dairy, what was the reasoning for that?  Well, let   s see. Granddad wouldn   t have been old enough for social  security. I don   t know, it might have been just because all the kids was  leaving home. I don   t if anybody would help him.  Federal regulations and     Yeah, that probably. I don   t really know why he quit.  Do you know about when he quit?  Yeah, 1947.  Oh, he quit before. Just got tired of it, I guess.  Yeah. Yeah. It was a lot of work. Myrl said he   d never have a dairy.  They sold all their cattle in    47. Steve is the mayor of Adair and the  people have been giving him a lot of old newspapers and things to put  up in the community center over there, and he got a newspaper here  awhile back that had a sale bill in it for James South   s estate. None of  the family knew they had a sale here for him. But it   s in the paper, it   s  quite interesting. Myrl   s dad was the one that was what they called him  the agent or something, whatever it is. But sold off all their stuff.  Farming equipment and stuff?  Equipment and some house stuff, too. Some furniture and stuff, too.  There was more than one cook stove so you know that other people had  to bring things in. Probably the other kids brought some of their stuff in  to sell, too, at the same time. None of them ever remember that. Of  course, Myrl   s mother, she had already passed away so we couldn   t ask  her anymore. His mother and dad didn   t talk about things very much,  things that happened. The day that Myrl and I got married, we came  back here, his sister had fixed a cake for us and we were here. We got  married in Pryor at the courthouse. We didn   t have a wedding. We came  back here and his dad said,    Well this is our anniversary, too.    We did  not know it and none of the kids knew that they had been married on  December the first.  This is about where we usually ask, then, how did you meet your  husband?  23  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  (Laughter) Okay. I met him at a New Year   s Eve dance in Pryor at the  community building. We had neighbors down there that usually got  together and they   d have a big dance on New Year   s Eve. Him and one  of his friends was there and I don   t know why, but then on   I think that  was on a Saturday night. It seemed like one day the next week, he came  to Pryor, and came into the drugstore where I was working and asked me  for a date. I remember hearing his dad say,    I wondered why he was so  anxious to get to Pryor.    He had just come home from California, I think  it was. He had farmed with his brother out there in the summertime  while he was going to high school. It was, of course, in the wintertime  and he had just come home. I don   t know, we went together for three  years before we got married. He was in the army for two of that, so.  Then he got out November 9 of 1955, and we got married on December  the first.  And you moved to the house here in    56? Not to this one, but...  We lived here with his mom and dad for nine months and then we built  our house up on the hill there as you   re going out the driveway. We  lived there for about three years, I think. We moved to Tulsa when our  youngest son was a year old. We lived there for nine years, in the same  house. He was transferred to Atlanta, lived there for three years, come  back to Tulsa and lived about two and a half years and then his dad  passed away then we moved out here in 1974.  This is quite a bit different from Atlanta.  Just a little bit. (Laughter) I   ve been back down there once, and I don   t  want to live there anymore. Although it was nice while we were there.  So what is it about this place that you   re so attached to it?  I don   t know. I don   t know, really. Other than it   s just been in the family  so long, and I didn   t want anybody else to have it. I don   t think Myrl did  either.  Then the next question is, who gets it next?  (Laughter) I don   t know. I don   t know. Better one of them take it. AJ  will take it, she says.  So do you have in mind what will happen to it in the next one hundred  years?  I have no idea. You don   t know. Times change so anymore that   I will  leave it to the kids, let   s put it that way. Our other son has bought a  24  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  Weyen  Finchum  Weyen  Finchum  S. Hall  G. Hall  Finchum  Weyen  S. Hall  Finchum  couple of pieces of land from us that were not part of the original part.  Well, with the turnpike so close, you don   t necessarily have to make a  living on the farm anymore. You can live here and work in     Oh, something else when we were first married. Myrl   s uncle had a  piece of land that was fifty-seven acres or so down south in the next  section down. The turnpike had come in and taken most of his land, so  he was going to move. There was seventeen acres on this side of the  turnpike and about forty on the other side. He wanted to sell it. He told  Myrl, he said,    I want you to have that land.    Myrl says,    I don   t have  any money.    We   d just got married. We didn   t have any money to buy  anything with.    But you   re going to buy that land.    He sold it to us for  five hundred dollars. Rick, our other son, has bought that seventeen  acres on this side and Kay has the forty on the other side, now. When we  moved to Tulsa, we sold it to   no I guess it was when we got ready to  move out here, this guy across the street from us wanted some land. We  sold that to him, and he decided he didn   t want it anymore a few years  ago so Kay bought it back so it   s still in the family.  I guess we should ask the two of you that question then, what is it about  this place that you   re attached to?  In the summer, we   d come out here almost every weekend. Of course,  we lived out here for a while, and we   d come out every weekends     I   d say you   ve probably walked across every inch of it.  Just about. Just about, yeah.  Couldn   t get lost, then.  Can   t get lost. Not after we picked up all the rocks, every year.  (laughter)  I used to always tell people when Myrl got mad at us, he had us pick up  rocks. (laughs)  Would they have a trailer pulling behind the tractor when you picked up  the rocks or   ?  Oh, yeah.  Load them in the back of the pickup and then unload them by hand.  Load and unload. Had some muscles going, then.  25  Weyen  Finchum  G. Hall  AJ  G. Hall  AJ  G. Hall  Finchum  G. Hall  Finchum  (Laughter) Yep.  Anything else you want to add before we close off?  What AJ?  The forklift.  Oh, the forklift. (Laughs)  The most popular of them all.  I think you remember about granddaddy having all the dogs ride with  him on the forklift, don   t you? (Laughs)  A lot of family pets through the years?  Oh, yeah. There   s always been dogs here. We   ve got too many now.  (laughs)  Well, we appreciate your time. It   s been fun hearing about and sitting in  this hundred plus year old house. Thank you very much  -------  ------- 
