 Finchum  LaFon  Today is December 19, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University and are working on  a project called 100 Year Life, and today we   re in Norman, Oklahoma  to speak with Dr. William LaFon, a retired physician. Thank you for  having us today. Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you  were born.  I was born on a farm that my dad was running just south of Edmond,  Oklahoma, and I apparently got there about three hours before the doctor  did, and my brothers use to say that that was the last time I ever hurried.  (Laughter)  And so when were you born?  I was born October the 8th, 1913.  And how many brothers and sisters do you have?  I had three brothers that lived to adulthood. My mother had one set of  twins and one of them died at just about eighteen months, and there was  a daughter that died shortly after birth, and so just the four boys grew to  maturity.  And what order where you? Were you the baby?  I was the baby.  You   re the baby, and you were slow, huh?  Yes.  5  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  Wolfe  Finchum  LaFon  And your parents were farmers?  No. My mother was a housewife and did a lot of interior decorating of  the houses. Paperhanging, painting, putting cast stoves up, taking them  down at the proper time. She was a very talented lady.  She was also a college graduate, wasn   t she?  Yes, and Dad was also a college graduate, and the way Dad got here  back in, oh about 1903, somewhere along in there, he was working in  the post office in Pullman, south of Chicago, and this fellow wanted to  come to Chicago, and he lived in Oklahoma. Dad traded with him, and  he apparently delivered mail on Northwest Third Street  in Oklahoma  City  with a horse and  cart  so it was a long time ago. My oldest brother  came in 1901.  In 1900 or 1901.  Somewhere in there.  When he was born.  Next brother was about, that lived, was about three years after that, and  Mother went to Missouri to have those two. After that brother, six years  later on the very same day of the month she had twins, and one of them  lived     Eighteen months?  About eighteen months, and passed away. Then I came along in 1913  and probably a surprise to my mother because she was forty-six when I  finally arrived. (Laughter) So     Did your father continue to be a mail carrier?  Actually, he did the postal clerk for a long time. Got tired of standing  around at the windows and did have a mail route in downtown  Oklahoma City for a few years before he retired.  Would you ever go on the route with him?  No.  Where did you go to elementary school?  Do you know where Putnam Heights is?  6  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Yes.  That   s where I went.  Okay.  And the principal was Mrs. Fox, and she was a disciplinarian, and didn   t  tolerate a lot of cutting up.  Did you have first-hand experience at that?  No, I observed it. (Laughter) I was, shall we say, corrected a couple of  times in my early life, but no corporal punishment was experienced.  (Laughter)  And so where did you graduate from high school?  I graduated from Central High School in Oklahoma City, and that was  back in    31.  That   d be about right,    31.  Somewhere along  in there .  Did you have a favorite subject in high school?  Pardon?  A favorite subject?  Yeah, getting through. (Laughter)  But you fell asleep sometimes.  Huh?  You fell asleep sometimes in class.  No.  Didn   t you? Because of your job?  I didn   t go to sleep.  Oh you didn   t? I thought you told me you did.  7  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  So you had a job during high school?  I delivered papers from the time I was about six or seven years old up  until the time I graduated from high school.  By foot or on bicycle?  No, bicycle. My favorite route was Northeast Ninth Street, and that had  a rooming house, from the railroad tracks to Walnut, and then it had  apartments and single residences, and finally the last east block was  black. They were the best paying customers I had, so I was a little partial  to them. Down in the rooming house area, you   d go down to collect for  papers every week and when the light went on in their room you went up  and collected, because if you didn   t, by Monday they didn   t have any  money. I got along. I made money on that route but the one that I took  the route over from was losing money every month, so he didn   t do any  good business. (Laughs)  He didn   t figure out the best time to go.  For some reason or another when I took over, he was taking fifteen to  twenty papers more than he had customers and you can   t do very good  that way.  How much was a paper for a week back then?  For thirteen copies it was, I believe, twenty cents. They had the  Oklahoman and the Times and the Sunday paper so I would deliver three  papers to a lot of them. Some just took the morning papers and Sunday,  and some of them just took the Times. We did all the collection and we  paid for the papers. We had to put the papers on the porch or at the door  in the apartment house or rooming house. We   d put the paper down at  the door so things have changed a heck of a lot.  Now they just chuck it and it lands wherever, huh?  What about the route you were offered in Norman?  Oh, my folks moved to Norman when I was a freshman in high school  and they offered me a route seven miles long that had seventy  customers, and I told them that I didn   t want it.  So what   d you do?  I went back to Oklahoma City. After I spent my freshman year here at  8  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Norman, I went back to Oklahoma City and bunked out with various  people at a price and had this route. I delivered, seems like it was  over   two hundred papers in the eight blocks.  And how   d you wake up?  Well, I was renting a room and there was nobody to wake me up, and the  alarm clock didn   t wake me up. Finally I solved that. I had a metal  washbasin and I set the alarm clock in the metal washbasin. (Laughter)  That   ll wake you up.  What time of day?  Huh?  What time of day?  Oh, two thirty to three, somewhere along there, but you   d go to work  and pick up your papers by three thirty, anyway.  A. M.  A. M., and go in and you   d get through about six thirty or seven o   clock,  then get to school by eight o   clock. Then in the afternoon, as soon as  you could, you   d pick up your papers and deliver them. Then with the  Oklahoman you had to go out and solicit new customers four or five  days a week, and collect on Saturday. You were a busy individual.  But when did you do homework?  What was that? (Laughter)  Didn   t you deliver to Mom   s house?  What?  Didn   t you deliver papers to Mom   s house?  No, no.  I thought you backed into a cactus or something?  No. She lived across the street from one of the paper persons. They  distributed the papers to the corners, but that was, oh, on Phillips, and  they moved around a lot.  9  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  So once you finished high school, what did you do?  I started pre-med.  Where, at OU?  OU. Graduated from high school, I guess it was    31, and spent two years  in pre-med and then I graduated from medical school in    37.  From OU, too?  OU.  So when did you decide you wanted to be a physician?  Oh, when I was about seven years old.  Okay.  Somewhere along in there. They had a story that one of Dad   s brothers  was a doctor, and he was in the horse and buggy days, and one of his TB  patients left him a bearskin coat, and he was wearing that bearskin coat  in inclement weather, and developed TB and died. I decided, for some  reason or another, that I   d be a doctor. I never did get a bearskin coat,  though. (Laughter)  Was med-school pretty tough?  Pardon?  Was med-school pretty tough?  Yes, you go to school at eight o   clock and have lunch at noon, and at  one o   clock you go back to school until five, and then you   re supposed  to study a couple hours for each hour you   re in class. You soon run out  of energy. (Laughter)  Well, once you graduated what did you do?  A friend of mine and I looked at the places for an internship, and we  picked out the ones that paid the most, and applied there, and were  accepted at Wichita, Kansas, at the Wichita hospital which was run by a  Catholic organization. We were the two interns for the entire hospital,  and spent a year there. They had what they called a residency, Sedgwick  County Residence, and applied there and got accepted. We actually took  care of the indigent people in Sedgwick County, and if we got in trouble,  10  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  we could call a staff man and he   d help us out. We didn   t really call him  out very often. We got along pretty good there. At the end of the  residency, a friend that was a physician supply type representative from  Kansas told me about a place that needed a doctor. I had gotten married  and we went down and looked it over, and for some reason or another  we just decided that was where we were supposed to be, so we moved to  Waynoka, Oklahoma.  Didn   t he write you a letter or something, and give you a price for his  clinic?  What?  Didn   t Dr.   what   s the doctor   s name?  Dr. Clapper.  Yeah, didn   t he write you a letter and give you a price for the clinic?  Oh, no. We did that through a conversation.I asked him how much he  wanted for his practice. He said he didn   t have any practice left, and so  he sold me his office equipment and all for five hundred dollars, fifty  dollars down, and fifty dollars a month until we could do better, and so  we rented a little house there and it was little. Now, this is a little house,  but that one would fit in and leave space for another one just like it. The  bathroom was so small. They had a little tub. You had to wash your ears  and knees at the same time. (Laughter)  And how long did you stay in Waynoka?  I was there seven years, and did general medicine. I also did surgery, not  there, but at Alva.  How   d you get paid?  Huh?  How   d you get paid?  Oh, we took a lot of things in. We even got one horse  once .  Tablecloths, and     Huh?  You got a tablecloth, I think.  11  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  Waynoka was a division point on the Santa Fe and had the smoking  engines in those days, instead of the diesels like they have now. They  had a roundhouse. They worked on the engines there, and they had a  group of apartment buildings for the Mexicans to live that worked on the  tracks and then the roundhouse. One of the Mexican ladies fixed a doily  sort of thing and gave it to my wife  in  appreciation of the way we took  care of them. Interesting things happened. (Laughs)  I had one call out there for a home delivery. We got there, and the lady  was Mexican, and there was a year and half old child on the bed beside  her. Everybody just disappeared and left this Mexican lady, who was in  labor, and me, and that  child  was asleep on the bed. The Mexican lady  didn   t speak English, and I didn   t speak Spanish. I had one phrase.     Tiene usted dolor?    and we got the baby and got almost cleaned up  before anybody showed up.  What does that phrase mean?  Do you have pain?  And the  child  on the bed.  Huh?  And the  child  on the bed.  And the  child  was still asleep. (Laughter)  So you made house calls?  Well, we made house calls and did home deliveries for about three  years. At that time, we were forty miles out from the closest hospital,  and had a shoulder operation. The shoulder was coming out first, and a  situation like that you   ve got to do something. You   d do an internal  inversion, but for that you have to have an anesthetic. I had a partially  trained nurse as my assistant at that time, and she gave the ether  anesthetic while I did the version. This was all by lamp light and a  woodstove flaming, and if you know ether, it is more highly explosive  than gasoline, but we ended up alright. What are you going to do? You  know, in those days they always had the husband boiling water, and  there are two things about it. It keeps the husband busy, and you have  something to make coffee out of when you   re through. (Laughter)  How much did it cost for a delivery?  12  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  Bishop  LaFon  Finchum  Bishop  Thirty-five dollars.  What about smallpox shots?  A dollar. We had five cases of smallpox in the county when I first went  to Waynoka, and I made a living giving smallpox vaccinations at a  dollar-a-crack. Office calls were a dollar, and on a house call it was two  dollars. Go out in the country you were supposed to be able to get fifty  cents a mile, but that was during the depression.  Did you ever have any critical life or death situations?  Do what?  Did you ever face any critical life and death situations on house calls or  as a physician?  Oh, most of the time it   s just a house call, you have somebody who   s  critically ill.  What about the Rh factor baby?  When we visited the first time I remember you telling me about the Rh  baby.  Oh, Rh was a factor then. You don   t hear anything about them anymore,  but if the husband was Rh negative and the mother was Rh positive,  those babies died shortly after birth. I had this young couple that had an  Rh factor. The husband was negative and the wife was positive. I stuck a  trocar in the umbilical vein at the time of delivery, and I watched the  baby. When the blood count was going down, we gave the baby five to  ten CCs of blood from the husband and pulled the baby through.  About three years or two years later, they wanted to know if they could  try for another baby. I said,    Oh, no     They kept after me,    Why don   t  we?    And so I took blood from the mother, the father and the child, and  sent it to, seems like it was Philadelphia that was specializing in this at  the time, and they came back with    By no means should they ever try to  have another baby, and not only that but we don   t know how the one  that   s alive made it.    So lucked out on that one. (Laughter)  You did good.  You were in a time when the polio vaccine came out. How prevalent was  polio when you were a physician in Oklahoma?  13  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Oh, I gave vaccines a lot. I don   t remember polio. We had an epidemic  of that, and had all the respirators that we could get and the people lined  up in the halls of the hospital. Took a man to keep track of them.  Oh, tell them about taking ladies to Alva to have babies.  Do what?  About the one that you took to Alva to have the baby.  Oh, well I had been up about twenty hours or so, and I had this lady in  labor so I let her drive to the hospital. (Laughter)  And what were you doing?  I was sleeping. (Laughter)  In the back seat. The hospital was what, twenty miles?  Twenty-four.  Twenty-four miles away.  And did she deliver safely?  Yeah, yep.  And were you awake for the delivery?  I was awake for the delivery. (Laughter)  Oh, there was this girl that had appendicitis.  I had done this residency and internship, got to Waynoka and had a  patient with appendicitis. I called up Dr.  Simon  at Alva and asked if  he   d do the surgery for me because I hadn   t even talked to the hospital  about working there. He said,    Well, you   ve done an appendectomy and  you   re registered.    I said,    Yeah.    He says,    Well, why don   t you come  up and do it, and I   ll help you. If I need to, I can finish it up.    So, I went  up and did my first operation and only one in my seven years at  Waynoka, but he took care of us. He helped me on a lot of the cases  after that.  So after Waynoka where did you go?  I moved to Alva.  14  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Where the hospital was.  Where the hospital was and joined a clinic, and in 1953 they called up  and said,    Dr. LaFon, we have a quota for one doctor from Woods  County to come into service, and you and Steve are the only ones  available.    The others were either too old or whatever, and Steve had  one son that was accepted to medical school, and two sons that were  ready to go to college. My son was ready to go to high school, and she  was     Seventh grade.  The seventh grade, and so I told them I would go, and so I went into the  service.  The Air Force, right?  Well, I applied for the Navy but they said that they had no openings for  what I would be eligible for, and so I talked to the Air Force and joined  the Air Force, and spent five weeks in medical officer indoctrination,  and three months for flight surgeon, a type of assignment.  And what rank did you go in as?  I went in as a major.  How   d you do that? (Laughs)  From my private practice.  And ROTC, they counted that?  Oh yeah, they gave me credit for ROTC, and     Nasty guard? (Laughter)  Nasty guard, yeah.  And private practice.  So I had a little experience, but I got out and they said,    Well, where  would you like to go?    I was finishing up from the school of aviation  medicine, and    Where would you like to go overseas?    Well, I had a  nephew that had been in Spain, and I said,    I   d like to go to Spain.     They said,    No, closing that out.    They had me scheduled to go to the  15  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  third Air Force in Great Britain, and got as far as Scotland and they  landed there, and briefing all the people that were on that aircraft. They  said,    Major LaFon, we   d like to talk to you after the briefing,    and I  walk up and they say,    How would you like to go to France?    Well, I   d  been in for four months, five months, and I didn   t know any better, and I  said,    Oh, all right.    They hand me this pack of orders and I go in the  transportation  office  and throw them on the desk and say,    I   m going  to go to France.    He looks at it, and    Oh, that   s too bad. I   ll send you the  best way I can.     So he sent me commercial air. I railroad into Britain, one of the big  places, and then back to London on commercial air. I walk in, he says,     Sorry, I can   t get you out today. I   ll get you out tomorrow but we   ll put  you up in a hotel there in London,    and so I wandered around in London  for a little bit. The next day I go out and there   s another Air Force major  in this aircraft, and I sat down beside him and he gets along and says,     Oh, do you have transportation?    I said,    No.    He says,    Well, I ought  to have a staff car waiting for me. My office is down in Bordeaux but  I   ll drop you by the air force base.    We get in about five o   clock in the  afternoon, and    Oh, we   re glad to see you. Welcome aboard    and all this  sort of stuff. Then they took me down and got me a room in one of the  little hotels in Bordeaux and told me how to get back. The next morning  about ten o   clock, I get back on base and walk up to them. They hand  me some new orders, and I   m hospital commander. (Laughs)  Of that base, on that base?  Yeah, a fifty-bed hospital.  And you kept being hospital commander the rest of your career didn   t  you?  Almost all of it. They, Ann and John, came over with their momma at  Christmas time. So they wouldn   t have to change schools from where  they were, I extended for three months I think, and instead of getting  out, I told them if they would give me an assignment in Oklahoma,  Texas, New Mexico, or Colorado I   d stay in. So they gave me Vance,  and that was halfway between where my wife   s parents and all lived,  and wherever I had practiced.  So you stayed in for more than one round?  When you retired, you   d been in how long?  Twenty years.  16  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  He had a    hardship    assignment to Bermuda, and he was in South  Carolina and England Air Force Base in Alexandria, Louisiana, and  Clinton-Sherman. So actually three times in Oklahoma, which is very  unusual, to be assigned to your home state. His last assignment was  Tinker, where he was hospital commander.  So what year did you get out?  I got out in    73.  And then what did you do?  Do what?  And then what did you do?  Well, I figured out that it cost me, oh, sixty thousand to set up a new  practice, and I didn   t figure on practicing too long. So, I took a job as a  general practitioner and worked on Tinker as a civilian.  Civil service.  Five years.  You were about sixty-five years old at that time?  Yeah.  And then you retired?  At that time, I had retired from the Air Force, and after about three  months I decided I wasn   t any good for me or anybody else, and so I  took a job at Tinker. Spent five years at that.  So he   s retired twice.  Retired again. (Laughter)  And then what did you do?  I messed around. (Laughs)  When did you become a master gardener?  Do what?  17  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  Wolfe  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  When did you become a master gardener? Was that after you retired?  Oh, no I think I was still working at Tinker.  Oh.  A friend and I took the master gardener  courses and were the  first  master gardeners in Oklahoma.  What did you raise?  Oh, I had all kinds of fruit trees.  Yeah.  And tomatoes, tried squash and the bugs got there before I did.  (Laughter)  You had pecan trees, and what? Apricot, pear, apple, a whole bunch of  trees and a big garden.  Yeah.  And now he   s  into  roses, but he put in a garden last year. What   d you  have in your garden this year?  We had tomatoes and okra and strawberries.  Peppers?  Peppers.  And he likes roses real well.  I   ve got about twenty rose bushes now.  Those take some tender love and care.  Yeah.  Well my question for you is, thinking about today, did you ever think  you   d make it to 100?  Oh, I never considered it.  But how old was your mother?  18  LaFon  Bishop  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  My mother was ninety-six when she passed away, and I had a cousin on  my dad   s side that was in Missouri, and she lived to 105. She was the  oldest person in Missouri at one time.  And where was she from?  Was she from Palmyra?  Well, originally, but I was trying to think      I don   t know.  So what do you think the secret to your longevity is?  Well, that brings up a different  matter . When I was interning, I had a  friend that had a friend that was an actuary in one of the insurance  places, and he figured that my wife would be able to live to be about  forty, and that I would be about forty, and so I made to 100. (Laughter)  And Mom passed away in 2003.  Yeah.  She   d had lots of surgery.  Well, she had cancer of the breast and cancer of the uterus.  How did you meet your wife?  Oh, that   s a different story. (Laughter) We were in BYPU.  Baptist Young People   s Union, I think it was.  We were going to Falls Creek, and our supervisor lady had, sort of,  influenced people to pair off, and so I was paired off with Anna Koberg,  and Anna had a good friend, Lucille Busby. So we went to Falls Creek  and I started pairing off with Lucille instead of Anna, and we started  going together.  Did you tell them about the oyster stew?  They had oyster stew, and we decided that they needed crackers with  that, so Lucille and I walked from Falls Creek to Dougherty to get the  crackers, and walked back just in time for the stew. (Laughter)  19  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Bishop  Finchum  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  How far a walk was that?  Pardon?  How far a walk is that?  It   s about five miles.  One way?  One way.  Oh my gosh.  Time for a lot of talking.  What about the ride back to Oklahoma City?  Oh, now that   s  another story . We went down   my buddy had a  Chrysler    51 I think they called it. Anyway, it had a rumble seat.  Coming back I had Anna on one side, Lucille on the other side, singing     There ought to be a moonlight saving time so I can love these gals of  mine.    (Laughter)  So how long did you all date?  Oh, a little over five years, and finally I bought a set of rings, wedding  ring and engagement ring. I gave her the engagement ring on my  birthday, and I told her she   d have to marry me to get the other one.  (Laughter)  And where   d you get married? Do you remember the name of the place  you got married?  Clinton.  Clinton? Oh, I don   t know, I forgot. Anyway, you thought you weren   t  supposed to get married, is that right?  That   s right. She was in nurse   s training, and they sort of understood that  the nurses weren   t supposed to get married so we got married secretly,  and     How long did you have to keep it a secret?  I think we kept it about two months. They found out that she could get  20  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  married and finish up her training.  So today, what is a typical day for you at 100? You know, what time do  you get up, what time do you go to bed, what do you do during the day?  Well, I go to bed anywhere from nine to twelve o   clock at night, it  depends on what I   m reading, and then I usually get up somewhere  between six o   clock and eight o   clock.  What do you do when you get up?  What do I do?  Yes.  Do you read the newspaper, have a cup of coffee? Do you have a ritual?  Oh, I usually eat breakfast and drink   they cut me down to a cup of  Sanka a day.  Decaf.  So I got a cup that holds almost two cups of water. (Laughter)  Well, what   s the first thing you do when you get up? Don   t you take  your medicine first?  Oh, yeah.  And then you wait for     Huh?  And then you wait for how long?  I wait half an hour to eat.  Yeah.  I have medicines that I take routinely and three of them are prescription  medicines, others over-the-counter, and sometimes it   s a little hectic. I  have always had my prescription filled at Thompson Pharmacy there in  Oklahoma City, or     Del City.  21  Wolfe  Bishop  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Bishop  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Bishop  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  Del City. Her husband works for Rose State and he picks them up  sometimes for me. I go to Sooner Baptist Church there in Midwest City,  and the pastor has a bible group that meets on Tuesday. Ann takes me  down for that.  Plus. Bible study, what else? We have pharmacy, post office,  commissary, BX.  You still remain active in the church, then, and in your church?  Yeah. Well, I guess it   s almost two years now that I quit teaching. I   m  getting old and forgetful.  You still go to church every Sunday?  I have a friend that picks me up and takes me  to Midwest City .  Ann   and her husband go to church here in Norman.  That   s pretty impressive.  Back to your daily routine, when you finish breakfast, what do you do?  In your daily routine.  I try to have quiet time, but sometimes it gets sort of neglected.  (Laughter)  What do you do during quiet time?  Read the bible and pray.  And sometimes before you go to bed don   t you also read the bible?  Read, yeah.  And what happens every afternoon without fail?  Your daughter knows your schedule pretty well.  Every afternoon, the postman comes and what does he bring you?  He brings me mail.  How much mail?  Oh, between twenty-five and fifty pieces.  22  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Bishop  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  Bishop  Oh my gosh. Is that fan mail?  Actually, its political stuff and they always want money.  Are you still interested and involved in politics?  I try to stay ahead of them on politics, but being a republican it doesn   t  work out very good sometimes. (Laughter)  Did you vote for Henry Bellmon?  Oh, yes.  That   s going way back. (Laughter)  He   s the first republican governor in Oklahoma.  I think I was a democrat back then.  His mother was a democrat.  I have to tell you all, I   m a mixed up character. (Laughter) My ancestors  were a little different. My mother was a democrat and my dad was a  republican, and my grandparents were opposites. My grandfather LaFon  had slaves and my grandfather Curd was an abolitionist.  My grandfather was born in 1865. My grandfather, isn   t that amazing?  1865.  You mentioned you read some. What   s your favorite book of choice?  I think reading     What   s your favorite author that you   ve got all of his books?  Oh, L   Amour.  Louis L   Amour, yes.  I only have probably a hundred of the books. (Laughs)  What   s good is he forgets he   s read them so he can read them over  again. (Laughter)  Well, the thing I want to know is, when history is written what would you  like it to say about you?  23  LaFon  Bishop  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  Finchum  Bishop  LaFon  Well, what would I want them to say about me? I guess that he was a  nice guy.  And if you could give anybody in Oklahoma advice or a motto or  philosophy to live by, what would that be?  Oh, I would say the first thing is they should become a Christian, and  that they should try to live according to His word. That   s one thing. I try  to help people that are evangelists. I   ve helped a niece and well, actually,  a nephew   s daughter and her husband are missionaries in New Guinea.  They   ve been there     A while, probably twelve years. He says he doesn   t plan for the future,  but he has planned to support them even after he   s gone, so he does  make plans.  The other I   ve helped in New Delhi for thirty years a little, and have  another couple that works with Mohammedans. What they do is, in  America, they get a telephone book and they go talk to people that have  names that indicate they might be Mohammedan. They contact them that  way.  What about the girl in Bangladesh?  That   s World Vision, and I   ve helped I guess three or four. Three before  this girl that I   ve helped.  What   s a couple of the biggest challenges for you these days?  My challenges, work as much as I can to get the one president  impeached. (Laughter)  But working through that stack of mail is a challenge, too.  And I understand you were among the first to be certified as a certified  physician in Oklahoma.  You said something about you were the first one to take the board exam?  Oh, Oklahoma comes along and they figure out a board for all kinds of  doctors, osteopathic and the other types, and sat up a board. My class  took the first boards of that, and it was a three-day examination, and  after that we took the medical boards, another three days, and then we  had graduation and it was sort of   we were physically and mentally  worn out. (Laughs)  24  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  Wolfe  LaFon  Bishop  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  In 2007, they had an alumni meeting and gave Dad this special cane,  College of Medicine, Alumni Association, Gold Cane Award. You were  the oldest of your class?  Yeah.  Oldest living person in his class.  And now I am the only member of the class that   s still alive.  Was the exam very hard?  The board exam.  Oh, yes. The chiropractor was on the board, and the osteopath, medical  and allopath. The chiropractor, one of his questions was    Describe in  detail the seventh cervical vertebra.    In detail. (Laughter)  I wouldn   t know how to answer that.  Did you study your cadaver? What was your cadaver   s name?  I don   t know what his name was, but he looked like Julius Caesar.  (Laughter)  Medicine   s come a long way since then.  Medicine has changed entirely, you know. The electrocardiograph, we  didn   t have that to start with. The first three or four years of my practice,  we didn   t have cardiographs. Then they had three places that they put  the electrodes and ran that. We had, in the county, one place that had  electrocardiograms. I had a little fellow from Waynoka that went up for  a physical exam and had this cardiograph and they sent the cardiograph  to Oklahoma City to a consultant, and got back that the cardiograph was  normal. Sure enough the fellow walked into the store and dropped dead,  so it   s one of those things.  What about penicillin?  Penicillin came in during the second world war, and     So you didn   t have it?  We didn   t have it for private practice, except that you could send a blood  specimen up in the New England area, and if they checked it out and  25  Wolfe  LaFon  Wolfe  LaFon  Finchum  LaFon  Finchum  penicillin was the only thing that would work, we could use it. The only  trouble is, that I had a patient with an odd blood specimen contaminant  and sent it up to them. They came back after about three weeks, three or  four weeks, and said that penicillin would work but in the meantime, the  fellow had developed heart plaque in the little valves in his heart and  died.  You want to talk any about the farm?  Well, I don   t know. The mailman   s here.  Okay. We   re running out of time, they   re going to have to go.  Okay.  Thank you for sharing today, it   s been fascinating. Thank you very  much.  You think I had good life, huh? (Laughter)  I do, I do.  -------  -------   
