 Finchum  Joyner  Today is October 30, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University. We   re working on a  project called 100 Year Life. Today, we   re in Stillwater to talk with  Clara Joyner, who turned 100 recently. Thank you for having us, today.  Glad you   re here.  Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  As if I remember a time. (Laughs) They tell me I was born October 11,  1913 in Greenville, Mississippi.  And what did your parents do for a living?  My father worked for the railroad. He was a stationmaster.  And your mother?  She was a homemaker. In those days, weren   t they all?  Did you have brothers and sisters?  I had an older sister and a younger brother who was born after my father  died. My father died in the spring and  my brother  was born in June.  Much, much later, when my mother had married again, I had another  brother. Goodness, I   m sorry.  Clears throat   Where did you go to elementary school?  I went to elementary school in Gunnison, Mississippi, a little town of  about 200 people. And with grades combined, we had enough to make a  5  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  pretty good school.  How many were in your class?  Seven. When I graduated, there were seven of us.  How far did you go in school? Did you go through high school?  I went through high school and I went through college and I got a  master   s, then I got another master   s. You know, some people just love  to go to school.  Where did you graduate from high school?  Gunnison, Mississippi.  Where did you go to college, then?  Mississippi State College for Women. Graduated there in    33.  With a degree in what?  Piano and public school music.  Oh, and so did you teach?  I   m trying to think where I first taught. It was so long ago, I   m having  trouble remembering.    Good Heavens  Come on Clara, you can do  better than this.     Was it high school or elementary school?  It would have been elementary. Then I taught in Mountain View. I  taught piano and public school music. In elementary, you know, you  have to teach both of them. And I taught here in Stillwater.  You said you got a master   s degree. Where was that from?  I got my master   s in       Oh, Clara, where did you get your master   s?    I  think I got my first master   s in Louisville, Kentucky at a Baptist school,   Woman   s Missionary Union  Training School. That was a master   s in  religious education. Then I got a master   s in elementary education here  in Oklahoma. Did I get it here or at OCW (Oklahoma College for  Women)? It must have been here, A M it was, in those days.  Do you remember what year that was?  6  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Oh, my goodness, no. I   m having trouble remembering where it was.  No, I don   t remember the year.  How did you get from Mississippi to Kentucky?  I went there to school. I think I must have had a scholarship. Otherwise I  would have had difficulty going. So I   m going to assume there was a  scholarship. Since I was going to a Baptist school and I was hoping to  become a Baptist Student  Union  secretary, it was not hard getting a  scholarship, you know. That   s the way it was.  Then what brought you to Oklahoma?  Oh, I came out here to be a Baptist Student  Union  secretary out at  OCW at Chickasha. Then I came from Chickasha up here for the same  reason.  Then somewhere along the line, you met your husband.  I met my husband up here.  And how did you two meet?  I was a Baptist Student  Union  secretary and at that time, I was sharing  an apartment with a friend of mine back in an alley behind a house   a  house that fronted onto Hester Street. I believe it was Hester. There were  several students who lived in that house. You know those houses on the  campus boarded students. So when we   d be walking to church on  Sunday morning, there   d be a bunch of us going along there. We   d  finally kind of wind up going about the same time. He was going about  the same time I was, and pretty soon we went together when we went to  church. That   s the way it was.  How did he pop the question?  Oh, my goodness sakes. I don   t even remember that. I think it is one of  those things that just kind of happened. I don   t think it was unexpected.  And you said yes the first time.  Yes.  Did you get married here in town?     Where   d we get married?    No. No, we went across the line to Kansas  7  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  for some reason or other, because I was expecting to continue working  here, and he was teaching somewhere down in mid-Oklahoma. I didn   t  want everybody to know I was married if he was going to be down there  and I wasn   t moving. So then, sure enough, I thought I was going to stay  here. He knew I wasn   t. (Laughter) Got married one day and moved the  next.  What year was that, do you remember?  Do I remember       What year was that?    That   s an answer I should  know, but I don   t know that. Let   s see, I   d have to go look at my papers.  I just don   t remember.  Did you have children?  Yes, we had three children. A daughter   she was born, and about  fourteen months later came a son. Then about umpteen years later came  another son. So we had a daughter and two sons.  When you were married, you went to live where he was. What brought  you back to Stillwater?  Let me see,    What brought us up here?    Olen had been coming up here  in summers finishing his master   s, but I don   t believe that   s why we  came back up here. Oh, I remember. Olen had been teaching agriculture  and then came up here to be part of the Oklahoma Agriculture  Department over here at CareerTech, they call it now-a-days. He was  what they called a divisional superintendent, or something, with  agriculture in the Northeast Division.  Were you working once you came back?  Not at first.  After your children got in school you went back to work?  I had to get a different degree then, because my beginning degree had  been in piano and public school music so I went back to school. Don   t  you always? If you live in a college town, you go to school. So, yeah, I  got a different degree, in elementary education. So then I started  teaching.  Where did you teach here?  At Westwood School, but I had taught before we moved here. I taught  down in Amber, Oklahoma. Do you know where that is?  8  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  No.  Close to Chickasha. I taught up here at Westwood, and I taught out at  the high school. I used to say,    If they could find something I could  teach, they   d keep me awhile.    (Laughter) But at high school and then  back at Westwood.  Do you still play the piano?  Oh, yeah, every day. Once you quit, you   ll not start again. So I try to  play a little every day.  Do you give lessons?  I used to. There was a time where I had thirty pupils, if you can believe  that. Before school and during noon and starting before the end of school  with kids from out of town, and teaching until six thirty at night. Oh,  man, those were busy days.  Those were. And you do hand bells?  I play hand bells, yes.  Is that hard to learn?  Oh, no. If you can read music. And you don   t have a whole bunch of  bells. You just have two or three, you know. All you   ve got to do is C  and C-Sharp and D, or whatever. So anybody who can read music can  read C, C-Sharp and D.  Did you ever compose your own music?  No, I never did, that anybody would know about. I sat at the piano and  doodled sometimes, but nothing I   ve ever even written down.  What were some things you would do for fun?  Oh, my. I haven   t done any of this recently, as you know. I used to swim  a lot.    What things did we do?    I   m having trouble even remembering  because it was always not just me by myself. It was with my husband.     What did we do?    He   s been gone so long. I   m having trouble  remembering anything we did for fun. I   m sure it was there, but I don   t  recall.  Would you go on vacations very often?  9  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Once a year, in the summer. He was a teacher. So he just had two weeks  in the summer, you know. We usually went to see his relatives out in  California. He had a brother out there and some cousins. So we   d go to  California. One year we   d go north and visit some places on the way as  we drove out. The next year, we   d go south and visit some places in  Texas, or wherever, along the way. That   s the way we got to see the  United States, because we didn   t go straight to California. We   d go  ambling around this way and that way.  Do you remember having your first car?  No. I don   t. I didn   t have one until  much later and not when  I was a  youngster or a teenager. Well, I   m a hundred years old. When I was a  teenager, kids didn   t drive the car. If the family had a car, the dad drove  it or the mother drove it and the kids sat in the back, very still. You  didn   t talk, you didn   t bother them. (Laughter) Different, different  world.  Do you remember much about the Depression years in the    30s?  I just remember that life was a bit difficult, but it was for everybody. I  can remember trying to balance your diet, your nutrition, so you were  well-fed. That was important, but it was not cheap and it was not easy.  So if you didn   t have a garden, which we always did, if you didn   t have  a garden, it was really difficult to have proper nutrition for your family.  Did your mother can?  Did she can? No. My mother was a widow and she worked. She was  postmaster in our town. So she worked, always. She was doing well to  get up in the morning and cook. In those days, before we even had gas,  she had to make a fire, you know. Or do you know about that?  You can tell us about that.  We had a stove, where you make a fire. Over on one side, there is a  place like this where you could have a grate and put in some kindling  and a little bit bigger wood. When the fire gets started, you put in  something to hold the fire. On the side, outside the stove, there was a  reservoir for water. The water would get hot from the fire. It was  interesting. Then at the back of the stove, up here, there was a shelf. You  could put something up there to keep it warm. It was different, quite a  lot different from the way it is now.  Did she teach you how to cook?  10  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  No, she was busy all the time. We had a cook, often. I learned a bit from  the cook, but not much. I was down in Mississippi and you had a cook,  the cook did the cooking. You didn   t do that. I had all this stuff to learn  after I got married. Owen probably nearly starved the first few months  we were there, I   m sure. (Laughs) He probably thought,    Man, I should  have looked longer and found somebody who could cook.    He loved to  eat.  Burned a few biscuits, huh?  (Laughs) Yeah, probably. More than a few.  Well, these days, describe a typical day for us.  A typical day, when?  Like now.  Oh, well, not much going on. I usually get up usually along about seven,  seven thirty. Have breakfast, watch TV, watch the news, get the paper,  read the paper. Go back and straighten up the bedroom. I don   t do much  to the house, I have a lady who comes in and cleans. About once a  month, she cleans. She may come in other than that, but just once a  month she comes in and gives the house a good cleaning. Typical day     what do I do? I sit and read a lot.  What sort of things do you read?  Oh, my goodness. Basically, of course I read the paper. I have books  I   ve read, some of them two times, some of them three times, but books  I   ve read a long time ago that maybe I   ve forgotten about. So I get them  out and reread them and put them back on the shelf. I have a shelf back  in the next room, I have bookshelves. What do I read?  Do you prefer novels or nonfiction, biographies?  Well, I read a lot of biographies and I read more nonfiction than fiction.  The books you get, like Reader   s Digest Condensed Books, they are  adventure, they   re biographies, they   re just novels that are fun. I read a  variety. I don   t just read one sort of thing.  And you keep up with current events through the newspaper?  I try to.  11  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  How often do you practice your piano, now?  I won   t say I practice. I say I play. (Laughs) Sometimes it sounds like I  need to practice. But, no, about every day, I get to the piano.  And do you get out and about town very often?  Grocery store at least a couple times a week. I go to church   I don   t  now, but I used to go every Wednesday night and every Sunday. I   m  doing well to get there on Sundays, now. I go on Fridays to play the  community hand bells. What else do I do? I don   t do much anymore. At  100, you don   t do much. (Laughs)  It sounds like you   re doing pretty much, though.  Well, I   m moving a little. I don   t move very far or very fast. (Laughs)  Do you drive yourself?  Oh, I drive, yes.  Last time you had your driver   s license updated, did they say anything  about your age?  They never have, yet. I haven   t had any accidents. If I had an accident,  they   d probably speak to me about that. (Laughs) But I haven   t had any.  I   ve been very fortunate.  What do you think the reason is for you still being with us? Secret to a  long life?  Probably heritage is a lot of it. My grandmother lived to be almost a  hundred. My mother was well into her nineties when she died. My father  had died when I was just, I think, four. But that was one of those things  that happened. It was a flu epidemic. That was way back. Flu epidemic,  was that    18,    19, something along that?  In 1918, I think.  He died at that time. So it was just one of those things. It wasn   t that he  was in bad health because he wasn   t, as far as I know.  And you said you watch your diet, so that played into it, too?  What about my diet?  12  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Played into why you   re still with us.  Oh, I imagine, yes. I was born down in Mississippi, and in those years,  way back then, people always had a garden. People shared their stuff. If  I had something in my garden that you didn   t have, we shared. So there  was always a very diet   very largely vegetables and fruits. Not a lot of  meat. Meat was expensive. I think that probably has a lot to do with why  I was healthy.  If you had your own garden, did you have a dairy cow, too?  No, we didn   t have a cow. We had to get milk from our neighbor who  had a cow.  What were family holidays like when you were growing up?  My mother had to work because my father had died, like I told you,  when I was about four. So holidays were very simple matters. She would  be really, really tired, needless to say. Every summer, she would let us  go   she would send us   to her sister down in South Mississippi. We   d  get to spend two or three weeks with my Aunt Maude and her family,  but my mother wouldn   t get to be here. So actually, family holidays, she  usually had a car. We   d get in the car and we   d go to Clarksdale, about  twenty miles away. Big deal. (Laughter)  What was in Clarksdale?  Oh, it was just a little bit larger, so they had a movie. We had a movie  once a week on Saturday night. But you know, very simple, really. Very,  very simple. We didn   t go on extended trips. We couldn   t afford it. We  never went anywhere   just to see the family or to go to a movie, about  once every month. (Laughs) Then it got to where we had a movie in  Gunnison. Friday nights or Saturday nights, there would be a movie that  would come there and everybody would go. The town would turn out for  the movie. Have a movie at the school building.  Who, generally, did you go see at the movie?  Heavens, I have no idea. Whoever they had at that   whatever the movie  was that night is what we went to see. We didn   t know about any of the  rest of it. We   d never been to movies. In those years, that was pretty  new. We talk about way back before you were ever born, before you  parents thought about you, before your parents got together. They  probably were beginning to know about movies, but I didn   t.  Did you ever see Charlie Chaplin movies or Shirley Temple? Those  13  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  types of     Well, I   ve seen those, but those movies were shown years after the  beginnings of movies. I didn   t see them in the early years. Movies cost  money. I think it cost fifteen cents in Gunnison. I didn   t have fifteen  cents.  That was a lot back then.  It was, indeed, for a family like my mother   a widow with three  children to rear. We didn   t have any money we didn   t need to spend.  Was church a very important part of your life, early on?  I guess it was. I went to Sunday school every Sunday. The people I  knew at church were my friends   well, in a little town, you know  everybody. But an interesting thing about those years, I went to the  Baptist church for Sunday school and whatever. We didn   t have  preaching. You know what I   m talking about when I say    have  preaching.    We didn   t have a preacher all the time. He lived somewhere  else and he came to our town every two weeks. So we   d have preaching  one week, and not have it the next week. So all the Baptist people would  go to Sunday school at the Baptist church. So after Sunday school, we   d  go over to the Methodist church for preaching. They were the same way.  They had preaching two times a month. So they   d go to Sunday school  on their day and then come over to the Baptist church. That   s just the  way it was. (Laughs) I don   t know why in the world we didn   t all get  together, but that   s the way it was.  Well, clothing sure has changed since the early days, too, hasn   t it?  I guess. I hadn   t thought anything about it. My grandmother   my  mother   s mother   lived with us much of the time. Grandma was good at  sewing. She made dresses for my sister and me. When my brother came  along, she made shirts for him. She was a wonderful seamstress. So  whatever the clothing was was whatever she could make.  Long skirts?  I don   t remember about that. I just don   t remember. Gosh, I don   t know.  I   d have to find some early day pictures to know what we wore. I don   t  remember.  Did she teach you how to sew?  No. I was helping my mother in the post office, most of the time.  14  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Grandma   no, she didn   t teach me how to sew.  Was it unusual for a woman to be the postmaster?  I don   t know if it was or not. When my father died, my father   s father,  my grandpapa had been postmaster in this town. He was wanting to  move. He was planning to move to Florida. Big deal in those years,  move to Florida. He realized that my mother, Mable, would need  employment. He kept hanging on and hanging on until she did her civil  service exams and all the stuff you have to do in preparation to be a  postmaster. Then she applied for the job and got it. So when she could  move up there to Gunnison, Mississippi, then Grandpapa moved to  Miami. I can remember to yet, a lady by the name of Mrs. S.J. Holkham.  She used to come to the post office. She told me more than once,    Well,  your mother got the job as postmaster, but I wanted that.    (Laughter)  She told me many times,    I wanted that     Well, she didn   t get it. My  mother did. So, so be it.  How long did your mother have it?  Until she retired in    66. It was a pretty good deal for us. She had to put  us through school and she had a regular job, regular salary, so she could  do that. My sister and I both went to school at the same time. They tell  us that when my sister, who is older than I, started to school, she had to  walk about a mile. They didn   t want that little girl walking by herself so  they let her little young sister walk with her. So when I got to school,  here I was, what are they going to do with me? (Laughs) So they just  taught me. So we always went to school together. We graduated  together. In high school in    29 and college in    33. And on like that.  Those were the days.  And you worked a little bit in the post office, yourself?  Oh, yes. Actually, in a little town   there   s not all that much you can do.  We used to sell stamps, two-cent stamps, postcards, one-cent postcards,  and we just had one, two, three windows in the post office. We couldn   t  write money orders at the money order window but we could sell  stamps. So my sister and I went to work over there. This was parcel post.  Well, when people came to get packages that come in the mail, and they  got a lot of packages because they ordered from Sears-Roebuck and  Montgomery Ward, you know. There would be all these packages and  we could read the names and deliver the packages, or we could accept  their packages and put them on the scales to see how much they weighed  and charge how much. You know, we could do the parcel post. Different  world. Different world.  15  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Was Christmas a busy time?  Oh, my goodness, yes. Oh, yes. You know, in a little town, they had to  go somewhere if they were going to buy stuff. Sears-Roebuck and  Montgomery Ward were big customers   they were big customers of  those. They   d order it. A lot of times, they   d order something to come in  COD. Do you know COD?  Explain that.  Cash on Delivery. So it would come in and they   d have to pay money to  get it.  Was there ever a time when someone didn   t have the money?  You better believe it. They   d order it and then they   d come and say     we   d given them a notice that the package was there and it cost twelve  dollars and thirty cents or whatever, you know. They   d come in and  they   d want to see it.    We can   t do that. We can   t open the package. You  can open it when you pay for it and get it, but we can   t open it.    Well,  they didn   t know if they wanted it or not. We told them,    Well, you  shouldn   t have bought it. Shouldn   t have ordered it.     Just as often as not when packages came in in those days, we had a book  in which we had to write the day it arrived, who it was addressed to and  where it came from. Then over here, there   d be another column. When  that package was delivered, we had to make a note that it was delivered.  So there was always a record of the package from Sears-Roebuck or  whatever, until you bought it, if it was yours. Until we delivered it to  you. So that was a lot of bookwork.  A lot of times, they   d order it and then they wouldn   t get it. So we   d  have to send a note to the company that this package was there, but it  had not been claimed, and the time it was to be returned   we were  letting them know that it was still there. Then they   d have to let us  know,    Well, send it back.    So we   d send it back. A lot of paperwork.  Believe you me. I don   t know if it is still that way in post offices or not,  but I   ll tell you, it was a lot of stuff in those days.  So you learned quite a bit about the operations of the post office as a  young child.  Oh, yeah.  Did you ever think you   d make it to 100?  16  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Never thought about it, I imagine.  When did you realize you were going to make it?  Let   s see, what day is today? October 30th   I probably knew by  October 10th, I thought I   d make it to the 11th. (Laughter) I never gave  it a thought. No, I was always pretty healthy. My mother taught us to eat  good food. We didn   t eat a lot of junk. We never had the money to buy  junk, you know. So we always ate good food. I always was pretty active  outside.  Did you have a birthday party?  For when I was 100?  Yeah, on your 100th birthday?  I don   t think so. The family came. The family was all here. I don   t think  we invited a bunch of people in. If we did   when you   re 100, you don   t  remember. I can just tell you,    I don   t remember.    (Laughter) Oh, lord.  What advice would you give someone that is asking, if they want to be  100? What would you tell them?  Well, when you get to be 100, you learn you don   t give advice because  people don   t want it, and you might as well not waste your breath. What  advice would I give? I think anybody who wants to   the same thing, for  any year, sixty or seventy or eighty   if you want to enjoy living, you eat  right, your activities are reasonable, you always are doing something,  but you   re not doing excess stuff to ware yourself down.    What advice  would I give you?    Let   s see.  I don   t know, tell me the secret.  I think that it is very important that you keep active. It is very important  that you keep up with your friends and make new friends. You don   t  want to be living alone. You want to live among people who you know  and appreciate. I   ve been active in church because my religion is  important to me. I think to live your religion is important. To be friendly  and to be helpful, to be concerned about people if they have needs, help  as far as you can. That   s just all a part of life.  Do you have a motto you live by?  A motto   now wouldn   t that be nice? No, I don   t know that I have a  motto.  17  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Or a philosophy that keeps you going?  My philosophy is just what I   ve been talking about. It is important to be  interested in people, to be helpful to people. I think it is important to be  honest. You don   t mess around with people by telling them something  that is not true or doing things that are not right. You try to be honest. I  try to be honest. I mean, I don   t know what you do. (Laughter) You try  to be honest and you try to do things of value to yourself and other  people. Like I play the piano. I play the piano for any organization that  needs me to, or when somebody is getting married or when somebody  dies or whatever. In a little town, the pianist had to do those things. I did  it, gladly.  Do you still do that today for the church?  Oh, yeah, I go to church, but I don   t play the piano anymore except in  Sunday school if the pianist isn   t there. I don   t know. Once or twice, I  played the organ at church. They have a regular organist. Only when she  is gone or sick or suddenly there is an emergency, I can play the organ.  My feet still know how to move to play the organ, so we get it done.  Do you sing, too? Or is it mostly just play?  I never did sing very much. I was usually accompanying. I did sing, yes.  When I was in school in Louisville, I sang in a quartet. We used to sing  on the radio every now and then. Big deal. (Laughs)  It was, then, wasn   t it?  I thought it was a big deal, yes. I was glad to be singing with a quartet.  Do you recall a favorite song?  Oh, my goodness sakes alive, no. When you play or sing in church, there  is a hymn book, and you know it from beginning to end. I wouldn   t say I  had any particular favorites.  Do you now? If we just sat down, it is something different every day?  I just play whatever pops in my mind. What is popping into my mind  right now? (Laughter)  I think your sense of humor has helped you, too.  (Laughs) Oh, well, you bet I have a sense of humor. You   d be in trouble  18  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Bishop  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  if you don   t.  Where are you scooting off to?  I was going to go to the piano and play that what was in my mind.  Just a minute and we   ll do that, okay?  I just want to know   if history was written today, what would you want  it to say about you?  Don   t include me. You don   t want to waste paper on me. (Laughs)  How do you want to be remembered? How do you want other people to  remember you?  I guess I never gave it a thought. I guess I would like to be remembered  as a person who was outgoing and friendly, who was honest, who had  wide interests. That   s a strange question, do you know that? I hadn   t  even thought about it   how do I want to be remembered? If I   m  remembered, that   s good. Oh, boy, if they remember me, I   m lucky.  (Laughter) I don   t think of any particular ways of how I want to be  remembered. Just if anybody remembers me, that I was honest, that I  was friendly, had wide interests   that   s pretty good right there. (Laughs)  And you liked music. Do any of your music students come back to see  you?  Oh, yeah. Down in Mountain View where we grew up, all the musicians  in Mountain View, most of them I taught. (Laughs) There were two of  us who were music teachers at that time. We had a lady who, as she said,     gave lessons.    She was not a graduate in music or anything, she   d just  known how to play the piano a little bit and she gave lessons. Marie  Smith and I both had degrees in piano and public school music. So we  had about all the pupils we could teach, believe you me. Before school,  during noon, after school until six thirty. So life was busy teaching. But  in Mountain View, there is a lot of music that goes on. Marie and I  taught many of them early on.  Mountain View     Mountain View, Oklahoma. It is out in Southwest Oklahoma between  Hobart and Carnegie.  So that   s a ways from here, too.  19  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Yeah, it   s a nice little town. It   s got a Baptist church, a Methodist  church, a Church of Christ   three churches within the town, and I don   t  remember about outside. But it was a pretty good little town.  You   ve lived in Stillwater the longest time.  Yeah.  Do you remember the OAMC song?  O-A-M-C, da-da-da-da,  Singing . Yeah, I know that one. What do they  sing, now? Singing used to be so important. When they got together for  any kind of meeting, they   d sing. Churches or town, or whatever, they   d  sing. I don   t know if they sing now or not.  They   ll sing the alma mater, but I have to look at the words when they  do it because I don   t know them.  Now, you see music is just not as important in general meetings as it  used to be. They   d start every meeting with everybody singing. Oh well.  At least they still do the national anthem.  You   d hope so. And do they still stand?  Yes.  You   d have to hope so. Things change. People don   t have the same  goals that they used to have, the same ideals they used to have. They  have things they want to do, but it is just not quite the same.  Times have changed.  Yeah, right.  Alex got educated on what light bread is.  Who wanted to know? (Laughs)  Alex.  You want to know what light bread is?  Sure, you can tell me.  You go to the store to get it now. You just get a loaf of bread, but it   s  20  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  light bread. I don   t know why they called it that. That   s what they called  it when I grew up. But I guess when you go to the store to get it, it   s  different from what you make at home. Maybe that   s why, I don   t know.  Alex had just never heard the term light bread.  Yeah.  That   s not L-I-T-E.  L-I-G-H-T, light bread. Do you know why they called it that?  No.  I have no idea, really. We did have light bread when I was a kid. So it is  not unheard of. It is within the last one hundred years.  You couldn   t go to the store and buy a loaf of bread, sandwich bread,  like they do now.  Yes, we could go to the store and buy bread.  Could you?  Yes. I could remember till yet. My mother worked all day long because  my daddy had died when I was young. I can remember if we went to the  table at night and we didn   t have bread, she   d say to Howard,    Run  down to the store and get a loaf of bread.    We lived behind the post  office and the post office was in town. The store was just on down the  block. It was just a little town, not that many blocks. So he   d run down  there, get a loaf of bread, and come back. Life was different. In a small  town, life is different, anyhow. Everybody knows everybody, and  everybody knows everybody   s business. They know what you   re doing  and what you shouldn   t be doing. (Laughs) Oh, man.  A lot of front porch sitting?  I imagine. I don   t know about that. We didn   t have a front porch because  we lived back behind the post office. Post office was all up here. Once  you got through the post office, back here was the living room, one, two,  three bedrooms, a hallway, a dining room, a kitchen and a bath. That  was it. We didn   t have a front porch. I know back there, we had one way  we could go out and there was a fruit tree right out that door, and go on  through the kitchen and out that way and we   d head to the garden.  That   s all I remember about that place.  21  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  And it had running water.  Oh, yeah.  And electricity?  Yes. Electricity was so different then. If you wanted a light, there was a  wire hanging down from the ceiling, you   d turn on the light hanging  down right there. It took a while. I can remember that from when we  were tiny, when we were young. It was a little later when we had plugins  and we could have a lamp over there or have something besides that  light hanging down from the ceiling. That was not very much light, but  that   s the way it was. But it was electric and you could turn it on. You  wouldn   t have to get up the next morning and wash the globe. Do you  know about the globes? Here   d be your lamp. It would have a stand,  there   d be an area here for your coal oil. You   d turn on your wick and  get a light. It was a chimney, they called it, a glass chimney over the  flame to spread the light. It had to be washed every morning because it  would be black with soot. Every morning, we   d wash the chimney.  Things have improved, believe you me.  What about refrigeration?  Oh, we had a refrigerator that had   every morning, the ice man would  come to the back door. He would come on in. My mother had a regular  card to tell how many pounds she needed, fifty pounds or twenty-five  pounds, whatever it was. She just put the card out, the man would come  on in and bring the ice and put it in our refrigerator. She   d just pay  whenever the time came, you know. You think back to it, that was  confidence. She had confidence in him and he had confidence in her. To  come into your house, and she wouldn   t even be there. He   d come into  the house and bring the ice and put it in the refrigerator. That was a good  deal.  And then what about laundry?  We had a washwoman. It was called a washerwoman. She would come  on a certain day of the week, and my mother had all the things gathered  together. She would get this bag of clothes and take them to her house  and wash them and bring them back. She was just our washerwoman.  So there   s trust again, there.  Yep.  Do you have a favorite memory from those days?  22  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Finchum  Joyner  Bishop  Joyner  Favorite memory? I guess I   ve never thought about it. That   s another  strange question   a favorite memory. What I do remember is that my  mother saw to it that my sister and I got to take whatever things were  advantages. In Gunnison, what we could do, we could take piano and we  could take expression. Do you know expression?  I   ve never heard of it.  Expression is speech, but it wasn   t taught in school. If you were to be  taught speech, you had a speech teacher. So we went to the piano teacher  and a speech teacher. Then that meant we had piano recitals. At speech,  you   d have to give a talk or a speech, whatever it was you learned, at the  recitals. That was busy life. You had to learn all that stuff from memory.  (Laughs) You think back through it, life is so different, but this was 100  years ago.  Well, you still express yourself quite well.  I don   t know about that. I tell you as I remember it.  Is there anything else you want to add before we shut this off and move  into the piano room?  What do I need to add? You don   t know what I haven   t told you, and I  don   t know either, so let   s let it go at that. (Laughter) I imagine I  probably told you the main things. Actually, well, I haven   t told you  about King George, have I?  King George   from England?  Not this King George. In our church, the Baptist church, didn   t really  matter if you were Baptist, Methodist or nothing, whatever. We all  would go to one church for Sunday school and go there for preaching.  They would go to their place on every other Sunday that we   d have  preaching. They   d go to their Sunday school and come over to our place.  Well, at our place, we had King George. He led the singing. When he  led the singing, he   d go like this (rhythmic tapping of foot), you know.  Keep the time while patting his foot. His name was George, so of  course, that was natural       King George will really stamp his foot on  this one.    They would say,    He   ll get it going, he   ll get it going.     (Laughter) Life was so simple. Really, everybody liked everybody. We  all knew that our crazy habits, we all accepted. Whatever I was and  whatever you were, we accepted. We all liked each other. I can   t  remember if there was anybody in Gunnison I didn   t like, including  King George. (Laughter)  23  Finchum  Joyner  Well, we   ll sign off on that. Thank you for sharing with us, today.  I hope you   ve learned something about life in the golden days. (Laughs)  I didn   t say the olden days, I said the golden days. It was fun.  -------  ------- 
