 Finchum Today is October 5, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in  Shattuck, Oklahoma, to speak with Ester Stout.  Stout Ester Stout and I used to be Ester Williams.  Finchum Okay, well thank you for talking with us today. Can you tell us when  and where you were born?  Stout Where I was going?  Finchum Born?  Stout Oh  I was born in, let   s see, I was born down on the river. I think they  called it Longdale.  Finchum In Oklahoma?  Stout Uh-huh. Longdale, Oklahoma.  Finchum Longdale, and when is your birthday?  Stout August the third.  Finchum What year?  Stout Nineteen fifteen.  Finchum Happy birthday, a little late.  Stout Thank you. I   m pretty old. (Laughter)  5  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Stout I had one sister and three brothers.  Finchum Were you the oldest?  Stout I was next to the oldest.  Finchum What did your father do for a living?  Stout I guess he was a farmer.  Finchum What did he farm?  Stout Everything. Maize, kaffir corn, wheat, rye, anything there was to do.  Finchum Did you have to help?  Stout I had to help all the time. (Laughs)  Finchum What did you do?  Stout Oh, I run the tractors, and I shuck feed. I   ve done about everything  there is to do on a farm  Finchum Had to milk the cows? Milk the cow?  Stout Yes, I milked. We had the first Grade A milking machine in Ellis  County.  Finchum Really? Made life a little easier?  Stout Huh?  Finchum It made life a little easier?  Stout Yes. It was all run by electricity, but there was still a lot of work to it.  Finchum Did your mother work?  Stout My mother just worked at home.  Finchum How did she do her laundry?  Stout Just on a washboard, (laughs) like we always did.  6  Finchum Then hang it on the line?  Stout I think so, most of the time.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Stout I went to school at Arnett.  Bishop Arnett?  Finchum Arnett?  Stout Oklahoma. I just went to the   then we moved to Shattuck and I just  went to   I didn   t go to the country high school. I just went to the eighth  grade I think.  Finchum Was the country school a one-room?  Stout It was. We was so poor I had to work. I worked at the cafes and places.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject in school?  Stout My favorite subject, geography.  Finchum That   s the first time someone has answered that way. (Laughter) Did  you have to walk to school?  Stout Most of the time.  Finchum About how far was it?  Stout About three miles.  Finchum One way?  Stout It was three miles one way. (Laughs) We rode horses part of the time.  Finchum What would you take for lunch?  Stout A biscuit and a big piece of sausage.  Finchum Killed your own hogs?  Stout (Laughs) And we carried it in a gallon bucket with our water.  7  Finchum With your water     Stout They tasted pretty good, too. (Laughs)  Finchum About how many were in your class?  Stout Huh?  Finchum How many were in your class?  Stout How many?  Finchum How many students were there with you?  Stout How many years?  Finchum How many students in the little school with you?  Stout I had brothers.  Finchum How many were in your grade?  Stout I don   t remember.  Finchum Don   t remember? Just a few?  Stout That   s been a long time ago.  Finchum So you finished the eighth grade and went to work?  Stout Yes.  Finchum Did you get married?  Stout What day did I get married?  Finchum Did you?  Stout Yes, I got married.  Finchum How old were you?  Stout I was   I think I was eighteen or nineteen.  Finchum How did you meet him?  8  Stout On the school bus.  Finchum What was his name?  Stout Kenneth Stout.  Finchum Kenneth Stout. How did he ask you to marry him?  Stout He asked me, he said,    I saved a seat for you on the bus. You can set by  me if you want to. If you don   t want to, I will find another place.    I sat  by him and that was when my romance started. (Laughter)  Finchum Where did you get married?  Stout At Woodward.  Finchum At Woodward. At a church or the courthouse?  Stout Just a judge.  Finchum Judge.  Stout A judge     Finchum Did you go on a honeymoon?  Stout No, not really. (Laughs) I was too poor. Didn   t have any money.  Finchum What did he do for a living?  Stout What did I do for a living?  Finchum No, your husband?  Stout He just farmer.  Finchum Farmer.  Stout Raised wheat, corn, kaffir corn and everything that farmers do.  Finchum Kenneth was a farmer, too?  Stout Yes, Kenneth was a farmer. Kenneth David Stout was his name.  Finchum And did you have children?  9  Stout I had a girl and a boy.  Finchum Did they have to help with the farm?  Stout Yes.  Finchum Did you raise chickens?  Stout Yes. I raised lots of chickens. I used to raise chickens and dress them  and sell them at the Bestway Store in Shattuck. We lived in Arnett.  Finchum You got to spend the money?  Stout Huh?  Finchum You got to spend the money?  Stout (Laughs) I didn   t have any to spend.  Finchum When you sold the chickens?  Stout I   d go shopping, but I usually didn   t spend anything. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, do you remember the Depression? The Depression?  Stout Do I remember the Depression? I sure do.  Finchum What can you tell me about it?  Stout Huh?  Finchum What can you tell me about it?  Stout About the Depression?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Stout Well, I just worked all the time, whatever there was to do. I cleaned. I  had a garden and raised chickens. I had guineas. Well, I was busy all the  time.  Finchum Were you a member of a homemaker club?  Stout Huh?  Finchum Were you a member of a homemaker club?  10  Stout Yes.  Finchum How would you do laundry?  Stout On an old washboard. (Laughs)  Finchum I   ve already asked that haven   t I?  Bishop What about the Dust Bowl, do you remember the Dust Bowl?  Stout Huh?  Bishop Do you remember the Dust Bowl?  Stout I sure do. I remember that. We thought it was a big storm coming, but it  was just the dust from way off. It would come from the Northwest.  Bishop How did you keep the dust out of the house?  Stout I usually didn   t keep it out. (Laughs) I had a mop and we mopped our  floors. That   s about the size of it. Mopped and swept, had a broom     Bishop How did you keep the animals protected on the farm?  Stout Huh?  Bishop How did you protect the animals on the farm?  Stout Well, we had wire, barb wire fences.  Bishop During the Dust Bowl, did you lose any animals?  Stout I can   t remember, but I imagine we did.  Finchum Was church an important part of your life?  Stout Methodist     Finchum Methodist. Did you go to church when you were a child?  Stout Yes.  Finchum Did you sing in the choir?  11  Stout No, I couldn   t sing. (Laughs) I would open my mouth up and down and  they would think I was singing.  Finchum Play the piano?  Stout No.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  Stout Danced. We had dancing.  Finchum What kind of dancing?  Stout Uh, waltzes and heel and toe, poke-e-o and all those old-fashioned  dances.  Finchum Heel and toe, I haven   t heard that in a long time.  Stout Huh?  Finchum Heel and toe.  Stout Heel and toe and poke-e-o.  Finchum I   m not sure what poke-e-o is? Did you have to have a partner?  Stout Yes, I had a partner.  Finchum Did you play sports?  Stout Not really, not very much.  Finchum Ride a horse?  Stout I rode a lot of horses.  Finchum Did your father plow with a horse or a mule?  Stout My father plowed with a   I think we had tractors already then. Oh  yeah, we had mules.  Finchum Did you sew?  Stout Huh?  Finchum Did you sew?  12  Stout Sew? I did a lot of sewing. Lots and lots of sewing. I made a lot of  quilts.  Finchum Did you have a favorite pattern?  Stout Well, the star quilt was my favorite really.  Finchum Do a double wedding ring?  Stout Yes.  Finchum A little easier than matching those points.  Stout I got a ring now. This is my father and mother   s golden wedding ring. I  lost mine. I don   t remember what happened to it. I think I lost it and  never could find it. This is their ring. It has their initials in it.  Finchum That   s a keepsake.  Stout Uh-huh. I don   t know what I   ll do with it. I guess I   ll give it to one of  my kids, if any of them wants it.  Finchum It   s special. Somebody will.  Stout Yeah.  Finchum What were holidays like? What was Christmas like? Christmas?  Stout Christmas?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Stout Oh, we usually just have Christmas dinner.  Finchum Have a tree?  Stout Yes, we usually do.  Finchum A cedar?  Stout We used to drag in trees, but it got so we didn   t do that anymore  because I was allergic to that cedar. I   d break out every time we drug in  the tree from outside, and so we used to have an official tree.  Finchum Cell phones   13  Bishop Going back to quilts, how would you get your fabric?  Stout How what?  Bishop How would you get your fabric for quilts?  Stout Oh, I   d go to the cheapest place I could find fabric and buy up a whole  bolt of it. (Laughs) I   d usually find part of a bolt or something like that.  And I made rugs, rag rugs.  Finchum Uh-huh.  Stout I did about everything there was to do.  Bishop Did you crochet?  Stout Yes, I crocheted a lot. Lots and lots of things.  Bishop How did you learn?  Stout Just taught myself. My mother crocheted so I got the idea, so you do  just your own thinking.  Finchum Were you a good cook?  Stout Huh?  Finchum Were you a good cook?  Stout I hope I was. (Laughter) At least they ate everything I   d cook.  Finchum What was the favorite?  Stout Oh, just steak and gravy and bread. Whatever.  Finchum Did you fry your chicken or bake it?  Stout Both. Both. I fried some chicken, but I baked a lot of chicken, too. That  way there wasn   t so much grease on it.  Finchum Be healthier. Make homemade ice cream?  Stout Sure did.  Finchum Where would you get your ice?  14  Stout They had a place where we could go buy a big chunk of ice and bring it  home. Wrap it up and try to keep it so we   d have ice for different  things.  Finchum An ice plant?  Stout Uh-huh.  Finchum Would the county agent come out to the house?  Stout A lot of times.  Finchum A lot of times.  Stout My kids would come out to the house. These are my kids   Finchum Do you remember your first car?  Stout Yeah. (Laughs) Big old car with wheels about that big around.  (Gestures) You were pushing more than you were a driving. (Laughter)  We, I think we just use to have one car like that. I had lots of cars.  Finchum Were the roads pretty bad back then?  Stout Where we lived they were.  Finchum Had to change a lot of tires?  Stout Yeah. Down in the sand hills and Red River. Yeah, we usually had to  push up every hill that we come to.  Finchum Push up the hill. (Laughter) You wished you had your horse then?  Stout Yeah.  Finchum Was your husband in the war? Did your husband go to war?  Stout No, he didn   t. We were farmers then and most of the ones that was  raising stuff to eat didn   t usually have to go.  Finchum Didn   t have to. He was doing his work here. Yeah.  Stout Because they needed food.  Finchum Did your brothers go to war?  15  Stout No. My father wasn   t very well. My mother wasn   t too well either. My  father had heart trouble.  Finchum Well, are you the first one to get to a hundred in your family?  Stout Am I the first one to get this old? Yes, I think I am.  Finchum What   s your secret, do you think?  Stout I don   t have any. (Laughs)  Finchum Don   t know why?  Stout Huh?  Finchum Don   t know why?  Stout Yeah.  Finchum How did you celebrate your birthday?  Stout Right in here where it   s nice and warm. (Laughs) So my kids could  come in here and see me. There are two of them right there.  Finchum They think you are pretty special.  Stout I think so.  Bishop Your daughter said you spent a lot of time with your grandkids.  Stout Yes.  Bishop Can you talk about that? What was it like to be a grandmother?  Stout What was it like to be a grandmother?  Bishop What was it like?  Stout I   m really a great-grandmother. My grandmother was born in Germany.  She was an Inselman.  Bishop Did you take care of your grandkids?  Stout My grandkids?  16  Bishop UH-huh?  Stout I   ve taken a lot of care of them. Practically raised some of them. They  always wanted to go home with me. (Laughter)  Bishop Did you feed them?  Stout I   d feed them what they wanted, if I had it. I didn   t always have it.  (Laughs) I raised lots of garden: sweet corn, carrots, and tomatoes, and  everything.  Bishop Did you ever take anything to the county fair?  Stout Always. I usually won first. I really did.  Bishop Yeah   Finchum With what?  Bishop What did you win with?  Stout Huh?  Bishop What did you win for?  Stout Well, one thing, I took a big cake one time. I won a big cake plate, one  of them big square plates with a center. I got first on that. Then, when  I   d take a quilt or something, I   d usually get first or second.  Bishop Lots of blue ribbons   Stout Huh?  Bishop Lots of blue ribbons   Stout Yeah. I was pretty particular with what I did. I wanted to do it good or I  didn   t want to do it. (Laughs)  Bishop What piece of advice would you give someone who wants to live one  hundred years?  Stout I don   t know. Just do your own thing. I   m over a hundred years old.  People don   t believe me though. They say,    That can   t be true. You  can   t be a hundred years old.    But I am, I guess. That   s what they tell  me anyway.  17  Finchum What time did you get up this morning?  Stout I usually get up about six or seven, if I   m awake. Sometimes earlier. It  depends on how well I sleep that night. That   s my bed right over there.  Finchum What time will you go to bed tonight?  Stout I like to be in bed by nine o   clock. I have a schedule. (Laughter)  Finchum What do you do during the day?  Stout Well, I crochet or lay in here and sleep and fight the flies. (Laughter) I  don   t crochet too much anymore. I used to crochet all the time. I   ve  made lots and lots of crochet work.  Bishop Do you read any?  Stout I read too. Not too long. It bothers my eyes. I like to read these big,  these books that have the large letters in them. They really are better to  read, if you can   t see very good.  Bishop What types of books do you like to read? Fiction, biography     Stout I like to read romance.  Bishop Romance?  Stout Romance, yeah    (Laughs)  Bishop Harlequin novels?  Stout Huh?  Bishop Harlequin novels?  Stout Yeah. (Laughs) I like anything that   s good.  Bishop If history were written today, what would you like it to say about you?  Stout What would I like to read today?  Bishop If history were written about you, what would you like it to say? How do  you want to be remembered?  Stout The good things. (Laughs) Anyway, I want my life to be remembered  the way that it actually is.  18  Bishop How is that?  Stout Good.  Bishop Do you have anything on your bucket list? Anything on your bucket  list? Anything that you want to do that you have never done before?  Stout Oh, let   s see. I   d like to go to Old Mexico, (laughs) and see   I like  those green things you get in old Mexico, the avocados     Bishop The avocados     Stout I want them to nice and soft. I just love them when you open them up  and let the seed fall out. Take a spoon and dig out the goodies. (Laughs)  There are not very many things that I haven   t done during my lifetime.  Bishop You   ll have to take her to Old Mexico now and get her some  avocados    (Laughter) Have you ever traveled?  Stout Traveled? Yes. We   ve been in every state in the United States, I think,  and was over in Canada, just barely in Canada. We had a travel trailer.  Had a trailer with it. We drove. We had everything we needed in it, a  place to eat and sleep. Prepare your food and just stop and buy your  food. Had an icebox and everything in it.  Bishop Where was the most favorite place you   ve ever been?  Stout In the west, west where the grass grows tall. It   s Wisconsin I think. Isn   t  that where that grass grows tall? (Laughs)  Finchum I don   t have any idea.  Stout You missed something.  Bishop A lot of dairy farms in Wisconsin.  Stout You missed something then.  Finchum I thought that was here.  Stout Ask Grayson, he ought to know.  Grayson I don   t know where you was talking about. I was thinking the Flint Hills  of Kansas.  19  Bishop Yeah.  Finchum Wyoming maybe.  Bishop Wyoming, Montana.  Finchum Did you make it to Hawaii and Alaska?  Stout Huh?  Finchum Hawaii and Alaska?  Stout Hawaii?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Stout No, I   ve never been in Hawaii.  Finchum How about Alaska?  Stout Alaska? No, I never went quite that far north.  Bishop How many years were you married?  Stout We was married, I think if my husband had lived another week, I think  we would   ve been married sixty-three years. Is that right?  Grayson I think you   re pretty close.  Bishop It   s a long time.  Stout It   s a long time.  Bishop What   s the secret to a long happy marriage?  Stout I wouldn   t trade my life for anybody else   s life.  Bishop What   s the secret to a long and happy marriage?  Stout Always be happy together. When I was going someplace, I went with  my husband. When he was going someplace, I usually went with him  too. We rode lots of horses     Bishop Did you ever have a favorite horse?  Stout Yeah.  20  Bishop Do you remember its name?  Stout Gopher. (Laughs)  Bishop What was so special about Gopher?  Stout (Laughs) Because I liked to ride him.  Bishop What kind of horse was he?  Stout He was just a horse, a tall horse.  Bishop What color was he?  Stout He was kind of a brown-looking thing.  Bishop Gopher. (Laughs) I always love the names. Did you ever have a family  pet?  Stout Yeah. I think we had one, one time.  Grayson Duke and Lassie, and all them dogs   Bishop A bunch of dogs  You had dogs  Did you have a dog?  Stout Oh, I don   t think I did. (Laughter)  Finchum You   re getting tired. I think we   re going to stop there. Thank you for  talking with us.  Stout Well, thank you.  Finchum It was a pleasure.  Stout Okay. I   m glad you came in.  Finchum I   m glad too.  Stout Come see me anytime.  Finchum I sure will.  -------  ------- 
