 Finchum  Jackson  Today is September 16, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University and today we   re in  Muskogee to speak with Jack Jackson, who turned 100 in August. So  thank you for having us, today.  Yes.  Can you tell us when you were born? Your birthday?  Oh, yeah.  What day?  August the 14th, 1913.  And where?  Haskell, Oklahoma.  Where did you go to school?  At Haskell.  How did you come to be in Muskogee?  Just drive in the car. The family car. That   s how we come there, just on  my own.  What kind of work did you do?  Well, in the beginning, I was farming. And I worked at the mental  5  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Atkins  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  hospital at Taft, Oklahoma for thirteen years. Then I went to the school  and I helped the sixth grade kids for twenty-six years, and then I retired  on the 14th day of August  2003 .  What did you do at the mental hospital?  Take care of   I was called a psychiatric aide. I would help the retarded.  And then you taught school?   Sandra Atkins, Jack Jackson   s daughter joins the interview   Foster Grandparent Program.  Foster Grandparent, okay. How did you get involved with the foster  grandparents?  Foster Grandparent, yeah. There was a program that came out and they  wanted somebody to work. That   s when I started working as a foster  grandparent, until I was 90 years old.  That   s a long time.  I went in there on the morning of the 14th day of August, when school  was starting. I told Ms. Lowell,    You know what? I   m 90 years old.  Today is my birthday. I didn   t sign up to work another year. I   m quitting  this morning.    (Laughter)   Evelyn Jackson, Jack Jackson   s wife joins the interview   He did.  It was nice. It was nice. I had a nice life.  It sounds like it. Were you in the War? Did you go to the War?  January the 1st, 1941. The war broke out. They sent me to the South  Pacific at Air Force guard duty   three years, ten months, five days.  They discharged me at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  That was a long time ago, wasn   t it?  Yeah, long time ago. I was twenty-nine when I went in.  Were you drafted or did you volunteer?  6  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Drafted, drafted  They knew they were getting pretty close to war and  they were drafting all those young boys. Soon as I got in that group, war  broke out. The Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. Three years, ten months  and five days. A mighty happy soul when I went, but a happy soul when  I got my discharge. (Laughter)  After you were discharged, what did you do?  I went to farming. Went back to farming. All the mental patients   you  know, it was Jim Crow laws, then. All the blacks in Lawton,  Oklahoma   they transferred them to Taft. It was a black mental  hospital. Worked there for thirteen years.  When you were farming, what did you raise? What did you farm?  Raising corn and cotton.  How many acres did you have?  Oh, I had, I think, forty acres.  Kept you busy, though. Did you have a tractor?  Yeah. I first started out with a team, but I bought me a little old tractor.  Little old Ford tractor.  I raised cows. I went out there one morning to feed them, and one  grabbed me and I stepped back. There was some dewberry vines all  tangled up, and I fell flat on my back, kicked up my heels. I said,    This  is it. I   m going to sell them cows and quit fooling with them.     (Laughter) And I did.  Once you make up your mind, it   s made. You make up your mind and  stick to it.  Yeah.  When you were younger, living on the farm, did you have chores? What  were your chores as a child?  Oh, I just raised corn and cotton, then.  When you were little.  Oh, I played and went to school.  7  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Bishop  Atkins  Jackson  Finchum  E. Jackson  Jackson  Finchum  You didn   t have chores?  Just like all little boys.  Do you remember the name of your school? Was it a one-room school?  Was it what?  Was the school just one room?  Three.  How many brothers and sisters did you have?  Three sisters, two brothers. I had three brothers, but he got wet. He  didn   t know he had to   he went with his dad to cut a little wood...  It was cold and rainy and he got wet and had small pox.     and that was it. That was all of it. But the rest of them didn   t get  grown, but I   m the oldest one out of nine kids. I was born real early one  morning at one o   clock   14th day of August, 1913. Up to the 14th day  of August, 2013. One hundred long, happy years. (Laughter)  Tell us about meeting your wife. How did you meet your wife?  Oh, she was an old girl running around there   teenager. I was seven  years older, you know   well, I don   t know how much older I am. She  knows. (Laughter) We   ve been fifty-something years.  Fifty-something years.  But he was older, right?  He   s thirteen years older than she is.  I didn   t drink, smoke, chew or dip. No strong drinks, no morning coffee.  What was your favorite food?  Greens and cornbread.  I don   t know. Most anything, then. I   m sure I didn   t have no favorite  food. All of that was edible.  You ate whatever she fixed. How did you catch her?  8  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Bishop  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Atkins  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Who?  How did you catch your wife or did she catch you? (Laughter) How  many children do you have?  Eight. Five girls and three boys.  Pretty big family.  He was older. He was forty when he had children.  So how old were you when you had your first child?  I don   t know.  Old enough.  I had a hard time keeping count with that.  After World War II? Is that when he got married?  Yes.  What did you do after World War II? Tell us about life after you got  back from the War.  What?  Tell us about your life after you got back from the War.  That   s what I said, I went to farming. I told her that.  And then he gave it up. After you gave up farming, what did you do?  That   s when I started working at the mental hospital and worked in the  school.  What about your family? Did you start a family?  Yeah, I started a family after I come out of the Army.  How did you meet your wife?  She was there in the country like I was. I just met her.  9  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Atkins  Finchum  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Did you go on a date?  On a date?  Yeah.  Went on and got married. (Laughter) It was cheap that day and time.  Things were cheap. I   ve seen them work for fifty cents a day. I didn   t,  but they did. Fifty cents for ten hours   Do you remember your first car?  First what?  First car?  Car? Model A Ford. Then I got me an old truck. In later years when I  was working and going on, I got me a Mercury Grand Marquis. Best car  I ever had. Yes, I did. I kept it, I forget now how many years. I sold it to  my nephew for five hundred dollars. One day, we were over at my  daughter   s house. Well, he gave me five hundred dollars for it, he kept it  two or three years and he sold it for the same five hundred. That   s a  good car. I always took care of it. I didn   t put a scratch on it. No, I was  particular about my transportation. No, I didn   t put a scratch on it.  Did you live in Muskogee when you were working?  No.  Haskell. He just came to Muskogee in 2010. He had fallen and we had to  put him in a nursing home. He moved here last year in 2012, over here.  Him and my mom   he was in a nursing home and she was still there,  out in the country, on the farm. So they found this place to where they  could be together again. So they moved over here in November of 2012.  Not too long ago, then.  He served in the South Pacific, right? Maybe we   ll talk a little about  that. Can you tell us a little bit about the War? What it was like for you?  It was pretty rough for me because I didn   t want to be there.  You fought in the South Pacific, right?  Yeah, I was in the South Pacific. First island, a little old   when the tide  got up, it would cut us off from the rest of the people for several hours.  10  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  They shipped me down there to an island called New Caledonia. It was a  pretty good size island. Stayed there for about eighteen months. Went to  the South Pacific in the Philippines. That   s where I put the rest of the  time in. Come on back and they discharged me at Fort Leavenworth,  Kansas.  What branch of the service were you in? Army, Navy   ?  I was in the Army.  Did you ever see action in the Philippines?  No, I was close to it. I didn   t come in contact with no action. I was doing  guard duty out by the planes coming in. They   d go out and bomb and  come back then. The 14th day of August   those Philippine boys run up  to me,    Oye Joe, victory, victory, victory.    That was a happy day for me  on my birthday. Hirohito surrendered.  What were some of your main duties?  In the Army?  Yeah.  I was doing guard duty.  Guard duty?  Yeah, somebody had to do guard duty.  Did you have to do it all night? Did you do an all-night duty?  No, daytime.  Daytime?  Somebody else was doing guard duty at night.  Did you get any training before you went?  Went where?  To the War.  No  (Laughter) There was no training to do.  11  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  E. Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Bishop  They just put you on a ship and sent you.  They drafted me because they knew the war was coming. They didn   t  know anything. One of the guards say,    I hear a bunch of planes  coming.    They didn   t pay much attention to it, didn   t do anything. They  were dropping bombs. Boom, boom, boom, boom. Put them ships under  the water there in the harbor. That   s the first time I ever heard of Pearl  Harbor   when they were bombing it. (Laughter)  Was he there?  I didn   t have no television. I didn   t have no radio. Next morning, I went  up to the store, and the old man he said,    They bombed Pearl Harbor last  night. Yes, indeed. The world is in terrible shape.    Getting tough,  getting tough. Fighting and killing people. A lot of people lost their  lives, that I knew.  When you got to Kansas, how did you get back to Oklahoma? From  Leavenworth?  From overseas? On a train. I don   t think they had no buses, then. They  didn   t have no buses then. Train.  And you two weren   t married at that point, were you?  No.  Did your farm have electricity when you came back? When did you get  electricity on the farm?  On the farm? I don   t understand.  Do you remember when you got electricity on the farm?  Nineteen thirty-eight. Nineteen thirty-eight   come out of Okmulgee.  Oh, we was glad. We had those old lamps, couldn   t hardly see by them,  not at night. Hundred years is a long time.  It   s a long time.  Thank the Lord, he gave me real good health, good remembrance, good  mind. I have seen people that is just gone to pieces. You always got to  treat people right   regardless, and it paid off.  What is your favorite memory about the farm?  12  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  E. Jackson  Jackson  Bishop  E. Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  E. Jackson  Bishop  E. Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  About the farm?  Do you have a favorite memory about farm life?  No.  How did you take care of all those kids on the farm?  How did I do what?  How did you take care of all those kids on the farm?  Oh, I was farming. Raising corn and cotton. Selling a lot of cotton.  Did the kids ever help you?  Every day. They   d come in from school. I   d go pick them up.  Did they? You train them how to work  (Laughs)  What did you make them do?  He didn   t make them do nothing. I did.  Your wife says she did all the work   No she didn   t. (Laughter) I know she didn   t say that. (Laughter) I know  she didn   t say that. Don   t try to put nothing over on me.  We worked together.  I   m too old. I   m too old of a cat to be fooled by a kitten. Did you hear  what I said? I   m too old a cat to be fooled by a kitten. (Laughter)  Never heard that, did you?  I assume you worked together. I bet you were a good team.  We did.  You and your wife, you worked together.  She worked longer than I worked. I   m old and I   m retired. I went to  drawing Social Security   I didn   t throw it away. I put it in the bank.  Whatever I didn   t use, I put it in the bank, Armstrong. I had two  daughters on my living will. When her husband turned it over and told  13  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  E. Jackson  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  me how much money I had up there   I made history in that. You seen  the paper?  What was family life like? Tell us a little bit about holidays or birthdays  in your home.  When I reached a hundred, I had a birthday there at the church. That  birthday they all were getting in there. The pastor of the church, he gave  me a check for a hundred dollars. The rest of it all went in there. I had a  good life. I thank the Lord. One guy told me I was going to live five  more years. I don   t know. (Laughter) Some preacher told me that. I  don   t know how long I   ll live. I never was bothering or no hard trouble  or nothing.  Did you ever think you would live to a hundred?  Yes.  You did?  My mother-in-law lived to be 101. That was a sweet woman, my  goodness. She was a sweet mother-in-law. She said,    Jack, you   re better  to me than some of my own kids.    She said,    I take them to town and I  give them money and they take it. You won   t take nothing. You won   t  let me cook nothing.       I don   t want you   re doing for me.    So sweet.  She lived to be 101. I had a sweet mother-in-law. Some people don   t  have   some have mother-in-laws is tough.  What was her secret to living that long? What is the secret to living to a  hundred?  Treat everybody right.  What   s the secret? Trust in God   That   s right.  That   s the only secret. Trust in God. Do right. Treat everybody right.  Black, white or whatever. Treat everybody right.  That   s right.  That   s what I tried to do. But the Bible says,    Aint nothing good but the  Lord Jesus Christ. But it is my desire to be good.    Just a closer walk  with thee.  14  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  E. Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  E. Jackson  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  E. Jackson  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Did you go to church quite a bit? Was that an important part of your  life?  I was the deacon of the church.  Oh, you were the deacon. Tell us about that.  Yeah, deacon.  The only deacon we got at church.  What was the name of the church?  One I started with   Wilson Chapel Baptist Church.  No, it was Clive Creek.  They built it out of blocks. My dad hauled sand from the river up there  to help make the model to put them big old blocks. Dad had all the sand  delivered up there. Then later years, added on a dinette, little smaller  down    Oh. I had a good life.  Where were you the deacon at?  Wilson Chapel Baptist Church.  How many years did you do that?  Still is.  How come I   m here? I fell   got up to turn the gas up. It wasn   t that  cold, but I don   t know. I started stumbling and fell backwards. Wasn   t  nothing for me to catch but the floor. It didn   t have no rug on it. That   s  why I can   t walk. I took therapy. I don   t know how long they make  them   the first time I tried to walk around again, I made thirty-five  steps. They had a wheelchair running behind me. But they didn   t come  back no more. If they had kept on, I never would have got feeble like I  am. That   s the reason why I   m here in this wheelchair.  So what is a typical day for you?  I didn   t get that, what did you say?  What is a typical day? What do you during the day? What are some of  the things you do, today?  15  E. Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Bishop  Jackson  Finchum  Jackson  Finchum  Bishop  Nothing. He can   t do nothing. I help to put him in that chair for me to  move him. I push the chair. Since it   s gotten to be warm, I   ve taken him  out twice and pushed him around on the sidewalk. I   ll ask him   maybe  say today, I   ll ask him,    You want to go out?    No, because I   m scared  you   re going to let me fall.    So by him being afraid, I don   t take him  because I want him to have the trust in himself that I   m going to take  care of him.  Do you have a motto you live by?  A what?  A motto, a philosophy?   Gestures no.   Well, when history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  Say what you want to say. (Laughter)  You   re pulling my leg, now. What do you want it to say? What do you  want to be remembered for?  Remembered for    I thank you for coming.  What do you want people to remember about you?  That I lived one hundred years by treating people right. That   s number  one.  Well, we thank you.  You   re welcome.  -------  ------- 
