 Finchum Today is February 1, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with me  is Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State. Today we are in Soper,  Oklahoma, to speak with Leona McGarry. So thank you for having us.  McGarry Thank you for coming.  Finchum Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born?  McGarry I was born in Oklahoma, Choctaw County, on July 27, 1915. I still live  about four miles from where I was born.  Finchum Didn   t venture too far.  McGarry (Laughs) No, I haven   t  I haven   t ventured too far.  Finchum Where in Choctaw County? Soper?  McGarry No, it was near my home now. I lived south of Soper, so I was born out  closer to where I live now  which is Boswell .  Finchum Born at home?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  McGarry They were sharecroppers. They rented   paid back their rent with the  products that they produced on the farm.  Finchum And what was that?  5  McGarry Cotton and corn mostly was their crops.  Finchum Were they from Oklahoma?  McGarry Yes, my dad was from Texas. He was from Kerrville, Texas. My  mother was from Oklahoma.  Finchum How did they meet?  McGarry They met at a dance one night, and they married soon afterwards. She  was fifteen years old, and he was thirty-five when they got married.  Finchum Wow, quite a difference. (Laughs)  McGarry Yes.  Finchum How many children did they have?  McGarry They had  nine  children and six lived to be adults.  Finchum Where are you in that?  McGarry I   m next to the youngest one.  Finchum Almost the baby.  McGarry My brother is younger than I am, and he is ninety-six.  Finchum Still living?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did any of the others live to 100?  McGarry No.  Finchum How about your parents?  McGarry No. My father died when he was  eighty-one . And my mother died  when she was eighty-six.  Finchum No one else, aunts or uncles that made it to a hundred?  McGarry No.  Finchum What do you think the secret is?  6  McGarry Well, I don   t know. It   s a higher power, must be.  Finchum A higher power?  McGarry It has to be a higher power. (Laughs) My father was a farmer, some say  he was a sharecropper. We lived on the farm and they had cows, and  hogs, and chickens, and ducks. So we were just farmers.  Finchum What was your chore to do?  McGarry Several. I was to get in the eggs, and help get in the firewood, and help  Mother on wash day. We had to carry the water from the springs, so we  had to help her fill up her tubs, and her pots, and get ready for wash  day.  Finchum Using a washboard?  McGarry Yes, and lye soap. Everyone in our neighborhood, we lived all just  alike. We were all in the same situation, we were. But life was good, we  enjoyed life. My father, he was a rodeo guy. He   d have to go to the  rodeos, and entered roping. He won a saddle one time at the roping  convention in Oklahoma City.  Finchum That   s pretty good. What was his name?  McGarry His name was Edward. He went by Ed, Ed Taylor.  Finchum Taylor, okay.  McGarry My mother, she was from Minco, or up around Oklahoma City. She was  borned a year of the land run, in  1889 .  Finchum Had her parents come for that, or were they already here?  McGarry They were here.  Finchum What are some things you would do for fun as a young child?  McGarry The first thing I remember is we had community candy breaking they  called it. They   d all come and have a big box of candy. I don   t know for  sure if they break in some way and they   d all distribute the candy to  everybody that was there that participated in the candy.  Finchum Chocolate or hard candy?  7  McGarry It was hard candy.  Finchum Like peppermint?  McGarry No, it was more of a taffy. They pulled, kind of like the old homemade  candy.  Finchum They   d made it themselves?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  McGarry I went to Iron Stoh School here, then I went to the Vorman school a  ways south of here. We walked to school. There weren   t no school  buses in those days. Me and my brother walked to school. Course we   d  get nosey you know. It was a long way. We had to go a long way to  school, but we would walk and go through the woods.  Finchum Rain or shine?  McGarry Rain or shine.  Finchum Or snow.  McGarry It snowed on us some.  Finchum About how far of a walk?  McGarry I imagine its four miles over there.  Finchum Go first through eighth?  McGarry Yes. So back in them days we didn   t have no buses, and if you  graduated from grade school to high school you had to go to town and  board there and go to school. We didn   t have no school buses.  Finchum What town?  McGarry Boswell.  Finchum Did you do that?  McGarry No, and it   s not very many of the country girls, you know, that we had  any higher than our grade school, but we was really taught straight and  we learned a lot.  8  Finchum How to do cursive writing?  McGarry Yes, some of it   penmanship.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject?  McGarry Yes, it was healthy living. (Laughs) Can you believe it? (Laughter)  Finchum You want to try that again?  McGarry (Laughs) I majored in healthy living more than any of my subjects.  Finchum Not math, history, or anything?  McGarry I wasn   t good at math. (Laughs)  Finchum What would you take for lunch?  McGarry Well honey, we packed our lunches in little gallon   little pails, buckets.  We would take fried sugar pies we   d make, and of course Mother would  boil us some eggs, and we   d take a sandwich. Something like that, but  everybody, all the children, carried their lunches in little buckets, little  pails.  Finchum Sugar fried pie?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum I know what a fried pie is, but just sugar on the inside?  McGarry Yes, then they   d bake it.  Finchum Would your mother make your clothes?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Where would she get her fabric?  McGarry In Boswell, we had a dry good stores. Had about two big dry good  stores. She would buy the material and make our own clothes.  Finchum Would she quilt?  McGarry Yes, she took the Kansas City Star way back there, years ago.  9  Finchum It had the patterns.  McGarry It had the patterns in it. Every fall when our fall crops were done, Papa  took the cotton off to gin it, sell it, we all got new shoes for winter.  Finchum Once a year, huh?  McGarry (Laughs) And they lasted us a year. They were good shoes then.  Finchum And if you outgrew them?  McGarry We got a new pair, yeah. But there was a lot of barefooting going on  too. A lot of us went barefooted in the summer.  Finchum Have to worry about bee stings?  McGarry Oh we got those too.  Finchum Snake bites?  McGarry No. Our whole family grew up   you know our place is not too far to  the creek here. None of us children were ever snake bit.  Finchum That   s pretty good.  McGarry That was good.  Finchum Did your mother teach you how to sew?  McGarry Yes, yes. I wasn   t too good at it, but I did okay. (Laughs)  Finchum Could sew on a button, huh?  McGarry Yes, I could sew on a button.  Finchum After the eighth grade what did you do, when you finished school?  McGarry I finished school and I was home. Then a year or so I got married and  started raising my family. So we had seven children, we had  nine   children and lost  three . I have six living, three boys and three girls.  Bishop How old were you when you got married?  McGarry I was sixteen years old.  Finchum That would   ve been    31, right during the Depression.  10  McGarry Yes, yes it was.  Finchum Did you get married at home or church?  McGarry No, we got married at the courthouse in Hugo. We married in Hugo.  Finchum Kind of eloped or did you tell people you were going?  McGarry They knew we were getting married.  Finchum You have a special dress?  McGarry Yes. I don   t know whatever become of it (laughs), but I had a special  dress that I wore that day.  Finchum Have a honeymoon?  McGarry No.  Finchum What would you do for dates? Where would you go on dates?  McGarry We went to country dances. That was our, mostly, pastime was going to  country dances. They had a dance every week somewhere in our  community.  Finchum Individual homes?  McGarry Yes.  Bishop How did you meet your husband?  McGarry I had knew him and saw him off and on for a good long time. They  lived between here and Boswell. My dad used to like to rope cows in  town, so they   d have him roping every Sunday. So my husband got to  coming down to the roping on Sunday evening. That   s how I met him.  So we lived in Hugo, I think, for three years. He worked down there for  a heavy machinery operator. Then we moved back and we   ve been here  ever since then.  Finchum Did you learn to do any of the rodeo things?  McGarry No, no. I think I did one time when I was very young. I thought I was  going to ride this calf and I told the other kids,    Well hold that calf and  11  I   ll ride the calf.    The calf just made one or two feet and over his head I  went. So glad he didn   t bite. (Laughs)  Finchum Nothing broke?  McGarry (Laughs) No.  Finchum But your pride, maybe?  McGarry (Laughs)  Finchum How did he pop the question?  McGarry Let me see, it   s been a long time ago. I think he and I   we kind of kept  it a secret for a while, that we were engaged. Me and my sister one day  we got ready and we went to Hugo, and he met me in Hugo and we got  married. My family really didn   t know that we were married until we  came home that evening.  Finchum And how did they take the news?  McGarry Pretty good.  Finchum So Hugo in the    30s. That   s when the circuses first came to Hugo.  McGarry Yes, I think so.  Finchum Any special memories about the Depression?  McGarry Yes, we didn   t have no washing machines but the tub and rubboard. We  had to do that, we had to draw our own water. You know our houses,  we didn   t have a modern house you know. We didn   t have running  water. It was kind of a struggle on wash day. (Laughs)  Finchum How about bath time?  McGarry Bath time, we took baths in our old big tub. We   d have to heat the water  on the stove. We   d take a bath, and maybe you couldn   t let just one take  a bath, others had to use the same water. (Laugh)  Finchum Did you get to go first?  McGarry I can   t remember, I doubt it. (Laughs)  Finchum How often would you do that?  12  McGarry Once a week, sure. We did it   the little toddlers got in more than that,  but I   d have to bathe them pretty often.  Finchum How often would you get to go to town?  McGarry Oh, I   d say   well after I got to raising my family out here, my husband  done most of the shopping. We had a country store up here, and he  would go and buy most of the groceries every day, so I didn   t go to the  store that much and shop. It   s a job I still don   t like. (Laughs) I don   t  like to shop.  Finchum Would you go to the movies?  McGarry Yes. We didn   t have movies like we do now. They were silent back  when I was young. There wasn   t no talking to it, you had to read it.  We   ve been through all that.  Finchum When you were younger would you get an allowance or any money you  could do what you wanted to with?  McGarry No, if we decided, me and my sister, to go to town, we probably got  fifty cents to go to town. The movie just costed a dime to get in back  then.  Finchum A dime a piece?  McGarry Yes. You   d get a big sack of candy for five cents.  Finchum Dimes were worth more back then, huh?  McGarry They were. I was telling my children the other day that if I can  remember right, and I think I can, when Dad went to plant his crops in  the spring, twenty-five dollars covered his prices of seed and everything  that he planted, for twenty-five dollars.  Finchum That was a lot of money, too.  McGarry That was a lot of money back then.  Finchum Where would he have to take the cotton to be ginned?  McGarry He took it to Boswell. They had a gin then.  Finchum About how far is that from here?  McGarry That   s ten miles from here.  13  Finchum That   s a long way in a wagon.  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did he plow with the mules or     McGarry Yes, he plowed with mules. Turning plow we called it.  Finchum One row at a time?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did you have to help pick cotton?  McGarry I had to help pick cotton and I hoed the fields, yes.  Finchum Barefooted?  McGarry Yes, most of the time we were. Course we had to hoe the cotton crop  and do things like that. Plant corn and stuff like that. Course in later  years we got a corn planter, so we didn   t have to drop it, but we have  dropped it.  Finchum Would you go to church?  McGarry Yes, we went to church. My dad, he went to church regular every  Sunday. Course my mother and us children that was at home, we would  go on the weekends. We had to go in the wagon. So yes, we attended  church.  Finchum What denomination?  McGarry We had a Pentecostal church, and we had a Baptist church that my dad  went to.  Finchum Did you sing in the choir?  McGarry Some, yes. That   s when we all sang in the choir, but now it   s different.  Finchum Did you play any instruments?  McGarry I played the tambourine a little bit, not much. (Laughs) No, my  mother   s sisters and brothers were musicians. My mother could sing  really good, and she could play the piano just a little bit, but not that  much.  14  Finchum Have a favorite church song?  McGarry Oh yes, we had a lot of beautiful little hymns we sang, yes.    Amazing  Grace   , I love that, and    An Uncloudy Day   ,    What a Friend We Have  in Jesus   , and yes, we sang all of those old hymns.  Finchum Have revivals?  McGarry Yes, we had the old outside revivals that   brush arbors they called it.  Brush Arbor Days, we went through that.  Finchum Have a regular preacher or a traveling one?  McGarry We had a regular pastor, minister.  Finchum Did your husband have to serve in the war?  McGarry No, he didn   t.  Finchum If you were sixteen, how old was he?  McGarry I think he was twenty-four.  Bishop Did any of your family members serve in the war or in the service?  McGarry Yes. My brother, that   s younger than I am, he served, I think, two years,  overseas. And my older son, well I had two, my two older sons. One of  them went to the Korean War.  Finchum When your brother was over there, did he write you letters?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did you keep them?  McGarry Yes, we did.  Finchum And he made it back?  McGarry He made it back. He was in good health, and he   s still in fair health. He  has some trouble with his back, and I think it is arthritis.  Finchum Where does he live?  McGarry He lives in Wilburton, Oklahoma.  15  Finchum So he stayed in the state too.  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Do you get to see him very often?  McGarry Yes, pretty often. We talk a lot on the phone, quite a bit.  Finchum Did you two get into mischief as kids?  McGarry Yes, sometimes we would. We stoled our dad   s tobacco one day, so we  was going to learn how to chew tobacco. So we got out on the cellar, we  took some box   my dad   s box of tobacco. So we took a big old chew. I  can   t remember if it made us sick or not, but I think it did, so that ended  our tobacco experience.  Finchum One and done.  McGarry Yes.  Finchum A cellar under the house?  McGarry No, we had it out in the yard.  Finchum Did you have to get in it for bad weather?  McGarry Yes, we did. Lots of times. Oh, and I   ll have to tell this. It used to be  when it came up a big cloud, we called it a storm cloud, Mother would  say,    It   s a tornado.    She   d say,    Kids, go get an axe and cut that cloud  in two.    We would aim the axe right at the cloud like we was cutting it  and believe it or not, it would work. One part would go one way and  one the other, so we didn   t get that tornado. (Laughs) Or we thought it  worked. (Laughter)  Finchum When you got in trouble, who would do the spanking or discipline?  McGarry Mother.  Finchum Would she?  McGarry Dad would never touch us.  Finchum Would she spank?  McGarry Yes, she would spank us and she used a switch. Yes, she would.  16  Finchum Would you try to hide it?  McGarry No, I would try to hide. (Laughter)  Finchum Didn   t work, huh?  McGarry It didn   t work.  Finchum Describe the house that you grew up in? How many bedrooms and  where you slept. That type of thing.  McGarry Okay. We moved into a   it had been a store building. It had been a  store there. It was just a big long hall. It was covered with sheet iron,  top and sides too. There had been some rooms partitioned off and we  had a bedroom, living room, and a kitchen. It was a big, big building.  Finally, if I remember right, we built a little bedroom on and a kitchen.  We had a big front porch in front of the building.  Finchum Have to share your bedroom with siblings?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did you work?  McGarry No. No, just in the fields.  Finchum Once you got married did you   you stayed at home?  McGarry I did. I think worked about two weeks in Hugo at a brick building there.  I think it was kind of a laundry or where we ironed. I just worked while  the children were in school, so it wasn   t over two weeks that I worked.  Finchum How did you do your ironing?  McGarry We had an old flat irons we called it. We had to heat it with a stove. Not  at the job, but in a home when we was ironing. We had to heat them on  the stove, had to have heavy cloths to handle them they were so hot.  That   s the way we ironed our clothes.  Finchum Iron anything else besides clothes?  McGarry Sometimes we   d iron our pillow slips, not often, but sometimes we did.  Yeah, we would iron the scarves and things like that.  Finchum Mostly cotton at time, wasn   t it?  17  McGarry Yes, it was cotton.  Finchum Before polyester.  McGarry Yes, thank goodness. (Laughs)  Finchum Did your mother can?  McGarry Yes, she canned lots.  Finchum Did you or her, either one, belong to a homemaker club?  McGarry We did for a while, but as far out in the country as we were it just  kindly fell apart.  Finchum Do you remember the name of it?  McGarry No, I really don   t.  Finchum They had some neat names back then.  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Like the Daisy Club or something like that.  McGarry We met at the schoolhouse, was our place where we always met, our  club meeting.  Finchum What were some things that you   d do for fun, after you were married?  McGarry I   ll tell you, I guess I kept pretty busy raising the family. Course my  husband worked for the commissioners and sometimes we   d go to   I  think we went to Broken Bow or Beaver   s Bend to have a little picnic,  and we   d all spend the day there. It was just occasionally this and that.  Finchum Pack a picnic?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Go fishing?  McGarry Yes, sometimes.  Bishop Who would drive the kids? Who would drive you there?  18  McGarry My husband, he worked for the county for a while and he had the  county truck, so we   d just all gather up. It was a big old truck. We  would just load that up and go picnicking.  Bishop Did you drive at the time?  McGarry No. I never drove until I was in my seventies.  Finchum Seventies?  McGarry Yes, and I got my driver   s license.  Finchum Who taught you?  McGarry I went   well, mostly I just taught myself. My husband passed away,  and I was telling my granddaughter this morning, and he left the pickup  and it was a standard. So one day I decided I was going to go to town.  My sister lived in Boswell, and I was going to visit her. I always went  the country road, I wouldn   t get on the highway. I made this whole  block around here, I went to town. I turn off to get on the country road  and there was a car behind me, and I   m sure I made a bobble and I  turned over to let him by. He wouldn   t go past me. He slowed down and  stayed behind me until I turned off. (Laughs) But I got to Boswell   (Laughter)  Finchum Did you pass the test the first time?  McGarry No, I didn   t. There was about three of us older ladies, we went together.  When they got through going through our training and everything I told  some of them,    I know those guys was so tickled we was in and out.     (Laughs) They were through with us. But we had fun.  Finchum Have you traveled much?  McGarry Well, yes I have, not boasting but it   s been six, seven years ago I guess.  Me and my sister just decided we   d travel. So we went to   first, me and  my daughter went to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. So we stayed there  a while and then we went to Monterey, California. Then us four ladies,  four of us ladies, decided we was going on a trip. So we all loaded up  and we went to California. It took us, I think, about five days to get  there. We just went through the Painted Desert, the Petrified Forest. We  had lots of fun. I told them when it come evening we were always  looking for a Motel 6. (Laughs) We enjoyed out trips. Oh yes, and back  to me and my sister. We went up to   in Georgia   no, where those  presidents are installed     19  Finchum Mount Rushmore?  McGarry Mount Rushmore  We went to Mount Rushmore. We stayed, we went  there, we went to Deadwood, a little frontier town. We traveled for, I  guess, maybe a year in all. We went on the bus, me and her on the bus.  We went to Monterey, California, and we went to Mount Rushmore,  and I love it up there. It   s beautiful.  Finchum I   ve never been.  McGarry South Dakota   s beautiful.  Finchum And this was all after your husband had passed?  McGarry Yes.  Bishop Did you ever do any camping?  McGarry We did camping. We camped out up there and part of it my nephew, he  had a Winnebago, so he took us some in it. We camped out, and we  camped one place on the top of a mountain and we could still see the  rocks where the teepees were years ago, in the ground, where they had  stations or teepees.  Finchum Pretty neat.  McGarry I enjoyed it.  Bishop Did you ever do any fishing or any type of outdoor   other outdoor  activities?  McGarry Oh yes, we fished. That used to be our big hobby, fishing.  Bishop Got any good fishing stories?  McGarry Not really, we just went fishing and that will make you really think,     Well, I really want good fish,    but you can   t get into that. You catch  them fresh. (Laughs) Bought fish you can choose.  Finchum What would you use for bait?  McGarry We used minnows, we bought minnows and fished.  Finchum Do any noodling?  McGarry No, no, no, no. I   m afraid of that   20  Finchum Too smart for that, huh?  McGarry (Laughs)  Bishop Your daughter told us about a cabin you once built?  McGarry That we once built? Yes, we built a little cabin. We had this fishing  place that me and my friend went for years and fished. So we decided  that we were going to build us a little camp where we could sleep at  night and stay at the lake. We got our little cabin fixed and everything  real nice. One day we went down there and behold, somebody had  burned our little cabin up. It was all of it gone. (Laughs)  Finchum Was it on your property?  McGarry No. (Laughs) That was the reason I guess. That neighbor called us  squatters. He laughed at us. We loved to camp out.  Finchum Pitch a tent?  McGarry Yes, yes we did.  Finchum So you fried your fish?  McGarry We fried them, we cooked on the campfire.  Finchum You cleaned them first?  McGarry Yes. We cooked them out in the woods at our camp.  Finchum After they burned the cabin down, did you go back?  McGarry Every now and then. Not that much anymore. We didn   t go back.  Finchum Found a different spot?  McGarry It was just kind of a time I think we just kind of got where we didn   t  fish that much anymore.  Finchum Do you remember voting for the first time?  McGarry Not really. I really can   t  recall the  first time I voted.  Finchum First time you saw an airplane?  21  McGarry Yes, I remember that. I had been, I think it was at the house, by myself.  It was the plane that ended up being two wings on it. I remember it  coming over the edge of the timber, you know. I was a little kid. I  thought,    What   s that? What   s that?    And it was an airplane. I  remember those     Finchum Biplanes?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Did you want to go up in one at that point?  McGarry Yes, I like to fly pretty good. But I   ve got to tell you all this. I was at  home one day by myself and I   m always waving at the planes, you  know, when they come by. I heard a plane, it was on a Sunday morning,  and I went out. It was kind of pretty low you know and I waved at it. He  saw me, he made a dive and he came down and he circled. I could see  his big old mittens he   s wearing. He   s just a waving at me, and I   m a  waving at him. He just played around up there you know. So he left and  I thought,    He didn   t leave a track, he didn   t leave dust. If I   d had told  my momma and them what happened they wouldn   t believe me. He  didn   t leave no track     (Laughs) That was a great experience to me. He  just put on a little show for me that morning.  Finchum Did you go on any train rides?  McGarry Yes, when I was younger I   d been on a train ride.  Finchum Have to go to Hugo to catch it?  McGarry No, we caught it in   right where you turned off coming down here.  There used to be a little place they called Unger. The train would stop  there. That was a long time ago.  Finchum Where would it take you?  McGarry You could go to Durant, or   you know. It also went to Hugo, too, back  in them days. We   d go to see my grandmother, she lived in El Reno,  Oklahoma. So we would catch the train and go see her.  Finchum How would you get from your house to the train?  McGarry We went probably in the wagon. I   m sure back in them days, yes.  Finchum Did you have pets?  22  McGarry Yes, I loved my cats. I had cats back in them days.  Finchum Did you have to milk a cow?  McGarry Never all that much, but my dad and the boys always milked. Yes, we  always had cows to milk.  Finchum The boys did the work outside and girls did the work inside?  McGarry We worked outside and inside, too. The girls did, yeah. We hoed and  picked cotton, and done things like that, yeah.  Finchum Did your mother teach you how to cook?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum What was the favorite thing that she would make that you liked?  McGarry I think it was a slaw that she made. I still wonder just how she made it.  It was so simple. It was shredded cabbage and I know she poured  cream, you know, heavy cream over it, and she poured sugar. And  perhaps a little vinegar, but I can never get mine to taste like hers. It  was very, very good.  Finchum Now it   d be the homemade cream that you can   t get easily.  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Fried chicken or baked chicken?  McGarry We always fried our chicken, yeah.  Finchum Would they slaughter their own hogs?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Smoke it or can it?  McGarry They smoked it. My dad had a smokehouse and big old benches in  there, tables, big old tables in there. He put the meat in there on that,  rubbed it down with salt and spices. Built his fire in there and smoked  it.  Finchum And it   d keep all winter?  McGarry Yes.  23  Finchum What were holidays like back in your childhood? Christmas and  Thanksgiving?  McGarry I believe maybe Easter was one that we might   ve kept more after we all  grown up. My brother and his family would come to my house for  Easter. They had five children. So we was just had a big long table, and  we would all eat at that table, and it would just be full of stuff that we   d  cook and brought for lunch. The kids, especially, just loved it. They  loved it.  Finchum Did they do Easter egg hunts?  McGarry Yes they did.  Finchum How would they color the eggs?  McGarry We would color them all colors. Way back then we had what we called  crepe paper. We would dampen that and it would color, so they would  color their eggs with that crepe paper.  Finchum Hadn   t heard that.  McGarry You never? The girls used to make hair bows out of it. Big old bows in  their hair. That   s before really they had that much ribbon. It   s probably  somewhere, but it wasn   t in our part of the country. (Laughs) I  remember the girls wearing those big old paper bows.  Finchum At Christmas time would you have a tree and presents?  McGarry Yes, we had presents. I can remember I   d get a doll, and my brother got  a little train set about that long, but it was just a cute little train, and  apple and oranges. That was about it.  Finchum Did they celebrate July Fourth?  McGarry Not that much, we didn   t.  Finchum Homemade ice cream?  McGarry Yes, we had  homemade ice cream . The community kindly went in and  we   d have ice cream at someone   s house and back and forwards.  Finchum During the summer when it would get so hot, how would you keep cool  at night?  24  McGarry We didn   t. (Laughs) We didn   t have even a fan back in them days. We  slept with the doors open, and mostly people had their beds out on the  porch. They pulled their beds out on the porch in the summertime.  Finchum Just to get a breeze, hopefully?  McGarry Just to get a breeze. We didn   t have no electricity you know, for the  fans. We all lived through it. None of us   it didn   t kill any of us.  (Laughter)  Finchum Do you appreciate air conditioning today?  McGarry Yes I do, I really do. I   m especially thankful for my washing machine,  yes.  Finchum I imagine the refrigerator   s pretty important too?  McGarry Yes, it is. I remember when we had an ice man. He   d come in his  wagon. He   d have ice back there with an old quilt over it or something.  So we   d buy our ice and we   d have to bring it in and wrap it up in an  old quilt Mother had or an older piece of duck it  canvas  or something  heavy. We   d wrap it up, keep it in the house. He run once a week.  Finchum Would it last that long before it melted?  McGarry I don   t think so, but I can   t remember for sure, but I don   t think so.  Finchum Would you order things from the mail order catalogues?  McGarry Yes, yes we did.  Finchum Montgomery Ward, or Sears, or what?  McGarry Sears and Roebuck, and Montgomery Ward, yes.  Finchum And did the postman come by the house or did you have to go to town to  get mail?  McGarry No, he came to the house.  Finchum Did you have a telephone?  McGarry No. We didn   t have no telephone. I still miss our letters we used to get.  You don   t hardly get letters no more.  25  Finchum People don   t know how to cursive write either. They don   t teach it too  much. Or shorthand. Did you learn how to do shorthand?  McGarry Not really. We did a lot of penmanship.  Finchum Did you learn needlepoint?  McGarry Little bit. I tell them I can crochet granny squares. That   s about all I can  do.  Bishop What kind of hobbies do you have today? Do you read, paint     McGarry I read, I was a reader. Even my dad, all of us, was readers, at home. All  of my older brothers were, but I can remember my dad. He would work  hard at farming and work it every day, but when he   d come in at night  he would get his book and read for a long, long time. Before he went to  bed. So we was readers when we were having domino games and  playing games. We just read a lot.  Bishop What kind of books do you like to read?  McGarry Oh, you would say that. (Laughs)  Bishop You have a favorite author?  McGarry True stories.  Finchum Biographies, or novels, or what?  McGarry They were novels. True stories in the book, maybe. I never hardly  missed a month getting a new one. I loved to read back then.  Finchum Westerns? Louis L   Amour?  McGarry I   ve read a lot of westerns. My dad loved the western books, he read  them.  Bishop Did you ever paint or do anything like that?  McGarry Yes, I paint a little bit. When I could. It passes the time. (Laughs)  Finchum Oil or what type of painting?  McGarry Landscapes.  Finchum How did you learn?  26  McGarry I took lessons for I   ll say maybe a year, maybe not that long. I did go to  art   took art from this lady.  Finchum Here in     McGarry In Boswell.  Finchum How old were you when you did that?  McGarry Oh my goodness, I was on up in my seventies probably.  Finchum Just decided to learn?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Good for you   McGarry So we took art, me and my sister. So I did belong, I don   t know if I   ve  been out too long or not, if I   d be too old. Our thing is in Hugo, the old  Fresco Depot. We go down once a year in April and set up our art. I  really enjoy it. You don   t sell it, or I don   t see any sold, but they do  grade it you know. The guy from Paris  Texas  comes over and he  grades our art. I never have got first prize, but I got second.  Finchum Are you working on anything now?  McGarry Yes, I just started a painting I think two days ago. Saturday, I believe, is  when I started. I just got the background in.  Finchum What   s it going to be?  McGarry Oh it   s going to be, I hope, it   s going to be a meadow with this old barn  sitting out there and I want to have a rail fence. I want a saddle over  these rails. Then I want his boots and hat upon a post there. So that   s  my want.  Finchum That   s your vision.  McGarry (Laughter) That   s what I want.  Bishop Every painter has a good vision.  McGarry These hands won   t do what you tell them to. (Laughs)  27  Bishop When you were growing up as an adult, did you ever submit anything to  a county fair for judging or did you attend the Choctaw County   I  guess it   d be Choctaw County Fair?  McGarry Yes. Not that much, but we went to the fair in Hugo. So there really  wasn   t that much activity just right around in our district.  Finchum Where would you get your books? Was there a library here?  McGarry In Hugo.  Finchum When you were younger how would you get them?  McGarry Our school furnished our books.  Bishop I know living out in the rural area were you ever a member of a  homemakers association like an extension homemakers group or     McGarry They did for a while, but I couldn   t tell you the name of it. They come  to our church house, is where they come. I cannot tell you the name of  that.  Finchum Did bookmobiles come out in your community?  McGarry No, they didn   t.  Finchum They didn   t get this far down.  Bishop Did you ever think you   d make it to 100?  McGarry No, I never thought of that.  Finchum How did you celebrate?  McGarry My daughter gave me a party over in Garland. They had rented the park  so we had the park all that day, in that certain park. I imagine we had  two-hundred people there.  Finchum Wow, that   s a good number. Have to blow out your candles, a hundred  candles?  McGarry No, did I? You weren   t there. I don   t think my cake had candles. Maybe  they did, I don   t know. (Laughs) It was a beautiful cake, but I can   t  remember blowing out the candles.  Finchum On typical day, what time do you get up these days?  28  McGarry I get up at seven thirty generally every morning.  Finchum And go to bed at what time?  McGarry Maybe eight. Seven thirty or eight.  Finchum And what sorts of things do you do during the day to pass the time?  Paint.  McGarry Sometimes I do and sometimes I just clean out old drawers and throw  away old papers. There   s always something to do, and wash. Some days  I iron. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you still drive?  McGarry No.  Finchum You gave it up   do you remember when?  McGarry It   s been about five years, I   d say. Not too long ago.  Finchum You drove twenty-five or thirty years. That   s not bad. Do you have  anything left on your bucket list left you want to do?  McGarry I don   t know.  Finchum Any place else you want to see?  McGarry I would love to go to Australia.  Finchum Why there?  McGarry I don   t know, I just think I   d love there. (Laughs)  Finchum See a kangaroo, huh?  McGarry I guess so  (Laughs)  Finchum That   s a pretty long trip  McGarry It is.  Finchum Have you been out of the country?  29  McGarry No. I   ve saw across the line from Texas to Mexico, but I was never over  in Mexico, Old Mexico.  Bishop I think you might have said, but what   s your secret to longevity? What  do you think is your secret to living so long?  McGarry Really, I don   t know. I don   t believe it   s anything I did. It must have  been a higher power. I think the Lord had that in control.  Finchum Do you eat pretty much what you want?  McGarry Yes.  Finchum Take any medicine?  McGarry Yes, I take blood pressure medicine, and I take thyroid medicine. I take,  you know   just common.  Finchum It   s all that fish you ate.  McGarry I guess.  Finchum Do you watch much television?  McGarry Not all that much, but I like the news and I like to keep up with Trump.  (Laughter)  Bishop So you follow politics?  McGarry I can   t say that in front of everybody. (Laughs)  Finchum Besides the news, what else is your favorite program?  McGarry I watch Dr. Phil, and I watch Judge Judy, and I have to break myself  watching I.D. (Laughs) I like a good movie.  Finchum Watch Jeopardy, or American Idol, or      McGarry No, I don   t like American Idol that much. I watch Sanford and Sons, I  like him. (Laughs)  Bishop Do you still get outside?  McGarry Yes, I get around. Practically every day I walk in the yard.  Finchum To the mailbox.  30  Bishop You enjoyed camping, I assume you still like getting outside for some  fresh air.  McGarry Oh, I can   t stay inside. I just want to sit here and not even get up, if I  can   t get outside.  Finchum What advice would you give to someone who wants to live to a  hundred?  McGarry Well, just love yourself and love the Lord. Treat everybody like you   d  like to be treated.  Bishop And when history is written, what would you like for it to say about  you? How do you want to be remembered?  Finchum That   s a tough question, we know.  Bishop Put you on the spot.  McGarry (Laughs) I don   t know. Just that old woman down in Oklahoma, I  guess. (Laughter)  Finchum With a good sense of humor   McGarry (Laughs) You need to be a detective.  Bishop A detective?  McGarry Detective, yes   Bishop (Laughs)  McGarry We were all a healthy family. I think the food, everything   s liable to  cause our bad health now. We used to have lots of bees you know,  honey bees. This country was full of them. We don   t have any anymore,  hardly any.  Finchum Would you all sit around and have dinner together? Mealtimes  together?  McGarry Yes, we all went to the table and ate our meals at the table.  Finchum What did you call the lunch meal   the noon meal?  McGarry We called it breakfast, dinner, and supper.  31  Finchum Now, do you still do that?  McGarry Yes, I do. (Laughs) I have to stop and think,    Now when is dinner?    Is  it at noon or evening?  Finchum Been a pretty good life?  McGarry Yes, I   ve had a good life.  Finchum Anything else you want to add before we close out?  McGarry No, I don   t think so.  Finchum We appreciate you sharing your stories.  McGarry I   ve enjoyed it, and I   m glad y   all came.  Finchum Quite a pleasure, thank you.  -------  ------- 
