 Finchum Today is October 5, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in  Mooreland, Oklahoma, to speak with Lahoma Grunewald.  Grunewald Grunewald.  Finchum Grunewald. Thank you for talking with us today.  Grunewald Thank you.  Finchum This is part of our Oklahoma 100 Year Life  project , so let   s start with  having you tell us when and where you were born.  Grunewald  In     13 in Marlow, Oklahoma, and what else?  Finchum What day and month?  Grunewald August the 2nd, 1913.  Finchum And did you have brothers and sisters.  Grunewald There was nine of us in the family.  Finchum Nine children? Where were you in the order?  Grunewald There was two ahead of us, wasn   t     Stricker Aunt Doris was the oldest. Was Aunt Doris the oldest?  Grunewald Yes.  5  Stricker And then Joe.  Grunewald Little Joe.  Stricker Then you and Ok  pronounced Oak .  Grunewald He died as a baby.  Stricker Joe.  Finchum You had a twin?  Grunewald Yes. My name is Lahoma and he was Ok.  Finchum Where did they come up with those names?  Grunewald My mother had a book called Lahoma, wasn   t it?  Stricker An Indian girl.  Grunewald And she said,    If it   s a girl,    she didn   t know there was two of them.  She said,    I   m going to name her Lahoma.    Little boy came first and  my dad said,    Oh, what are you going to call him?    She said,    Well, I  can   t think of a name right now,    so they called him Little Guy for a  little while and Mother then said   well, he came first. Mother then said,     Well, I   ll have a girl next time.    They didn   t know there was two of us.  So I showed up then in a little bit and so she said,    Well, that   s Ok and  Lahoma.    So that   s     Finchum That   s pretty neat. Did you grow up on a farm?  Grunewald Yeah, until we were   let   s see, grade school and the little country  school   we were ready for the eighth grade and they said,    She can   t  go to school here,    so my Dad   they moved to Marlow, the town. We  lived then in town.  Finchum What did he do for a living?  Grunewald Farmed.  Finchum Cattle, or wheat, or what?  Grunewald No, cotton.  Finchum So did you have to pick a little?  6  Grunewald Oh yeah, a lot. (Laughter) Let   s see, we were, I think, in the seventh  grade and   well what was I going to tell you? I can   t think now.  Finchum Would they let you out of school to pick cotton?  Grunewald Yeah, the little country school, they closed it through cotton time. So  we   yes. Anyway, my brother and I   some friends of ours had a cotton  sack that they pulled and picked cotton and put it in it. We had to have a  cotton sack, so we got it and picked cotton. In  Marlow  we picked the  cotton, but after we moved to Woodward they were picking the bolls,  the whole thing. Boy, you just had your fingers cut reaching and getting  those cotton bolls out.  Finchum Hard work?  Grunewald Yes, it was. (Laughs)  Finchum Where would they take the cotton once it was picked?  Grunewald To the gin, and my dad worked at the gin.  Finchum In Marlow or Woodward     Grunewald Yes   no, Marlow.  Finchum What was the name of the country school?  Grunewald Star.  Finchum And what would you take for lunch?  Grunewald Sandwiches. I can   t remember what all it was, but sandwiches   a  sandwich, and cake. Mother usually had cake, of course.  Finchum How would you get there?  Grunewald Walk three miles.  Finchum One way?  Grunewald Yes.  Finchum Take you a little while?  7  Grunewald It took a little while. Bad weather, my dad would take us in the wagon.  We had a covered wagon, which if it was raining or something, why,  that   s what he would use to take us to school.  Finchum Was church an important part of growing up?  Grunewald Yes, we went to church in the wagon. (Laughs)  Finchum So he had horses, or mules?  Grunewald Both. We had mules and they were what pulled the wagon, but we had  horses to ride. One time we had a pet pig and my brother and I   we  petted that pig. I straddled it one time and tried to get him to straddle it,  but he wouldn   t do it. I said,    Okay, I   m going to,    so I straddled it and  sat down, then I was on the ground. (Laughter) Pig took off. It was quite  an experience.  Finchum Did you have chores you had to do?  Grunewald Oh yeah, milked, and go hunt the cows up when it was time for them to  come in. We   d have to go out in the pasture and bring the cows in.  Finchum Were you a pretty good milker?  Grunewald Yes. My husband, after we were married, why, he knew I   d milked and  he said,    But you couldn   t see, could you?    And I said,    Yeah,    and he  squirted the milk right at my face. (Laughter)  Finchum Did you get him back?  Grunewald Oh yeah, I   m sure I did. I can   t remember, (laughter) so yeah, I got him  back alright.  Finchum Did you have to gather the eggs?  Grunewald My twin brother and I, we were real close, and   well, I forgot what I  was going to say, tell you. My twin brother   oh, yeah, one time we  were   I don   t know, five or six, something like that. We were living in  Marlow then, and we were sitting out on the porch. I guess this was  probably my idea. I said,    Let   s trade clothes. You put on mine, and I   ll  put on yours.    Because I played with the boys all the time on account of  him. So we did, changed clothes, and Mother came out and she said,     What are you doing?    Said,    Okay.    We were living in town, said,     You   re going to sit out there and let all the people go by and see you  have changed clothes.    Course we cried about that, but we stayed out.  (Laughter) So I don   t know. We had a great life, happy life.  8  Finchum How did you do bath time?  Grunewald Bath time? In a washtub. A round tub of a thing. Mother would fill it  with water and have it out in the sun. That   s how she warmed it  sometimes. (Laughs) So we had a great life.  Stricker How often did she empty it? Did y   all have to take a bath, all of you,  before she emptied it out? Or did she empty between children?  Grunewald Well, I don   t remember. We   d take turns. One day it   d be part of us,  and then the next day another. I imagine we probably took it in the one  water. (Laughter)  Finchum How would you do it in the wintertime?  Grunewald She   d heat it on the stove.  Finchum And have it in the kitchen?  Grunewald Yes. A big wood range.  Finchum Did she teach you how to cook?  Grunewald Yes, she did. She was a good cook.  Finchum What was your favorite thing she fixed?  Grunewald Creamed English peas. Isn   t that weird? But   oh, in fact, there was a  girl called me, it   s been less than a year ago, and wanted my recipe for  the creamed peas, but I could not think of what it was. So I don   t think I  gave it. I told her partly, but I said,    I don   t remember.     Stricker Took a lot of cream, and a lot of butter, and a lot of sugar. (Laughter)  Grunewald Yeah, that   s right.  Finchum Did she grow her own peas? Have a garden?  Grunewald Oh, yeah, and she had peas.  Finchum What was Christmas like when you were little?  Grunewald When we went downstairs for Christmas, she had it wrapped around  with sheets. We couldn   t see it. We did all of our chores and had our  breakfast before Mother would open it up and let us have our  9  Christmas. (Laughs) That was hard, (laughs) because we wanted to see  it.  Finchum You would have a Christmas tree?  Grunewald Yes, one. My Dad went out and chopped down a tree. We had cedar  trees out in the country, so we   d   we had a great life.  Finchum So it was a two-story house?  Grunewald Yes.  Finchum How was it heated?  Grunewald Wood, wood stoves.  Finchum Would it be cold upstairs in the winter?  Grunewald I don   t think   I don   t remember it. Mother   they had stoves in  different rooms I know. They kept it pretty warm.  Finchum And then had quilts?  Grunewald Oh yeah, quilts.  Finchum Did she make your clothes?  Grunewald Yes, out of flour sacks. She always bought flour sacks that had  something on them, a figure or something on them. She would make  our clothes out of those.  Finchum Being one of the older girls, you didn   t have hand-me-downs.  Grunewald Yeah, I had some older cousins that I got some of their clothes, I  remember. (Laughs)  Finchum What would you and your brother do for fun?  Grunewald Play with the boys. (Laughs)  Finchum Go fishing?  Grunewald No, we never did that. We always played with the boys and never  played with the girls.  Finchum Played ball?  10  Grunewald Yes, and hopscotch. (Laughs)  Finchum When you got in trouble, who would discipline you?  Grunewald My dad. Mother wouldn   t, she   d have him do it. One time he said,     Okay, go out and get your switch and bring in, that you want me to  use.    I picked a real flimsy one.  I got this tooth knocked out. I have all my teeth. That   s the only one  I   ve ever lost, and my boyfriend   we were down on the creek having a  school picnic and my boyfriend   there was willow trees and they could  get it down and then walk around like that and turn loose of it, and it  flipped. My boyfriend, it hit this tooth, knocked it out, and I have all my  other teeth. I was toothless   I mean, that tooth was out until we moved  to Woodward. My mother let me go to town to see if I could find  somebody that I could work for in town. We lived in the country in that  two-story house. It wasn   t ours, it was the house that my dad worked  for, the guy out   his house.  I moved to town and got a job with a lady, Mrs. Adams, and one  morning we were in breakfast and her husband said,    Lahoma,    said,     You wear clothes so well, you   d make a good model in the store.    He  said,    Would you go to work for me in the store?    Mrs. Adams said,     Roy, you   re not going to take my girl     He said,    We   ll find another  one.    So I went to work in the store and did clerk then from then on. I  was tickled to death to get out on my own.  Finchum About how old were you? Still in high school?  Grunewald Seventeen, yes.  Finchum Did you graduate from Marlow?  Grunewald Rush Springs, but I got smart and got me a job and quit school. My  brother, twin brother, went ahead and he graduated when we were  seventeen years old. I never finished school.  Finchum But you went to work.  Grunewald Yes (laughs), and made money. That   s what I wanted.  Finchum When did you meet your husband?  Grunewald After we moved to Woodward. My dad had a brother that lived in  Woodward and he kept after Dad   the gin closed one summer. Why,  11  Uncle Don talked my dad into moving to Woodward. We moved to  Woodward, and when I went to work in that ready-to-wear store, my  husband was working in the meat market. That   s where I met him.  Finchum What was his name?  Grunewald Leland Grunewald.  Finchum So what was your maiden name?  Grunewald Williams.  Finchum Okay, so what did you do for dates?  Grunewald A date? Well, not much. We didn   t have a car, or my  husband  didn   t  at first. Then we got a little convertible and that   s what we used.  Finchum Did Woodward have a movie theater?  Grunewald Oh yes, had one out in the country, a country theater, and one in town.  It was two brothers that owned them, Adams brothers.  Finchum When did you get married?  Grunewald In   let   s see, I was twenty-two.  Stricker It was December. Was it December of    37?  Grunewald Yes.  Finchum December of 1937? December, around Christmas?  Stricker The fifth. Wasn   t it the fifth of December, 1937?  Finchum That was kind of during the Depression time.  Stricker Was that during the Depression?  Grunewald Yeah, I think so.  Finchum Did you have a honeymoon?  Grunewald No. (Laughter) We got married one day and   well, my husband had  already found this apartment, so we got married and moved in to this  apartment. It was a   upstairs was the part we had in that. So I don   t  know, we had a great life.  12  Finchum During the Depression, do you have anything particular that you recall  from that? From the Depression days? Do you have any memories from  the Depression days?  Grunewald No. We, of course, was still on the farm, so we had it alright.  Finchum How about the Dust Bowl?  Grunewald We didn   t have it, Woodward did. We were living in Marlow at that  time.  Finchum Then were you in Woodward when they had that bad tornado?  Grunewald Yes.  Finchum You were in Woodward? I know just a little bit.  Grunewald Woodward   my dad said,    Oh, there   s a storm coming.    Said,    Come  on, we   ll all get under the bed.    We put the children under the bed, but  we couldn   t get under. It was too low, laughs) but they were safe. So we  lost the roof on our house, but     Stricker And that back porch where your sewing room was. It was gone.  Grunewald Yeah, I had a little sewing machine, portable, and it blew away. We  went, in a couple days, looking for it. Thought   and we found it. It was  alright. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, if the children were under the bed where were you?  Grunewald By the bed.  Finchum Kind of scary?  Grunewald Yes it was, sure was.  Finchum Did you have brothers that went to the war?  Grunewald Brothers?  Finchum Yes, that went to World War II?  Grunewald Yes, Ok and Al went. Yes, I had two brothers.  Finchum They both made it back?  13  Grunewald Yes.  Bishop Did they ever write letters to you, or did you write them?  Grunewald Yes, we corresponded a little bit.  Stricker She was a bit of a firebug in her youth.  Grunewald What?  Stricker I said you were a bit of a firebug when you were little.  Grunewald Yes. One time Mother had filled the clothesline with clothes. I went out  and sat the grass on fire under the clothesline. Then I went in the little  bedroom and   how   d I start that? I went in     Stricker In the closet or something. Wasn   t it in the closet?  Grunewald Yes, and I guess I, with a match, set the closet on fire. (Laughter)  Burned my dad   s suit, burnt his suit.  Finchum How were you punished?  Grunewald With a switch. (Laughs)  Finchum Where was Ok when you were doing this?  Grunewald He wouldn   t have any part of it. (Laughter)  Bishop You were the wild one.  Grunewald He stayed away. I was the firebug.  Finchum You couldn   t blame it on anyone else?  Grunewald No. (Laughs)  Stricker Tell them about when Grandpa was hired up at May  Oklahoma  to do  broomcorn and you and Ok were riding that cow.  Grunewald Oh yeah, my dad was working for a man and   was it broomcorn?  Stricker I think that   s what you said. Anyway, it was out at May, Oklahoma.  Grunewald Yes, and   well, I can   t think.  14  Stricker The man had gone someplace.  Grunewald Oh yeah, and the man that my dad was working for had gone on     anyway, to see, visit. They came home, why, Ok and I was on this big  old cow. Ok was on that now, the cow, and the man   no, it was a horse,  a pony, wasn   t it?  Stricker I don   t remember.  Grunewald Was it the cow?  Stricker I thought it was a cow, but I wasn   t there. (Laughs)  Grunewald Yeah, I guess it was a cow. The man that owned where my dad was  working, he came home and Ok and I was on the cow. It was sometime  later my dad got a letter from this man and said,    Okay, I   m going to  blame your children with this: my cow had twin calves the other day.     (Laughter) Yeah, we had a happy life.  Finchum Must   ve been fun having a twin.  Grunewald Yes, it was. We were close. He died about six years ago, I think. I   m  still a kicking.  Finchum Are you the first one in the family to make it to one-hundred?  Grunewald As far as I know. I never heard of it before.  Finchum How old were your parents     Grunewald I don   t know.  Finchum    when they passed?  Grunewald You mean when we were born?  Finchum No, when they passed?  Grunewald Mother died at eighty-eight, I think, and Dad died younger than that. I  don   t remember what it was.  Stricker How old were Grandmother and Granddad Gordon? It always seemed  to me that they were older than the world. (Laughs)  Grunewald No, they were both in their late 80s.  15  Finchum What do you think your secret is?  Grunewald I don   t know, unless I was always happy. (Laughter) So I guess.  Bishop Fire.  Finchum Fire   playing with fire?  Grunewald Yes. (Laughs) Oh shoot. (Laughs)  Stricker How about when you had the hot date and decided you needed Aunt  Doris    skirt altered? She had a skirt you wanted to wear on your date  and it was kind of a full skirt and you wanted a fitted skirt.  Grunewald So I cut it down on both sides to make it a fitted skirt, and my mother  had a fit, (laughter) but I   d already cut it before she saw it.  Bishop Sounds to me like the boys were knocking down your door.  Grunewald No, not really. (Laughter)  Bishop Did you ever go on a double-date with your brother?  Grunewald No, we never did.  Bishop You hear a lot of stories about twins that go on dates, double-dates,  together. Boy and girl     Grunewald Yeah, we never   no, we never did.  Stricker He had a lot of trouble in the service. He had to go by     Grunewald I told y   all I got this tooth knocked out, and I still have all my teeth.  Stricker    Guy Williams, because they said that Ok, O-K, that that   s not a word.  That he could be O-A-K, or he could be initials, O.K. And he said,    No,  that   s not my name. My name is Ok. O-K Williams.    They made him  use Guy in the service because   I guess his social security, anything  that needed a legal name, you know, he had a lot of trouble convincing  people.  Grunewald Guy was his middle name.  Finchum What   s your middle name?  16  Grunewald Ann, Lahoma Ann.  Finchum With an    e    or no    e   ? A-N-N-E?  Grunewald A-N-N.  Finchum No    e   , okay. What about your other brothers and sisters? What are  their names?  Grunewald Oh, there   s too many to say.  Finchum But are any of them different like that? Like yours?  Grunewald Doris, Doris May, was my oldest sister, and Dixie, and Donna Beth, I  can   t think what Dixie   s middle name was. Then Ok and me, and Jim.  Stricker Jimmy Ted.  Grunewald My youngest brother, Jim, he   s still alive.  Stricker Jimmy Ted?  Grunewald Yes.  Stricker Uncle Al   Albert.  Grunewald And Al has the Polly Anna Caf   in Woodward. Well, his son runs it  now. He   s retired.  Stricker What is Uncle Al   s name? Albert Vance?  Grunewald Vance.  Finchum And then two more? That   s seven.  Stricker Well, Little Joe, which what was Joe   s name? Little Joe   s all I ever  heard him called.  Grunewald I don   t know.  Stricker Anyway, he died when he was just a small child. Then Patsy Nell     Grunewald He was crawling at the time he died.  Stricker Okay: Doris, Mother, Ok, Joe     17  Finchum Dixie.  Stricker    Dixie     Finchum Donna.  Stricker    and Donna, and Al, and Jimmy Ted, and Pat   Patsy Nell.  Finchum They were about to run out of names.  Grunewald Yeah. (Laughs) You know it   s funny. My husband, that I married, he  had the same nine children in his family only he had the boys     Stricker Five boys.  Grunewald    as the five, and the girls four, and we had five girls and four boys.  Finchum When the families got together it was large. Large reunion.  Grunewald Oh, you   re not kidding. (Laughs)  Finchum A lot of cooking.  Bishop What did you do for most your life? Did you   for work?  Grunewald Well, clerk, and then my husband and I were in restaurants. We had the  Woodward restaurant, and Mooreland restaurant, and Canadian, and  Texas     Stricker Spearman  Texas .  Grunewald    that was the Peewee Grill in Canadian. In Spearman, we had a  restaurant in Spearman, Texas.  Finchum So did you keep the books or did you cook?  Grunewald I did the cashier and kept the books.  Finchum Kept the money. And what did he do? Was he the cook?  Grunewald He was cook, yes.  Finchum Did he cook at home?  Grunewald Yeah, he did. He was a good cook.  18  Bishop What was his specialty?  Grunewald Chicken fried steak was his specialty. In fact, there was a guy from  Oklahoma City stopped at our restaurant in Mooreland, and he just  thought that chicken fried steak was out of this world. So he asked Dad  if he could take the recipe with him and Dad said,    Yeah, I don   t care,     so he did. Took it back to Oklahoma City.  Stricker But my brother   s wife, she   s smart. Anyway, she was waiting tables at  this caf  . It was a steakhouse just, what is that, two miles west of  Mooreland?  Grunewald I think.  Stricker Anyway, she had never waited tables or anything in her life. She came  back to my brother one night and said that,    Lee, you   re going to have  to do something about a guy out there.    She said,    He keeps telling me  he wants chicken fried steak. I keep telling him he can either have steak,  or fried chicken, but we don   t have anything       Lee said,    Oh, but we  do  We do     She   d never heard of that in her life. She was from North  Carolina. (Laughter)  Finchum Then we need to back up. How many children did you have?  Grunewald Three. Two girls and a boy. The youngest one, she was wasn   t she? She  died with cancer.  Finchum What was her name?  Grunewald Billie Rae. Had to think. Then my son, Lee Ross, he lives up next to  D.C., Washington, so he doesn   t get home very often. Met a girl in  Boone     Stricker North Carolina.  Grunewald    Carolina. So they   re still there.  Finchum Billie, and Lee, and who   s the third one?  Grunewald Dixie   s the     Finchum (Laughter) Just checking. Dixie, so she   s named after your sister?  Grunewald Dixie     Stricker Ann.  19  Grunewald Ann, yeah.  Stricker At 101 you   re forgiven. (Laughs)  Finchum Yes you are.  Grunewald What?  Stricker At 101 you   re forgiven if you can   t remember every day.  Grunewald (Laughs) Shoot.  Finchum Since you dropped out of high school, did you make sure your children  finished?  Grunewald Yeah, they all finished.  Stricker Billie didn   t. Don   t you remember? She dropped out at Spearman.  Grunewald No, she didn   t, did she? She took after her mother I guess. (Laughter)  Finchum You couldn   t say anything.  Grunewald I decided I wanted to work and make money. (Laughs) Oh shoot.  Stricker I just think Billie thought she was smart enough. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, how did you celebrate your 100th birthday?  Grunewald How did I?  Finchum Yes, how did you celebrate? Big party?  Grunewald Here in the nursing home.  Stricker Well, your 100th was at Providence Place. (Door knock) Come in, it   s  okay.  Aide Sorry, I just need to get her weight later.  Stricker She wants to get your weight later.  Grunewald Weight?  Stricker Yes, they   re weighing today.  20  Grunewald I don   t want them to get it. (Laughter)  Stricker I know what you mean. (Laughter) Anyway, her 100th she was still at  Providence Place, an assisted living in Woodward. We did have a big  birthday party.  Grunewald Big party.  Stricker I can   t remember now how many     Grunewald Oh, there was over a hundred.  Stricker    people did come, but she   it was a big deal.  Finchum Do you have anything on your bucket list you want to do, but haven   t?  Grunewald I can   t think.  Finchum No place you want to visit? Nothing you want to do?  Grunewald No, just be happy.  Bishop You were raising a family, did you ever go on any family vacations?  Grunewald Yeah, my grandfather lived at Anadarko, and we lived at Marlow, and  we went to see them, when we were kids, on vacation. One time we  were going along and a car in front of us hit a Negro man, slung him a  long ways. They wouldn   t   the bus wouldn   t stop, the school bus, to  check on him. They said,    No, we   re not allowed to.    So we went on, so  I don   t know if the poor man was killed or what.  Stricker Those was back in the days that if he was, he was, they didn   t   he was  a black man.  Finchum Did you go on vacation with your children?  Grunewald I can   t remember, did we?  Stricker I remember when we went to D.C.  Grunewald We went to see our grandparents at Anadarko.  Stricker But she wouldn   t stay away from Daddy overnight. She had to go  home, and the last spanking I ever got from Daddy was on my sixteenth  birthday because I had a date and I didn   t want to go see Grandmother,  21  and Mother was insisting that we go. Well, Grandmother was living  back in Marlow at that time and had that little grocery store. Anyway, I  did go. (Laughter) Daddy had a way with changing my mind.  Finchum What did you call the noon-meal? Dinner or lunch?  Grunewald The noon meal?  Finchum Lunch or dinner?  Grunewald Lunch, I think, when I was growing up.  Finchum And what about the   was it supper or dinner?  Grunewald No, it was dinner.  Finchum Did you go to dances?  Grunewald Oh yeah, we danced a lot. In fact, Ok and I and then my husband, he  had never danced. His dad had been a, was a pastor, and he never  danced. One time my son   s football coach and his wife was friends of  ours and they were at our house one time. Lee asked   well, I can   t  think of his name. Said,    Do you know how to dance?    He said,    No, I  wish I did.    He said,    Let   s go down to Coche   s Dance Studio.    So they  did and learned to dance, so then we danced a lot.  Finchum Ballroom or square-dance?  Grunewald No, ballroom. We never square-danced very much. We tried it a time or  two, and I wasn   t very good at it, so we just did the ballroom dancing.  Finchum Did you play the piano?  Grunewald No, I   ve always wished I could because several out here play, and they  have the hardest time getting them to play. I thought,    Boy, if I   d  learned to play the piano I   d be on it all the time. They wouldn   t have to  beg me.    (Laughs)  Bishop If you could, what would you play?  Grunewald Oh, ballroom dancing.  Finchum Classical, I guess. Did you sing? Can you carry a tune?  Grunewald Not very good, I   m not good at it. I sing, but not very good.  22  Finchum Do you wake up happy every morning?  Grunewald Well, I think so. Not very often that I don   t.  Bishop When history is written, what would you like it to say about you?  Grunewald If what?  Bishop When history is finally written, what would you like it to say about you?  How would you like to be remembered by others?  Grunewald As happy and I had a ball.  Finchum What do you do in a typical day? What time do you get up now?  Grunewald A typical day? It   s usually seven in the morning.  Finchum And then go to bed at what time?  Grunewald Oh, about seven-thirty?  Finchum And what do you do in-between?  Grunewald Oh, everything. We do all kinds of activities. We   re busy all day.  Finchum Do you get to read much?  Grunewald I don   t read a lot. I   m not a reader.  Finchum Were you before you came in     Grunewald No, I wasn   t.  Stricker She was a card player.  Grunewald Yeah.  Finchum What kind of cards?  Grunewald Pitch, and Bingo, and     Stricker Skip-Bo.  Grunewald    Skip-Bo.  Finchum Don   t know that one. Bridge?  23  Grunewald No, I never played Bridge. I tried it, my husband was a good Bridge  player and he would insist I play. Course I would, but I wasn   t any good  at it. I wouldn   t play very much.  Finchum Rummy?  Grunewald Yeah, I played Rummy, liked that. In fact, we played Rummy yesterday  I believe it was, here.  Finchum You win much?  Grunewald Oh, some. Let   s see, I don   t believe I   yeah I did. I won one game  yesterday.  Finchum Do you have any advice for anyone hoping to make it to a hundred     and two?  Grunewald No, just be happy. (Laughter)  Finchum And don   t play with matches?  Grunewald (Laughs)  Bishop Or you might get burned.  Grunewald Yeah, I was a firebug.  Stricker I think Grandmother said the first time she threw a   when you were  very small, about two or three, when you threw one of your shoes in the  fire.  Grunewald I think I was four.  Stricker Were you? Anyway, she was pretty small when she started. (Laughs)  Finchum You didn   t have many shoes to do that to. (Laughter) How often would  you get new shoes?  Grunewald Oh, I don   t remember.  Finchum Once or twice a year?  Grunewald A week?  Finchum A year.  24  Grunewald Probably.  Finchum For school and   one for school and one for work.  Grunewald (Laughs) Shoot.  Stricker I don   t ever remember Grandmother   anyone talking about that they  had hardships like a lot of people did that     Grunewald I told you about riding the pig, I guess, yeah.  Finchum And the cow.  Grunewald Yes.  Finchum You were just adventurous   Grunewald (Laughs) I was.  Finchum I thank you for telling us a few things today, we appreciate it. Thank  you for talking with us today.  Grunewald I enjoyed it, it was great.  Finchum It was quite a pleasure, thank you.  Grunewald Thank you. I   m glad you came.  -------  ------- 
