 Finchum Today is October the 13, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re in Kingfisher, Oklahoma     Phillips Yes.  Finchum    to speak with Christine Phillips, and this is part of our Oklahoma 100  Year of Life project. Thank you for letting us come today. Let   s start  with having you tell us when and where you born.  Phillips I was born out there on the farm between Dover  Oklahoma  and Loyal   Oklahoma .  Finchum And when?  Phillips October 7, 1909.  Finchum Nineteen nine.  Phillips In the evening. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Phillips One brother, he   s passed away several years ago.  Finchum Older or younger?  Phillips Older.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Phillips Farming, they farmed.  5  Finchum What did they farm?  Phillips Well, they raised wheat, corn, alfalfa, milo, maize. They had a little bit  of everything.  Finchum Where had they come from?  Phillips Well, my mother was from Nebraska, and she was born here in the  United States, but my dad came from Hamburg, Germany.  Finchum How did they end up in Oklahoma?  Phillips My dad lost his mother when he was a little kid. His aunt took him by  the hand, and said,    Well you better go to the United States. There   s  nothing here.    She give him some money to go on, to come over here.  My mother was born in Nebraska. They both moved up here on the  farm, and someway they go acquainted. (Laughs)  Finchum They didn   t move here together then?  Phillips Oh, no, no. It was a different family.  Finchum What did your mother do? She was a farmer, or did she do something  outside of the farm?  Phillips She farmed. She helped with the farm. She sewed a lot. We had a big  garden, raised a lot of chickens.  Finchum Did you have to kill any of those chickens?  Phillips Oh yes. (Laughs)  Finchum You did or your mother did?  Phillips We both did.  Finchum Did you have a technique?  Phillips Well, yes. You just take them by the feet and use an ax to chop their  head off. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s what you did in those days, wasn   t it?  Phillips Yes.  6  Finchum Your dad, where would he take his produce to market?  Phillips Yeah, he used to go to Dover, Oklahoma, and take the eggs, and the  cream, and the butter to the store, and then bought a few groceries.  Finchum Was Dover pretty big at that time?  Phillips Do what?  Finchum Was Dover pretty big at that time?  Phillips Well, they had two grocery stores.  Finchum Yeah, pretty big.  Phillips Let   s see, I think it had a drugstore and a restaurant. Yeah, they were     and two filling stations. They were a pretty good sized town.  Finchum How would he get there?  Phillips With horse and wagon. (Laughs) Two horses and a wagon.  Finchum Okay, did you have chores?  Phillips Oh yes. I had to take care of the chickens and other things. I always  cooked, and helped my mother cook, and worked in the garden.  Finchum You did more girl stuff and your brother did more boy stuff?  Phillips Well, I mean yes.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Phillips Excelsior. Between Dover and Loyal is a little school, one-room  schoolhouse, between Dover and Loyal.  Finchum How many grades were there?  Phillips From the first to the eighth grade. One year, we had thirty-six kids in  that one-room school. They were just piled up in there. (Laughs)  Finchum How many were in your grade?  Phillips There was seven of us girls. We were all girls. We didn   t have a boy in  our grade.  7  Finchum What was your favorite subject?  Phillips Arithmetic. Algebra they call it now.  Finchum What would you take for your lunch?  Phillips Oh, a sandwich. Usually a bread and butter sandwich, bread and jelly,  bread and jelly and butter sandwich, maybe a cookie, or a piece of pie,  or an apple.  Finchum Your mother was a good cook?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum What else do you remember about her, about your mother?  Phillips Well, she worked real hard. She worked out in the field with the man.  Shucked wheat, and shucked corn, and raked the hay when they cut the  hay. I mean, she   d go out there and rake it, and they   d come along and  bale it. She worked real hard.  Finchum What do you remember about your dad?  Phillips He worked hard too out on the farm. (Laughs)  Finchum Did he have a job other than the farm?  Phillips No, he just farmed.  Finchum When you finished the eighth grade, what did you do?  Phillips I stayed home and helped my parents on the farm. I didn   t go to high  school.  Finchum Did you get married?  Phillips Yes, I got married. Then, we moved northeast of Dover and farmed  there a while. Then after that, my daughter was born in 1946, and we  bought the place out west of Hennessey then, and moved there. We had  a small dairy of about twenty cows, sold milk to Golds Spot Dairy in  Enid.  Finchum Did you have to help milk?  8  Phillips Oh, I milked a lot of cows, yes, but we had electric milkers that you  hook on to   and we had a great big tank that the milk when into to  cool.  Finchum How long did you do that? With the dairy?  Phillips Oh, 1946 to about 1964, I think. My husband had heart problems, so we  had to sell the cows and the farm and move here to Kingfisher.  Finchum That was quite a move too, I bet.  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Change     Phillips Hated to sell the cows. (Laughs)  Finchum Made a lot of homemade ice cream?  Phillips No, we didn   t do that. We bought it. (Laughter) We even bought the  milk  We didn   t use it. (Laughs)  Bishop You didn   t use your own milk?  Phillips No. (Laughs) I don   t know why, but we always bought Gold Spot milk.  Finchum (Laughs) You didn   t make your own ice cream. What about cottage  cheese?  Phillips Oh, we used to make that a long time ago. We didn   t when we had the  dairy, we didn   t make cottage cheese. But I did, at home we always  made cottage cheese.  Finchum Well, how old were you when you got married?  Phillips Thirty-six.  Finchum You were thirty-six, so you lived at home a while.  Phillips Yes. (Laughs)  Bishop Now at home, when you were a child growing up, did you speak another  language?  Phillips Oh yes, German and English both.  9  Bishop Do you know any German today?  Phillips Yes. I   ve forgotten a lot of it. (Laughter)  Finchum Would you go to church?  Phillips When we lived there by Hennessey, we went to the little Harmony  Church, which they got out here in the museum. They moved that  church out here. We went there a lot. Sunday afternoons we   d have a  big picnic, everybody   d bring a dish, and we had good times.  Finchum Was the sermon in German?  Phillips No, no. Nobody spoke German then. During World War I, you didn   t  dare speak German. (Laughs)  Bishop No.  Finchum That   s true. Dover   s close to a little town of Loyal?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum But it was called something else though, wasn   t it?  Phillips Kiel.  Finchum Kiel.  Phillips See that was a German name, so during World War they changed it to  Loyal. Yeah, it   s all German people out there around Loyal.  Finchum Well, did you learn to cook some German dishes?  Phillips No, not really.  Finchum Well, in the house that you grew up, how was it heated?  Phillips With a coal stove, a wood stove, either one. Sometimes we burned coal,  sometimes wood.  Finchum Would it keep you warm in the winter?  Phillips Oh yes, but we just heated two rooms. The bedrooms were icy-cold.  (Laughs)  Finchum Well, how   d you stay warm in there?  10  Phillips We had a lot of quilts.  Finchum Your mother made quilts?  Phillips Oh yes, they had the feather bed. They were warm.  Finchum You have to beat them to shift them around, didn   t you?  Phillips Yes. (Laughs)  Finchum Was the bathroom inside or outside? The bathroom?  Phillips Outside, we didn   t have nothing inside. (Laughs)  Bishop Was that bathroom a one-seater or a two-seater?  Phillips Bathroom? There wasn   t no heat.  Bishop It was an outhouse right?  Phillips There wasn   t nothing  No, there   s no heater in there  (Laughs)  Bishop But did you have an outhouse?  Phillips Yes.  Bishop Was that a one-seater or a two-seater?  Phillips Two-seater. (Laughs)  Finchum We never have quite figured that out, if people actually used it at the  same time or not.  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum How would your mother do laundry?  Phillips On a board, washboard.  Finchum Back in the hard days weren   t they?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Well how was the Depression on the farm for you?  11  Phillips Oh, it didn   t bother us too much because we always had plenty of  canned fruit and vegetables and always had a granary full of oats, and  wheat, and barley, but you didn   t dare   World War I, you didn   t dare  feed wheat to the chickens. That all went into flour. We always bought  the big forty-eight pound sacks of flour and sugar, in forty-eight pound  sacks.  Finchum I can   t imagine you could move those.  Phillips I still got some of those sacks left. If you bought flour you had to buy  potato flour with it and hominy. Nobody liked hominy. My mother then  mixed the potato flour in with the other flour and baked bread. We  couldn   t hardly tell it, but you had to use it somehow. You were  allowed only so much flour.  Finchum During rationing?  Phillips Yes, and everything was rationed. Sugar, flour, coffee, shoes     Bishop Was that during World War I?  Phillips Yes. Shoes you had to wear one pair of shoes for a year. (Laughs)  They   d put soles on them. My dad got a guy pretty good at putting soles  on. Our soles would wear out, and he could put different soles on them.  All we had was one pair of shoes a year.  Finchum Your brother, too?  Phillips Yes.  Bishop Did you ever have any family members who fought in World War I?  Phillips No, I haven   t. My husband was ready to go. They met him here at the  Kingfisher courthouse     Bishop World War II?  Phillips Is that okay?  Finchum Yes, you   re fine  World War I or   no, World War II?  Phillips World War I. They had all met here at the Kingfisher courthouse. They  was ready to be shipped out, and the war was over. The whistle blew  and everything was going on and they said,    Well the war   s over. You  don   t have to go,    They give him a dollar and told him to go back  home. (Laughs)  12  Bishop What year was that?  Phillips Gee I   must   ve been about   what was it? I really don   t know what  year that was. That would   ve been 1920, in the 1920   s somewhere.  Twenty-four maybe, I don   t know just really when that was.  Finchum Your brother was too young to go?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Did anyone in your family have the flu? The major flu back in the 1918,  1919?  Phillips No, no. There   s a lot of people died out there from it. It was bad. Yeah,  we went through some tough times sometimes, but we made it.  (Laughs)  Finchum It   s interesting that you remember World War I being over.  Phillips Oh yeah.  Finchum You would   ve been ten, eleven.  Phillips I was about nine years old I think. I remember all about that. That was  bad, that was the worst war. It was bad. Didn   t have anything.  Everything was rationed. Yeah, you didn   t dare feed wheat to the  chickens.  Finchum Well, and you wouldn   t have rubber for tires.  Phillips Yes. I remember some of them used their old tires and put them on over  the other tires that they had on. They used their old tires that they had  thrown away and wired them on, so the other tires would last longer.  (Laughs) It was a mess.  Finchum Would you talk about it around the dinner table? Would your parents  talk about it around the dinner table to you?  Phillips Oh yes. We always had plenty to eat. Some people suffered, they didn   t  have hardly anything.  Finchum Winters were pretty bad?  Phillips Oh yes, we had some hard winters. A lot of snow. I remember during  World War I, so many people died from the flu, especially out there too,  13  and my parents lived about a mile and a half west of the cemetery out  there. Every few days they   d come along,    Well you have to dig  another grave.    The ground was froze hard as a rock. They had to pick  it all the way down by a shovel   spade, and a shovel, and a pick. The  ground was froze so hard. It took them all day to dig a grave.  Finchum That was     Phillips Hard times.  Finchum That was around Dover?  Phillips Yes, west of Dover.  Finchum Did they spend their entire life on that farm   your parents?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Is it still in the family?  Phillips Yes, I still own it.  Finchum Cool.  Phillips I made it over to my daughter, so she   ll get it. My mother always said,     Don   t never sell that place     (Laughs)  Finchum You do what your mother says.  Phillips Yes. (Laughter)  Finchum How did you meet your husband?  Phillips Well we just lived about a mile and a half apart out there. (Laughs) He  came to see me one day, and we started dating and got married.  (Laughs)  Finchum Did you go on a honeymoon?  Phillips No, no, didn   t have money to do all that.  Finchum How many children did you have?  Phillips Just one daughter, Shirley.  14  Bishop What about the Dust Bowl? Do you have any memories of the Dust  Bowl?  Phillips Oh yeah, that was bad. One of my neighbors, he was out in the field  working with horses out there, and he couldn   t find his way home. He  just turned the horses loose. They knew where to go. It got so dark you  didn   t know where you was at. The horses just followed the fence row  and came on home to the barn. You couldn   t see anything when that hit.  It was awful. Like a big old black cloud came in. You   d just wiped the  table off and about five minutes it was just covered with dirt again.  Finchum Made cooking and having dinner a little hard didn   t it?  Phillips Oh yes. We learned to turn all the cups and the plates upside down.  Finchum I guess I should ask, what did you call dinner? Was it supper, dinner,  lunch, back in those days?  Phillips Yeah, it was breakfast, dinner, and supper. Now they call it lunch and  dinner in the evening.  Finchum Well, would you travel into Kingfisher very much?  Phillips No, we didn   t. When we did they drove the wagon and the horses to  Dover and caught a train to Kingfisher. It was faster.  Finchum How about Oklahoma City? Would you ever go that far?  Phillips Never got there, no. That was too far away. (Laughs) Never thought  about Oklahoma City.  Finchum So you sold the milk from your dairy to Enid?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Would they come pick it up?  Phillips They came. Big old truck came, and picked it up, and hauled it to Enid.  Every farmer out in there where we lived had a dairy. He just went  around and picked up everybody   s milk, and took it Enid.  Finchum Was that before regulations came in and changed things?  Phillips No, it was pretty strict then. The barn had to be clean.  Finchum They had inspectors?  15  Phillips Oh yeah, it had to be real clean. An inspector would come around and  inspect it every so often.  Finchum Did your dairy have a name?  Phillips No, huh uh. I went through a lot of hard times.  Finchum Yes, tell us a few of them.  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum Just a few.  Phillips Just a few, I don   t know where to start. (Laughs) Well I remember, one  year my husband had heart problems pretty bad, and he was down here  in Kingfisher Hospital, and I had twenty cows to milk. My daughter  worked here at the bank, and we had a big ice storm. Everything was  covered with ice. I told her, I said,    Don   t take that pavement. Take the  dirt road. It won   t be quite as slick maybe.    She turned off west of  Dover, and hit that little bridge west of Dover, and down she went, car  and all went down in the creek. I just got all the cows milked and  cleaned up, took care of the chickens. I was just went in the house to fix  me a bite to eat, and I saw the sheriff car coming up the road. I said,     Oh.    I knew she had a wreck then right away when I saw the sheriff  car coming up the driveway. He came and got us and took us back to  Kingfisher. My mother lived here in Kingfisher then. We stayed with  her until night. Then, we had to go home and milk the cows. My  husband was here in the hospital, and I went to see him. He said right  away he could tell something was wrong, he said right away,    What   s  wrong?    (Laughs) I wasn   t going to tell him, and I had to tell him. It  didn   t bother him too much. (Laughs)  Finchum He knew you too well.  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Well, with dairy cows there   s no vacation from what I understand.  Phillips Oh no, you can   t go off and leave them.  Finchum Twenty cows was enough to make a living with?  Phillips Oh yes, we got by. Didn   t make much money, no. We got by. (Laughs)  It don   t make much like they do now. Course it costs three, four times  more than it did then.  16  Finchum That   s true.  Phillips Well     Finchum Did you learn to sew?  Phillips No, I didn   t ever sew much. I   d rather work outside. (Laughs) I made a  cook.  Finchum What was your favorite thing to make?  Phillips Oh, I like to make those big ol    meringue lemon pies and coconut pies.  Finchum Desserts.  Phillips (Laughs) Yeah, oh I didn   t mind any of it.  Finchum Would you take things to the county fair?  Phillips No, I never did.  Finchum Did the county agent come to the farm much?  Phillips No, no he never did.  Finchum Did you belong to a homemaker club?  Phillips No.  Finchum Too busy?  Phillips Yeah. (Laughs)  Bishop What were holidays like as a child growing up?  Phillips Well, we never celebrated them much then. You know, for  Thanksgiving we usually had a goose. We had ducks, and geese, and  chickens. We never did raise any turkeys. I know my mother always  said,    Well you want a chicken, or duck, or goose?    Everybody said a  goose. They all liked goose. We always roasted a goose for  Thanksgiving. Christmas we got one toy. (Laughs) Now the kids have a  whole room full of toys. (Laughs)  Bishop What would you usually get?  17  Phillips I don   t know. I never did get very many dolls. I got toy guns, I liked.  (Laughter) Got those little toy guns about that long, little bullets in them  about the size of my little finger made out of wood. I got pretty good at  hitting the target, (laughs) because I had a brother, I guess that   s why. I  always went hunting with him, and I liked guns. I got a doll once in a  while and a doll buggy, something like that, but one thing is all we got  for Christmas. We got an apple, or an orange, or some candy. We  thought that was great  (Laughs)  Finchum What would you go hunting for, you and your brother?  Phillips Oh, ducks. Hunting ducks, shooting ducks   we cooked them, and they  were good. I went trapping with the guys, too. My brother and his  friend, they always went down to the creek. We lived right close to the  creek. They always trapped for coons, and possums, skunks, mink, and  all that stuff. I   d always tag along with them. (Laughs)  Bishop What about rattlesnakes?  Phillips Oh, we didn   t have none of them . (Laughs) Good thing...  Finchum Skunks?  Phillips We had snakes, but no rattlesnakes.  Finchum What would they do with a skunk?  Phillips Skin them and sell the fur.  Finchum And the smell?  Phillips Yeah, the boys all trapped out there. They always trapped skunks, and  the schoolhouse all smelled like skunk. (Laughs) Yeah, they had to  stretch those furs. They had to have a certain board, you know, to  stretch them on. My brother always had the whole side of the garage  hanging full of furs that he had stretched on the board like skunk, and  mink, and civet cats, and possums, all that.  Finchum Where would he sell them?  Phillips Well, a truck came around every so often and picked up all the boys     furs.  Bishop What   s a civet cat?  18  Phillips It   s a little smaller than a skunk. Looks a lot like a skunk, but a little bit  smaller.  Finchum Do they have a stink? Do they stink like a skunk?  Phillips Oh yes.  Finchum Do they?  Phillips Oh yes.  Phillips Yes, they   re similar to a skunk only they   re smaller.  Finchum We learned something today, Alex.  Bishop Yeah. (Laughter)  Phillips Yeah, a lot of people haven   t heard of a civet cat.  Finchum Well, would other salesmen come by the place? By your parents?  Phillips No. They used to     Finchum Like the Raleigh man or whatever?  Phillips Oh yes, once in a while they did with their Raleigh products. Everybody  bought liniment and stuff like that. (Laughs)  Finchum Spices, sometimes spices?  Phillips Yes, every so often they   d come around.  Finchum Do you remember the first car?  Phillips Oh yes. My father leased the place out there for oil, got eight hundred  dollars and bought a brand new Buick for eight hundred dollars.  (Laughs)  Finchum Living in high cotton.  Phillips Yeah, wouldn   t buy much of a car now would you, for eight hundred.  (Laughter)  Finchum Maybe a tire or two.  Phillips Yeah.  19  Finchum He was smart and kept mineral rights to the property?  Phillips Yeah, oh yes. Yes. We had a neighbor had his first car, ole Model T  Ford. Everybody, if they needed to go to Kingfisher they   d get him to  haul them to Kingfisher. They paid him so much to come down here.  It   s a lot faster than driving a wagon and team down here. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, did doctors make house calls back then?  Phillips Oh yes.  Finchum Did they?  Phillips With a horse and buggy, and they didn   t charge nothing hardly. They   d  always say,    Well don   t worry about paying us. When harvest comes  around you can pay us.    (Laughs)  Bishop What would you pay them during harvest?  Phillips About a dollar. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you ever trade any goods?  Phillips Five dollars. Huh?  Bishop Ever trade any goods for their time?  Phillips Sometimes they took an old hen or two or three chickens, maybe. Well,  the grocery stores in Dover, half of the farmers charged their groceries  until harvest time. Then, they paid them. My dad always paid  everything, cash right away. He didn   t want to owe anybody. I know  Clyde Sherwood, he always said,    Well, don   t worry about paying us.  When harvest comes you can pay us.    He always went ahead and paid.  He didn   t want to owe anybody.  Bishop Who was Clyde Sherwood?  Phillips Huh?  Bishop Who was Clyde Sherwood?  Phillips It   s a grocery man in Dover.  Bishop Oh, okay.  20  Finchum Did your dad trust the banks or did he keep his money hidden at home?  Phillips No, he lost five hundred dollars at the Loyal Bank. Loyal had the bank  then. Five-hundred dollars was a lot of money at those times. Yeah, it  was gone. Bank went busted.  Finchum He kept it at home from then on?  Phillips No, he didn   t put it into that bank anymore. (Laughs)  Finchum Keep it under the bed?  Phillips No, he dealt with Kingfisher Bank then.  Finchum Just switched banks.  Phillips Yes, I   ve done business with that bank all the time. We done business  with that bank here in Kingfisher for a long time.  Bishop What did you used to do for entertainment? Did you go to carnivals, a  circus? Was music involved or     Phillips (Laughs) No, we never went anywhere. Once in a while, they had kind  of a carnival come through town up at Loyal or Dover. We went to that,  but not very often. We didn   t have no entertainment. (Laughs)  Entertained ourselves  (Laughter) We was always so tired. My land,  you worked so hard all day. When night come, we were tired. Didn   t  think about going anywhere and doing anything.  Finchum How often would you get to take a bath when you were little?  Phillips Once a week usually. Saturday night bath, they called it. (Laughs)  Finchum Would you have to share it with your brother? Or do you get to go first?  Phillips No, I always got to go first.  Finchum Did you?  Phillips Yeah, that   s the way all the kids done. All the way at the school, they  all had a once-a-week bath. We had to bring the water in, and heat it on  a stove, get through with it, and throw it back out. (Laughs)  Finchum So by Friday, it wasn   t smelling too good at school?  Phillips No, no. (Laughs) We were all smelling alike. (Laughs)  21  Bishop What about church? How important was church back in those days?  Phillips Well, we never did go then. My mother went quite a bit to the Catholic  Church at Loyal, but my dad and I, we never went. We stayed home and  worked.  Bishop As you got older, did you go to church?  Phillips Yes, yes. Got married, and then we moved over southwest of  Hennessey, there was a little country church. We always went to that.  Finchum Your mother wouldn   t make you go with her?  Phillips No. (Laughs)  Finchum Were you a daddy   s girl?  Phillips Yeah. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have music much in the home?  Phillips We had an old talking machine, we called it then, an old Edison  phonograph.  Finchum Had to crank?  Phillips Yes. Had those round, little old round, whatever you call them, tube  things you stuck in there.  Finchum Yes, I   m not sure what you call them, but I know what you   re talking  about.  Phillips We had a neighbor that got the first one, then it seemed like everybody  got one. They all traded records with one another. We didn   t do like  they do now. My brother and his friend, they   d always trade records  back and forth.  Finchum Did you have a radio later, a little later?  Phillips No.  Finchum No radio?  Phillips Oh later on, yes.  22  Finchum Well, do you remember getting electricity on the farm?  Phillips Oh yes, that was something. (Laughs)  Finchum What was the first thing your mother did?  Phillips Well, I don   t know.  Finchum Not get an electric washing machine?  Phillips No, she had one with a motor on, used it quite a while. The refrigerator  was the next thing, to get a refrigerator.  Finchum Was there an ice plant in Dover?  Phillips I don   t think there was. There was one here, but I don   t think there was  one in Dover.  Finchum How would you keep things cool?  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum You didn   t huh?  Phillips We didn   t keep anything cool. We just ate it all up, and then didn   t have  nothing left. You couldn   t save stuff like you do now. Fixed it until  everybody ate it up, and it was gone. Couldn   t keep nothing.  Finchum Not even butter?  Phillips Butter, we went put down in the cellar. It kept real good down in the  cellar     Finchum Okay.  Phillips    but we couldn   t put everything down there.  Finchum Did you have any pets growing up?  Phillips Oh yes, I always had pets.  Finchum What   d you have?  Phillips A goat. (Laughs) A goat and I had a dove. Oh that dove went  everywhere with me. When I went outside, it   d always sit on my  shoulder.  23  Bishop What were their names?  Phillips I don   t know, I never did name them. (Laughs) I always just   I don   t  know, somehow I didn   t name anybody. The thing always followed me  everywhere I went. That dove, he just always sat on my shoulder  everywhere I went. I went out in the orchard, it sat in the trees. We had  a big orchard out there. Had chickens for pets, an old hen, then that  goat   that goat followed me everywhere I went. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you milk it?  Phillips No, no. (Laughs)  Finchum Well goat milk, people do.  Phillips Yeah, they use it now, yes. Well, I don   t know. There   s a lot of water  run under the bridge. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s true. Did your husband help with the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  or any of those programs?  Phillips Oh yes. Yes, my dad and my uncle did, too. Then, they had to work off  their poll tax, they called it. Every spring they had to work off their poll  tax. They always worked the half a mile grading up the road, fixing the  road up. Each one had a half a mile they had to take care of.  Finchum Did you go to the movies very often?  Phillips Oh no, we never went to movies. (Laughs) Didn   t know there was such  a thing. (Laughs) No, we never went to no movies.  Finchum Do you remember getting your first television set?  Phillips Yes, I remember that.  Finchum That was after you were married, I   m sure.  Phillips Yes, oh yes. I remember the first radio. Oh my, they were big.  Everybody thought that was something. Had to listen to Amos    n    Andy.  (Laughs) My dad couldn   t miss Amos    n    Andy, had to listen to them.  (Laughs)  Finchum And the baseball games?  Phillips Yes. They used a car radio, get it a going.  24  Finchum Used a car battery in order to get the radio going?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum What do you think   s been the biggest change that you   ve seen?  Phillips Oh, been a lot of changes. Man, so many changes.  Finchum What do you think   s been the most   the biggest one or the most  significant one?  Phillips Computers and all that. My land, those computers and then that other  thing they got. What is it, iPad, or whatever they call that? Where they  talk, they show all those pictures on that and doings.  Finchum And cellphones?  Phillips Yes. It   s a big invention. I just wonder what it   ll be the next twenty,  thirty years. (Laughs)  Finchum We   ve come a long way, I know, in your lifetime.  Phillips They   ll be something coming up, some new stuff. These young kids  coming on, they   re going to see a lot.  Finchum Well you   ve seen a lot, too   Phillips Yeah, I have. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you remember where you were when Pearl Harbor happened?  Phillips Yes, I was northeast of Dover. I was at home, and my husband had  helped somebody with baling hay. He came home and told me about it.  I didn   t know anything about it. I didn   t have no radio on, and I was out  messing with the chickens. He came home and told me.  Finchum Well, Oklahoma   s changed a lot during your lifetime.  Phillips Oh yes.  Finchum I mean you were young when it was young. Right?  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum You would   ve seen it turn twenty-five years old and fifty     25  Phillips Yeah, it   s changed a lot.  Finchum Did you follow politics?  Phillips No, not much.  Finchum Well, once you got out of the dairy business, what did you do?  Phillips Well, when my husband got heart problems, we had to sell the cows and  the farm out there, and move here to Kingfisher. I went to work at the  nursing home, cooked there for ten years, as a cook. We fed them pretty  good. (Laughs)  Finchum Made homemade bread? Made biscuits from scratch?  Phillips Homemade biscuits, yes. Everything was homemade. Right now, they  stick everything in a microwave or an oven and have it prepared  Boy,  it was all homemade stuff, made pies, and cobblers, and roasted turkeys,  and chickens     Finchum Good eating.  Phillips    fried chickens. Everything was   it wasn   t   This stuff now, it   s got  so much preservatives in it, I don   t think it   s good for people. There  wasn   t nothing like that.  Finchum Now back in your day, you had to cut up your own chicken.  Phillips Oh yes. I remember Fourth of July I was working at the nursing home,  cooking. I had to cut up thirteen chickens that morning. (Laughs) We  made thirteen freezers of ice cream. I still look back and say I don   t  know how in the world we all got it done, but we did. It was just two of  us doing it.  Finchum Now, we wouldn   t know how to cut up a chicken.  Phillips We wouldn   t? I sure would.  Finchum I wouldn   t. You would.  Phillips I still would. (Laughs)  Finchum Would you have a pulley bone?  Phillips Oh yeah.  26  Finchum Yeah? Would you butcher hogs?  Phillips Yes, that   s all we butchered. We never butchered the beef. Those days  you couldn   t keep beef. When the coolers came up and refrigerators,  then people starting killing beef, but you couldn   t keep beef. See the  pork, we fried it down to put it down in the cellar. Put lard over it, put it  in the big old crock, put lard over it, and it kept all summer down there.  Oh, it was good. Those old threshers, they loved that meat. (Laughs)  Finchum The threshing crews?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Would it be tough?  Phillips Oh no, nice and tender. It was good.  Finchum And you fried it first?  Phillips Fried it first, fried it a little in the oven, and it got all the water off of it.  You didn   t dare leave any water or anything like that on it, it   d spoil.  You got all that water dried out, and then they put it down in the big old  crock, down in the cellar, and put lard over it. Keep melting lard and  putting over it, and it kept all summer down there.  Finchum Would you layer it?  Phillips Huh?  Finchum Would you layer it?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Like layers?  Phillips Layered it.  Finchum Just used a little bit at a time.  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Make your own sausage?  Phillips Oh yes, had sausage. People nowadays would say it wasn   t sanitary, but  it never killed nobody. (Laughs)  27  Finchum That may be why you   re still here.  Phillips It was good meat, yeah   Finchum Did you ever think you   d live to be 100?  Phillips No, I never did. Huh uh.  Finchum How old was your brother? How old did he get?  Phillips He was about sixty-four.  Finchum So, young.  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Your parents?  Phillips My mother was ninety-eight and my dad was eighty-nine when they  passed away.  Finchum So pretty old. How did you celebrate when you turned 100? What did  you do?  Phillips My daughter had a party down at the bank. Had a lot of people come  by.  Finchum Do you have anything left on your bucket list that you still want to do?  Phillips No. (Laughs)  Finchum No?  Bishop Well, what   s a typical day like for you today? What time do you get up?  What do you do during the day? What time do you go to bed?  Phillips (Laughs)  Bishop What does a 105-year-old do?  Phillips (Laughs) We went to bed early because we was always so tired, worked  so hard all day.  Bishop I mean about now.  28  Phillips Now?  Bishop At 105?  Phillips Well, I sit here, and watch television, and work crossword puzzles, and  about nine thirty or nine, I get in bed, leave the television on a while  until I get sleepy, turn it off, and go to sleep. (Laughs) Usually about  nine, nine thirty.  Bishop I want to go back a little. You met your husband later when you were in  your thirties. Is that right?  Phillips Yes.  Bishop How did he court you? What kind of dates did he take you on, or what  did you do? What did you two do?  Phillips (Laughs) He had a car. We went to the show once in a while, here in  Kingfisher.  Bishop Do you remember what show it was or what shows you     Phillips No, I don   t. Usually a western     Bishop Yeah.  Phillips Yeah, we never went hardly anywhere. You just stayed there at the  house.  Bishop Did you say your mother lived with you for some time? Did your mother  live with you for some time?  Phillips I lived with my mother for a while before she passed away.  Bishop But did she ever live with you when you were married, with you and  your husband?  Phillips No, no, huh uh, no, huh uh. That   s after my husband died. She needed  help, and I just moved in with her then. She passed away, and then I  bought a house further up this way. I still worked at the nursing home  when she passed away, but I finally retired from there.  Bishop What did you do there?  Finchum Cook.  29  Bishop You cooked?  Phillips (Laughs)  Bishop You cooked?  Phillips Nothing much, I just stayed there at the house.  Bishop At the nursing home you cooked?  Phillips Yes, I cooked.  Bishop That   s right, that   s right.  Phillips Yes, I cooked. I didn   t mind it at all. We always had plenty to cook  with, and it was nothing prepared like they have now where everything  you just kind of stick it in the oven or in the microwave. (Laughs)  Finchum When you were growing up, did you have to order things from the mail  order catalogs?  Phillips Oh yes, Sears and Montgomery Ward. We ordered a lot of it.  Finchum And going to Dover to pick it up or would they deliver?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Pick it up     Phillips No, it came in on a train. We had to go to the depot, and pick it up.  Once in a while it was a small package, the mailman would bring it by.  Finchum Well, what big things would you get through the mail? What would be  bigger things that you would order?  Phillips Well, like men sometimes ordered pants, or an overcoat, or something  kind of cumbersome that couldn   t be delivered.  Finchum Would your shoes come through the catalog?  Phillips Oh yes.  Finchum Montgomery Ward?  Phillips Yeah, both of them. We ordered from both of them.  30  Finchum Well, do you remember getting the telephone at the farm?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum How many rings was yours?  Phillips Yes  Everybody had their certain ring.  Finchum What was yours, do you remember?  Phillips Two longs and a short. If somebody died in the neighborhood, they had  this certain ring. Everybody knew somebody died. They   d all run to the  phone and see what happened.  Finchum Not quite eavesdrop?  Phillips Oh yes, there was a lot of eavesdropping. (Laughter) You could talk to  anybody, they   d be listening.  Finchum No secrets, huh?  Phillips No. (Laughs) Yeah, you   d hear those receivers go down when you   re  ringing, everybody   d be listening.  Finchum Well, would you wear dresses or pants?  Phillips Dresses.  Finchum Mostly dresses?  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Even when you were helping your dad on the farm, you   d wear a dress?  Phillips Yes. We all did at that time. Nobody wore pants. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, when you got married, were you still wearing dresses or could  you wear pants by then?  Phillips Dresses. (Laughs)  Finchum Still dresses.  Phillips I wore pants when I milked, yeah.  Finchum Denim?  31  Phillips Yes.  Finchum Were they denim?  Phillips Striped.  Finchum Did your dad ever grow cotton?  Phillips We tried it one year. Oh my land  That rich ground out there, that stuff  got that tall, oh my land. One year was enough, we didn   t plant cotton  no more. They have soil out there that   s rich and oh, that stuff grew. We  had cotton everywhere. (Laughs) Everybody said,    One year   s enough.     Finchum You had to pick it?  Phillips Oh yes, drag that big ol    sack around.  Finchum Did you get out of school in order to do that?  Phillips No, I don   t think I did. They always done most of it.  Finchum The house you grew up in was two rooms. Is that what you said, two  bedrooms?  Phillips It was a kitchen, and a dining room, and a front room, and two  bedrooms.  Finchum Two bedrooms.  Phillips Yes. Five-room house.  Finchum That   s a pretty good size.  Phillips Yeah, it was pretty good size.  Finchum No air-conditioning?  Phillips Oh, no.  Finchum Throw open the windows.  Phillips Hot, it was hot. One year it was 113, no air conditioner, nothing.  Finchum And no ice.  32  Phillips Nope, nothing. The well went dry. Had to go to my uncle   s on top of  the hill. He had plenty of water. My brother always hauled water from  there. We had to drink that warm water, no ice, no nothing.  Finchum What was your brother   s name?  Phillips Louie, Louie Kruse.  Finchum Louie.  Phillips L-O-U-I-E K-R-U-S-E. Yeah, somebody else interviewed me here  while back. They put me in the paper.  Finchum That   s a good place to be, I guess.  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum You   re one of the happiest people I   ve met. Why is that?  Phillips Gee, I don   t know. Just like my mom, she was always a smiling. She  never worried about it. She always said,    Oh tomorrow will be better.  Don   t worry about it. Tomorrow will be better.    (Laughs) I guess it   s  just nature, I don   t know.  Finchum Was your dad like that or was he more serious?  Phillips Yeah, he was kind of that way.  Finchum Did you go to dances when you were younger?  Phillips No.  Finchum No?  Phillips We didn   t. We didn   t have any dances then. (Laughs)  Finchum Not barn dances?  Phillips The neighborhood once in a while had one. I never did go.  Finchum Box suppers at the     Phillips Oh yeah, had box suppers.  Finchum And would you fix one?  33  Phillips Yes.  Finchum And waited for some     Phillips Some guy to buy it. (Laughs) We had them.  Bishop What would you usually fix in those box suppers? What would you  take?  Phillips We always had it at the schoolhouse, and we all would sit at one of the  desks there at the school.  Bishop What would you cook? What would you put in it?  Phillips (Laughs) Whatever we could find. Mostly it was a piece of pie usually,  or a sandwich, or fried chicken, or something that way, real fruit,  whatever we wanted to fix.  Bishop I   m thinking one of those big lemon meringue pies you   re talking about.  (Laughs)  Phillips (Laughs)  Finchum Well, if you were thirty-six when you got married, these pie suppers  didn   t work too good did they?  Phillips No. (Laughs) I wasn   t in no hurry.  Finchum Just waiting for the right one to come along.  Phillips Had a good life at home, a busy, busy one. Busy all the time.  Finchum Hadn   t really planned to get married?  Phillips Oh yes, sometime. (Laughs)  Bishop I want to know what   s your secret to longevity?  Phillips I really can   t tell. I don   t know. I didn   t think I   d ever live this long. I  don   t know, I really haven   t done anything special. (Laughs) Only  usually try to eat right. I   ve got a doctor here, Doctor Arthurs, I go see  every month. He always says,    You amaze me. Whatever you   re doing,  you   re doing right,    he always says. He says,    Keep on eating what  you   re eating.    (Laughs)  Bishop What typically in your life have you eaten?  34  Phillips We mostly lived on fruit and vegetables, had a big orchard, a lot of  vegetables, and very little meat. Most of it was pork, pork and chicken.  I don   t know. We didn   t eat much fried stuff. Everything was baked in  the oven, and fruit, and vegetables. Summers we just lived on  vegetables. We didn   t hardly have any meat at all   bread, and  vegetables, and fruit. For a while, my mother didn   t even know  anything about fried, anything fried. The northern people, you know  she   s from the north, they don   t fry nothing. They didn   t at that time,  but they probably do now. At that time they didn   t know what it was to  fry anything. They didn   t. Everything was baked in the oven.  Finchum Didn   t need an iron skillet for that did she?  Phillips No.  Bishop Very true. Do you have a philosophy that you live by?  Phillips No, not really. (Laughs)  Bishop Or a motto?  Phillips No.  Finchum Be happy, happy, happy.  Phillips Just live.  Bishop When history   s written, what do you want it to say about you?  Phillips (Laughs) Do what?  Bishop When history is written, what would you like it to say about you?  Phillips Oh...  Bishop How do you want to be remembered?  Phillips Oh, I don   t know. (Laughs) I really don   t know. I think the 20   s were  the best years there ever was. The 20   s were so nice. The war was over.  Everybody was so friendly and happy. The times were good, crops were  good, it rained every   when it   s supposed to be, it rained seemed like.  Always had good crops. People were so happy. Everybody got new  cars. (Laughs) I remember the 20   s were the happiest years, the nicest  years that there ever was.  35  Bishop Then in 1929, that changed a little bit.  Phillips Yes. Then, the dust bowls came. Oh, that was awful. That was bad.  Bishop Was there anything in particular about the 20   s that you really  enjoyed?  Phillips Well, I enjoyed everybody being so happy, and going different places,  and getting new cars, radios and everything. I don   t know. It was just  different. I don   t know. Everything in life, like you say, was booming.  (Laughs)  Finchum Sounds like you   ve had a pretty good life.  Phillips I have, yeah. I have. Went through a lot.  Finchum We thank you for sharing with us today.  Phillips Well, thank you.  Finchum It was a pleasure.  -------  ------- 
