 Finchum Today is October 2, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in  Clinton, Oklahoma, to speak with Goldie Kenney, and this is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project. Thank you for having us.  Kenney You   re welcome.  Finchum Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Kenney I was born in Higgins, Texas, in 1914, no. Oh, gee whiz. Yeah, 1914.  Finchum What month?  Kenney January 23. Then, when I was about four years old, we moved to  Oklahoma, down by Burns Flat. We moved in a wagon, two horses, and  I think we took a cow, but I   m not sure of that. (Laughter) We camped  out on the road at night, just made a pallet on the ground, and we got to  Burns Flat. There was a vacant house. We stayed in it that night. Next  morning, my dad talked to one of the guys there, Jay Dale, and he said,     Mr. Young, why don   t you rent this place and farm it?    Dad said,     Well, I haven   t got a thing to farm with.    He said,    Well, I   ll help  you,    so we stayed there that year.  There was a widow woman that owned the place. She fell in love with  us, and we fell in love with her. When the year was up, Dad asked her,  said,    Mrs. Hines, are you going to rent me this place another year?     She said,    No. I am going to put you on a better place.    She moved us  down by Sentinel  Oklahoma . We stayed down there two years, I  think. Then, we moved up by Foss  Oklahoma . We lived there until we  moved on the last place, when I married. That was my young life.  5  Finchum What did he farm?  Kenney Cotton, mostly cotton.  Finchum Did you have to help pick?  Kenney Yes. (Laughter) I   ve picked cotton. I   ve pulled cotton. I   ve hoed cotton.  I   ve plowed cotton. I never did plant any. I couldn   t plant a straight  row, (laughs) but I plowed all the rest of the kinds of plowing that   d be  done in a farm. I was a farm girl. I took the horses and plowed the  ground. My biggest thrill was when my dad sent me to the field to  harrow. Do you know what a harrow is?  To harrow the ground, and that   s not heavy, but he sent me across the  creek, up to the field, with those four horses, his best four horses, and I  harrowed. He put a board across the harrow for me to stand on. I said,     Why did you do that?    He said,    I didn   t want you walking.    I  harrowed those four horses. I hooked them up to the harrow, and I  harrowed and drove them to the house at noon. I did all of it.  Finchum About how old were you when you first did that?  Kenney I was probably about, let   s see, probably about fourteen. I did  everything that he could do on the farm.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Kenney I had two sisters and a brother.  Finchum Were they older or younger?  Kenney They were older. I   m the baby. (Laughs) I   m the baby.  Finchum He let the girls work as hard as the boy?  Kenney Yes. They were partial to him.  Finchum Were they?  Kenney Yep, and he was spoiled. He was rotten. (Laughter)  Finchum They usually say that about the baby.  Kenney Well, she wasn   t. (Laughter) No, I wasn   t spoiled. I was partial to my  dad. My mother was, she was pretty strict, so I was partial to Dad.  6  Finchum When you got in trouble, which one would punish you?  Kenney I didn   t get punished. I didn   t get in trouble.  Finchum You didn   t get  in trouble ?  Kenney No, I don   t think I ever got a spanking.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Kenney At Foss, and we moved from there. I would have had to ride about five  miles. Let   s see. Yeah, I think I would have to ride a horse five miles to  school, and I wouldn   t do it. I wouldn   t do it. I wouldn   t stay with my  older sister who was married. I knew I couldn   t get along with her, so I  quit school. I was in the ninth grade, first semester of the ninth grade,  when I quit.  I   m sorry that I didn   t go. I   m not sorry that I didn   t ride the five miles  in the wintertime. I couldn   t have done that. After my daughter got in  high school, she tried to get me to go back to school with her. I  wouldn   t do that. Of course I was an old woman then. (Laughs) I had  chores to do at home, so I couldn   t do it. That ended my schooling, and  I   m sorry that I didn   t   .  Finchum What did you do after you quit school?  Kenney Just helped.  Finchum On the farm?  Kenney Yep. My momma raised a big, big garden. I would help her in that  some, not very much, but some. We canned a lot of food. We never  suffered for food ever. During the Depression, we didn   t suffer for food.  We didn   t have any money, but we had food. Then, I married when I  was twenty and still stayed on the farm until the dam put us off.  (Laughs)  Bishop How did you meet your husband?  Kenney At parties. We kids, teenagers, we played party games out in the yard in  the summertime and in the house in the winter. By wintertime, we got  to dancing, and we danced in the homes. Momma would clear out the  bedroom. She   d take everything out of the bedroom, and we   d dance in  there. I had a good teenage life. I had a lot of fun, a lot of friends. I  can   t complain about my teenage life.  7  Then, of course, after we married, we had to move. We bought a farm. I  guess we lived on it probably ten years or more. I don   t know how long.  Then, we had to move, and we moved to Stafford  Oklahoma , the only  place we could find to move to. I was a cook in school at Stafford for  two years. I was the only cook and had 109 kids. Some of them didn   t  eat there, but most of them did.  Finchum What would you cook? Breakfast or lunch or both?  Kenney Lunch, just one meal.  Finchum From scratch?  Kenney Just like it was at home, start out with potatoes, (laughs) some kind of  meat.  Bishop What was your specialty? What did the kids like best?  Kenney Oh, they liked chicken, when I   d fry chicken. They all liked what I  cooked. I just cooked good meals, not like they are here. (Laughter)  They all liked my cooking, and they all liked me. Then, I didn   t take the  third year and cook at school. I got a job at Burns Flat in the drive-in, in  the Dairy Queen it was then. I worked there two years. A lady on the  base that owned it.  Bishop On the base?  Kenney Burns Flat.  Bishop Military base?  Kenney Clinton-Sherman. Clinton-Sherman Base. When they closed down, I  closed out. I could not stand to see all those guys leaving. I made a lot  of friends down there. They flew all over the world, you know, they  were good guys. Someone said to me one day about the boys out there,  and I said,    Well, those boys are not out there because they want to be.  They   re there to protect you and me.     I was good to them because if they had money, they could eat. If they  didn   t have money, they could eat. When they went to TDY  temporary  duty assignment , there was about five or six of them that went. I don   t  know what that is. It   s just some part of the base, military. I give them  all a free meal. When they came back, I gave them a free meal.  (Laughs) Then, they brought me gifts. (Laughs)  Finchum Why did you have to move from  Foss ?  8  Kenney I don   t know why we had to move. Dad got, he bought a place up north  of Foss, and we moved up there. I would   ve had to gone to school to Pie  Flat  Oklahoma . You know where Pie Flat was?  Finchum When you got married, you lived where?  Bishop You lived on the farm. Why did you move when you got married from  the farm to Stafford?  Kenney We had to move, and that was the only place Jim could find for us to  move to. We didn   t have any money. We couldn   t buy anything. We  bought a ginhouse at Stafford.  It  wasn   t a very good house, but it  covered you.  Finchum Why did you have to move, though?  Kenney From Stafford?  Finchum From the farm, you and Jim, why did you have to move from the farm?  Kenney The dam.  Finchum The dam?  Kenney We were the first ones to have to move so they could build the dam. It   s  right where we were living. (Laughs) That   s why we had to move.  Bishop Is that the Foss Dam?  Kenney Clinton Dam, Clinton Lake.  Bishop Clinton Lake Dam. Okay.  Finchum Did they pay you a little bit for that?  Kenney They paid us a little bit, but they didn   t pay us what they should have.  They got appraisers from up north, some other state up north. I don   t  remember what. They didn   t know anything about our red dirt, and they  didn   t give us very much for it, not enough to buy a place. I worked at  the Flat in the, it was called a Dairy Queen then. I worked there two  years, and then I bought it.  I stayed there ten years, and my folks all complained about me working  so much, so I retired. When the base went out, I went out. (Laughs)  Then, the rest of my life, I   ve just worked. I worked in some of the little  places in Clinton: the Busy Bee and Goldie   s Drive-In. I put in at the  9  Dairy Queen, but I didn   t like the atmosphere there. I didn   t like the  boss.  Finchum When you owned the drive-in, was it called Goldie   s or something else?  Kenney Yeah.  Finchum You changed it?  Kenney I changed it to Goldie   s.  Finchum Goldie   s Drive-In.  Kenney I didn   t have to pay a franchise.  Finchum Hamburgers and French fries?  Kenney Yep.  Finchum Did you have children?  Kenney I got a boy and a girl. Well, I lost a boy. My first child, I lost him, but I  have a boy and a girl who will be here after a while.  Finchum What are their names?  Kenney Janice Kenney Dew, married a Dew, and Max Kenney. Do you know  Max?  Finchum No.  Kenney Well, he   s an ice hauler. He hauls ice. Janice taught school twenty  years, and she got tired of the parents and the kids, so she retired. Then,  she worked other places, but she   s retired now. They travel a lot.  Finchum Would they help you at the drive-in?  Kenney No. I helped them. (Laughs)  Finchum I thought maybe they might have worked for you.  Kenney No.  Bishop Did you have any good employees?  10  Kenney I had all good employees. They were older women like myself. We all  got along good, and they worked good. One of them, I could trust. I left  the key with her, told her where the money was hid, so I trusted her.  Well, I trusted all of them. I knew all of them.  Finchum What did your husband do once you moved off of the farm? Did he  continue to farm?  Kenney Yeah, he took care of cattle. We had cattle, and he took care of the  cattle and loafed around. (Laughs) He didn   t help, only pick up the  papers, clean the yard of the morning. He never helped in the kitchen at  all, ever. Oh, I could write a whole book about my life, and I should.  Bishop I want to go back. When you were a child, what were holidays like in  your home?  Kenney Just another day.  Bishop Just another day.  Kenney Just another, except Fourth of July. We always had a big picnic on  Fourth of July or something, but holidays wasn   t anything. Birthdays  weren   t anything.  Finchum Christmas?  Kenney Yeah, Christmas was big. We had a big Christmas and a big  Thanksgiving, but other than that, we just worked. My mother was a  workaholic. She wanted to be working all the time. She wanted you  working all the time, but this little gal didn   t always work. She was  lazy. (Laughs)  I don   t know. I   ve had a pretty good life, not a rich life, but a good life.  I   ve worked hard in the field and in the house, and I have no regrets  about my life. I could write a pretty good book on it if I just sit down  and do it. I   ve gotten now to where I can   t write very well, so I   ve  waited too long.  Finchum Well, you can tell us some of those stories. Did you sew?  Kenney Yes, I made my wedding dress.  Finchum You did?  Kenney Yes. Momma sewed when we girls were little. She made my brother  shirts. She made all our clothes, and a lot of them out of feed sacks. We  11  were a poor family, but there was a lot of poor families back in the  Depression days.  Finchum How often would you get a new pair of shoes?  Kenney Twice a year. I   d get dark ones for wintertime, and white ones for  summer. In the summer, we would wear the white ones. In the winter,  we wore the dark ones. As the season changed, the shoes changed, so  we got two pairs of shoes a year.  Finchum Did you work in the shoes or work barefooted?  Kenney I worked in high-heel slippers, two-inch high heels. I pulled cotton in  those slippers. It wasn   t bad. The heel went down in the ground. After I  got to be a teenager and got high-heeled shoes, that   s all I had was high  heels. (Laughs)  I  didn   t have no tennis shoes or anything like that to  wear. We didn   t have a closet full of dresses, either.  Finchum Did you even have a closet?  Kenney No, we hung them behind the door. We had a three-room house most of  the time, two beds in the bedroom. There was a boy that came and  visited us a lot, and I have wondered and wondered where he slept.  (Laughs) I can   t remember where he slept.  Finchum A pallet on the floor.  Kenney Probably was.  Finchum Was the bathroom in or out?  Kenney Out, down the way. Let   s see, I was about, well, my daughter, she had  finished school when we first had electricity or had water in the house.  Finchum When was she born?  Kenney She was born in October.  Finchum What year?  Kenney Thirty-eight.  Finchum  In    38, so into the    40s before you got electricity. Wow.  12  Kenney We didn   t have electricity or water in the house until we moved to  Clinton. After we left Stafford, we moved to Clinton, and then I started  working at Burns Flat. We didn   t have no electric.  Finchum How would you do your laundry?  Kenney Go to the laundry, but when she was a baby, I did her laundry. She had  109 diapers. We didn   t afford bought diapers. I made them.  Finchum You made them?  Kenney I made them like a diaper, smaller in the middle. I had 109 to wash.  Finchum That took a little while.  Kenney Took all day. (Laughter)  Finchum How did you wash them, in a big tub and a rubboard?  Kenney Yep, and dry them on the line.  Finchum Even in the winter?  Kenney Yep.  Finchum We   re spoiled today, aren   t we?  Kenney You couldn   t live today like we lived. The kids nowadays, they couldn   t  take it the way we did, but you know what? I could go back to those  days if I had to. I could. I could rub on the board and iron. We ironed  everything, even dishtowels, towels. Momma would iron the shirts, the  dresses, but my sister and I would always iron everything.  Finchum Even the sheets?  Kenney Even the sheets. I   ve got the iron now that I used.  Finchum Get it hot on the stove?  Kenney Big wood range. Momma had eight irons. She had five like this, one  handle fastened on to the iron. I used three irons, and she used the five  irons. We   d heat them on the stove, and we ironed everything, but that  was all right.  Finchum You looked sharp.  13  Bishop Was your mom a good cook?  Kenney Was she what?  Bishop Was she a good cook?  Kenney I don   t remember. I guess she was, because we had good meals from  out of the cellar. (Laughs)  Bishop Can you talk about that? Out of the cellar, what do you mean by that?  Kenney Just a cellar like we have nowadays, big hole in the ground.  Bishop Would you store your food in there?  Kenney Potatoes, we   d plant potatoes. When we   d dig them, she always had us  to put the potato vines on the ground. Then, we   d put the potatoes on  that, and then cover them up with small vine and dirt. They   d keep all  winter, but I sure did hate to go out there and have to dig through them  vines to get those potatoes out. Everything was done the hard way.  (Laughs) Kids couldn   t do that now.  Finchum Did they raise chickens?  Kenney We raised chickens and hogs, cattle, and Dad liked to trade horses.  (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have a family pet?  Kenney Dog, cats. Yeah, we were all typical farmers.  Finchum In the summer, when it would get so hot, would you sleep outside?  Kenney We   d move our beds outside. Of course, we had iron bedsteads, and we  moved them out. I was out in front yard. Mom and Dad was in the  backyard. (Laughter) It was not a good life, compared to what we have  now, but it was a good life at that time.  We lived in the best part of our country, but we did where we lived. We  lived in the best part of the country, of the times. There were bad times,  but of all seasons and everything, we lived in the best part of the time.  Some of it, I would like to go back to. Some of it, I wouldn   t.  Finchum Picking cotton had to be a little hard.  14  Kenney Ooh, that was hard. I didn   t have to pick very much. I had to snap a lot,  snap the cotton, burr and all. They had kind of quit picking cotton when  I got old enough. That was hard to pick that cotton out of them burrs.  Finchum Was church an important part of your growing up?  Kenney No, not really. My mother wouldn   t go. Of course, if she didn   t go, the  kids didn   t go. After my sister and I got, the one next to me, we got old  enough to go by ourselves, we went to church.  Finchum How would you get there?  Kenney Walk. When we lived down by Foss, we just lived across the road from  a country church.  Finchum You did a lot of walking in those days?  Kenney A lot of walking and a lot of horseback riding. I rode a horse all my life  nearly. When I was little, my brother had a black mare, and she was real  gentle. I was set on her when I was about four years old. All day, I   d  have her out in the yard, and I   d just sit on her. Then, I rode horses all  my life.  Finchum What was her name?  Kenney Come in, come in.  Bishop Good morning. How are you?  Kenney That   s my son, Max, and my daughter, Janice.  Max I   m Max and this is my sister, Janice.  Bishop Hi, how are you?  Finchum We   re just doing a little oral history with her.  Janice Okay.  Kenney They   re finding out what I did, or they think they are. (Laughter)  Finchum What was the horse   s name?  Kenney Bess, and I had two horses. They looked just about alike, but they were  a horse and mare. I rode two of them. Well, I rode all of Dad   s horses.  15  (Laughs) We would go to the field. When noontime come, why, I   d get  on one of the horses and ride to the house. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you remember seeing your first car or your dad getting his first  one?  Kenney I remember him getting, not his first car, but the first car that I can  remember him getting was a Model T Ford. We were really proud of it.  Finchum The roads were different back then, too?  Kenney Yes.  Finchum Did you ever think you would make it to a hundred?  Kenney I said if I could make it to eighty and see both my kids married off,  happily married off, I   d be ready to go. I never dreamed I   d live to be a  hundred, but my daughter is happily married. She was two girls and  four or five grandkids. I don   t know how many. Max hasn   t been so  lucky.  Finchum Did your brother or your sisters live to a hundred? You   re the first?  Kenney Momma was ninety-nine.  Finchum Oh, there you go   Kenney My sister next to me was ninety-eight. My other sister was eighty-eight,  and I think my brother was in his eighties.  Finchum There   s longevity there. Any reason why?  Kenney Dad was ninety-three when he died.  Finchum What do you think the secret is?  Kenney Hard work. My mother was a workaholic. She didn   t want a day to pass  that she didn   t work all day.  Finchum She was from Texas?  Kenney Yep. Texans are all great. (Laughs) I don   t know why people think  Texas is such a grand place.  Finchum It   s just big.  16  Kenney My daughter just think Texas is grand. She lives in Dallas.  Finchum You got married when? You said you were   .  Kenney I was twenty.  Finchum  In  1934.  Kenney Yeah, February 17.  Finchum To Jim.  Kenney Yes.  Finchum Your maiden name was     Kenney ...Young.  Finchum How long were you married to Jim before he passed?  Kenney I think we liked three or four months of it being fifty years.  Finchum Wow, that   s pretty good.  Kenney He was fifteen years older than I was.  Finchum Well, he robbed the cradle.  Kenney He robbed the cradle, but he was really good to me.  Finchum Did you go on a honeymoon?  Kenney No. We just went home, slept in my own bed. (Laughs)  Finchum You made your dress   Kenney Yes, I made my dress. I still got it, too.  Finchum Did you get married in a church or at the Justice of the Peace?  Kenney At the preacher   s house. We went there at night, one Saturday night.  Then, we went to the show. Then, we went home. We didn   t have any  money to go anywhere.  Finchum Not in    34, things were tough. Did he serve in the military?  17  Kenney No.  Finchum He was too old, I guess. He was too old?  Kenney Yeah, I don   t know. He didn   t serve. I think he was just about ready to  go, be called, when it was over.  Finchum Do you remember that day when they declared war over?  Kenney No, I don   t remember it.  Bishop What about the Dust Bowl? Do you remember the Dust Bowl days out  here?  Kenney Do I ever  They were bad. You could cover everything up in the house,  and it   d still get covered with dirt. I can remember one time. It was  about milking time, and we could see that dark cloud north of us. It was  dirt. Oh, the Dust Bowl was terrible.  Finchum How did you keep it out of the house or try to?  Kenney You couldn   t keep it out of the house. Of course, our houses weren   t  brick then. They were wood houses.  Finchum Keep it out of the kitchen?  Kenney Tried to, and our beds of the morning would be just covered with sand.  Bishop Those were pretty tough times on the farm. What did you do to survive  in terms of farming?  Kenney Just deal with it, just whatever you could do. We had hard winters then,  too.  Finchum Would snow come in the house?  Kenney No, thank goodness, but the cattle would back up into the shed, and the  snow would get them covered up in there. It snowed hard and a lot. We  had hard winters, and the winters started about October.  Finchum How did you stay warm during the winter?  Kenney Chop wood, wood heaters. We burned wood. A lot of that stuff is what I  lay awake at night and dream about is my past. I guess, in a way, that   s  why I don   t like to live here. I don   t like to live here. This is a nice  place. The people are nice to me, but it   s not home. I don   t care how  18  humble home is. This is not home. I   m just sitting here waiting to die.  That   s all I   m here for, just waiting to die. Well, I may live three or four  more years, who knows?  Finchum Who knows?  Kenney All I   ll do is be sitting here waiting to die. Well, I want to die at home. I  could get out at home and walk around and do what I wanted to. I can   t  here. I had my son buy me an onion the other day. Well, he bought two.  I ate part of one and put the other onion in the refrigerator there. Day  before yesterday, she came in. She says,    Goldie, you   ve got onion in  here.    I said,    I sure have.       Well, it smells,    and it was. I didn   t smell  it in here because I was in here with it all the time. I said,    Look over  there in that refrigerator,    and she took it out. I don   t have an onion  anymore. (Laughter) I love onions  I think onions are healthy.  Bishop You like to eat them raw?  Kenney They said you could have anything you wanted, so I got the onion, but I  don   t have it now. (Laughter)  Bishop What   s a typical day like for you? What time do you get up, and what   .  Kenney I get up about five.  Bishop What do you do? Do you have a morning ritual?  Kenney I get myself cleaned up, get my teeth in, get my hearing aids in, and  then, I   m usually ready to go eat around seven. I leave the room at  seven-thirty to go down to the dining room. Then, we have to wait.  It   s usually about fifteen or twenty after eight before we get our  breakfast. Supposed to eat at eight, but we don   t. It   s usually about  fifteen, at least fifteen minutes. I think it was about eight-thirty this  morning when we got it.  Finchum Then what? After you eat breakfast, what do you do?  Kenney I come in back up here, and I get on the bed. I go to sleep and sleep  until almost noon. I don   t sleep well at night. I fell out of that bed once.  I almost do. It seems like it   s lower on this side, and I can   t stay in it.  I   ll roll over. I   ll roll out.  Bishop Do you read during the day, watch TV?  19  Kenney I have television on, but I don   t watch it, same way at home I did. I  always had the television or radio on. I wanted the noise, but I wouldn   t  watch it.  Finchum Did you read much?  Kenney I can   t read now. I can   t see well enough. I was, before I came in here I  could, but I don   t know. Something about it, it   s taken my eyesight  away.  Finchum When did you come here?  Kenney December.  Finchum Not too long.  Kenney I can   t hardly see to do anything.  Finchum Then you go to dinner?  Kenney Yeah.  Finchum What time do you go to bed at night?  Kenney I go to bed about seven or something, a lot earlier than I am used to  going. Usually at home I   d sit up until ten, eleven o   clock. I don   t here  because I can   t do anything, just sit  I can   t see to read. I   m trying to  work some puzzle. I can   t see where they go, but I   m going to try. I  said,    I   ll leave it on the table, and I   ll come by, maybe find one or two  pieces that   ll fit.     Finchum That   s about as good as I am. (Laughs)  Kenney I did them up there. (Gestures) Well, I didn   t do them all. I had some  help.  Finchum Well, I want to back up. When you were in school, did you have a  favorite subject?  Kenney I guess math and reading. I used to like to read.  Finchum Did you ever do art?  Kenney Not very much. My daughter brought me a book yesterday when she  came up. Pictures to color, and I   m not going to do that. (Laughs)  20  Bishop What did you like to read? When you could read, what did you like to  read?  Kenney Oh, I don   t know, just a book, storybook.  Finchum Novels or biographies or   .  Kenney Novels. I used to read at home. I   d read to my dad. He didn   t. I don   t  guess he read. I   d read western stories to him. Every night, we   d read  western stories.  Finchum Louis L   Amour?  Kenney Yeah.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  Kenney Dance. (Laughter)  Finchum Play sports?  Kenney No, I didn   t play many sports, and I don   t here. I don   t go out and play  their games here, either. Of course, they   re just little old kids    games  here.  Finchum You like music and dance.  Kenney Music and dance and ride horses.  Bishop What kind of dancing? Ballroom dancing, square dancing?  Kenney Some square-dancing, not like they dance now square-dancing. I  couldn   t do it the way they do it, but I can   t hear it. I don   t hear very  well, but I loved to dance. I started dancing when I was four. Momma  loved to dance, and I   d hold her dress tail and dance around with her.  I danced all my life, until I married, (laughs) and then I stopped dancing  until Jim died. Then, I started in again. My lady friend and I, her  husband was dead, too, and we danced together. She was the man, and I  was the woman. (Laughter)  Finchum You had fun?  Kenney We had loads of fun  We traveled quite a little bit. I got a new car, and I  said,    I   ll give you the key, and we   ll travel.    We went to several states.  21  Finchum On Route 66?  Kenney No, we went up in the northern states mostly. We went to Canada.  Finchum Oh, out of the country   Kenney Just all over the country.  Bishop This was a friend of yours?  Kenney Edna Cryer.  Finchum Edna?  Kenney Yes.  Finchum Cryer?  Kenney Cryer.  Bishop How long had you known her?  Kenney Oh, ever since, I don   t know, a long time. Ever since her kids started to  school, and I was a cook at Stafford.  Finchum A long time.  Bishop Long time.  Kenney It   s been a long time.  Finchum I want to back up, too. I called it dinner. Did you call it supper?  Breakfast, lunch, and   .  Kenney Breakfast, dinner, and supper.  Finchum Supper, okay. Dinner was the noon meal.  Kenney (Nods yes) But all meals were good. We didn   t have sandwiches and  cookies and stuff like that. We had meals, food.  Finchum Meat, potato, and something green?  Kenney Yep.  Finchum What would you drink?  22  Kenney Water, I think, mostly.  Finchum Not soda?  Kenney No.  Bishop Did you have a milk cow, a dairy cow?  Kenney Oh yes, I can milk a cow. I can have them kick the bucket over, too.  (Laughter)  Bishop You sound like that happened once or twice.  Kenney Yes, I saw it happen.  Finchum Would you make homemade ice cream?  Kenney Yes, with the cream.  Finchum Where would you get the ice?  Kenney In town.  Finchum In town, had to go get it.  Kenney Yep. At home, we didn   t have a freezer. We usually would have  company. Momma   d bring her tub in and put two syrup buckets in that  tub and put that milk and ice cream mix in the buckets, and sit and turn  it back and forth.  Finchum She   d churn it, huh?  Kenney Yep.  Finchum Vanilla?  Kenney Yeah. Can   t you imagine seeing kids now sit there and turn that bucket  back in forth in that tub of ice?  Bishop No.  Kenney We did. We   d have to open the buckets maybe once or twice, scrape the  ice cream down so it   d freeze all   oh, everything was harder to do, but  it was good.  23  Finchum Just the way it was.  Kenney It   s the way it was.  Bishop I want to know when history is written, what would you like it to say  about you?  Kenney Nothing. (Laughs)  Bishop How do you want to be remembered?  Kenney Just my name is all. Goldie the dancer, I guess, because I danced all my  life.  Finchum Goldie the dancer. Do you know where you got your name, Goldie?  Kenney I don   t know, and I don   t know this: my name is Goldie  as in  gold.  My next sister next to me was Sylvie  as in  silver. My other sister was  Ruby  as in  a ruby. Whether they did that on purpose like that, or if it  just happened so   and my brother was Jimmy. That was Jim. I don   t  feel like they realized they named us that a way, but that   s the way it  turned out.  Finchum What was your middle name?  Kenney Iretta.  Finchum Iretta. Goldie Iretta, pretty.  Kenney Sylvie Alberta and Ruby Rachel and Jimmy Leroy. I guess I had a good  life, everything went well, and I have a very good family. My daughter  is married, and she   s got two children. Each one of them has three  children, or two of them, I don   t know.  Her kids are all through college, and they all got good, good jobs  teaching. One of them is in, he   s in New York teaching some big  school. The next one is, he didn   t like school. He didn   t go to college  but that one semester, and he dropped out. He has a good job with   my  memory   s getting old.  Finchum Oh, you   re doing great. They came from good stock.  Kenney The granddaughter has got a good teaching job. They   re all have got  good educations and good jobs, and I   m proud of them.  Finchum That   s good. I   m sure they   re proud of you.  24  Kenney I think they are.  Finchum Well, we thank you for talking with us. It was fun.  Kenney I haven   t told much of interest, but   .  Finchum No, it   s been great.  Bishop You   ve been wonderful.  Finchum We   ll let Alex do his part so you can visit with your children.  Kenney Well, they were going to take me out to the house.  Finchum Okay, we don   t want to stop that   Kenney My house is here in town. They were going out to the house for a while,  if they can get me in the car.  Finchum We hope. Thank you for talking with us.  Kenney You   re quite welcome. Come back again, and I   ll talk some more.  Finchum All right.  Bishop If there   s a will, there   s a way. You   ll get there   -------  ------- 
