 Finchum. I   m here along with Alex Bishop, and we   re  with Oklahoma State University. We   re with Connie Tranchilla, in  Tulsa, Oklahoma. This is part of our 100 Year Life project. Thank you  for having us today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start by having you tell us when and where you were born?  I was born in St. Louis, Missouri.  When?  July 22, 1912.  Were you born at home?  Yes.  How many brothers and sisters did you have?  (Laughs) Well, living, there were five of us, but my mother had about  three or four miscarriages.  And what order were you?  I was the oldest.  Where did you go to school?  5  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Well, I went to Catholic schools   Holy Ghost, first, and then I started  Rosati-Kain in high school. In the meantime, my mother died when I  was thirteen years old. During the summer, my father decided he better  put   there were five of us   he decided he better put us in a home. I had  been in an orphan   s home for about eleven months, but I was very happy  there. They were all very good to us. I loved the nuns, there.  Your siblings were there with you?  Yes.  After those eleven months, what happened?  Then my father, in the meantime, he builds a house. He got it ready for  us when we came out.  Did you have to be the one that took care of the children, then?  Yes, but first, I did try. I was going to start high school. We had all kinds  of house help, housekeepers, you know. It was kind of hard on account  of five children, you can imagine. Women didn   t stay with us for very  long. After about the tenth one, I decided I better quit school and do this.  So that   s what I did, for four years. Then my father remarried and I went  back to school.  So you finished high school or eighth grade?  Yes. I finished eighth grade at the orphan   s home. I didn   t finish high  school, so I had to go back and catch up. I guess I decided,    Well, I  don   t want my children to be smarter than me.    (Laughter)  After you got your high school degree, what did you do next?  I worked in my father   s office. He had a real estate office. I met my  husband there. I don   t know, I think I only worked for about two years  because then I got married. After that, what did I do?  How old were you when you got married?  Twenty-five.  So a little older than most people for that time period.  Yes.  And were you still in St. Louis?  6  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Yes, this was all St. Louis. I   ve never been in any other state but St.  Louis, Missouri.  And then here?  Yeah. I came here because my daughter  lives here . I thought,    Well,  it   s not so cold here.    I decided that I would move here, but I wanted my  own place. I didn   t want to live with any of my children. As a matter-of-fact,  that was one of the things my husband always said,    Don   t live  with your children.     When did you come to Oklahoma?  In 1995.  So you   ve been here a while, then.  Yeah, about eighteen years.  How many children do you have?  I have four living.  Are they mostly in the area? Are they all in Oklahoma?  Oh, no. They   re everywhere. One is in Minneapolis, one is in New  Jersey, another one is in Texas.  They are everywhere, then.  So that   s three of them, and the fourth one is here.  Did you work?  Yes, I worked for a while for my father.  Once you were married?  No, I didn   t work once I was married. Wait a minute, I did. After my  children were grown and my daughter, Mary, was going to college, she  taught kindergarten while she was going to college. Then she got  married so then the pastor knew me and he thought that I could handle  the kindergarten class. That   s what I did for ten years. But that   s about,  really, the only real work I ever did.  7  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  That was pretty much work, though.  Yeah, it was fun. I loved it. Then I did, after that, I did a lot of  volunteering. I volunteered at a school to help the teacher with reading. I  did a lot of other volunteering. I was always busy. I wasn   t the kind that  just let time go by.  Did you expect to live to 100?  No, never. I didn   t even expect to live to ninety-four.  At what point did you think,    Okay, I   m going to?     Well, I just thought the good Lord is keeping me here, so keep active.  (Laughs) Move it or lose it. So that   s what I did.  So what do you do to stay active, now?  I do a lot of exercise. Even now, I have a man that comes in. He   s a  trainer. He comes twice a week. He gives me a workout.  Sore muscles, still.  Yeah  A lot of those people don   t know that that   s what they ought to  do, but it   s something they should do.  They should.  So anyway.  So you were thirteen when you lost your mother?  Yes.  Did that happen during childbirth?  Yes. As a matter-of-fact, I remember they were talking   the relatives  that were there. She had pneumonia because my father was building a  house for us to move into. My mother went to the house to watch the  colored girl do the work. You know how sometimes you just got to be  around, so that   s where she picked up and had pneumonia. That   s what  happened. The doctor thought he would take the baby and maybe that  would help her with the pneumonia. Geez, you know in those days they  didn   t do much about pneumonia.  Prior to that, did you live on a farm?  8  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  No, we always lived in the city.  Did you have chores?  As a child? Oh, sure.  Like ironing or helping in the kitchen? What?  What the heck did I do? (Laughter) Oh, I know that my mother needed  help so I was helping around as much as I could, for as young as I was.  Did they have a car?  Yes.  Do you remember getting the first one? Since you were in town, you  didn   t have a horse and wagon, you had a car?  Yes. (Laughs) My father had a car. It   s funny, in those days, they sold  the car to you and you didn   t even drive.  You had to teach yourself how to?  (Laughs) Yes, I remember. This is so odd. They just give you the car,  and they don   t know whether you can drive it or not. My father, he was  the kind of man, he was going to do it or else. I guess I kind of took after  him. (Laughs)  What was your favorite subject in school?  Oh, I don   t know. I didn   t have a favorite. I just did the subjects that I  had to do. I didn   t really have favorites.  I thought reading may have been since you still read.  Oh, my gosh  I have read   I don   t know   I read all the time.  Can you describe a typical day for you now?  (Laughs)  How early do you get up?  Six thirty.  9  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  What time do you go to bed?  Ten.  That   s a long day   Well    I pray every morning for about an hour. That   s after I get up and  take my first pill. (Laughs) I sit here and then I get my breakfast. I   ve  always had a good  diet , lots of vitamins and whatever.  Watch much TV?  No. I   m not crazy about TV. I   d rather read.  Read the local newspaper?  I don   t get that, but on Sundays when I   m at my daughter   s, I read the  paper.  How do you get your books?  We buy them. (Laughs)  What type of things do you read? What is your favorite type of books to  read?  Well, I don   t like to read   I   d rather read fiction. Wait, what am I  saying   am I saying that wrong?  Novels or biographies?  Biographies. I like biographies. I like to find out how people became a  success.  So nonfiction, then. You prefer nonfiction.  Yes. (Laughs) That   s why I thought I used the wrong word.  Are you currently reading a book?  No, right now I   m reading the Bible. I don   t have a book right now.  Besides with all the company that is coming, I didn   t want to start.  Since we   re talking about company, when you turned 100, what was that  day like?  10  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Well, it was a happy day.  Did you have a party with guests?  Oh, gee whiz, yes. (Laughs) I had all my in-laws and all my side. That  was a room full of people  I have a whole bunch of grandchildren, great-grandchildren.  Plans for this year?  I decided I didn   t want a party this year, but there are a couple people  that are close to me that said they were coming.  At least have a cupcake, then, huh?  (Laughs)  Can you tell us a little about the origins of your family? Where your  mother and father came from and how they met     Oh, they met through other people. That   s the way they did it in those  days.  Were they from the United States, originally?  No, they met in the United States.  Where were they from, originally?  My mother was from Sicily and my father was from Palermo.  Did they carry over, when they came to the United States, any family  traditions or rituals?  No, they did not. But after I married my husband, I lived upstairs from  them. That was our first home. That was a mistake. (Laughter)  In what way?  Well, because my mother-in-law wanted to mother me, and I had so  many experiences, I didn   t need anybody to mother me. (Laughs)  You   d almost been a mother yourself.  Yeah. So, anyway.  11  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Did she teach you a recipe or two?  Oh, I guess I got a couple recipes from her. But she wasn   t one of my  favorite people. (Laughter) She was one of those women who just didn   t  want to give up her son. Anyway, we were happy after we left. You  know, she would    (Laughs) After we lived upstairs from them for ten  years, then we had a home built in Clayton Gardens. That was the first  time we were away from them. My husband would drop off his father  first, but he would always go in and see his mother, say hello to her. She  would always have loads to complain about me and my kids.    They  didn   t do this, they didn   t do that       So the man would be angry when  he came in the house. I knew right away that she   d been feeding him     (Laughs) So anyway, we got through that.  How long were you married?  Over fifty years. I didn   t count after that. (Laughter) We stayed together.  What kind of work did he do?  He had an imported grocery and meat business with his father. They  were together. That   s what he did most of his life. Thank goodness he  bought some stock in between. (Laughter) Because I   m living off of it.  (Laughs) Oh, dear. And I take care of my bills  I even take care of my  taxes.  Do you do your own taxes?  Yes, I do. I do my own taxes. Well, I have to give them to the  accountant, but he always marvels that he doesn   t have to work on them.  I do all the work.  I assume that religion has been a central part of your life. Can you talk  about that?  It meant everything.  Did you go to church every Sunday?  You know, when I would have a problem, I would pray for it. I would  feel that I would get an answer. I always did, too.  As a youngster, what would you do for fun?  Oh, you know, the usual thing. (Laughs) In those days, we used to make  up our games and whatever. We didn   t go to the store to buy them.  12  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  In town, it   s a little different than being out in the farm, so just curious.  Did you do music?  Oh, yeah, I took piano lessons for a while, but then I decided I didn   t  want that. (Laughs)  Did you learn to sew?  I did that, too. That, I think, I learned to do those months that I went to  Rosati-Kain High School. They had that, too. Sewing and cooking, I  think. Economics, they called it. We had Latin and English and the rest  of them.  What was it like living in the orphanage for that   ?  Wonderful. I told you that the nuns were very good with us.  Did you share a room with your siblings or did they separate you?  We were separated. According to age and sex.  Do you remember a particular nun that influenced you or helped you?  Yes. I remember, I think it must have been my eighth grade teacher  named   I   m trying to think of what her name was. (Laughter)  What type of nuns were you associated with? You know, there are  different orders of nuns   which ones were you   ?  I think they were Sisters of Charity.  You didn   t want to be a nun after that?  Oh, I don   t know. No, I guess I never wanted to be a nun. I don   t want to  be cloistered. (Laughter)  What gives your life a sense of purpose today?  I guess I live for my children. I   m very family oriented. I guess, my life,  the way it started   what other way was it going to turn? (Laughs)  What were holidays like?  You mean after my mother died?  13  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Or before, either one.  They were okay. We didn   t make such a big deal about it in those days,  except for Christmas and Easter.  What was special about those holidays?  For one thing, my mother was born on Christmas so we   d celebrate her  birthday. Believe it or not, she died on Easter.  That is odd.  She was only thirty-eight years old.  Those are two pretty important days.  Yes. Well, gosh almighty, they were important. I have never forgotten  them, I guess.  Did you travel very much?  Oh my gosh, yes. I went to Italy three times. I went with my children,  during the summer, we went to a lot of parts of the United States. I can   t  even count how many different states we went through. Every summer it  was a different   it all depends on the area we were in. Like if we   d go  to California, whatever was close by   the states around there.  Do you have a favorite place?  I think Italy was. Well, my goodness. It was so beautiful in Rome. I had  a sister-in-law who lived in Florence, Italy, and that   s such a beautiful  city. My brother, when he was in the war, he met this girl from Florence.  Married her and brought her to the States.  Was your husband in the War?  No, he wasn   t. I don   t know, maybe because he had a grocery store. I  don   t remember why he didn   t have to go.  Were you married during the Depression, or a little after?  Right around the Depression. It was    36.  So toward the end of it. Still rough times, though, I guess.  14  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Yeah. There is one thing, though, that I have to give my in-laws. We  lived with them for ten years and didn   t pay any rent. That helped us  build a home. Save that money.  Do any historical events stand out in your mind?  Sure, like Lindberg and his children. His one son was stolen. I remember  the event, but I don   t remember exactly when. It was such a horrible  thing.  Do you remember the JFK assassination?  Oh, sure. Yes. I remember that, too.  Being a Catholic, I thought you might.  (Laughs) Yeah. That was unusual. I   m a republican, but I voted for him.  Not because he was Catholic, because I thought he was handsome.  (Laughter) Which, that is a lot of the reason why people vote   women  especially.  I have heard it before, yes.  That was a heck of a thing, wasn   t it? I was young, then. Gosh almighty,  I don   t know. I guess I thought maybe he could change things. But he  didn   t live long enough to change     He was going to, I think.  So what is your secret to living a long life? What do you think are some  of your secrets?  I don   t know. I think the good Lord just kept me here. I don   t have any  secret. Everybody knows that if you eat right and exercise, that helps. I  have lots of faith so that has a lot to do with it.  Talk a little about your faith. How has that been a central part of your  life?  I just feel that you have to pray and you   ve got to love God. That   s about  all I can think of.  Have there ever been times where you may have had some doubt?  Some doubt? Oh, sure. You do.  15  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  What have been some of those experiences for you?  It wasn   t an experience, you just sometimes wonder. It   s only normal, I  think, that you would do that, or maybe not. I don   t know how to answer  that.  I assume the practice of your faith is important, too. Can you talk about  what a typical Sunday might have been like when you were a kid or even  with your own family?  Gosh almighty, first thing, everybody had to go to church. We went to  mass.  What did you do after mass?  As children, I   m talking about after my mother died   my father would  take us after dinner, we called it dinner instead of lunch, on Sunday. We  had a big dinner, early. Then he would take us to the theater. The nice  theaters like the Ambassador in St. Louis or the Fox Theater on Grand  Avenue. He would take us every Sunday.  All the kids?  Yeah, first we   d go to the cemetery. Then from there, we   d go to the  theater.  I assume you visited your mother   s grave.  Yes.  What show do you remember? Do you remember a particular show?  I remember at the Fox, there was a   what do you call them, a  Vaudeville show? His name was Eddie Lowry. I don   t know if you   ve  ever heard of him. (Laughs) He   d have the whole show. We used to  enjoy him, besides the movie they had then.  What was your favorite movie growing up? Or a favorite actor or  actress?  Oh, those old ones, there   s a lot. I have a lot of them, of the old ones. I  don   t know too much about   I don   t know the ones today very much.  Gone with the Wind.  Oh, sure.  16  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  All the Shirley Temple movies.  Yeah. (Laughter)  Did you ever go to a circus? Remember much about that?  Yes. Yes, we went to a circus whenever a circus was in town. (Laughter)  Can you tell us a little about the neighborhood you grew up in in St.  Louis? St. Louis has different neighborhoods.  It was a nice neighborhood. My father being in the real estate business  helped.  Did you settle in like an Italian section, or   ?  No, no, we never lived in an Italian section. I always lived amongst  Americans.  I know in St. Louis, they have what is called the Hill District     I know, I know, I know.  And then Ladue is another district.  Right. The one they call the Hill    (Laughs) We   d go to the Hill to buy  groceries, certain Italian oils and cheeses   things like that.  I know the Hill pretty well. I   ve been to the Hill several times.  Oh, really?  There   s some good food in that section.  Yeah. (Laughs)  How is life different for you, today, in Oklahoma? What is different  about life here for you?  Well, we don   t have as many places to go to as you did. In St. Louis,  there was so much more, so many more places for entertainment. I don   t  know. You have to belong to a club or something here. It   s different.  How was that move? How was moving from St. Louis to Tulsa? How  would you describe that for you?  17  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  It was okay because I knew   I was then eighty-one. No, I was eighty-three  by that time. I knew there was nobody in St. Louis. My brothers  and sisters, they all lived way out, like in Chesterfield. Anyway, I  sometimes miss St. Louis. But that   s okay. That   s the way I am. I just  make the best of it.  You were there when they were building the Arch.  Yes. We have the zoo, Grant   s Farm     Did you ever go to a Cardinals game?  Sure  (Laughs) I   d even go by myself sometimes.  Who was your favorite? Did you ever have a favorite player on the  Cardinals?  Babe Ruth, although he wasn   t a Cardinal?  You saw Babe Ruth play?  Yeah, I used to watch him play. Of course, there were a couple of St.  Louis boys that I just can   t remember right now. I haven   t watched the  Cardinals for a while, now. Not the last few years, here.  Must have been something to see Babe Ruth, though.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That was probably a hard ticket to get a hold of.  He was from the Hill. There was another one that was from the Hill. I  can   t remember his name. I can see him, but I can   t place his name.  That   s what it is a lot of times, now. I can see the person and I can   t  remember their name.  That happens to the rest of us, too.  Yeah. (Laughs) I know.  Can you share a little more about your experience after your mother  died? What were some of your responsibilities?  Well, after the home, they gave me a lot of responsibilities there and  taught me a lot, too. How to clean and how to darn. We darned socks  18  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  and helped in the laundry room. They had those dryers that you pulled  out. I don   t know if you ever heard about those. You fill them up with  wet clothes and then push them back again, it was heat. That was just for  the drying. I helped with a lot of things there. I didn   t mind it. I just liked  doing whatever I was doing. Everybody was so nice. It was kind of fun  to be with other children, too.  When you got home, I assume you had to help raise your brothers and  sisters.  Yes.  Do you have any special memory of doing that or   ?  (Laughs) They got to the point that they treated me like I was their  mother.  They would do what you say?  Yes  (Laughs)  Would you have to discipline them, or would your father?  Oh, I didn   t need to discipline them. They didn   t mess with my father.  (Laughter) He was strict.  How was your relationship with your step-mother?  Mine was fine, but my sister never did get along with her. The boys  didn   t care. I was okay with her. As a matter-of-fact, what I did was after  they got married, I said,    Well, now, this job is yours.    (Laughter)    I   m  going back to school.     Good for you   You kind of passed the torch.  Yep. Well, she didn   t just marry my father. The other kids came with the  package. (Laughs)  What do you feel is one of your accomplishments that you   re most proud  of in life?  Well, I think that I helped my children along to where they   all four of  them, they turned out great. They went to school, which that was a big  thing with me, education. I always thought that was so important.  19  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Did you make sure they went to a parochial school?  Yes. We sent the children to parochial school. As a matter-of-fact, they  even went to college that was Catholic. Except for one daughter, she  came to Tulsa and she attended Tulsa University. The reason why she  did is because Mary married a young man from Tulsa, whom she met at  St. Louis University while she was going to school there. He was going  to school there. So yes, my children have all had a Catholic education. I  have to say, they   ve really turned out well. I never had any trouble with  them where they couldn   t take care of themselves. They   ve all been able  to take care of themselves. I never interfered with their in-laws.  (Laughter) I had my lesson.  That seems to be a critical point in your life, is that ten years you lived  above your in-laws.  Yeah.  Was that a dissatisfying period of life for you?  What?  Not a very happy time for you.  No, it wasn   t. But I didn   t dwell on it, though. I just made the best of it.     This is the way it is. I   m here and I can   t go anywhere until we can  afford it.     How did you meet your husband?  I met him when I was working for my father in the office, in his real  estate office. That   s something else. My father went into the building  business. My brothers went into   that   s what they did most of their  lives. They built a lot in St. Louis.  Housing?  No, no, big homes in like Chesterfield, around there. That area   they  were big builders out there. So as far as living, I have always   I can   t  say that I was ever poor.  Going back to your husband, you met him at your father   s office   what  was your courtship like?  20  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Bishop  Don   t even go into that. (Laughter) There again, my mother-in-law had  something to do with that. We had to have   when we went out, we had  to have company with us. What do they call them?  A chaperone?  A chaperone. So my sister and his sister used to come with us. We   d  ditch them somewhere. (Laughter) Put them in the theater  We found  ways of getting to really know each other.  What was a typical date like back then?  We   d go to the theater. They have like, oh, that place in St. Louis   what  the heck   ? Highlands? I don   t know if you   ve heard of it. It   s like a  Ferris wheel and all that. We   d go to those things, too.  But you had to have a chaperone.  Yep. (Laughs)  How did he propose?  Oh, he proposed in the office  You know what? I was surprised. I knew  he came in all the time, but I didn   t have any idea what he had in his  mind. I said,    Well, I can   t give you an answer now  I don   t know how I  feel about this.    (Laughter) So I think he was a little TO   d  ticked off   about that.  Did you make him wait?  Yeah  (Laughs) But he came back, finally, after about three or four  months. What he was doing, in the meantime he opened up the grocery  and liquor business in his father   s   my father-in-law had a meat market.  My husband, he wanted to be an architect, but in those days   I told you  when I got married in    36, it was during the  Depression  and wasn   t  much building going on. So that   s what he was doing in the meantime.  He didn   t tell me what he was doing. He just didn   t call or anything.  (Laughs) He was a nice guy, but boy, he was a typical Italian. He had a  temper. Of course, my father had a temper, too. I was used to that.  So he asked you a second time?  No,    What   s your answer? What are you going to do? Did you make up  your mind?    (Laughter)  What did your father think of him?  21  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  Finchum  Bishop  Tranchilla  Bishop  Tranchilla  Oh, my father knew him and his family. As a matter-of-fact, we lived in  this flat. The Tranchillas were looking for a place because they were  living where all the Italians were, what they call a ghetto. They were  looking for a way from there and they came to see the house we were  living in. They bought it. How many years later? I go and move in  upstairs. We lived downstairs, then.  So you actually lived   you moved out of your house and then you came  back after being married and lived in it again     When I married him. (Laughs) That   s where I lived for ten years. You  know, I just took everything and I never made a big deal about things  that happened to me. I just would think that, things are going to happen  and just make the best of it, so if you can override it    I didn   t believe in  spending time thinking about things like that. It   s just a waste of time.  I   ve always felt, too, when there is an argument, I just tell them   what is  it that I tell them? Oh, my gosh  Oh,    You argue with a fool, then you   re  a bigger fool.    (Laughter)  I   ll have to remember that.  This is kind of a different question for you, but did you ever have any  aspirations or did you ever dream to become something? In other words,  how did you imagine life would turn out as you got older? Did you  accomplish what you set out to do?  I think what I did was just make the best of the day-by-day. Whatever  happened in my life, I just   I just felt,    so be it.     Do you have a bucket list, a list of things you want to do?  (Laughs) No, I never   you really need to write a list?  Some people do.  When history is written, what do you want it to say about you? What do  you want to be remembered for?  Shoot. I never thought of that.  How do you want family and friends to remember you?  I think they would remember me as a decent person. (Laughs) I can tell  that they think a lot of me. But I don   t know what I would want to be  remembered for.  22  Bishop  Tranchilla  Finchum  Tranchilla  What do you mean by decent?  You know that I wouldn   t lie to them and they could trust me. That   s  about all I can think of.  Well, we thank you very much for sharing your story with us today. It   s  been a pleasure.  You   re welcome.  -------  ------- 
