 Finchum  Miller  Today is June 24, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Tulsa, Oklahoma to speak with Henry Miller, and this is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year of Life project. Thank you for having us today.  Well I   m glad to have you.  Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Well, I was born in Charleston, West Virginia, April 22, 1914. I only  lived there two weeks. Mother and Father were on a business trip and I  happened to come along too soon. So we came back home to Suffolk,  Virginia, my hometown where I was raised, and I lived in Suffolk off  and on until I went into the Navy in 1931.  And what did your parents do for a living?  Well, my father built homes, he managed lumberyards. He was in the  lumber business and construction business most of his life, but he moved  to different parts of the country and took different levels of jobs. The  one he enjoyed the most was in Sturgis, Michigan, a little town on the  southern border of Michigan. He was operating a lumberyard   a  manager for a lumberyard and he was getting all his lumber free. So he  was building small homes, this was in the early twenties, for returning  veterans from World War I. He had some designs that incorporated a lot  of space savers. That was new at that time. He got a lot of satisfaction  out of building those homes.  And did your mother work?  Yes. My mother and father separated, and my mother worked as a  5  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  sonographer and office manager, up until she retired when she was  sixty-five.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  I had one brother and one sister but they were older than I, five or six  years. My sister was the oldest, then my brother, then me. They went to  live with my dad for a good part of the time. They did come back and  forth from Virginia to Michigan, where my dad was. I never got to  participate in a lot of activity with my brother and sister. I was always  the baby of the family. I think they were a little jealous of the attention I  got, because there was so much age difference. But yes. My brother and  sister finally came back to Suffolk  Virginia  to settle there after they  had gotten their education in Michigan and came back to get married  and go on with their lives.  And where did you go to school? Elementary school and forward.  Well, where did I go to school? Well, I started in   because they didn   t  have room in our school system in Suffolk, small town, I had to   in the  first grade I started in the Masonic Temple. They just had a back room  big enough for twenty or thirty young children. So I started there in the  first grade. In the second grade I moved to a school grounds at the end of  Clay Street. At the Thomas Jefferson High School I actually went to,  they had some outer buildings that they used for their lower grades,  second through fourth. Second through third we were in a Quonset hut,  what would constitute a small building, for us to attend. Fourth grade we  moved into the building at Thomas Jefferson High School, at that time.  That was before they built the existing high school. So it was three  jumps starting out. Masonic Temple, with no connection to the Masons,  but just a place where they could accommodate the new children that  had come along in Suffolk that they didn   t have room for in the other  schools.  And then for high school?  Suffolk High School until the tenth grade. I went in the Navy. I never  finished high school. I went in the Navy. While I was in the Navy I  saved a good amount of my salary and attended Spartan School here in  Tulsa. Came to Spartan School in August of 1938 and took the flight  course and aviation mechanics course for both aircraft and engines. But  I   m in the middle of a long story. Do you want me to tell any more about  my education? At Spartan there   s a story in itself right there. The  different interests I had while I was at Spartan during between    38 and     40.  6  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Well let   s back up. So in tenth grade you dropped out of high school or  you finished the tenth grade.  I was promoted from the lower tenth grade to the high tenth. I may have  misstated, in the tenth grade. Middle tenth grade was my highest level.  And then you joined the Navy?  Yes.  How old were you?  I was seventeen.  Your mother had to sign for you?  Yes, I was   Yeah but, you see that was the Depression. My mother was  having a hard time supporting a family on her salary and she had some  health problems herself. So to ease the load in my family, I thought I   d  be able to go to school, then finish school and learn to fly. That   s what  the recruiting officer was telling me.  I most certainly had gotten into the Navy, but Roosevelt started  economizing. He cut everybody   s pay, and a lot of people don   t know  this, Roosevelt cut all federal employees, including military, 10 percent.  They shut down Pensacola for enlisted men only. Annapolis graduates  were still able to get flight training. So I was real disappointed and that  sat up an attitude that kept me in trouble. I spent too much time in bars  and places like that instead of applying myself as I should as a radio  operator, the second choice for my time in the Navy.  And how long were you in the Navy?  From December 1, 1931 until July 28, 1938.  So seven years.  Yes.  Two rotations?  Yes, I have two discharges. I got one discharge after the expiration of  what they call a minority cruise. When you   re under age they had a term  to apply and you enlisted until the day before you   re twenty-one.  Minority cruise is where the term applied. Then you had to re-enlist,  which I did, and I had a second discharge in July of    38.  7  Finchum  Miller  During that time did you have to go overseas and do anything?  Yes. My first assignment was Special Service Squadron. Nobody ever  heard of it. I was on one of the cruisers, the Memphis, with a contingent  of marines and we cruised back and forth in a Central American area.  We were there to protect our agencies. We had fifty marines out ready to  go to shore anytime there was trouble. It   s just like what happened in  Benghazi here. It wouldn   t have happened during Roosevelt   s time. He  had a force of men ready to go to hot spots   that   s not a good word   to  go to places where there   s political unrest and calm things down. Of  course it was for the benefit   it depends on how many American  businesses got involved in these revolutions.  In Nicaragua it was a   a long story right there, why the Sandinistas  were rebelling. But I got down there at the very end of the revolution  when they had it settled. We were stationed near Corinto, Nicaragua on  the Pacific Coast. As we withdrew the marines from the interior, we  were there with our fifty marines to take over and keep things calm in  Corinto so that they could disembark without any riots, trouble. They  had a lot of Nicaraguans that came down as the marines were  disembarked   that   s not a good word   as the marines were embarked in  the Henderson, the U.S.S Henderson. A lot of Nicaraguan girls had a  family with them.  The marines had been down there from 1928 until 1932. There was a lot  of jungle fighting. You didn   t hear a thing about it. I never heard  anything about it. I was in Corinto off and on several times before we  were relieved of our duty. I came up to the states aboard the Memphis,  transferred to the Richmond and then the Marblehead. I was on three  light cruisers over that period of time.  I got to go to China. The Japs were closing in on Shanghai then. They  were fighting in the streets of Shanghai, on both sides of the river, when  we came in. We were taking 1,300 marines to the American Embassy in  an area they called the International Settlement. Embassies from all  different countries were protected within this area. I guess England,  France, Germany or whoever, the Italian embassies.  So we got there in time to keep the Japs from occupying the  International Settlement. But they were fighting in the city on both sides  of the river when we got there. In fact, we nearly had to fight the Japs to  get in there. The Japs sent a heavy cruiser and two destroyers to keep us  from coming up the Yangtze River. We met these guys about thirty  miles from the entrance to the Yangtze. The Japanese cruisers got across  our path   that   s not a good word. Anyhow, we were heading straight up  8  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  the river but we were blocked by the cruiser and two destroyers. So they  had some kind of flag signals as a way to talk, international flag signals.  We had ours and we were not stopping. They wanted us to stop, we  weren   t stopping.  They didn   t want to risk a collision. They had already sunk an American  ship, the U.S.S Panay. They thought that we were on the verge of   if  they created an incident and not allowed us passage through there, then  it might be considered an act of war. I don   t know what to read into that  except they did let us come through. But the cruiser went off, out of  sight. The two destroyers circled around, they came up alongside the  Marblehead and alongside the Charmont with a lot of marines so we  went on up the river. The destroyers were trying to alert the people on  both sides of the river that were fighting that we were being protected by  the Japs by their presence in there. So we got up, unloaded the marines,  and pulled out after a short period of time and went up into North China  to evacuate some more, oh a couple employees that were being affected  by fighting up in Shandong Province. So we took on, oh I forget, several  hundred families, whole families, aboard the Marblehead and made a  speed run down to Hong Kong. There was a Duilio, a passenger line,  down that way waiting. So we   I got that accomplished and then came  back to Shandong for our base, and we operated out of Shandong after  that.  Did you feel endangered yourself at any point?  I   m sorry     Did you feel like you were in danger at any point?  Oh, not really. The Japs would practice bombing runs on us once in a  while. I guess that was what they were doing. Planes would fly over and  I   d see the bomb bay doors open, and we   d go to general quarters, just in  case and get down way from the aircraft guns above. Well no, we never  had any confrontations other than the heavy cruiser assigned to keep us  from unloading those marines.  And what was your job?  I was a radio operator, and we had a lot of problems with the Japs trying  to block our communications. In fact, they had blocked an embassy   s  communication up in Shandong, in North China, so we handled all the  embassy traffic for them for quite a while. Certainly for about a month, I  guess, or more.  Did you consider making it a permanent career?  9  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Not at that time, not at that time. Well, that   s a story in itself, why I  didn   t. (Laughs) No, at that time I was glad to be out there. I volunteered  for the Asiatic Fleet when I was assigned to Panama, for the Special  Service Squadron in Balboa  Panama . So I was glad to get out to China  and feel like I had a small part in relieving the situation there.  No one knew what would happen if the Japs did invade. The  International Settlement   s a large area. Each nation had their own troops.  It would   ve been a wildfire. It would   ve been a big fight because the  Japs had tried to gain entrance to the International Settlement. They   d  come down to the gate and they would demand entrance and the marine  sentries wouldn   t let them in so there was a lot of animosity in Japanese  officers. They were losing face with their troops that were with them  when they were turned away from coming into the compound. What  they were coming in for, I don   t know, but there was a lot of bombing  going on day and night, aircraft bombing, in the city. So we heard a lot  of it and saw some of it, but we didn   t get involved.  So a couple of years later was Pearl Harbor. Do you remember where  you were when that came down?  Yes, I was working for Spartan. We had a flight training program for the  Air Force, and I was working in the engine overhaul department as an  assistant to the manager. We were overhauling aircraft engines for the  Air Force. There was a range of engines that they used in the PT-19  airplanes that they were using in the flight program.  So I was contributing, in some degree, but I would have liked to gotten  back in. Well, I had an honorable discharge but the Navy wouldn   t allow  me to re-enlist because of another long story about some of my problems  I have with alcohol. Nothing illegal at all. It   s just I was sent to the  Naval Hospital in Washington D.C, just a small hospital, no retention at  that time, to dry out. They had they own system when an enlisted man or  an officer had a problem. There were some men who were on drugs.  There was a mixture, believe it or not, of officers and enlisted men at  one hospital with no difference. So they eased me out with an honorable  discharge. They said, when I tried to re-enlist, it didn   t look like I   d be a  very satisfactory enlisted man. They were right, based on the trouble I  was in with a car wreck, and I was an alcoholic. Alcoholics don   t get  along very well and while I was in the military I, of course, knew this.  Well did your time in the hospital work?  You bet. It sure did. I stayed out of the bars and I stayed away from  alcohol, saved my money, was able to pay my tuition to Spartan School  10  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  and realize what I wanted to get out of the Navy to start with. I was able  to learn to fly and be around aircraft. It was a wonderful satisfaction to  be able to follow that.  How did you learn about Spartan?  Well, when I was in the hospital one of the men had gotten some  literature from four or five different schools. Spartan had the best  offering. They offered me a job. I was able to pay my tuition in advance,  all the tuition, and work as a night watchman. That was the best deal out  of all the other schools.  And how long was that program?  How long was that program?  Yes.  The aircraft and engine program would   ve been a full year. Flight  program, I bought flying time on the  inaudible , type of airplane. Then  when I wasn   t able   when my health broke down I needed an operation  and I asked the school director if he could refund any of my tuition. He  said,    No, I   m sorry. The economic situation   s so bad.    He said,    Well,  I   ll give you flying time in the C-3.    Well I   d been working on the C-3s  and watching the guys fly those things. So I traded it in, the unused part  of my tuition, for flying time in the C-3 biplane. I got a lot of satisfaction  although I wasn   t able to completely finish the course, and then they  gave me a job offer as an assistant to the manager of the Aircraft and  Engine Department. I had my own office, we shared a secretary.  Well then, take us on from there. Where did you go?  Well, from Spartan I got a job at Douglas Aircraft and worked with them  for eight years     Still in Oklahoma?  Yes. Yes at the local plant here at the airport, and then went out to  Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Now that is a job. That was a  wonderful little town, Sunnyvale, California. The jobs they gave me  were better than what I had and paid more than I was realizing from  Douglas. I was promised an administrative level job if I would stay, but  this is in    64 and Lockheed lost a lot of contracts. The Juno Rocket was  their main source of income. It had more than one failure and the  contracts were nullified so they had to lay us off. At the time I was laid  off I contacted a friend back in Tulsa. He says,    North American   s  11  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  hiring. Come on back to Tulsa. I can get you in the right door    or  whatever he said.    Come back to Tulsa. The jobs are here, if you want to  work as a planner,    which I did. I stayed with North American for  eleven years and retired from North American. That   s just about it.  That would   ve been in the eighties?  Well, I retired in 1975. In the 80s Ruth and I decided we wanted to retire  to California. So we moved to a little town, Sonoma, California, in  Northern California with mostly old folks, kind of a sleepy little place.  But I was not happy. No one knew what an airplane was I don   t think.  No Navy veterans. I know I hadn   t made a contact with a soul in twenty-three  years, I   m not exaggerating, with any people who had any idea  what it was like back here in Tulsa. Well, Californians are a breed apart,  they   re different people. I envy them. I   d liked to have worked out there  for Lockheed, I would have liked to it. I still would   ve been out there if  Lockheed hadn   t lost their contracts.  So when did you move back to Oklahoma that time?  I came back this final time 2007 when my wife was very ill. We moved  into a retirement center, Forest Hills, in Broken Arrow  Oklahoma , and  Ruth died very soon after we moved in. I stayed there three years and  came up here to Town Village in July of 2011. I   ve been here   well,  pretty soon it   ll be three solid years.  You   ve lived in various states. Where do you consider your home?  Well, I lived in California off and on thirty-seven years. We had six  years there in San Diego or more. Then four years in Sunnyvale,  Northern California, when I was working for Lockheed and twenty-three  years in Sonoma  California . I   ve been in and out of California so many  times   Tulsa   s always been my home, but I would   ve liked to have  spent more time in California.  Well, let   s back up a little bit and have you tell me how you met your  wife.  Well, she was a waitress in the Spartan cafeteria. We began to see more  of each other in the cafeteria. We dated, and she didn   t like Tulsa and  wanted to go back home to Missouri. Came from a little town Aurora,  Missouri. I had to persuade her to stay in Tulsa by agreeing to get  married. It complicated my desires to fly more. I was going to pick up  some more flying time and get a commercial license as a sideline. But  once we were married our son was born about nine months and two days  later. My daughter came along pretty soon after that so I needed the   I  12  Bishop  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  couldn   t do a lot of things I wanted to do. Might   ve been good for me  anyhow, who knows.  When were you married?  When? Oh, May 17, 1939.  In 1939.  May 17, 1939   yeah.  So she was more than happy to move to California?  Oh yes, anything I wanted to do she   d go along with it. I tried to satisfy  her and make her happy wherever we went. She wasn   t hard to please  and that was a good thing, because I never made a lot of money.  So flying is really your first love or your second love?  Ah, second. I used to like to drive racecars. When I was in the Navy     when I had this accident, I had a fractured back. I was practicing racing  on an athletic field, it had a lot of loose gravel on it. Some boys were on  motorcycles and some cars would gather at night when the lights were  out. We   d go out there and we set up oil drums at either end. I guess  they were about a quarter of a mile apart, and we   d get out there and  race back and forth. So I was going sideways and making a turn there  and a tire blew and I rolled my car. Fractured my vertebrae, and blood in  the spinal fluid, I really took a   well that was something I wanted to do  even when I was a little kid this big. (Gestures)  I   d build my own airplanes and my own little racecars. I always had  tools and equipment and materials. I   d take an old wagon and I   d build a  body on it like a racecar or something. So I had two inches, or several  inches, bolted. To this day I   m too old for it to have much to do with  either activity.  Well did you do the racecar business after you were married or before?  Well, in the Navy we were just a bunch of amateurs out there. We   d see  who could drink the most beer and who could run the fastest. Now I lost  my train of thought. I was back in San Diego. (Laughter). What did you  ask me? I   m sorry.  I may have lost mine too. (Laughter)  Well, I had multiple interests but those two primary things. I wanted to  13  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  get a job where I could get some money. I built a racecar out of three  wrecked racecars and raced them here in Tulsa on a racetrack and made  money, and this is in 1946. I have pictures of it over there and those  posters.  So after you got married?  Yes, this is 1946 when I first started racing professionally. After I tore  the car up real bad and it frightened Ruth, I   d just go out and run, not  regularly, but someone would drag in an old racecar with no driver. No  one wanted to get in it. (Laughs) Well I   d take it out and run it around  the track, if they were trying to sell it or something like that. So I always  kept my helmet and garment with me, but I didn   t use it very often.  Let   s see. Oh, in 1955 I was out at the track one night and there   s a  couple in the box seats there and I was leaning on the rail behind them  and watching the races. We got to talking and the lady asked me if   I  told her, I guess, I volunteered it that I   d driven a racecar. She said,     Well why aren   t you out there driving a stock car?    I said,    I   m too  old.    I was forty-something at the time. So anyhow she says,    You   re  not too old,    I was there taking it all in but she was giving me advice.  She wanted to see me  drive . So I went down in the pits and I contacted  a boy that had an old junker no one else wanted to drive. So I started  driving stock cars and I do have pictures of them over there on that  poster. But it was just a   it was a sport with me. I wasn   t about to quit  my jobs and try to make a living doing that. I just was too concerned  with supporting my family.  Was it the thrill of going fast? What drew you to that?  Well, if you ever lost control of a car on ice, and it begins to slide  sideways, that   s what you get out on the race tracks, on these little race  tracks. On the dirt tracks you got to turn those things sideways to get  around the corner and that   s the fun of it. Boy, they can just spin and get  away from you so quick. You   re in a big bunch of other cars and those  guys are having trouble getting through the turns and you   re butting, so  it gets pretty physical.  I never did care for getting out on the big tracks and running straight,  turning left. The guys on the big tracks today, most of the accidents is  just following one guy following another guy and turning left at the turn.  But the slick tracks is what I liked. I liked to feel the car slide and slip.  That   s what I thought took the most skill and to do it with an old piece  of junk, it gave me a lot of satisfaction. I had a lot of people who knew  what I was trying to do and gave me credit. In fact, the top driver there  wrote me a letter one time, which I won   t go into, but I had real good  14  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  relationships with professional drivers who had made their living driving  racecars. So I got a lot of enjoyment, but it was strictly avocation   is  that a good word, or something to do for fun with no idea that I would  try to make a living at it.  Did you own racecars?  Yes. I bought one to start out but I built the one I was talking about in  1946, from the three junkers, but the first one was in a barn up in Kansas  and been in the barn all during the war so this is 1945, fall of 1945.  Friend of mine had an airplane. He and I flew up there and found this,  got this old thing out, got the hay off of it and took it out in the pasture  and drove it. So I bought it right there. I bought it and went up the next  day and hauled it back home, but this is at the end of the racing season in  1945. I only had about three or four race meets. I had a cracked block. I  didn   t know that the motor was in bad shape so I sold it and that   s when  I began to look for some cars to put together, some old wrecks that I  could put together myself.  I bought a Sears and Roebuck army jeep motor. They were selling  military surplus back in those days, several different types, Dodge  motors and Willis motors and several other kinds I   m not familiar with.  So the biggest expense I had was  102 on that motor. The total car I  only had  200 and some dollars in it, and after three nights I had it paid  for, and I   ve got the receipts in here. No one believes this. I   ve got the  receipts right here in a book. I   ve kept the pay receipts and I   ve kept the  records of material I bought, where I bought it. (Laughter)  So when it came time to teach your children how to drive, did you do it?  Yes, yes. It was a different time and a different mode of instruction.  (Laughter) We got on   I taught Ruth to drive first, and Ruth helped with  the children. We didn   t have any problems, any close calls or anything  to be leery of. So we and the children got through it all right and so far  as I know they were very careful and didn   t have accidents and a bad  driving record afterword.  Well what got you interested in airplanes?  Well I got to go clear back to Suffolk, Virginia. During the war, I was  about five years old, four or five, there were planes they were using in  the naval air station in Norfolk  Virginia    sometimes they   d fly over  the city. Every once in a while one would show off and get up and loop  the thing, roll it or whatever. So they   d come over our little town, only  twenty miles away, to have some fun. They couldn   t do that, I guess,  with their superior officers watching them. So they   d come over home,  15  Finchum  Miller  over Suffolk and perform a lot of aerobatics. Then they had some  blimps, they had two or three power blimps that   d come over. They   d  come in real low and the guys would be leaning over the side and  hollering at us kids, waving. So we had contact with military aviation  when I was a real small kid.  After the war there was a lot of surplus Jennies that were being bought  and were hangered at a little field at Wilroy, Virginia, about five miles  from Suffolk. My uncle used to take me out on a Sunday drive and we   d  go out and we   d watch these guys haul passengers, barnstorm as I used  to call them, but they   d fly these old biplane Jennies. The Jenny name  coming from the initial JN for war or something like that but   Air  Force. But they were slow flying little airplanes, good for instruction.  I had airplanes in my neighborhood, planes that I could watch. So I   m  beginning to build models, I was always building something in the  garage. So I built a few strictly non-flying models, and I bought some  that were capable of flight. You   d just wind up a rubber band and it   d fly  sometimes two or three minutes. So that was my introduction to  aviation, is the war   the airplanes from the Air Force.  And do you remember the first time you went up in one?  First time? Oh yes, I was in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, 1934. The whole  fleet was heading from New York City for review by President  Roosevelt. So we stopped at   we were at anchor there in Guantanamo  Bay. My gosh, I don   t know how many ships were there. It was this  dotted all over, spread out all over Guantanamo Bay. So we have an  enlisted man, pilot, aboard the Memphis. And he one day, just out of the  blue (he knew I liked airplanes) say,    Want to go fly around a little bit?     I was,    Lord, yes.    So I was able to fly with this friend of mine.  The original Corsair, now the name Corsair was used later on by the  Boeing Company on that fighter plane, but this is an old biplane Corsair  there. We took off, it was a seaplane. We took off from the water and of  course landed in the water. They would fly around; we were able to fly  around Guantanamo Bay. I   m not sure why he was making this flight.  Maybe he was assigned to check to see if any foreign vessels were in the  perimeter, or anyone was coming in in fishing boats and getting in the  middle of us, but I don   t know why. Well I enjoyed it, and that was my  first flight.  So later on I was able to go off on the catapults. That was an experience  in itself. You   ve got a fifty foot catapult. Today   s carriers, you know, the  guys have about a thousand feet of flight deck before they have to take  off. Anyhow, I got that experience of catapulting and landing in the open  16  Finchum  Miller  ocean. When you   re catapulted out in the ocean the way you get back  aboard ship, see we can   t come back to the ship and land on the ship, so  the ship makes a slide and turn either one way or the other, depending on  wind direction. It knocks the top off the ocean waves, see you come in  and land in the middle of the wake of the ship that has just made this  slide and turn for you. But a lot of times all it   d do is knock the tops of  the waves off and you get wet because when the nose of the pontoon  would dig in, it   d throw water back, and you   d get a good bath. Well it  was an experience. That was a lot of excitement.  So once you land in the water, you taxi up alongside the ship and drop a  boom over with a hook, hook on to your center section and lift you up,  set you back on the catapult for the next shot. So that was pretty tricky  too, if it was choppy. One radio operator lost his finger holding that  hook down and trying to get it in this sling that   s in the center section.  He got his finger in the way, and the ship went up and the airplane went  down, and he lost his finger.  What about the first time you yourself flew one?  Oh, that   s easy, that was at Spartan. I bought this flying time on a little  Taylorcraft cabin airplane. I forget how many hours of instruction I took.  We went through, all I know it was 180s, 360s, and basic landing and  forced landing and engine failure. I guess I had about six hours  instruction. I bought ten so I soloed after about six hours and got to fly  solo after that for the full   remainder of the ten hours. That was in the  winter of    38 and spring of    39, so I didn   t get to fly the C3   s until six  months later. I checked out on them and had a lot   I built up a good  amount of time.  In the Navy I   d flown a commercial airplane called a Fleet. Picked up a  sailor out on the highway one day hitchhiking out to Chula Vista from  San Diego. He said,    You want to fly today? Want to fly an airplane  today?       Oh hey, yeah.    He said,    Well, that   ll cost you ten bucks. See,  it had cost me twenty. I   ll go out and I   ll let you handle the controls.     But the Fleet biplane was just a small plane like the Spartan. Hell, 145  horsepower, one engine, it performed real well. But we, we had a lot of  fun that day flying that small plane. Then there was a next door neighbor  that rebuilt a plane and I used to give him rides out to Harvey Young  Airport, and this was an old Swallow airplane that had an OX-5 World  War I motor. It was a reconstruction on an old airplane. I remember the  old motor because it turned so slow. You didn   t get the vibration or the  noise that you would normally.  So I got to fly the OX-5 Swallow a few times. So I got to fly a variety of  airplanes. I flew five different airplanes at Spartan, two different models  17  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  of the Corsair, the Fleet and   so I   m dragging this story out, but I went  over to Tulsa Air and Space Museum. They had a couple of Spartan  airplanes I knew the stories about, bad news. They had some bad  peaches. So I was telling the guys escorting me through the museum,  they said,    Wait. I better go get the curator.    He wanted to know what  these stories were. They   d crashed   within the first month I was at  Spartan they crashed two of them. So they had a design failure, a flaw.  The first guy, the student got in trouble, Julio Rodriguez, a boy from  Puerto Rico. He put the thing in a dive and pulled back on the stick, and  something popped. The wings folded up around him. He had to fight to  get out. It was a low-wing monoplane. They had one hanging on the  ceiling so I was telling this guy,    I knew some bad things about that  plane.     So he went and got the curator and he got interested in not only those  planes but the other planes that I had flown. I just never did have a lot of  time but I got to fly a lot of different airplanes that he had some interest  in so we became friends, and he arranged all of this   he got with  Spartan and arranged this hundred year celebration for me. I   ll never pay  him back or repay him in any way, but I sure have appreciated him. I  guess what we shared was his interest in old airplanes. If you   ve been to  the museum there   s all kinds of different levels of different stages of  airplane production.  Well tell us a little more about that day     Ah, about the day     The day you got to go up for your 100th.  Oh. Let   s see, well   It started on the 10th. The copilot wasn   t available  for the 22nd, but he was available for the 12th. So here at Town Village,  they gave me a supper, pardon me, a celebration on the 10th. So it  started on the 10th of April, and then on the 11th I had go out and see if I  could get in the plane and out, to see if a 100-year-old man could in and  out of this cockpit. (Laughs) I got in and out without any trouble, so the  next day is when they had the reception at the hanger in Jones Airport.  They gave me my Spartan diploma and the president of Spartan made a  nice speech and patted me on the head. It was two or three hundred  people. I never anticipated any kind of response like that or interest. But  there they were and I had a permanent smile (laughter) for three days,  but I did get to fly in this old C3, which is a plane that I had flown in,  not this particular one, it was refurbished, but the same model, same  horsepower and so forth. But yes, that was a great experience.  Did you get to take off and land, do all of it?  18  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  It was bumpy that day and they had a plane taking pictures real close to  us, so he was on the controls the whole time. I was on the controls, all I  was doing was going through the motions that he was   I had my feet on  the pedals but I wasn   t about to try and fly the plane myself because he  was uneasy. But it was about as bumpy as I ever remember and these  planes   this one plane taking pictures had come in real close maybe  thirty, forty feet away so he didn   t want me   (laughs) he didn   t know if  I could fly or not but he knew I hadn   t flown in seventy-three years. I  appreciated him just letting me get in the thing.  Sure.  I did enjoy the flight. We flew over parts of Tulsa I hadn   t seen from the  air in a long time and it just, the feel   the visibility in an open back,  open cockpit biplane is so much better than a closed-cabin plane. You  can see so much and you can smell the exhaust fumes. It   s a different  way of flying. I   d do it again anytime. I was invited to come back. They  said,    We   d do it again sometime.    But the plane was refurbished by  Dennis Henderson who was a chief maintenance man for Spartan at  Jones Airport where the Spartan hanger is located. So Dennis told me  more than once,    Let me know when you want to take a flight and we   ll  do it.    But it was a   I sure made some friends that I had no idea that I  was capable of having any   oh, them having any interest in me.  An exciting day.  Oh, Lord  But it   s been going on for thirty days. (Laughs) Been in the  news   two newspapers, three newspapers. I got calls from my  hometown. I had people from California calling me,    Hey, you   re on the  internet,    and    We saw you on the internet.    So it   s been a   couldn   t  have   well I enjoyed every minute of it. Haven   t had a lot of attention  in my life, and the older you get the more you do enjoy it, I guess.  Well, at what point did you realize you were going to make it to 100?  April the 21st. (Laughter)  Of this year?  Yes. (Laughter)  Had anyone else in your family lived to be 100?  Yes, I had an aunt that lived to be 102. She was the daughter of Judith  Kilby Smith, my great-great grandmother who was the only civilian  19  Finchum  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  casualty in the fighting in my hometown. I just got a letter here today  about that, but there was a   now I lost my train of thought there, but  talking about age, she married a wealthy banker in Washington, DC. She  lived in a Walden Park Hotel, I guess one time most prestigious, what   s  the word I   m fishing for, prestigious. She lived in luxury, had good  attention, so she lived over 100. But her mother and the five boys in the  farmhouse between where the fighting was going on, both sides thought  this farmhouse had spotters and had military people in it so they began  to fire at the farmhouse. So the whole family makes a run for the woods  and the mother, my great-great grandmother, was hit and bled to death in  the woods that night. Elizabeth, the tiny baby, she was just a baby in  arms, she   Aunt Elizabeth lived to be 102. When I start telling a story I  get distracted. There   s so many side stories that I get lost every once in a  while.  What do you think your secret is? To living     Well, to old age? Well, I   ve practiced saying things to make people  laugh, bogus things. But the truth of the matter is harder, just having  good genes, inheriting good genes, and having a good wife who   s a good  cook and interested in your own personal health and Ruth was. She  never tried to make me reduce fatty foods or any of the usual things that  wives do. I don   t know how she did it, but she kept me well fed and  healthy for sixty-eight years and that   s why I   m sitting here.  Going back to flying, did you ever fly competitively?  Competitively, no. Some of my instructors had flown competitively. I  have a friend   Oh good Lordy, I   m getting into a whole other story of a  competitive flyer. He used to fly   he came up when I was driving  racecars and he got a gasoline mixture for me, with some nitro that he  used in his plane. He and Roscoe Turner, Roscoe Turner way back in the  early    30s I guess, he and Roscoe were always at each other. One race  Roscoe would win, and the guy   s name was Earl Ortman. Earl brought  me the fuel to try out in this old Willis that I was trying to drive. It  helped some, but that was a professional airplane racer that I got to  know, pilot.  I   m curious, did you ever parachute?  No. I had to wear them, but I never did   yeah. I had to fill in one time     do you want to hear some more stuff?  Yes.  I was going to tell anybody I nearly fallen out of the airplane. (Laughs)  20  Well, the incident about the parachute, as radio operator I filled in for  other operators when they were incapacitated or not available and so  forth. So one day it was a big heavyset guy, must have weighed a couple  hundred pounds, that didn   t show up. So they called me in,    Miller, do  you want to fly today?       get back to airplanes      The plane   s on the  catapult ready to go.    So they rushed me down there. So I had to get in  there and put on this big parachute. The straps were all adjusted for this  big fat guy   not big, muscular guy actually. So I slipped them over my  shoulders and went through the procedure of making sure the radio set  was secure and the toolbox   went through the routine.  We took off and I didn   t get a chance to adjust the parachute straps, so  we go up and we were doing a   another plane would fly by, we were  the target. The radio operator had a machine gun and we   d fire, try to hit  this target as we go by. Well, I was following this target, was leading it  quite a bit and I was getting too close to the wing. The pilot got uneasy  so he dipped the plane over to the right side. Well, I   m getting ahead of  myself. Before I started machine-gun fire I took the parachute straps off,  because I couldn   t handle the machine gun. So when he threw the plane  over to one side I was holding on to the machine gun with one hand  trying to grab hold of the canopy in the other one. Well, we were  (gestures). I won   t exaggerate it but, if we   d gone over another ten  degrees I might   ve fallen out.  So that was a learning thing. If filling in for anybody, I should adjust my  parachute before we got in the air, really. Yeah, that pilot looked at me,  he could see the traces. He could see me I was on the target. I was  coming too close to his wing, to the biplane wing, he thought. I was just  right on the verge of shutting off the machine gun. He didn   t realize that  I didn   t have my parachute on. That wasn   t a very pleasant experience.  But I learned from it to adjust those straps before we took off. That  whole flight was a mess.  The radio set is held into a track. You can pull it clear out and put  another one in there, had two knobs on the front. You got rubber bands  called shock cords, you know, and you pulled these shock cords over the  knobs and that keeps the radio set in the track and gives it some motion  so when you go off a catapult there   s no damage done to it. Well, here   s  another case where I was filling in for this radio operator. So, I checked  the radio set, pushed it back up like it should, checked the toolbox,  closed it up. We took off before I could pull those rubber bands around  the radio set and the toolbox. I managed to hold the radio. When we took  off the catapult, I managed to hold the radio set but the toolbox spills all  those tools out on my lap and they were kicking around in the floor. So I  had two unfortunate experiences by not being prepared when we went  off a catapult.  21  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Did you have any close calls?  In the Navy?  No, when you were driving the plane.  Oh, when I was at Spartan?  Yes.  Well, I think I did. I lost an engine; take it back, lost all the oil from an  engine on one of the C3s. I had a copilot. We went out on the practice  field east of the Tulsa Municipal. For some reason or another he didn   t  want to come back, didn   t want to fly back. He said,    You fly the plane  back.    So I brought it back, taxied it up to the hanger and Bill Madden, a  mechanic, walked out and said,    What in the hell   s going on?    (Laughs)  There   s oil just all over the belly of the plane so they took the   inaudible  off where he could look at that and the nose cone that held  about fifteen to twenty studs. Some of those studs had broken. The main  bearing had given out inside and the crankshaft was rotating the  propeller and the propeller shaft and this nose cone. It popped the studs.  So when the studs popped, the services part didn   t hold the oil. All the  oil ran out. That wasn   t an accident, but if I   d have been flying very  much longer I   d lost an engine and probably had trouble getting it down.  Good flying old airplanes fly themselves.  Did you ever take Ruth up?  Yes, but not in the C3s. Yes, and it was a pilot that had an old  Beechcraft airplane at Tulsa Municipal Airport and he was carrying  passengers. Ruth and I and the children came out one time. We were just  standing watching what he was doing and he saw me standing there. He  said,    Miller, take off and take a flight, check my motor here,    he made  some offer. He said,    Come on, I won   t charge anything. Just want to  see if the plane is flying right.    So I did take Ruth and the children up  for a flight in an old Beechcraft over the city of Tulsa and back.  But once in a while Ruth, when Ruth was pregnant she   d go out and find  some place out in the open to where she could walk. She liked to walk.  A couple mornings I   d come out and I   d look for her. I   d fly around all  the residential areas trying to find her. This was around the airport and  wasn   t any homes, a lot of empty highways, roads, streets. But someone  called in and complained about an airplane flying too low over their  home, so I didn   t try to find Ruth on her daily walks after that. (Laughs)  But she did walk a lot around the airport, residential areas I guess you   d  22  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  say.  The airport   s really changed a lot since you were doing those things.  Oh, good Lord yes. It   s all gone. I   ve been out there several times. Every  time I go there   s more gone. All the old hangers are gone. The school  buildings have all been destroyed and cleared off. My home I bought  about three blocks away from the airport, it was gone. It was torn down  years ago. A lot of good memories when I go out there but there   s  nothing to remind me very much of what it really looked like.  Let   s switch gears and have you tell us about this gold thing.  Well, Ruth and I, when we were working at Lockheed, we found a bar  almost on a mountaintop east of Palo Alto, about 1,800 feet up. They  had about six or seven miles of winding road that followed Stevens  Creek. The creek is only five or six feet wide; there was quite a lot of  water.  So when we go up, we go up to this bar and have a few drinks on  weekends and enjoy the scenery. You can   t imagine the variety of  scenery on Stevens Creek; you   d have to go there. But at different levels  you   d see strange vegetation like you see down in the tropics. There   s  hanging moss in places as you go up, as you go up to the top of the  mountain. You   re passing through some of the prettiest variety of  scenery that I can remember. So one day Ruth and I were coming back  and I was looking over there at the water and I saw some bedsprings. I  said,    Who in the hell would throw bedsprings       You   re halfway, or  two-thirds of the way up this mountaintop, in that beautiful stream of  water. So I told Ruth I   m going to get that thing out of there. So I  stopped my car and I went down and got those bedsprings and I picked  them up, I threw them, I was mad. I threw it as far as I could.  A little black head popped up. I thought it was a snake. It didn   t come  clear up out of the water right at first. But then as the current began to  move it, after the weight of the springs was off on it, it began to float  down the stream.    What in the hell is that?    I thought it was a snake  when I saw it. So, I picked it up and I fished it out of the water and took  it home. It had been burned. It had some burned areas. I cleaned it up the  best I could and painted it. I   ve had a lot of good luck since then. I   ve  always wanted to think I was just being repaid for rescuing it, my   inaudible  we called it, out of the water. Couldn   t think of any other  name as a name for it. (Laughter)  And you had no idea what it was?  23  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Well, someone I was talking to later, told me that it was part of a  manzanita root, a manzanita tree root. I   ve never seen a manzanita tree. I  don   t know what it looks like, but down below the surface of the ground  this is what   s going on.  But you painted it.  It has such an unusual contour, you know. The surfaces are different all  the way around. So it, I   ve gotten a lot of pleasure out of getting it out of  the creek.  And you   ve had it for quite a while.  Yes.  This is the secret to longevity.  Yes, since 1964. Bingo. (Laughter) I   ve often thought that Alex, often  thought it.  Well, when history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  About me? I don   t think I can summarize it because so much of it was  good and so much of it was bad. I would   ve liked to have been an officer  in the Navy, and I could have. I was told by my division officer that if I  behaved myself I   d be sent to school in Washington, DC where they  trained radio gunners. They used gunners as a slang term, warrant  officer, radio warrant officers. Then you can go on up into the higher  ranks once you get the golden braid, you know. The warrant officers had  a uniform just like the Indianapolis men and were given opportunities  for advancement that they wouldn   t have had if they   d just hadn   t taken  this special schooling. I imagine, I don   t know for sure, I think it was  kind of like a finishing college, to prepare these men for what an  officer   s like. They want to make them as close to officers and  gentlemen, I suppose, as they can. Besides they were taught all the latest  electronic devices that were being brought in about that time.  But at that time, I was assigned Admiral Courtman   s personal staff.  Every admiral has a certain number of people that   s in his staff; I guess  the word staff would apply. When he moves from one ship to the next,  one ship needs repairs or whatever reason, you follow. You have to  follow the admiral you are assigned, and it   s in my Navy record I got  commendations from the sergeant. I got some recommendations in there  as well, connections with the rescue of the Macon  USS Macon Airship ,  the Navy   s  dirigible  that was destroyed. It had a structural failure in the  fin. Our ship got a directional bearing on it as it was falling. We got  24  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  there ahead of all the other ships in the fleet; we were the first ones  there. We rescued fifty-seven men out of the eighty-some crew   eighty-some  men that night and the Macon crew.  But a lot of people never saw one of those big old dirigibles, 800 and  something feet long. They carried five airplanes in the belly, quite a  piece of machinery. Of course, then it crashed off of Big Sur, California  and someone salvaged one of those old airplanes a couple years ago. I  read about that, I don   t know whether they will rebuild it or not, or if it   s  re-buildable. So I did have some recommendations, some  commendations, in my record. The Navy put up with a lot of time in the  hospital. I spent more time in the hospital than I was aboard ship there  for a while. That car wreck, of course then I had the motorcycle  problem, and I fell overboard one time   it gets worse and worse I tell  you. (Laughter)  Can you swim?  Beg pardon?  Can you swim?  Oh sure, not in the middle of night. You don   t want me to tell that story  do you? It   s nothing     It   d be very scary.  What?  Very scary.  Well it should   ve been but I had been drinking and I know I wasn   t  afraid of anything. We were at anchor so I was floating from the place  where I fell overboard back to where the motor launches were moored. I  was going to pull myself up on one of the hawsers that the launches  were moored to. Well, there   s that one guy back on the stern of the ship,  one o    clock in the morning, smoking a cigarette. Usually the ship   s  deserted except for when shifts change. This one guy didn   t want to go  down below to his bunk so he standing up there, here I came floating by.  Had about a four or five knot tide there in the harbor so I wasn   t  hollering or anything, but he saw me, and he hollered and I didn   t  answer. So he went over and triggered the general alarm, one o    clock in  the morning. When the general alarm comes on the captain gets up, the  commanders get up; the entire ship   s company had to get up at one o     clock in the morning. They had a fire and rescue boat that they put in the  water and picked me up, took me up to the gangway and took me down  25  Finchum  Bishop  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Bishop  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Bishop  to the sick bay. (Laughs) I didn   t want to tell you that story. I was  ashamed of that, but I was vomiting.  We had aviation fumes in this gun room in the gun compartment where  my sleeping quarters were. We complained about it, but I wasn   t the  only one thought I was getting sick and throwing up. There   s one place  between the torpedo tubes and the gun housing   gun compartment, that  has a chain that   s tied on to the end of the torpedoes. They didn   t have a  drill that day and the torpedo man had forgot to hook the chain back up.  So I got in the middle of the night, dark as all get out on topside. I was  trying to keep from vomiting on that deck. So I was going to run to the  side of the ship and let it go over the side, and there just wasn   t any  lifeline there so I ended up in the water. But it all started out from the  fumes, going back to the ship   cold beer and whatnot.  A couple nights before that, there   s a radio operator in the bunk above  me and he had gotten sick. He had just leaned over his bunk and let it go  in my shoes. I got up to go on watch, so I thought I was doing everybody  a favor by trying to get sick over the side and I ended up over the side  myself. Isn   t that awful that I have to tell that story. (Laughter)  I   m sure you weren   t the only one.  Yeah.  Well, I don   t know of anybody that ever fell overboard in my six years  in the Navy.  I   m sure someone had to have     Oh, I tell you that the Navy frowns on that kind of activity, and they  decided that I wasn   t suitable material for any further advancements.  (Laughs) That   s awful. I should have kept that one to myself.  No.  If you have any final advice for persons getting ready to turn 100 what  would it be?  I   m sorry Alex     If you had any advice to somebody     Advice?  What kind of advice would you give someone who   s getting ready to turn  26  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  100?  Oh no. I wish I was capable Alex. I don   t feel capable, I was telling  someone else, because people   s lives are so different, their physical  conditions are so different, mental attitudes are so different. I   m not  qualified to get close enough to someone to feel that they benefit by  anything that I learned.  What are a few of the challenges you have today?  What are the challenges?  Of being 100.  Well, I still have arthritis problems and vertigo. I have a, well, should we  discuss my other physical     You don   t have to.  Arthritis is mainly   I have trouble walking and keeping my balance.  Do you still drive?  (Laughter) Yes, but not for any distance. Like Walgreen   s, I go down to  get my medicine, I only have to go a block. I do on occasion, maybe  once every couple of weeks I go to the grocery store. I wait till ten  o   clock in the morning when traffic is light as it   s going to get and I do  get my own groceries. But I   m making arrangements with my son   s ex-wife  who took me to the doctor today, so I won   t be endangering  anybody. So the answer   s yes, but I know I shouldn   t and I   m in process  of making other arrangements, finding other ways to handle it.  Well do you have a philosophy that you live by, or have lived by?  No, I don   t think I   d have enough education to really   well, I don   t  believe that I   m qualified. Oh, I have enough good experiences to pass  them on to someone who could benefit by them.  Is there anything left on your bucket list that you want to do?  Gosh, that   s a   I   d like to go back to California for a short visit. I   d like  to go to San Diego, and then go up to Santa Monica where I was for a  month. Then I   d like to go to San Francisco and then to Sonoma. I   d like  to see those three   well I won   t. I   m realistic. I can always look forward  and think how enjoyable it would be. But then you begin to lose sight of  the things, oh physically what it would cause   what it could cause. I  27  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Bishop  Miller  Finchum  Miller  Finchum  Miller  wouldn   t want to get out 3,000 miles away from home when there   s  some kind of problem with my heart. I   ve had two heart attacks. I have  three stent sleeves in my heart, and I occasionally have to take a  nitroglycerin pill.  I don   t know whether I   m answering your question or not. Yes, I   d love  to take a trip back to California, for about a week or no more than a  week or ten days. But I don   t want to cause any problems for my family.  If I got out there, even if I was escorted and got in trouble, they   d all  want to come and help me get home. (Laughter) Or put me away, one or  the other, depending on how bad the situation was. (Laughter)  Is there anything else you   d like to add before we close out?  Yes, I   d like to thank you folks for being interested in what I   ve done  and I hope I haven   t exaggerated anything. I don   t know how many  other people get this attention, but I know they would all appreciate it,  like I have and it will be a pleasant memory for a long time I hope.  It   s been a pleasure meeting you and hearing your story.  Well you know I   ve enjoyed blabbering   (Laughter)  If you go up in the plane again I want to go, too.  What hun?  When you go up in the plane again I want to go, too.  Hey  Okay, why not. It   d take three people.  I   ll watch. (Laughter) I   m a ground animal.  There   s no experience like it.  I can imagine.  Yeah.  All right well thank you very much.  Well, I thank you folks, for being kind and patient and understanding for  an old f   100 year old man.  -------  ------- 
