 Finchum Today is October 13, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum.  Veasley My name is Fred Veasley.  Finchum Fred Veasley. Thank you for having us today.  Veasley Yeah, well, okay, that   s alright.  Finchum Along with me is Alex Bishop.  Veasley Yeah, I know, so     Finchum And we   re with Oklahoma State University.  Veasley Yeah, yes.  Finchum So my first question is for you to tell me when and where you were  born.  Veasley I was born in Arcadia.  Finchum Arcadia.  Veasley Arcadia, Oklahoma.  Finchum And when?  Veasley I don   t know. (Laughs)  Finchum A long time ago, huh?  5  Veasley Yeah, a long time ago. I   ll tell you that. That   s as far as I know.  Finchum 1912?  Veasley I think so, something along in there. Something like that.  Finchum And June 11? Does that sound right?  Veasley June the 11th, yes.  Finchum And what did your parents do for a living?  Veasley Oh, we worked. We worked all our lives. We worked.  Finchum What did your father do?  Veasley He would hunt all the time and he   d make us work. He made us work  all the time. (Laughs) That   s what he done, hunt rabbits or something,  you know.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Veasley Yeah, had brothers and sisters. They all dead.  Finchum How many?  Veasley Oh, I guess about three, three sisters, four boys. We had one boy out in  California. He died. And so I   m the only one now. I   m the only one  living now.  Finchum Were you the baby?  Veasley Yeah.  Finchum The last one?  Veasley Yeah, the baby   s the last one that   s gone. I   m the last one now.  Finchum And where did you go to elementary school? First grade, where did you  go to first grade?  Veasley I went to Liberty School, Liberty School.  Finchum Liberty.  Veasley Yes.  6  Finchum In Arcadia?  Veasley Yes, but I didn   t get a chance to go many times because I had to work,  you know   Finchum You had to work.  Veasley Had to make a living you know  Couldn   t go very many years. The only  time I went was when it was raining, you know, and then I was glad to  go to school then. The other times I had to work, see. So I didn   t get a  chance to go to school very much. You know, you know how that is,  you know.  Finchum What kind of work did you do?  Veasley Farm. Farm, plow, most stuff like that you know, yeah.  Finchum Was it cotton or corn?  Veasley Oh Lord  Don   t talk about that. Whoa  Don   t talk about that, I   ll tell  you  (Laughter) Pick that cotton. Oh, something else I tell you. Oh man,  whoa, I was just little too.  Finchum Hard work?  Veasley Oh Lord, sure was hard. I   m telling you, oh well. Picking cotton,  chopping cotton, oh Lord. That is something normally   you obviously  didn   t do that.  Finchum No.  Veasley A lot of the youngsters didn   t do that, see. I know. A lot of them don   t  know what cotton is  A lot of them don   t know what cotton is  (Laughs)  Finchum They just know that   s their blue jeans.  Veasley Yeah, yeah. Bale hay   oh Lord, I   ll tell you, I   ve done all of that. All  the farming and everything, I done all that myself.  Finchum Where would you take the cotton to the gin?  Veasley In Edmond.  Finchum Edmond?  7  Veasley Yes.  Finchum How would you get it there?  Veasley Well, we had teams, we had teams.  Finchum Put it on a wagon?  Veasley On a wagon, yes.  Finchum How long would it take you to get there?  Veasley How long?  Finchum Yes.  Veasley Oh, it took us about   I   d guess about two hours to get to town.  Finchum By wagon?  Veasley Yeah, with wagon. A wagon, yeah. Those two wagons a going. My dad  would drive one and I   d drive one. Carry a load of cotton  Carry some  cotton. I was coming on back that night, that evening. I was coming on  back home though. A fellow   I thought he was going to go around. He  didn   t go around and he run right into me, the back of the wagon, you  know. I had seed on that. I had cotton seed on that. Lord have mercy.  Then I had to stop and get the cotton seed, shovel that up. Oh man. I  have had it. I have had it  (Laughter) People don   t know what the point  of   people don   t know what work is  I tell you the truth  Really  They  don   t know what work is. Oh, how did they do that? You get out and  you   ve got to do this, and you   ve got to do that on the farm. Yeah, but  they just don   t know what it is   a lot of them. They don   t know what it  is. Some of them, they   re walking around here and they don   t even  know. Don   t even know what   s going on.  Finchum Did you have to milk cows?  Veasley Oh, you better hush your mouth  (Laughter) I had a bunch of cows to  milk, yeah. Four o   clock, we had to harness the horses up and get them  ready, get them ready to go before we go to feed them to work.  Finchum Was it easy to learn how to milk?  Veasley Easy?  Finchum Is it easy?  8  Veasley Oh yeah, it was easy to learn how to milk. Oh yeah, it was easy, it was  all right.  Finchum Were your parents from Oklahoma?  Veasley Yeah, yeah, Oklahoma. Yeah, my mother was. My daddy, he   s from  some other state. I don   t remember. I can   t think of what the other state  is, but he wasn   t raised here. My mother was though. I remember     Veasley, she was raised here.  Finchum Did you go to church a whole lot when you were growing up?  Veasley Oh, that   s where I went, church   Finchum Church?  Veasley I go to church now, every Sunday now.  Finchum Did you sing in the choir?  Veasley Oh Lord, yes. Sure did.  Finchum You have a favorite song?  Veasley Yeah, they was something. Yeah, we had a nice time, I tell you. Oh  boy.  Finchum What did you do to make a living when you were older?  Veasley What?  Finchum What did you do for a living when you got older?  Veasley Well, I had to work. I was out on my own, then.  Finchum What did you do?  Veasley What?  Finchum What did you do?  Veasley Oh, I cut wood.  Finchum Cut wood.  9  Veasley Yes, oh yeah.  Finchum Did you work here in Guthrie?  Veasley No, no. I was in Arcadia. That was in Arcadia. And so I went down to  the plant. I went down to the plant down there and got along down there  every morning. Then I stayed there, that   s where I put in thirty years at.  Down there.  Finchum What kind of plant?  Veasley What?  Finchum What kind of plant?  Veasley It was a   oh shoot, I forget the name of it. What kind of plant was it,  girl?  Finchum She went outside. Was it furniture?  Veasley Yeah, furniture factory. Yeah, yeah, furniture factory   Finchum Did you make something?  Veasley Oh yeah.  Finchum What was your thing?  Veasley I was making beds.  Finchum Making beds.  Veasley Making beds, yeah.  Finchum For thirty     Veasley I was doing what they had me to do. Yeah, thirty years. For thirty years.  So I said well,    I   m going to stay with this job,    and they wanted me to  go to Mississippi with them. I told them,    No, I ain   t going. I don   t  want to go down there. I don   t want to.    (Laughs) They said,    Well, I  sure I miss you,    because they knew I was a good worker, you know, a  good worker, you know.  Finchum Good worker.  Veasley Yeah. So I said,    Well,    I said,    I can   t go way down there, no.     10  Finchum Did you serve in the military?  Veasley What?  Finchum Did you serve in the military? Did you serve in the Army?  Veasley No, no, no, no, no, no, no.  Finchum No?  Veasley No, I ain   t never went to the Army.  Finchum Didn   t go in the Army?  Veasley Never did go to the Army, no, no, no. I didn   t get a chance to make it  there. I went a lot of different places though, but I didn   t make it there.  No, I didn   t make it there.  Finchum Did you get married?  Veasley Yeah, I got married and Norleen   she didn   t   she didn   t want to stay  up here. She didn   t want to stay up here. She went to back down where  her mother was, in Green Pasture, back down there. So we got a part on  there and got my license, and so we had to get a part. She didn   t want to  stay up here, and I couldn   t go down there all the time, every, every,  every weekend. I had to stay home and work  I couldn   t do it. So she  wanted to stay where her mother is. So I said,    Well, that   s alright.    So  I didn   t worry about that then. Tell her, I said,    Well, somebody else  will come along again one of these days.    That   s what I said. I kept  working. So I wasn   t worried about nothing.  Finchum Well, did somebody else come along?  Veasley Yeah, oh yeah. That girl   s mother come along. That   s right   Finchum Did you work for the WPA  Works Progress Administration ?  Veasley Oh Lord, yeah   Finchum Tell me about that.  Veasley What?  Finchum Tell me about that.  11  Veasley Well, I worked on that when I used to haul dirt. Used to haul dirt. I  didn   t do anything but drive, drive the horses. Then I got through with  that and I had to get on and cut wood and all of that stuff. Oh Lord  yeah. I done all that work. Yeah, I done all of that.  Finchum Well if you were hauling dirt, were they making roads or what?  Veasley Yeah, making roads.  Finchum Roads.  Veasley I just went on.  Finchum That was during the Depression?  Veasley Yeah, oh Lord, yes. Yeah, I was glad to get it, too. I was glad to get that  money. All I   d do then is drive, that   s all I had to do. They   d put the dirt  in the wagon. I didn   t have to do nothing but drive. That   s all I did.  Finchum The team?  Veasley And then I got back out there where I had to carry it at, they   d unload it  like that. I didn   t do nothing but drive, that   s all I did.  Finchum Horses, mules?  Veasley What?  Finchum Horses or mules?  Veasley Horses.  Finchum Horses.  Veasley Horses, yeah. Well, I had some mules too, but I didn   t work them. I had  the horses.  Finchum Well when you were working in the furniture factory, did you live here  in Guthrie?  Veasley What?  Finchum When you were working at the plant, did you live here?  Veasley Well, no. I was working down in Oklahoma City. I lived down at Green  Pasture, down there. I was living down there, you know.  12  Finchum Okay.  Veasley And then I got transferred. We stayed there about, oh, quite a while  down there, down there, and then we moved up here, see?  Finchum Okay.  Veasley And so we just went, you know, that   s why. That   s where I retired up  here.  Finchum What year?  Veasley What?  Finchum What year did you retire?  Veasley June, June 11, that   s when I retired.  Finchum Retired.  Veasley Yes.  Finchum And then what did you do?  Veasley What?  Finchum And then what did you do?  Veasley Sit down, sit down, then  (Laughs) Sit down, right then  I sat down  then. That   s what I done  I sit down then. That   s what I done. Now I   m  still sitting down. Still sitting down  I   m doing nothing now.  Finchum Well how early do you get up?  Veasley What?  Finchum How early do you get up in the morning?  Veasley Oh, I get up about seven o   clock. Every morning I get up at seven  o   clock and don   t do nothing. (Laughs) I like to get up early.  Finchum Yes.  Veasley Of course, I was trained. I was trained to get up early. So I get up and  turn the television on for my little granddaughter that goes to work. So I  13  get back into bed, and I get up when I get ready. (Laughs) I get up when  I get ready then, you know. I get ready to get up, but I   ll be sure to get  her off. People that are working, they   re always trying to help.  Finchum They are.  Veasley And she said,    Grandpa,    she says,    What are you getting up so early  for?    I said,    Oh, I   m tired of laying down.    You know you get tired of  laying down sometimes.  Finchum Yeah.  Veasley Yeah.  Finchum And then what time do you go to bed at night?  Veasley I go to bed at ten, eleven sometimes.  Finchum Not bad.  Veasley Yeah, something like that, something like that. I get tired of sitting up,  I   ll go to bed. (Laughs) Yeah, I go to bed.  Finchum And so church was very important to you?  Veasley Oh yes.  Finchum Church.  Veasley Yes, yes, yeah a whole lot. Yes, church is important.  Finchum What denomination?  Veasley What?  Finchum What church do you go to?  Veasley What church?  Finchum Yes.  Veasley Church of Christ.  Finchum Church of Christ.  Veasley Church of Christ.  14  Bishop: And how do you get there today?  Veasley Walk, walk, walk. They want to come after me, but I walk. Exercise,  you know. Of course you know some mornings sometimes I don   t feel  like going, you know, and I wouldn   t want them to come around and  pick me up, you see? When I take a notion of going, I get out and go  walk myself.  Bishop How far a walk is that?  Veasley That ain   t far. The church ain   t far, you know. Down on Grant, it ain   t  far. So I just take my time and walk down there. I go when I get ready,  see?  Bishop How far is that from here?  Y. Veasley I think it   s about seven blocks. That ain   t nowhere.  Veasley There ain   t nowhere to walk.  Finchum Well, do you remember getting your first car?  Veasley What?  Finchum Do you remember your first car?  Veasley Car?  Finchum Car, vehicle?  Veasley Oh yeah. Yeah, I got in his one morning. I got in his one morning and  started it. Started it, but didn   t go nowhere.  Finchum Do you remember your first one?  Veasley Yeah, yeah.  Finchum What was it?  Veasley A Model.  Finchum A Model.  Veasley I bought an A Model once. I bought an A-Model then.  15  Finchum New or used?  Veasley What?  Finchum New or used?  Veasley Oh, it was used. I never buy new. I wouldn   t buy a new car. (Laughter)  I don   t buy a new car, no.  Finchum And how were the roads?  Veasley What?  Finchum How were the roads, then?  Veasley Oh, the roads was pretty rough, I tell you. Yeah, we had some bad roads  out there, out in the country. It was bad roads.  Finchum Would you go to Oklahoma City any?  Veasley Yeah, we went to Oklahoma City. Go to the city, go to the city with  somebody else. Yeah, go with them. Something like that, you know.  Yeah, we went. Yes.  Bishop Well all that     Veasley Well, I had a nice time in my life.  Bishop All that work, what did you do for fun?  Veasley What   d I do?  Finchum For fun?  Veasley Yeah, I had fun.  Finchum What did you do for fun?  Veasley Oh, I went to church and around, went to the ballgame, you know.  Finchum Did you go to dances?  Veasley Yeah, oh yeah. Go to dances. Sometime, I didn   t go all the time,  though. No, I didn   t go all the time.  Finchum Did you ever go to Boley?  16  Veasley Boley?  Finchum Yes.  Veasley Oh yeah, I went sometimes.  Finchum Sometimes.  Veasley Yes. When I feel like going. (Laughs)  Finchum When you weren   t working, huh?  Veasley Yeah, I was working, oh yeah. Sure was.  Bishop Well what do you remember about the Great Depression?  Veasley What?  Bishop Can you tell us a little bit about the Great Depression?  Veasley Yeah.  Finchum What do you remember about the Great Depression?  Veasley Oh yeah, Great Depression. I tell you, it was something else. Oh boy.  You just had to get out and hit it, hit the ball. Work, that   s what you had  to do. (Laughter) That   s what I had to do   work.  Finchum Work.  Veasley Yeah.  Y. Veasley Ask him about the furniture factory.  Finchum What all did you do at the furniture factory?  Veasley Handled mattresses.  Finchum Handled mattresses?  Veasley Yeah, handled them. Wrapped them up.  Y. Veasley He come here with the furniture factory. Tell them how you come here  with the furniture factory. Daddy, tell them how you come with the  furniture factory.  17  Veasley What?  Y. Veasley Tell them how you come here with the furniture factory. You came here  with the furniture factory.  Veasley Oh yeah, I came here with it. I came here with it. Yeah I came here with  the furniture factory. I came here with it.  Finchum From where?  Veasley Oklahoma City. Yeah, sure did. Been here ever since.  Bishop Where was the furniture factory?  Veasley What?  Bishop Where was the furniture factory?  Veasley Where was it?  Finchum Yeah.  Veasley In Oklahoma City.  Bishop Do you remember where? What street?  Veasley In Oklahoma City? No. No, I don   t know. I forget the street   s name. I  forget it. Pass by it all the time sometimes. I pass by it all the time when  I go to the city, sometimes I do. But I forget it now. You know, a person  forgets. It   s been so long you know. You forget sometimes.  Finchum You do.  Veasley Yeah, you forget sometimes. It   s a long time.  Finchum Is it still open here?  Veasley What?  Finchum Is it still in business? The furniture place, is it still in business?  Veasley Oh, I don   t know.  Y. Veasley No.  18  Finchum No?  Y. Veasley It   s been shut down a long time.  Veasley I don   t know whether it is or not.  Y. Veasley No.  Veasley But they wanted me to go with them and I told them no, I didn   t want to  go. I ain   t going no further.  Finchum Oklahoma   s home, huh?  Veasley Yeah. Memphis   Memphis is where they wanted to take me.  Finchum Memphis?  Veasley Yeah. I told them no, I couldn   t go down there. I couldn   t go down  there. No.  Bishop What is your secret to living so long?  Veasley What?  Bishop What is your secret to a long life? Why have you lived so long?  Veasley Well, I just lived so long, that   s all. Living the way, living a good way  of life. That   s living a good life, that   s all.  Bishop Well what   s your secret?  Veasley What   s my secret?  Bishop Yeah.  Veasley Well, I didn   t have a secret. Just live a long time. You live a long time,  you know. That   s all.  Finchum What   s your favorite food?  Veasley Cornbread and beans.  Finchum That may be why. That   s your secret then.  Veasley Yeah, yeah, that   s what it is. That   s my secret there, cornbread and  beans.  19  Y. Veasley And neck bones.  Veasley And grits and neck bones. Yeah, that   s right.  Finchum Would your mother have a big garden?  Veasley Oh yeah. We had a big garden. Oh yeah, sure did. I got out there and  helped her work it, too.  Finchum Did you?  Veasley Oh yeah.  Finchum Did she can?  Veasley My mother didn   t have to do nothing much but cook. That   s all she had  to do. Yeah, we done all the rest of the work, you know. I did.  Finchum Who did the laundry?  Veasley She did.  Finchum She did.  Veasley She done the laundry.  Finchum Yeah.  Veasley Oh yeah. Sometimes we took them to town and had them laundered.  Sometimes we did, and sometimes we didn   t. Sometimes we did,  hooked up the wagon and take it. We didn   t get a chance to go. We  went sometimes. Me and her would go sometimes to town. Sometimes  when I didn   t work none nowhere I had to take her, had to take her to  town.  Finchum Would you get in much trouble?  Veasley Yeah, sure did. Yeah.  Finchum How was the house heated during the winter?  Veasley Oh, stove.  Finchum Stove?  20  Veasley Big stove.  Finchum Wood?  Veasley Yeah, oh Lord yeah. We didn   t know anything about the gas business   No, didn   t know nothing about it, no. That   s new, that   s new to me.  Yeah, it   s been new to me.  Finchum And did you have to share a bed with your brothers?  Veasley Oh, we   d sleep together. Me and my brother would sleep together.  Finchum Keep warmer that way.  Veasley Yeah, oh yeah we kept warm. And sometimes I   d kick him out.  (Laughter) Kick him out of bed, yeah.  Bishop What about electricity?  Veasley We didn   t have that. We didn   t have nothing like that, no.  Bishop Do you remember when you got electricity?  Veasley Do what?  Finchum When you got electricity, do you remember when it came to the farm?  Veasley Come to the farm?  Finchum The electricity.  Veasley No, I don   t remember.  Finchum Don   t remember?  Veasley No, I don   t remember that.  Finchum Did your mother make your clothes? Did she sew?  Veasley Yeah, she sewed most of the time.  Finchum Did she?  Veasley Yeah. Yeah, she sewed most of the time.  Finchum Make quilts?  21  Veasley Oh Lord yes  I sat up with her. I sat up with her until about twelve  o   clock. She   d be quilting. I sat up with her, and then I   d get me a glass  of milk and then I   m ready to go to bed then. Cornbread, I   m ready to  go to bed then. Yeah, going to bed then.  Bishop Did you ever play any sports?  Veasley Play? Yeah. Marbles, shoot marbles, you know. I liked to do that, shoot  the marbles. Win all the marbles from the boys. (Laughs) I   d give them  back to them. I didn   t want the marbles. I   d just win just to be doing  something on Saturdays, you know. That   s the only time I had any  chance to bother with the boys was on Saturdays, you know. That   s the  only time I had to bother, because every other time I had to work. I had  to hit them. Yeah, I had to go. Ain   t like it is now. Ain   t like it is now.  You have to sit around now. (Laughter)  Bishop What do you do during the day typically?  Veasley I just sit down and look at the TV. Look at the TV, that   s all. Yeah,  that   s all. Yeah, that   s the way I do.  Bishop Do you visit people? Do you go around and visit people?  Veasley Oh yeah, yeah. I   ll go out and visit, yeah. I   ve got a quite a few of them  I can go around and visit if I take a notion to go. I go over there most of  the time, over there to Mother   s. I call her Mother all the time, lady over  there. Most of the time I   m at home by myself.  Finchum Well, do you sing very much?  Veasley Oh yeah, yeah.  Finchum Do you have a favorite song?  Veasley Yeah.  Finchum Do you want to sing it for us?  Veasley No. (Laughter) No.  Finchum All right. I figured you had a favorite church song.  Veasley What?  Finchum Do you have a favorite church song you sing in church?  22  Veasley Oh yeah, in church I do, in the church. So that   s it.  Finchum What do you think   s the biggest change that you   ve seen?  Veasley Yeah, electric lights were the biggest change I ever seen.  Finchum Electric lights.  Veasley Yes. We didn   t have all of that, we didn   t have all of that around there.  We didn   t have all of that.  Finchum How did you do bath time?  Veasley Bath time?  Finchum Yeah.  Veasley Well, you get a tub. We had a tub, better get in that tub and take a bath.  Finchum A number two?  Veasley Yes, a number two.  Finchum A number two.  Veasley Yeah, take a bath. That   s what we did.  Finchum How would you warm the water?  Veasley On the stove.  Finchum On the stove?  Veasley Yes.  Finchum Would you have to wait for your turn?  Veasley Yes, have to wait. Oh yeah, you had to wait, got to wait. Yeah, had to  wait until it got warm. Yeah, that   s what I had to do. Everything you  had to do you had to do on the farm. Everything you had to do,  everything. Everything you had to do, it was on the farm. There wasn   t  no electrical lights, no gas, nothing.  Finchum No indoor plumbing?  23  Veasley No.  Finchum Nope.  Veasley No, didn   t have that.  Finchum How big of a farm was it?  Veasley Oh, we had a good big, big place.  Finchum Big place.  Veasley Yeah, we had a big farm, big farm. Yeah, we had a big farm.  Finchum And you used horses and plows?  Veasley Yeah.  Y. Veasley Tell them about that donkey.  Veasley Yeah, I could plow all right. Had to walk.  Y. Veasley Did y   all have some donkeys?  Veasley No.  Y. Veasley You didn   t have no donkeys?  Veasley No, no.  Y. Veasley Okay.  Veasley No.  Finchum Raise chickens?  Veasley Yeah Lord, we had a bunch of chickens. (Laughs) Yeah, we had a  bunch of chickens, turkeys, geeses, all that kind of stuff. We had all that  stuff to feed, had all that stuff to feed. Get out there and raise sweet  potatoes.  Finchum Did you have to kill the chickens or did your mother?  Veasley Well, I killed chickens.  Finchum Did you?  24  Veasley You know, have to break the neck off, wring the neck off. Chicken sure  was good, too. You get it in there and I   d pick them, pick them too.  Yeah.  Finchum Tasted better in those days, didn   t it?  Veasley Oh Lord, yes. It was better, sure was. That   s some good old days then, I  tell you. Go out there to the pear tree and get a pear or an apple, but  now you can   t do it.  Finchum Can   t do it.  Veasley Everything done changed. No pears, nothing. Now, no peaches. Go out  there to get a big peach, nothing. Nothing. That ain   t like it is now. I tell  you. This is the funniest country I   ve ever seen. It is, yeah. I ain   t going  to lie now. My neighbor there, they had a big load of apples and one of  pears, one thing or another, and we did too. We did too. So we   d share  all this. We   d get ready to kill hogs, we   d go ahead and kill hogs. All of  us get together and kill hogs. I go help them and then they come back  and help us. It ain   t like it is, you go there, you have to work for  somebody and they hold their hand out there looking for pay. We didn   t  do that. We didn   t do that, no. You go over there and the fellow says,     Well, I want some hay baled.    Well, get to baling. Go to work, yeah,  go to work. That   s what we did, yeah. Sure did.  Finchum Neighbors helped each other.  Veasley Oh Lord  Helped, sure did. Look, they were white, they was white, they  were white too. They sure did, yeah. All of us chipped in, helping one  another. But now, you can   t get nobody to do nothing for you now.  Nothing. Can   t get nobody to do nothing for you now. No. You tell  them,    I want to do you something.       No.    They just tell you, yeah.  You ain   t getting nothing. No, you ain   t getting nothing now unless you  pay for it now, I tell you. It ain   t like it is now, I tell you. It   s different.  Everything   s different now.  Finchum Well how was Christmas when you were little?  Veasley Oh Christmas, I got lots of toys for Christmas. Oh Lord, yes. I had a red  wagon, you know. I washed that wagon every day. I use to haul wood in  it and I   d wash it, take it to wash it. My dad had bought me a wagon, oh  yeah. I didn   t let nobody borrow that wagon. Nobody borrowed that  wagon. My daddy   I had everything I wanted at Christmas. I had  everything I wanted for Christmas. Daddy and Mother got it. Yeah, they  got it. Sure did. Everything I wanted they got it. They told me, they  25  said,    Well son, you better go to bed because Santa Claus will be along  about eight o   clock.    We was in bed at eight o   clock. Eight o   clock  we   re in bed.  Finchum But were you asleep?  Veasley What?  Finchum Were you asleep?  Veasley Yeah, we were asleep. We were asleep alright, sure was. We didn   t get  up until   we got up about, oh let   s see, we didn   t get up until  about   we got up about nine. We got up about nine, you know. About  nine. That   s on Christmas Eve, you know. We didn   t get up until about  nine. Got up, apples, had apples, oranges, and candy, and more stuff.  And so I said,    Well,    I said,    Well, old Santa Claus has been here.     Yeah, all right. Well I did know one thing. I got to tell the boys, I said,     Boys, they always trying to trick us, you know.    My daddy thought,  and my mother thought I was asleep one night. I got up and I got to look  through the door. I could see them putting things in there. I said,    You  call this a Santa Claus?    I said,    There ain   t no Santa Claus.     (Laughter)  I said,    There ain   t no Santa Claus.    There was no Santa Claus, but this  is what I tell them,    There was a Santa Claus. I didn   t see nothing.    I  acted smart, I didn   t see nothing. Better not say nothing, my daddy  would bop me upside my head. (Laughter) Yeah, my daddy would if  he   d seen me. I had fun all my life though. I had good fun all my life.  Finchum Sounds like it.  Veasley Yeah.  Bishop Well when did you have your daughter? Are you the only daughter?  Y. Veasley Yes, I   m the only one.  Bishop Your daughter, when did you have her?  Veasley Oh, let   s see.  Bishop I   ll rephrase it. What was it like for you to be a father?  Veasley Who me?  Bishop Yeah.  26  Veasley I didn   t know any different. I didn   t know until the girl told me, until  the woman told me, you know. I didn   t know it. I didn   t know it. I said,     Oh,    I said,    Well I   m glad.    I was glad then.  Bishop Do you have any memories of when you were     Veasley Yeah, I remember now. Now I know now.  Bishop What types of memories do you have when she was younger?  Veasley Oh yeah. She wanted to go everywhere. When she got big enough, she  wanted to go wherever I was going to go. She wanted to go. I told her, I  said,    You can   t go, you can   t go.    So she wanted to go. I said,    Well,  I   ve got to go downtown.    She   d run over there, back there, and get that  coat, ready to go, ready to go. I said,    Now,    I said,    Oh well,    I said,     Well, I guess I   ll take you on down there,    and every time   oh Lord,  she   s dying to go. Dying to go to down there, so I took her. I took her. I  sure did. She didn   t go to sleep, any of them, didn   t go to sleep. Until  we   re coming on back home, she went to sleep and I had to pack her. I  said,    Oh no,    I said,    Look a here, look a here.    (Laughter)  Y. Veasley Tell them about the lawn mower. I went with you to cut grass and stuff.  Veasley Oh yeah. Well, she wanted to go. I had to cut the lawns, you know, and  she didn   t want to stay home. Didn   t want to stay home. So I said,     Well, I   ll just get her old clothes and take her with me. I   ll cut a place  where she can sit down,    you know, until I cut the yard. So she   s sitting  on that thing, right on there, until I got done cutting the yard. I got done  cutting the yard and come on back home then. Come on back home  then. Oh, I had a time. I had a time. (Laughs) Oh boy, I had a time.  She didn   t give me no trouble to amount to nothing. She didn   t give me  no trouble. She just wanted to go somewhere. She just wanted to go  every time I went, you know. One night I was going to the carnival. I  said,    Well, I ain   t going to the carnival tonight. I   m not going.    I  waited until she was asleep then I slipped off and went to the carnival,  and she didn   t know that. (Laughs) I said,    I ain   t going to tell her I  went. I ain   t going to tell her nothing. I ain   t going to tell her nothing.     Oh Lord. Yeah, I had my fun, I tell you. I have had my fun, I tell you. It  was nice. I sure did appreciate it, though. I appreciated everything I did.  Everything I did I appreciated. Yeah, everything I did.  Finchum So a carnival came to Guthrie?  27  Veasley Yeah, yeah, it   d come through.  Finchum What would be at the carnival?  Veasley Oh, it would be   it would be anything at the carnival. Everything.  Finchum Rides?  Veasley Yeah. I   d get on those hobby horses down there and ride them, I did. I   d  get on and ride them. Yeah, I like to ride them. So I had my fun.  Bishop Did you play any games at the carnival?  Veasley What?  Bishop What types of games did you play at the carnival?  Veasley Oh, well, they had a place there, they had a place there to   they had  money there. I said,    Well, they have a place,    I said,    Well shoot. I   m  going to try myself,    tried the one where you drop down and you put  the money in and drop down on it, you know. So I played that about, I  played that about two hours and I didn   t win nothing  I said,    Oh, I   m  going to quit.    (Laughter) And I went back down there the next night. I  said,    I   m going to try.    I went back down there and I win. I win about  two dollars, about two dollars that night, yeah, yeah.  Finchum So you had a little fun, then.  Veasley Yeah, I had fun. I had fun doing it. And so now I don   t go down there. I  don   t go to the carnival now. I used to, but I don   t go now. Now, I stay  home now.  Bishop What has been one of the greatest changes you   ve witnessed in history?  Veasley Well, a whole lots of things were changed when I was coming up. A  whole lot of things were changed. They didn   t have no automobiles.  Nothing. They didn   t have nothing like that. They didn   t have nothing  like that, no. All had horses, everything like that. They ain   t have all of  that stuff. So we didn   t know nothing about that, about no electric light.  Nothing like that. We didn   t know nothing about that until, until they  come along with it.  Finchum Did you have a radio?  Veasley Radio?  28  Finchum Yes.  Veasley No.  Finchum No?  Veasley No, no radio. We didn   t have none.  Finchum Do you remember where you were when World War II broke out? Pearl  Harbor?  Veasley Pearl Harbor?  Finchum Yeah. Do you remember where you were when Pearl Harbor  happened?  Veasley Oh, let me see. I   m trying to think.  Finchum Some people remember and some don   t, so not a big deal.  Veasley I don   t believe I do. I don   t believe I remember that. Of course, you  know a whole lot of things that run across your mind and you forget,  then you forget  A whole lot of things are, you know, used to run across  my mind, but I forget now, since I done got a little older. I forget  sometimes. I get up in the morning sometimes   I say,    I done got the  wrong shirt.    (Laughter) I said,    This ain   t the shirt I had on     I said,     Well, I   ll just pull that off and get me a new one to put on,    see.  Bishop Did you ever think you would make it to 100?  Veasley Me?  Bishop Yeah.  Veasley I don   t know. I don   t know. I   m just living. I don   t know. Hard to tell. I  live by day, that   s what I can do. I live by day. I couldn   t tell you, I  couldn   t tell you nothing. Can   t tell you nothing because I don   t know.  You don   t know how long you   re going to be here. None of us. None of  us   we don   t know. We don   t know how long we   re going to be here.  We don   t know how long we   re going to live. We don   t know. It ain   t  for us to know. See, it ain   t for us to know. It ain   t for us to know. A  person   s libel to pass out any time. Can   t ever know. No one knows. No  one knows those things. I may see you, I might see you tomorrow, and I  might not. See, who knows?  Y. Veasley That   s right.  29  Veasley Huh? Ain   t that right?  Bishop Yes.  Veasley That   s right. You never know when you   re going, you never know. We  don   t know what tomorrow   s going to bring. You never know. Might  not be here, might not be here to see it. When I get up in the morning I  thank the good Lord, when I get up every morning. I do. That   s what I  do.  Y. Veasley Praise the Lord.  Veasley I thank him. I thanks him every morning. That   s what I do. Every  morning I thank him. If it wasn   t for him, I wouldn   t be here.  Y. Veasley That   s right, none of us.  Veasley I don   t think so. Because I don   t think so, because I don   t know. So  many people has gone on that I know, I have worked with, so many of  them done gone, done gone, and I   m still here. Thank the good Lord  I   m here   Y. Veasley That   s right.  Veasley Y   all don   t want me to get started. (Laughter) Y   all don   t want me to  get started. I   ll tell you.  Y. Veasley God is good  Oh Lord, God is good.  Veasley Because you know, there   s one thing about it. We know where we   re  going, but we don   t know when. We don   t know. We don   t know when  we   re going to leave from here. We don   t know. You might get in your  automobile and you   re driving home, might drive your cars home and  something happen. See what I mean? But we don   t know. A lot of them  I know before used to live here they said,    Oh, I wish I was dead.     Yeah, some of them.    I wish I was dead, I wish I was dead.    I said,     Don   t say that.    I said,    You want to live, don   t you?       I   m just  getting tired of living.    I said    No.    I said,    No.    I said,    Don   t say that,  because we don   t know.    We don   t know. We just don   t know now. We  just don   t know the day and time. A day at a time. I put up tents for  funeral homes, everything. Yeah, I did.  Y. Veasley He sure did.  30  Veasley I sure have. I done the other thing, the other thing. You name it, I done  it. I have done it. I done it. Yeah, pallbearer, everything. Used to call  me for a pallbearer every morning. Every morning and go. Somebody  died, I didn   t know them. I didn   t turn them down, see. I didn   t turn  them down, but I said,    Well, I may be gone one of these days.    I   m  going, but I don   t know when  See? (Laughter) Hey, that   s true  That   s  true about that now, ain   t it?  Finchum It is.  Veasley That   s true.  Finchum That   s true.  Veasley Because we don   t know.  Finchum We don   t.  Veasley We don   t know. It ain   t for us to know.  Finchum Nope.  Veasley It   s not for us to know. That   s what it is. Not for us to know.  Finchum Well when you do go, how do you want to be remembered?  Veasley What?  Finchum How do you want to be remembered?  Veasley Well, when I go, I   ll just go. I   ll just go, because I know I   ve got to go.  So you don   t need me.  Bishop How do you want others to remember you?  Veasley Well, somebody will remember me I know. Somebody will. Yeah,  somebody will, but if it   s my time to go, I   ll just go. I   ll just go. This is  my time to live. My time to go, I   m gone. That   s that.  Bishop In your church, were you ever a deacon?  Veasley Deacon?  Bishop Yeah.  31  Veasley I   m a deacon in the church now. Yeah, yeah, oh yeah. I just take life  easy and go on. If you ain   t got no money, I   d just go on anyhow. Just  go ahead on anyhow. That   s the way to live, yeah. That   s the way it is.  Finchum Well we appreciate you talking to us today.  Veasley Well, I appreciate y   all coming.  Finchum You   re great, thank you.  -------  ------- 
