 Finchum  Youngblood  Today is July 17, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re from Oklahoma State University and today we   re in  Tulsa, Oklahoma to speak with Evelyn Youngblood, to talk about some  of her 100 years. Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you  were born.  I was born in Mayes County,  Oklahoma  1913, June 8, 1913.  So you   re a young 100. Did you have any brothers or sisters?  I had four brothers.  And where were you in the     I was fourth. I had three brothers and me and then my brother.  And what did your parents do for a living?  They were farmers, and my father  Isaac Jackson Standlee  ran a  threshing machine, besides farming.  He owned and operated the  machine. My brothers, uncles, and grandfather were on the work crew at  various times. At least two or three men and a team of horses pulling the  water tank to creeks or ponds kept the engine supplied with water. Ours  ran on coal and water.  My dad separated wheat and oats for family, neighbors, and even  traveled north almost to Kansas as crops were ready for harvest. He  operated the engine which connected to the separator by a big long belt.  The landowner fed the wheat, they had previously cut and shocked, into  the separator then hauled off the finished wheat in their wagon.  5  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  I only got to watch this operation cause I was little. Dad would  sometimes set me on the big wheel when the engine was running and I  still remember how it would shake and dig itself into the ground.   And did you have chores?  Oh, yeah.  And what did you have to do?  I had to gather the eggs and feed the chickens until I was a certain age,  and then I started working, helping my mother in the kitchen.  Did you have to slaughter the chicken?  No. That was not my job. (Laughs)  Who had to do that?  Mainly, my mother.  Did she have a technique?  (Laughs) Yeah, she   d wring their head off. (Laughs)  I always ask that. They have different ways of doing it.  Yeah, I know, but she didn   t use a hatchet. She   d just give them a whirl  or two. It was always amazing to me the way they flopped around on the  ground.  Did she have a big garden?  Always.  Did a lot of canning?  Yes.  And where did you go to school?  I went to a country school.  A one-room schoolhouse?  Yes, where they taught eight grades. You never heard of that? (Laughs)  6  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  How many were in your grade?  Most of the time just me.  What was the name of the school?  West Hazel.  So you finished the eighth grade?  No, I didn   t. I didn   t go to the eighth grade. At that time, the seventh and  eighth grade was so, well, if you were in seventh grade at the end of the  year you could take an eighth grade examination. If you passed, you  could go on to high school and that   s what I did. So, I never went to the  eighth grade. I skipped a grade.  What was the name of the high school you went to?  Pryor.  And you graduated what year?  Well, I didn   t graduate. I quit my senior year. I got married and went to  California. (Laughs) Went to San Francisco.  That would   ve been in the early     Nineteen twenty-nine.  I was going to say the early    30s. Ahead of the Depression, a little bit?  I guess that   s why we went to California. I don   t remember too much  about it. That   s a long time ago.  High school sweetheart?  Yeah, I had one. A boyfriend. You know, just a friend. His name was  Tom McCoullough. He lived in town. I lived in the country. When I  started high school, of course, I   d been riding a horse to school all of my  life but I started riding four miles. We lived four miles from Pryor, in the  country, and I rode a horse. My dad rented a stable. I   d go ride to school  and go to the stable, and they would take my horse, unsaddle it. I   d walk  about a block to school. When school was out, I went back to the stable,  got my horse, and went home. It was ready for me. It was saddled and  ready.  7  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  One thing I can remember that might be interesting to you. If we ran out  of cornmeal at home, my dad would go into the corn crib, which we had,  and he would take out some of the nicest ears of corn he could find. He  would put them in a sack, what you   d call a tow sack. I don   t know if  people know what that is or not. Anyway, he would strap them to the  back of my saddle and I would stop at the mill and leave them on the  way to school, and when school was out I   d go back by the mill and pick  up my ground corn, into cornmeal. That was done and I thought nothing  of it (laughs) and it   s weird now. (Laughter)  People won   t even know what a corn mill is, I guess, these days.  People don   t know what cornmeal is?  The place that you mill it.  To make cornbread. (Laughs) Wow.  The cornmeal, yes, but not where you got it milled.  Well, there   s two kinds of cornmeal. One of them is white and one of  them is yellow and there is a difference, a little bit difference in the taste.  What was your favorite thing your mother cooked?  I don   t know. That   s hard to say, because she cooked everything, and we  had an orchard and she canned apples and peaches. Made plum, you  know, jellies and stuff. Blackberries, we   d pick blackberries and she   d  can them to make pie, and we also made jelly from them. Life was  interesting, and you worked.  And they raised cane, also. (Youngblood   s daughter)  Another little funny story I can tell you about riding a horse. There was  five of us kids and we all had a horse to ride, that never went to the field.  You know, if you had thrown anything on them but a saddle, they   d had  a fit. So, I have been told, money was something we never discussed but  I had been told, since then, my folks were well to do. I don   t know. I just  lived. I can   t remember doing without anything.  Did the farm have electricity?  No, we didn   t have electricity. We didn   t have running water, not in  those days. I could show you a picture of myself and my brothers in the  first car my dad bought. I think he gave  500 for it. Mary would you get  8   Holeman    Youngblood   Holeman  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  it?   Mom, tell them about when the car was delivered.    Well, back then you didn   t just go to a car dealer and buy a car. There  was no such thing. You had to order it. My dad had bought the car and  when it came in they delivered it to us on the farm. I don   t remember  what year it was but I was about seven or eight years old and that would  make it around 1920.  My dad was gone from home working when the car arrived. I had older  brothers and they were just like teenagers nowadays, they wanted to go  in that car. No one knew how to drive so Mom, with the help of my  brothers, took off across the hay meadow in that car until she learned  how to operate everything. Licenses were not required then. Then we all  wanted to go see Dad in the car, about ten miles from home.  The Moores lived a mile down the road from us and when we got there  Mr. Moore was in the road with a team of horses. He had to get out of  his wagon and hold the horses until we passed. The roads were narrow  and anytime we met someone, their horses got upset. I don   t remember  what happened when we found Dad, but it had to have been a fun trip,  cause we always had fun.   Tell her about the cane that you used to raise, how grandpa pressed cane  for everybody.  Cane? The cane that your grandfather pressed? You grew cane?  The cane. Yes, he made molasses.  Molasses, ok.  Well, I know it   s hard to explain how it was made but they had a deal  you fed cane to, sugar cane, and it would press the juice out of the cane.  It would run into a deal and they would cook it and make molasses out  of it. It wasn   t easy to do but he did it. We had a horse that was trained  for that job, and it went in a circle and every so often   this little pipe  run down for the juice to run out into a big container, this horse had to  step over this rod. Every time he went around he had to step over so he  had to be trained for the job.  So you had riding horses and working horses?  Yes. One time I was, I must have been in the tenth grade, somewhere  along there. I can   t remember exactly what year. I was in high school but  9  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  I was going home, and in those days we didn   t kill beef to eat. We killed  chickens and hogs, and if you killed a hog you would, you know, send  your neighbor a fresh mess of meat. That was, you know, I mean, that  was just friendly. Well, about a half a mile from our house, there was a  family by the name of Baker, and she was an Indian. I was going home,  just riding along, and she stepped out on her front porch because they  had butchered. She stepped out on her front porch, and she didn   t call  my name, she whooped. And when she did my horse took off. He ran  away with me, and he jumped a little bridge. He jumped the fence and  went right straight into the barn, and I was pulling leather. Don   t think I  wasn   t, but I made it. She wanted to send my mother some meat. They  had butchered hogs that day. That   s one thing that sticks in my mind  because I was scared to death. When I got to the house, one of the jobs I  had, I cooled my horse down and put my saddle away and went to the  house. My mother looked at me and she said,    What   s the matter with  you?    I said,    Nothing.    I wasn   t going to tell her and she said,    Well,  you   re white as a sheet.    (Laughter) I was still scared. That   s life on the  farm. (Laughs)  My dad, you could see that   s his car. (Gestures to photograph) Now, I  don   t know really how old the car is, but that   s me in the backseat in the  center and I was nine. And this is a neighbor girl, this is her sister, and  this is a sister and that   s her brother. This is my brother, my brother, my  brother, and my brother.  That   s a great picture.  The two on the outside, on the running board, are comedians (laughter)  or they thought they were. (Laughs)  So talk a little bit about your house.  10  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  The house?  Yes.  It was a big house and had the largest living room I think there was in  the neighborhood, and about once a month we had a dance. We had  musicians in the family and they played, and the neighbors came and  then maybe the next Saturday night, well, one of the neighbors would  have a party. That was life. We didn   t have television and radio. We had  a good time. We had to make our own fun.  Being the only daughter, did you have a room to yourself?  Oh, yeah.  And the boys had to share?  The boys slept upstairs. There was two bedrooms downstairs in our  home, a big, big living room, and a large kitchen that we ate all the time  in. It had a table that would sit all seven of us. It sat eight, really. We ate  in the kitchen all the time. One thing I can remember, my dad, now of  course we had woodstoves and my dad would get up in the morning, and  he   d build the fire, and he would put on a pot of oatmeal. He set it on the  back of the stove, and that   s the best stuff I ever ate. It was really good  because it cooked real slow. He done that every morning. It didn   t make  a difference what else we had for breakfast. We still ate a bowl of  oatmeal. The farmers raised oats. (Laughs)  What would you do for fun?  Fun?  Yes.  I don   t know. You   re talking about playing with dolls or something? Not  me, I wasn   t allowed that. I can remember one time I got a, my mother  bought me a doll for Christmas and the next morning my brother, he   s  three years older than I am, he set her straddling the doorknob and shot  her. (Laughs)  I never had heard that. What did he shoot her with?  What do you call it?  A sling shot?  11  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  A sling shot but she had a china head and hands and feet. The rest of it  was cloth and stuffed. That   s the way they made dolls. Well, it broke  her. When she hit the floor, her head busted. He was an ornery kid.  And did he get punished for doing this?  Oh yeah, he got punished but not, in my opinion, not enough. (Laughter)  Who would do the punishing? Your mother or your father?  It was mostly Mother. My dad was   I can never remember my dad  spanking me. Never. I don   t know. The boys will tell you I was Dad   s  favorite. I was his little girl, but I don   t know. He was good to me, and  so was my mother but you gotta remember we had neighbors and they  had kids. I can remember a lot of things that happened that were funny.  They   re funny now, but then they weren   t. We were at the neighbor   s  house and they were making ice cream. Do you know how much trouble  it was to make ice cream?  Where would they get their ice?  They   d get it in town. Somebody had to make a trip after it and they   d  buy a great big, maybe twenty-five or thirty-five pound, chunk. They   d  wrap it all up. Of course, they had to get a car and they would get home  with it as quick as they could, but we were at the neighbor   s one time  just sitting on the porch. They had a big, in those days the houses the  way they were made the porch usually went clear around the house, you  know, from the back door to the front door, a lot of the places were. We  were all sitting on the porch and it was raining and kinda storming a  little bit. One of the oldest boys of the Jackson family, that   s where we  were, he said,    Dad, I just saw a bale of hay jump out of the barn.    He  happened to be looking in the direction of the barn and wasn   t long until  there was a flame. Lightning had struck their barn and when it did I  guess it hit this bale. There   s a little door at the top where they kept the  hay, where they could just kick a bale of hay out into the barnyard.  When they saw the flame, everybody who could run, run to the barn  after the livestock that was in the barn. I don   t know, a horse, maybe  they   re different now, but then they were afraid of fire and they, the  guys, would jerk their shirts off and put it over the horse   s head so it  couldn   t see until they led him out of the fire. I mean, that   s the way I  remember it, but it didn   t save the barn. When you   re four miles from  town or the fire department, if they had one, I don   t remember that they  had one. (Laughs)  The closest town was Pryor?  12  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Yes.  Did it have a movie theater?  I don   t think so then. I don   t remember going to the movies until I was  about thirteen, somewhere along there. Well, they did. They had one  when I started high school. So, but I don   t know. I don   t think we were  ever too interested.  Was church an important factor?  Oh, yes. We went to Sunday school and church every Sunday. That   s  where we met all of our neighbors. That was kind of a     Some of her ancestors were preachers.  What?  I told her some of your ancestors were preachers.  Yeah, my grandfather was a minister, or in those days they called them  preachers. I guess they still do, I don   t know. My folks came from  Missouri in 1910.  What brought them to Oklahoma?  Change, I guess, because they came and looked over that part of the  country for a farm.  That wasn   t during a Land Run?  No, no. They just came. My mother, they lived in Cassville, and my  mother had   my brother was a baby, the one that   s three years older  than I am. He was a baby and Mother didn   t come on the wagon. She  came on the train because she had a baby, and one of her sister-in-laws  also had a baby so they came on   and I wasn   t with them. (Laughs) I  was born three years later in Oklahoma. My three oldest brothers are  from Missouri.  Were you born at home?  Yep.  That   s the way they did it, too.  That   s the way they did it   13  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Did your mother do a lot of sewing?  Oh, she made all of my clothes. Yeah. Let   s see. That   s me when I was  fourteen. (Gestures to photograph) She made that dress. Now this was  voile but I don   t, that, I can   t remember what they call that material  because it was stiff like it had been starched. I can   t remember what they  called it but that collar stayed like that. You could wash it and you   d iron  it but it was still stiff.  The dress doesn   t look like it was made out of cotton feed sacks.  No, but I had some. I can remember Mother going to town, when she   d  go buy flour, shoot there would be a sack of some kind of real pretty  material and    Oh, I   ve got of have another one of these.    And the next  time she   d have to have flour she   d look for that print. There would be  enough of it to make me a dress.  Did she quilt, too?  Oh, yeah.  And she crocheted.  I have some, and my mother crocheted.  14  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  So she had a little free time?  Yep. I had older brothers too so they done a lot of the work.  She crocheted those gloves in that frame behind you.  I was wondering if someone had.  Yeah, my mother made those.  That   s a lost art, isn   t it?  No. My oldest daughter made this.  Ok, good, someone else...  Well, she   s made a bunch of stuff   that name.  And that.  You just don   t see it very often.  Around all the house I have it. She crochets and knits.  But Granny taught her how to crochet.  My mother taught her how but she couldn   t teach me because I   m left-handed.  I guess it was just too big a job. Now I am left-handed with a  knife, with scissors, or anything like that but I write with this one.  The teachers saw to that.  Yes. The teachers done that. Consequently, my brother that   s just older  than I am, they just ruined him. Till the day he died you could hardly  read what he wrote, because they tried to change him.  And he was real smart but he could not write worth a flip.  They don   t do that now. If you   re left-handed, you   re left-handed and  see now I   m mixed up. (Laughs)  So when you left Oklahoma, how did you get to California?  In a    29 Ford, and when we got to San Francisco we discovered we  didn   t need it. You could go anywhere in the town on a streetcar for a  nickel. What   s the point in having an old car? So, we sold it.  15  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  How long did you stay in California?  Eight years.  And then came back to Oklahoma?  I came back to Oklahoma. I lived, during the war   I started to say I had  spent all my life in Oklahoma but during the war, my husband went to  Houston, Texas and he worked on PT boats. He was a welder and they  needed welders so my brother, he lived in Houston and he was a   I  don   t know what you call them.  He was a foreman, Mom.  Yeah, he was a foreman and he called my husband and he told him,    We  need welders bad.    So, he went to Houston and the children and I  followed him later on. I lived down there thirty-two months, and they  can have it, my part of it. (Laughs)  Then you came back to Oklahoma?  Yep.  So, how many children do you have?  I have four, two boys and two girls. I had a girl and two boys and then  another girl. That   s the baby (Gestures to Mary) and my family is all   I  have one granddaughter that lives in Dallas, and I have a son and his  family lives in Ponca City. Everybody else is in Tulsa.  Did you work?  Never.  Well, you did, but not     Well, I did too. I take that back. I keep forgetting because when I came  back from California I got a job at a ten cent store, if you can call that  work.  A ten cent? A five and dime?  A five and dime. You know they don   t have those any more, do they?  They don   t. Probably since the seventies, maybe. Did you ever think  16  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  you   d live to be a hundred?  Never, but then I don   t know. Maybe I did have a sneaking idea I would  because my grandfather, my mother   s father, he was ninety-two when he  passed away and he had six sons and four of them lived into their  nineties. So, I don   t know. Don   t ask me why I   m still here. I don   t  know.  She lost all of her brothers at a fairly young age. They were in their  sixties and one of them in his seventies   maybe two of them in their  seventies. She got heart disease from one side of the family and  longevity from the other.  And my mother, you see, some things just leave me. I can   t remember  how old she was when she lost her foot.  I don   t know   that was in the late    40s or early    50s. I think late    40s.  But, she fell and broke her foot completely off, just a little bit of skin  holding it. She crawled to the next door neighbor, and in doing so she  got a lot of junk in her foot, where it was broke, and gangrene set in and  she lost it. Some   I can   t remember his name, that made her a foot. He  lived here in Tulsa, and he made her a foot. He took it off just below the  knee and she put that foot on, and of course she could only wear a  certain size heel, but she   d put that foot on and you   d walk and you  couldn   t tell the difference. She could go up and down stairs. Man, she  had grit, but she would. I guess I come from tough ancestors. (Laughter)  Strong stock, huh?  What   s your personal secret to living a long life?  My personal secret? I don   t worry about much, never did. I have a  sneaking suspicion that what   s gonna happen is gonna happen, and I  don   t think there   s much  you can do . Little things maybe you can  prevent, but not much. The important things are gonna happen anyway.  Are there some historical events that stand out in your mind?  Well, of course, the war, but you wouldn   t like to, people wouldn   t like  that. A historical thing that happened in my life, because I   m a democrat,  was FDR. I think the people in this country have forgotten that he saved  it. You know, if you want to go back in history. (Laughs) This country  was in bad shape when he was elected.  He did the WPA.  17  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holemon  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  That   s right. I remember that. I had some cousins that, man, they were  glad to get a job working on the road, because that   s where he started.  Roads, bridges     I think he built a few libraries with WPA funds.  He done some great things.  Well do you remember when JFK was assassinated?  Oh, yeah. That was a sad situation for the country, but things happen.  Well, in your lifetime refrigeration came around. That was a big thing  wasn   t it? Getting a refrigerator in your home?  Yes. (Laughs) First came an ice box with ice in it. You didn   t know  about that?  What did you do before that happened?  Oh, well I don   t know what most people did but we had a cistern. Well  people, do you know what a cistern is?  I do.  Ok.  Educate me. (Laughter)  Well, ours was concrete. Who made it, I don   t know, but we had a  cistern that caught  rainwater . It would kill people now I guess, but we  had gutters around the house. When it rained, the water run in the gutter  and the water run down into a barrel that was full of little rocks and then  into our cistern. That was the cool water, and my mother used to have,  she   d have buckets that she could put food in. Well, that   s where she  kept our milk and butter. She would put them in this bucket, seal it   a  gallon bucket. No, you don   t know what a gallon bucket is. They had a  real tight lid and she would do that, and she had a little rope and she   d  go out and open the cistern, because besides having the pump, there was  a place where we could lift it up and she could put this down in the  water and it kept it cool.  Now, is that the same water that you would pump out and drink?  That   s right. Absolutely.  18  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Ok. So she kept her bucket clean?  Well, it was supposed to be. Like I said it would kill people now   (Laughter) You get used to them germs  (Laughter) You never thought  anything about it. You know, I mean, you just done what you had to do  to live and I think people back then, they wanted to live.  What   s your philosophy on life? What   s your motto for living?  Just go and have a good time. Now what a lot of people call a good time  and what I call a good time, there   s a difference.  What is that difference?  Tell us   I   ve never drank. I   ve never used dope. I don   t, and I have never,  smoked. I   ve lived a pretty clean life. A lot of people would say no, but I  know. I   ve known people who have drank to excess but that don   t mean  I joined them. I   ve been married twice. My first husband was an  alcoholic but I didn   t stay with him long. It was too much for me  because my dad and my mother and my brothers were all   they didn   t  fool with that stuff. So, I was against it too. Can   t help it.  Did you play any bridge?  I never did. I used to play pitch.  I   m not sure what that is. (Laughter)  Well, you play it with cards. (Laughs) I didn   t get into that.  The card game with suits.  Well, I had my kids. My first child was born when I was seventeen, and  when you have kids you   re busy, unless you hire someone else to do it.  You don   t fool around.  You were in San Francisco when that child was born, right? You were in  the city?  You know something? When I lived in San Francisco, and it was in the  early    30s until 1938, there wasn   t any colored people in town. My  oldest daughter was four years old before she ever saw a colored man,  and he was a porter on the train. When she was four years old, we came  19  Bishop  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Bishop  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  back to Oklahoma on a visit and it scared her to death, because that was  the first time she ever saw a black man.  What was life like in San Francisco during the Depression?  I don   t know. I know my husband didn   t have any trouble getting a job,  but he happened to be acquainted with the boss. So, he went to work for  the San Francisco transit. They had streetcars. You could get on a  streetcar and go clear across town for a nickel. Of course, there was a lot  of cars in town, don   t get me wrong, but we didn   t need one to get to  work. I didn   t work, but my husband   when we went out there     Wasn   t his boss an Okie? Wasn   t his boss from Oklahoma?  Yes, and anybody that came and applied for a job from Oklahoma, got it  because he said,    They   re good workers. They show up for a job and  they do it.    That was the way he felt about it. It was some city, I   ll tell  you for sure. It still is but the Chinese, they were the ones that took care  of the domestic work and they had a Chinatown. It wasn   t very big but  they had a Chinatown and they still do, don   t they?  Yes.  I know some really nice Chinese people. I really do.  Once you left there, did you go back? Once you moved away?  No, I   ve never been back. The kids have. My kids have, you know, have  gone on vacations and been through there but I never had the desire to  go back, because it changed. When I lived out there, there was a lot of  Italians and Slovenians. You know what a Slovenian is? Is there a  Slovenia country now? Or did it disappear? Czechoslovakia   There   s a Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Bosnia     Yeah, all that   s changed.  They were my neighbors and they were nice people but they were  working and saving their money so they could go back to the old  country. A lot of them were, and I never could understand why but then  I never lived in their countries. (Laughs)  You were saving yours to come back to Oklahoma. (Laughter)  Yeah, and I came back on the train.  20  Finchum  Youngblood  Bishop  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Holeman  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  On the train, ok. Didn   t drive that time?  No.  Did you come back alone?  Were you divorced at that time?  I divorced in Oklahoma.  So he came back with you?  No. He stayed in California. I don   t need to tell you where he wound up.  (Laughs)  No. So how long were you married to the second one?  Well, he   s been dead thirty-six years now, her daddy. You   ll have to  give me a pencil and I   ll figure it out. (Laughs)  I was just asking how long they were married, her and your dad?  Well, they got married in about    39 and my dad died in    77.  Almost forty years. So, describe for me a typical day for you these days.  These days?  Yes, like how early do you get up and what   s a typical day?  Well, I get up in the morning and I do all my own chores. I make my  bed, dress. I go to the kitchen and I help my daughter.  She turns on Good Morning America and catches up on all the national  news. Then I get up and she tells me what   s going on. (Laughter)  I told her this morning, when she woke up, I said,    You know there   s  only two states in the United States that   s gonna be below ninety degrees  today.     Not us.  Did you know that?  No.  21  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Denver is supposed to be eighty-three and Boston was eighty-nine. The  rest of the country was either ninety or above. Now that   s   well, the  weatherman said that was unusual for that to happen. For it to be that hot  on the west coast   wow. People are suffering out there, if it   s that hot. I  know that much about it.  So you watch television. Do you read much?  Oh, yeah. I read a lot   almost anything I can get my hands on. I like to  read and I have twenty-twenty vision. I don   t need my glasses because I  had implants. I have had them, for about what? Twenty, twenty-five  years? And these are only when I read. It brings the print a little closer.  She gets a box of books every month from a reader   s service, and she  reads that and anything else she can get her hands on. Magazines     The only thing right now that bothers me is the fact that I   m losing my  hearing. That bothers me because I know I   m missing a lot with my  children. They get around here, the bunch of them, and they yak yak yak  yak and I can   t understand what they   re talking about. (Laughs)  Sounds like hens in the henhouse. (Laughs)  Yeah. (Laughs) I want to say,    Hey  Talk a little louder,    but I don   t.  Hearing aids don   t help too much?  Oh yeah, well they help but right now I   ve   because of this sore ear, I  don   t wear them.  Well, how did you celebrate your one-hundredth birthday?  Oh, they had a birthday party for me. We went to the firefighters    union  hall and it was full  I don   t know. There was about sixty people, I think.  Sixty-five.  Sixty-five showed up? And every one of my relatives was there. That  you know, I mean, I can   t say that because I   ve got some second cousins  somewhere in the world, but you know.  But all your immediate family.  Well, I have a nephew that lives in   is it Santa Clara? He lives close to  San Francisco and one of my brother   s  has a  son  who  lives out there  and he didn   t show up, but all the rest of them did. I have a picture. I  22  Holeman  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  have three, five generations. So we made a picture of all that. (Laughter)  My generations. I could have more but then some of the girls had  decided they wanted   one of them wanted to be a doctor, one wanted to  be a teacher.  They didn   t have time to have kids. (Laughs)  I want to know what keeps you going.  What makes me keep going?  What makes you want to get up every day and live? What do you think?  Life, I guess. I just   I don   t know. I would have to think about that.  What makes me get up every morning? Well, because I don   t want to  stay in bed  (Laughter)  That works. How early do you get up, really?  Oh, I   m up about six o   clock.  Up with the chickens.  Yes. I get up early.  And stay up how late?  I get up and make me a cup of tea, go sit down, turn on the TV, and I  watch it until around nine and then I turn it off and I don   t turn it on  again until the  evening  news.  And how late do you stay up at night?  I usually go to bed between nine and ten.  That   s a pretty long day.  But a lot of times she goes in to bed and then she reads a lot.  But you know, sometimes I sneak a nap in. (Laughter)  I was wondering if you have cat naps during the day. Do you have to  watch what you eat?  No, not really.  23  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Not diabetic?  No, I   m not a diabetic.  That   s good.  No. I usually eat what   s put on the table.  We eat out a lot, too.  I like sweets, but not too many. I love vegetables, all kinds, and I   m not  a big meat eater and I eat very little bread.  And she likes to cook. She helps me in the kitchen.  I love to cook. Always did.  The only time she   s not helping me fix a meal is if she   s napping.  (Laughs)  Well, I usually make the salad. No, all in all I   ve had a pretty good life.  What do you consider to be, I guess this is a two-part question, the least  happiest and the most happiest part of your life? Period of your life, I  should say.  I guess the happiest I was, was when my kids were little. The man I was  married to was priceless and there   s nobody like him. He was good to  me. He was good to the children and he worked hard and that   s it.  Yeah, my dad raised my sister and my brother just like they were his  own.  Now, we liked the water, and we got a lot of lakes, and even when she  was just a little tyke, she couldn   t do anything. We had a boat, wasn   t  much, but we had one and we didn   t have a motorhome. We had a tent  and we would take those kids and my husband made a   he was a  mechanic. He worked for Bill White. You know who Bill White is?  Chevrolet agency.  Chevrolet Company. He worked for him for thirty-two years. He run a  department like it was his own. He fired and hired his men. So, anyway,  we all liked the water. He made a trailer that was about that deep and put  it on two wheels, and we   d load that thing up and go to the lake and  spend the whole weekend, with little kids. We taught them all to swim,  24  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  and when they got old enough we taught them to ski and to fish. I think  it   that   s my opinion, I think it kept my boys out of a lot of trouble,  because a lot of boys their age were getting into trouble and mine didn   t.  So, I don   t know.  That was kind of the typical family outing and vacation, spending time  on a lake.  Now, they have kids they raised just like I raised them.  They go to the lake?  They go to the lake. Well, they have a house on the lake. (Laughter)  They stepped up. (Laughter)  Well, we didn   t stay in a tent. We eventually  bought a travel trailer ,  and every couple of years we would get a bigger and a better boat, until  our kids were out of high school. We kept them busy. We kept them in  school and my boys were     Plus our friends. Our friends just gravitated to our house because they  liked  what we were doing .  I wished I had a buck for every gallon of milk their friends drank,  because that   s what they drank. They drank milk, and we didn   t drink a  lot of pop. I don   t understand that. Now everything is pop. You know,  Pepsi, and we didn   t drink a lot of that, and water. Water or milk and  they   d come   I, honest to God. I   d get ready to go to bed on Saturday  night and my living room would be full of teenagers. I   d have to run  them off. (Laughter) Sometimes, if I didn   t run them off I   d have to get  up and wake them up and tell them to go home. (Laughter)  Of course we had   one of the boys, my oldest son, he went to work  when he was sixteen. You know what he started doing? Don   t they still  do it? Clerking in the store, grocery store. Of course, he joined the air  force when he got old enough but you know   but he, and that   s what  they all done. Mary, she graduated in1960 and she went to work for a  company here in town. They   re not here anymore. Did you put them out  of business? (Laughs) They   re gone. They   re dead.  When history is written about you, what do you want it to say? What do  you want to be remembered for?  Me?  25  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Bishop  Yeah.  I don   t know. I just lived a good life. I just took what, you know, that  come along. I either knocked it down or lived with it. I   ve had a good  life. An interesting one, maybe. Then for some people it would be  boring, but it wasn   t to me.  You made it your own.  Yep. (Laughs).  What were holidays like back in your youth?  Holidays?  Like Christmas or July 4th? That sort of thing.  Oh, well, Christmas has always been a big deal to us. We still get  together. Our family gets together and has what we call a bad Santa.  Bad Santa? Ok.  What   s a bad Santa?  Everybody buys a gift   whatever they want. They buy a gift. They don   t  put anybody   s name on it. Then when we all get together they draw  numbers, and number one gets to pick out a gift. We put them on the  floor. You could pick out anything you want and open it, and then  number two, he can either pick a gift or he can take yours.  That   s why it   s bad Santa.  Huh?  That   s why it   s bad Santa, huh?  Yeah and so on. That   s the way it goes. So you may wind up getting  what you wanted out of all of them or you may not.  Or you might end up getting it taken away from you half a dozen times.  I would want the very last number. Then you can take anything in the  room from anybody or you can take the gift that   s left.  Have you ever gotten the last number?  26  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Oh yeah, she has.  Oh yeah. But it   s a lot of fun. Now we make it fun.  How about when you was a kid? What was your Christmases like when  you were little?  Well, I don   t remember too many until I was   when I was real little I  don   t think Mother, they fooled with a Christmas tree, but we always  had a nice Christmas. Relatives would come and stay too long, you  know. (Laughs) But we always had nice Christmases.  I had a nice childhood. I did. By the time I was nine or ten years old, I  would dance because I loved to dance. Always have. I was a good  dancer, and I danced with grown-ups when I was just ten or twelve years  old. I liked to swing    em. I   m sorry, but that   s the way it is.  You liked to cut a rug.  And then she ended up with my dad and he had two left feet. (Laughs)  And all my kids danced. I have some great kids. My grandkids, I have  three boys and three girls, and they are very dear to me and so are their  children. Of course, they   re kind of scattered around. Some here, some  in Ponca City,  one in Dewey and one in Dallas .  Do you do a Christmas card list?  Well, I used to try.  A lot of people used to.  Well, it   s expensive anymore. You can buy a Christmas gift as easy as  you can buy a card.  Her list and mine kind of melded.  If it   s from me, it   s from her, and vice versa. I guess they could call us a  pair now.  How long have you lived here with your daughter?  I   ve been here eleven years. Gee whiz  I kid my son-in-law. We kid one  another all the time. He   s the greatest guy in the world but I told him one  day, I said   see, I sold my home and I moved into an apartment and I  was doing all right. I wasn   t lonesome. I had friends. I had a car. I drove  27  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Holeman  until about four years ago. If you remember when it was real cold and  we had a lot of snow, Christmas time, if you can remember back. That   s  the year I quit driving a car. There was snow on the ground and I didn   t  go anywhere and I just quit there. I thought,    Hmm, I just won   t drive  anymore.    So I quit but, you know, he called me up and he said,    We  have an extra bedroom over here waiting for you,    or something like  that. I kid him and say,    When you asked me to come over here you  thought maybe I   d live for a couple of years and then I   d be out in Floral  Haven.    I say,    Now see, I lived eleven.    He just laughs at me.  (Laughter)  So what   s next? What are you planning for the next few years?  Next year?  Well, for the next few years?  Well, when I was ninety-nine, they had a big party for me at my  grandson   s, and they were eating cake and ice cream. I just said,    I want  everybody   s attention,    and I said,    What are you going to do next year  for my birthday because I   m gonna be there?    and I was. So, I made that  threat this year, too.  Yeah, I don   t know if we can top that, Mom. (Laughter)  I may not make it  (Laughter) But that   s life, you know. I   m ready. I am.  When I go, I go. I just want to go quietly. I told my doctor I don   t want  to be in any pain. I don   t want to go out screaming, hurting somewhere. I  just want to lay down, and I   d like for it to be in my sleep. I have a  brother that   my youngest brother. That   s the way he went. He went to  bed one night and his wife got up the next morning, fixed breakfast and  called him. He didn   t answer and she went to see him and he was dead.  She had a fit. She said,    I was sleeping with a dead man and didn   t know  it.    But that   s the way. That   s really an ideal way to go. I don   t want to  go to the hospital, and I shouldn   t say that because I may have to, but I  don   t want to.  But she   s never shied away from doctors. If she   s got anything wrong,  she seeks medical help.  But I still do what I want to do. I stay packed. If they want to go  somewhere, we go. If they don   t want to take me, they just say,    Mom,  you   re going to stay home.     And how often do you stay home? (Laughter) You don   t ever stay home.  28  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Bishop  Youngblood  Holeman  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Finchum  Youngblood  Well, if you want to run to the grocery store or something. (Laughs) If  they want to go somewhere, you know     What   s one thing you want to do or one place you want to go, you still  haven   t done or you still haven   t seen, but you want to?  I don   t know of any place that I want to go.  Do you have a bucket list is what he   s asking? Do you have a bucket  list?  A bucket list? No. I just take it as it comes.  One more trip to the lake?  No, I don   t make   once and awhile I   ll go up there, but they   re afraid  I   ll fall on some of them rocks, because I do fall, you know. I don   t have  any balance. You know what that   s like?  Sort of.  My son-in-law was standing in the   the first time I can remember it  happening. I don   t remember how many years. He was standing in the  kitchen there, and I was standing in that doorway and we were just  talking, and for some reason or another I started to turn and when I did, I  hit the floor.  But you   re a lot more careful now.  Oh yeah.  Haven   t broken anything?  No. It   s like I always fall backwards. I don   t fall on my hands and knees.  Never. Wayne, my son-in-law, said I fell like a tree. He said,    You just  hit the floor.    It hurt.  Is there anything else you want to add before we close out?  No, I can   t think of anything.  Well, we very much appreciate your time.  Now, I tell you what, if I see you a year from now I might have some  more to tell you. (Laughter)  29  Finchum  All right, thank you.  -------  ------- 
