 Finchum Today is February 1, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum, and this is  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State, and today we are in Hugo,  Oklahoma, to speak with Hershel Pence. This is part of our Oklahoma  One Hundred Year Life project. Thank you for letting us come today.  Let   s begin with having you tell us where and when you were born.  Pence Where I was born?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Pence Down at Hunt County, Texas.  Finchum And when?  Pence October 16, 1911.  Finchum So you are a hundred and four   Pence A hundred and four years old.  Finchum That   s pretty good. Are you the first in your family to get there?  Pence No, I   ve got a sister, a half-sister. I didn   t know much about her. She  was a hundred when she died. She died out somewhere in New Mexico.  She was a half-sister. I really wasn   t raised with her.  Finchum Okay, so you were born in Texas?  Pence Born in Texas.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  5  Pence Well, my daddy farmed. In Texas, he had a cotton farm. He raised  cotton. He moved to Oklahoma, and he quit farming. He liked mules  and he had big mules, and he worked on road jobs and stuff like that  with them. Back then, there wasn   t no bulldozers. It was all mules and  horses. You could work all the time like that. They were building up all  the roads and railroads and everything.  Finchum Was he from Texas?  Pence No, he was Alabama. He was born in Alabama.  Finchum And your mother?  Pence My mother was from Tennessee.  Finchum Where?  Pence I can   t think of the name of it now. Something like Freeman, but I can   t  think of it now.  Finchum East Tennessee or West? Do you remember that?  Pence Close to Virginia. They had lived in Virginia.  Finchum East then.  Hugh The way they talked, they owned a place and they worked on the other  side of the river.  Pence That was a long way back yonder. (Laughter)  Finchum What was her name?  Pence Amanda Emaline. Everyone called her  Lina . That was her nickname,   Lina .  Finchum What was your father name?  Pence Ira Benton     Finchum Ira?  Pence Ira Benton.  Finchum Pence?  6  Pence Pence.  Finchum Did you have to help pick cotton?  Pence Well, I did a little, just kind of playing. See when he sold the cotton  farm, I was seven year old.  Finchum Okay.  Pence We come to Oklahoma. I   ve been in Oklahoma ever since I was seven  year old. This was open range. We came up here, and he went into  cattle. Had a lot of cattle, hogs.  Finchum How did you get to Oklahoma?  Pence Well, he come in a wagon. We come on a train, my mother and us. We  had four of us kids. We come on a train.  Finchum Where did you end up? Where were you going from Texas? What town?  Pence Hugo.  Finchum You came to Hugo?  Pence We came straight to Hugo. Been here ever since.  Finchum You were seven, so that is 1918? That   s a long time to be in this town.  Pence Yeah.  Finchum You were here when the circuses first came?  Pence Oh the circus didn   t start coming here until after we had come here  sometime. They didn   t have a way to travel then, you know. There  wasn   t no trucks or nothing else.  Finchum Why did  they  come to Hugo?  Pence I don   t know exactly the reason. There was a machine shop down here.  When they started coming here, they started building trucks and buses  and things down there to travel with. They   ve been here ever since.  More keep coming. There are about three or four of them here now.  Finchum Well, why did your father come?  7  Pence He wanted to get away from cotton raising. You know, he could work  on roads and stuff like that and have cattle. It was open range and if you  had fifty, you could turn out, or more. He had a bunch. If he   d lived     pneumonia He died, see. My daddy died when I was thirteen years old.  I was the oldest one at home. He died of pneumonia, when pneumonia  killed so many. It got him.  Finchum Do you remember that?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Do you?  Pence Yeah. I was thirteen years old.  Finchum Did the doctor come to the house?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum By wagon?  Pence No. The one that was doctoring him rode a horse.  Finchum A horse?  Pence He   d rather get on a horse and take off. It was faster, see. One or two of  them had two horses and hooked them to a hack and take off. You know  what they called a hack? Something like a buggy, you know. I was big  enough, I was pretty apt. I   d get on a horse out here, I lived north of  town, and go to town. I   d tie the horse up down there and I   d go up to  that doctor   s office and he would go get on a horse and go out there. I   d  wait and I   d get the medicine and come back.  He took it in March, first of March, somewhere along in there. He  didn   t die until May  1925 . He kindly got over it to where he could sit  up around in the house, go from one chair to another. But he finally  died. He died in May. It got his lungs. He couldn   t breathe.  I had a little sister that, she was about seven or eight years old. He   d lay  down on the bed and she lay down beside him and take an ammonia  bottle and hold it under his nose so that he could sleep, see. She would  lay there for two or three hours. (Laughs) We didn   t have nothing to  doctor you with.  Finchum No penicillin then.  8  Pence Now they can cure it over night   Finchum How did they do the funeral? At the house?  Pence We carried him back to Texas and buried him. He   s buried close to  Bonham.  Finchum Well, did your mother remarry?  Pence No, never did.  Finchum She had to keep farming herself?  Pence Well we weren   t farming much up here. He worked. When he got sick  he was hauling lumber.  Finchum Okay, well she had to raise the rest of you by herself?  Pence Yeah. Just her and us.  Finchum Can you describe the house you grew up in?  Pence It was just a three-bedroom house.  Finchum One-story or two?  Pence One-story. I   ve been living in it, I think, ninety-seven years.  Finchum In the same house?  Pence I   ve moved one time. They put the lake in down there, where I lived  down yonder, and I moved house and all. (Laughter) Never missed a  night. They loaded it up and set it down. I owed land up the road, and I  just moved it up away from the creek.  Finchum Your roots run deep.  Pence I re-done it, remodeled it. I   m still living in it. I stay up here at night a  lot, but I still go back to it every day. I stayed out there all last week.  I   ve got a daughter that lives up at Ada and she come down and stayed a  week. We stayed out there all last week. I come back up here last night.  I go back out there all morning and stay all day. Piddle around.  Finchum Did you get flooded with all the rain?  Pence No, it didn   t bother me much.  9  Finchum Well, did you get stranded?  Pence No.  Finchum You didn   t get stranded? Didn   t have to get in a boat to get from your  house to town?  Pence No. I never had to get it a boat.  Hugh I thought you did one time Dad, back in the    90s when it got so bad  raining and flooding.  Pence I live three miles from Kirk Street, down there.  Finchum That   s where the elephants are.  Pence Yeah. They are about two miles   their headquarters   the road I   m on,  they   re two miles east of me.  Finchum Okay.  Pence Yeah, you got to go east.  Finchum How was the house heated when you were little?  Pence It was an ordinary house.  Finchum How was it heated?  Pence Oh, wood, when we first got it.  Finchum Wood.  Pence It   s gas now, but it was wood when I first moved in it.  Finchum Did it have indoor plumbing?  Pence We didn   t when we moved there. We did after we were there a while.  Finchum How would you do a bath when you were little? Bath time     Pence We had a bathroom on the back porch. We had a back porch there and  got a bathroom there. We had a big tub, kind of a double tub. It was just  like a tub, but it was about a tub and a half in other words.  10  Finchum How often would you take a bath?  Pence Oh I don   t know. I guess when I needed it. (Laughter)  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Pence The little school I went to was just a half mile from where we lived. We  walked it.  Finchum What was the name?  Pence Shady Grove.  Finchum Shady Grove. Was it a one-room?  Pence Two-room.  Finchum Two-room.  Pence Had two teachers.  Finchum What would you take for your lunch?  Pence I guess whatever we could get. (Laughter)  Finchum Your mother a pretty good cook?  Pence A good cook. I   d say a good country cook. She knew how to cook  beans and tators. (Laughter) Beans   Finchum Beans  Brown beans?  Pence Yeah. This guy asked me,    What did y   all eat when you were growing  up?    I said,    We had plenty to eat.       Where did you get it at?       We  raised it.    He said,    What did you live on?    I said,    Beans and tators.     He said,    Beans and tators?    I said,    Yeah. When I was growing up, if  you didn   t eat beans and tators, you didn   t eat.    (Laughter)  Finchum Do you like them today?  Pence Yeah. I still eat them.  Finchum Hmm, not chicken?  Pence Yep. My mother could reach in there and get a little meal and walk out  the back door and holler,    Chick    and throw it down and reach down  11  and pick one up and wring its neck and have it cooked in fifteen or  twenty minutes. (Laughs) We raised them.  Finchum Just part of it, wasn   t it?  Pence Part of it. Yeah, this guy asked me,    Where   d you get your eating when  you were a kid?    I said,    Well, an old cow come up and brought our  milk and butter. We had to take it away from her though.    (Laughs) I   d  come in from school, it was my job to get the eggs and feed the  chickens, pick peas or cut okra, whatever. We had plenty to eat. My  daddy had a meat box big as a wagon bed. There was meat in there all  the time.  Finchum A meat box?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum I don   t know what     Pence You cure meat in.  Finchum Okay.  Pence You kill this hog, see and take some hams and everything. You put  them in this box and cover them up with salt. The salt drawed the water  all out of it. It just cured then, see?  Finchum Tasted pretty good?  Pence Yeah  The doctor tells you not to eat it now, it ain   t good for you. I was  raised on it. I still eat sausage and I still eat ham, so I don   t know. The  doctors tell you there   s too much cholesterol in it.  Finchum You worked it off.  Pence I guess we did, probably.  Finchum Did you go to high school?  Pence No.  Finchum Finish the eighth grade?  Pence Finished the eighth grade.  Finchum Then what did you do?  12  Pence Oh I worked around until I was grown. As soon as I got a year or two, I  was doing everything a man done. I got on a road job with them mules  that my daddy left. When it came time to go to school, I didn   t quit, I  just kept on going. Then the Depression come on. And we milked cattle  all through the    30s. It was the Depression. Milked cows, separated the  milk, and sold the cream. That was rough times when it was that  Depression.  Finchum What else do you remember about it?  Pence It was just   people were out of work, they had to leave. They left here  by droves. Wasn   t no money.  Finchum But you all stayed? You and your mother stayed here?  Pence Yeah. We had a lot of cows. It was open range. They closed the range  after my daddy died. It was    28. We had to have everything off the  range by    28, 1928. We was already milking one or two cows, selling  eggs and cream and stuff like that. We just had to sell them cows and  stuff. No place to keep them. Well, when I sold them, we had fifteen  milking cows. For about ten years there, we made a living milking cows  and selling cream. That   s a job. Milk at night, then you had to clean up  everything. Heck, we sold cream on Wednesday and Saturday. We were  getting four or five dollars. We made it, see?  Finchum Hmmm   .  Pence We stayed. A lot of them left, couldn   t get nothing to do.  Finchum Would you buy your clothes?  Pence Us boys. She made the girls, most of them. She was a good seamstress.  She patched a lot of britches for us. (Laughs) We   d wear the legs off.  Finchum Were you the oldest?  Pence Yeah. I was thirteen when my daddy died.  Finchum You had a brother and sister?  Pence I had two sisters and a brother. The brother was just younger than I was.  By the time he was seven or eight years old, he was bigger than I was.  He made a big man. He died, he weighed over two hundred.  Finchum Well did you work for the WPA?  13  Pence Yeah. I helped   I worked on, in Hugo, to build a big stadium up there.  I don   t know if you   ve seen it, the rock stadium? I worked on it. Then, I  went to work at carpenter work. I worked two or three years at that. I  went to painting. I went to work painting in Hugo in    45. I stayed  working until   oh, I still go up there and talk to people sometimes.  They want me to come up there. Show them what to do.  Finchum When did you retire?  Pence I took my social security in    76, but I still worked because I could make  so much  and still draw .  Finchum Well, has Hugo changed a lot?  Pence Yes, it   s falling down. They   re pushing it down. (Laughs) Going to  have a new one I guess.  Finchum Did you help with the library?  Pence No, I didn   t help with it. I was working in town but I didn   t do it.  Finchum Well, when you were on the WPA, did you help with the library?  Pence No.  Finchum No, not then either.  Pence I just worked on that stadium up there.  Finchum Well, do you remember your first car?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum What was it?  Pence A T Model   Finchum New or used?  Pence Huh?  Finchum New or used? Was it new?  14  Pence No  It was old. Secondhand. Done been used, but it would get you  down the road faster than a wagon and a buggy. (Laughs) We had a  buggy and a wagon both.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  Pence There was a creek that goes down through there and me and my brother,  we stayed on that when we weren   t a working. (Laughs) Run up and  down that creek, catching perch. Caught a many a one in that creek  down there.  Finchum Would you go to dances?  Pence Yeah. I wasn   t a very good dancer though.  Bishop Did you ever pick cotton as a child?  Finchum He asked you if you picked cotton with your family.  H. Pence Yeah. We left Texas though when I was seven years old. We didn   t  raise cotton up here.  Finchum Oklahoma was pretty new at that point.  H. Pence Yeah, it was. Hugo, they built a lot after we come here.  Finchum The Harvey House?  Pence It had just been built, the Harvey House, the depo down there. The  freight depo was still over there south of town. On Main Street they  called it. The freight depo was over there. We had shipped all our junk  on the freight and he parked over there. We had to haul it all over there.  Finchum Hmm     Pence Them was good days and bad days. You didn   t have no better, it was  good. If you had better, you didn   t want that stuff. (Laughs) You know  getting in a wagon now and going to town would be kind of rough,  wouldn   t it?  Finchum Well, the roads are paved. It wouldn   t be too bumpy.  Pence Yeah, they just give me a good road. It was all broke up.  Finchum Well, did Hugo have a movie theatre when you were little?  15  Pence Yeah, had ever since I   ve been here. Me and my brother, after we got  big enough to get out kind of on my own, if we could get a quarter by  Saturday, at dinner they opened the theatre, and all the western shoot-em-  ups and stuff. You could go in for fifteen cents, kids could, and you  could get a soda pop for a nickel and popcorn for a nickel. Man you  could go in there and stay all evening (laughs) and night watching them  over and over and over.  Finchum How would you get your quarter?  Pence Just anyway you could. First one way and then another.  Finchum Would you get paid for doing chores?  Pence No, just done them. (Laughs)  Finchum Sold extra eggs to get the quarter?  Pence I had to gather up the eggs every evening after school, feed the  chickens, and carry in wood. Kids don   t work anymore. They worked  back then. Picking peas or doing something. Feeding the hogs.  Finchum Was a quarter the most you ever had?  Pence As a kid, if I could get a quarter by Saturday, we   d go to the show.  Sometimes my daddy had to give it to us.  Finchum How would you get there?  Pence Well, you could get a ride in a wagon anytime. They was passing all the  time. Especially on Saturday.  Finchum Everybody went to town?  Pence Everybody went to town. This country was self-supporting then. There  wasn   t nothing hauled in here but sugar and coffee, or something like  that. It came on a train. Yes, the train brought that little stuff. There  wasn   t no trucks coming in here. There wasn   t no trucks, when we first  come in here. It was self-supporting. They   d come to town every  Saturday and through the week too. Peddle all kinds of vegetables, sell  eggs, kill hogs and sell them to the butcher shop. Everybody raised  everything they eat, raised it here, the vegetables and all. Now they  don   t raise nothing hardly. Don   t make a garden even.  Finchum Well, how did your mother do laundry?  16  Pence To start with like this. (Gestures scrubbing)  Finchum With a washboard?  Pence Washboard.  Finchum How would she get the water?  Pence Had to draw it out of the well.  Finchum How would you get it hot?  Pence We had a big pot there. It   d hold about thirty gallons. Build a little fire  and put in there and you got warm water.  Finchum Would she do that in the winter too?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Do you remember when she got her first washing machine?  Pence Yeah, I started to say, they came out with some washing machines for  sale, and she got a washing machine. Had a motor on it, had a gasoline  motor on it. She used it for a long time. Crank it up and take off.  (Laughs)  Finchum Hang it on the line?  Pence Then, when it got like   there wasn   t no electricity then, see. When they  put electricity in, why she traded it on an electric motor.  Finchum Well, when did you get married?  Pence Forty-one. It was 1941.  Finchum You were thirty? Waited a little late?  Pence I was, yeah, I think it was    41 when I     Finchum How did you meet her? Your wife?  Pence I just met her. Actually, I had known her when she was just a kid, going  to school. We   ve got a box here somewhere that   s got her picture in it.  Finchum What was her name?  17  Pence Ann, Ann Lorene.  Finchum What would you do on a date?  Pence Oh just go to a show or go to church or go someplace. Party.  Finchum Did you get married in a church?  Pence No.  Finchum At home?  Pence I got married at the preacher   s house.  Finchum Oh, did you have a honeymoon?  Pence No, we didn   t. We just honeymooned at home. (Laughter)  Finchum How many children did you have?  Pence Four.  Finchum Four.  Pence Four.  Finchum A house full.  Pence I just have three now. One of them died last month. He was sixty-nine  years old. He   d come up with that Lou Gehrig   s disease. Take him five  years to die.  Finchum That   s hard.  Pence He died out. It started in his ankles. He got to falling, his ankles turning  over. He went to the doctor about it. They messed around with it. He  got worse. They sent him to Oklahoma City, and they told him what  was the matter with him. Said he had Lou Gehrig   s disease. It just  gradually went up. It took him five years.  Finchum Did he live here in Hugo?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum What about the other three?  18  Pence There is one of them there. I got another one that lives here in town. My  daughter lives in Ada.  Finchum So you had two girls and two boys?  Pence No, I had one girl and     Finchum Three boys.  Pence Three boys.  Finchum Okay.  Pence The youngest one   s a girl. I had three boys and then a girl. This is the  youngest boy.  Finchum Well, you mentioned church. How important was that to you?  Pence Well, I go all the time. I went Sunday to church.  Finchum When you were younger?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Did you go when you were younger?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Baptist or Methodist or what?  Pence Baptist.  Finchum Did you sing in the choir?  Pence No, I didn   t sing. I told some of them that I couldn   t carry a tune and all  I could do was put it in a bucket. (Laughs) That is the only way that I  could carry a tune was in a bucket. (Laughter)  Finchum Play any instruments?  Pence No.  Finchum No.  Pence I can   t play no instrument. I never did try.  19  Bishop What did you used to do for family entertainment?  Pence Huh?  Bishop What did you do for family entertainment?  Pence Well, we   d go to this house over here and play dominos. We   d go over  there and they   d have a singing over here. People don   t do that no more.  They go home and watch TV.  Finchum Dominos, are you pretty good at it?  Pence Well, I make out. (Laughs)  Bishop You still play?  Pence I play every, I play now. I play every Thursday evening.  Finchum Do you win a little?  Pence A lot of time I do.  Bishop Where do you play at?  Pence Up there at the church.  Finchum At the church?  Pence First Baptist Church in the basement. A bunch of old guys. (Laughs) A  bunch of has beens. In fact they got more women that plays than there is  men. (Laughs) Yep.  Finchum Did you serve in the military?  Pence No, I didn   t get to serve. I missed it. I was just between, see. World War  I, I was, well it was over in    18. I was about seven year old then. Then, I  was married and had a family when another come on in the    30s, see. I  worked for the railroad during the war.  Finchum Oh did you? Doing what?  Pence Painting and when the war was over   I didn   t like the railroad. Antlers  had a tornado. It blew half of it away. Killed ninety-some people. A guy  I knew started painting up there. I quit the railroad and come back here  and went to painting. I painted the rest of the time.  20  Finchum Houses or inside/outside?  Pence Inside/outside     Finchum Everything?  Pence Yeah, I went to work for a guy and we were doing Antlers. He come to  Hugo, he wasn   t but fifty-four years old. He was working right there.  He said,    My leg is hurting.    He got up and messed around. He said,     I   m going to go to the house and lay down.    It wasn   t over twenty  minutes and they come and told me he was dead. I bought everything he  had, everything he used in the painting business. I went from then on  contracting, painting.  Finchum Well, did your wife work?  Pence She did before we married and when we first married. She didn   t after  that, after she started having these babies.  Finchum Well, she worked then, but at home.  Pence Huh?  Finchum She worked at home.  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Well, have you traveled much?  Pence Not much. Not much.  Finchum Been back to Texas?  Pence I used to go back to Texas. I got a lot of folks down in Texas, cousins  and what-not.  Finchum Well, when you turned 100, how did you celebrate?  Pence Oh they had a deal for me up at the church. They got it somewhere  there I think.  Finchum Did you think you would ever make it to a hundred?  Pence No, I didn   t. I never even thought about a hundred, but I kept on going.  Finchum What do you think your secret is?  21  Pence I ain   t go none. I imagine what helped me a lot is I never was  overweight. I never did weigh over about a hundred and sixty-five. I  never did weigh where I weighed over 170. I imagine that had a whole  lot to do with it. I never did have no stomach on me, just like I don   t  now.  Finchum You stayed busy.  Pence Yeah, I stayed busy. I don   t know whether that helped or not.  Finchum Painting, you would be doing a lot of exercise.  Pence Out there I   ve got a hundred-some acres of land. They took forty away  from me when they built that lake, and I had to move my house. I don   t  know. I made it some way or another. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, when they took that land, did they pay you for it?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum They did.  Pence They didn   t give me enough for it.  Finchum Just another place to fish?  Pence Just another place to fish. We didn   t need it. (Laughs) They spent a lot  of government money there you see. But I guess it   ll make money. I  don   t know. I   ve sure caught a lot of fish out of it.  Finchum Fry them up?  Pence Yeah. Me and my wife caught a lot of fish out of it before she died. I  got a boat. Ready to go now, but I haven   t been going. It   s been staying  up. Rained too much. A guy that fishes all the time down there, he told  me the other day, he said,    I can   t catch no crappie in there. I believe  when the lake is up they left out.    (Laughs) I said,    I don   t know. I   m  going one of these days.     Finchum Have you ever noodled?  Pence No, I don   t want to. I seen a guy do that and he pulled a moccasin out,  had a hold of his finger. That finger drawed down like that. He couldn   t  do nothing with it. He had to have it taken off. He came out and a head  of the moccasin had him right there by the finger. (Laughter)  22  Finchum Not for you?  Pence But I waded the creek, though, a lot.  Finchum What would you use for bait?  Pence Dig worms.  Finchum Dig worms.  Pence Yeah, anything will bite them worms, catfish and all of them.  Finchum Well, how early did you get up this morning?  Pence Oh, it was about seven thirty.  Finchum What time will you go to bed?  Pence I went to bed at, just a little before nine. I try to get to bed by nine.  Finchum What do you do during the day?  Pence Just anything. Go somewhere. Nearly every day I go to the house once a  day, if I   m up here. Piddle around out there and keep things straight. I  mow my own yard, work in the yard.  Finchum How do you get from here to there?  Pence I got a pickup setting out there.  Finchum You drive yourself?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Umm     Pence Yeah. I was out there yesterday. I drove myself. (Laughter) I quit  driving like going to Durant or Paris or Antlers. I just drive around here.  I go to town and get me something to eat.  Finchum Where is your favorite place?  Pence Well, I don   t guess I have no favorite one. I just eat anywhere. (Laughs)  Down here there   s a little place, in Sawyer. They got a good eating joint  down there. Then out in Messer, out there, it   s just three miles from  23  where I live, they got one. They   ve got them up here in town. Eat at the  house, just first one place and then another. I eat somewhere every day.  (Laughs)  Finchum Well, you mentioned you had a half-sister?  Pence Yeah. I had a half-sister.  Finchum Whose?  Pence She was my mother   s.  Finchum Your mother   s?  Pence Uh-huh. She   s buried in Fort Sumner, New Mexico.  Finchum Your mother was married before?  Pence Uh-huh.  Finchum How many children did she have by that husband?  Pence She had two.  Finchum Had two.  Pence Two girls.  Finchum Then you and your brothers and sister? So six?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum She had six children total?  Pence Yeah. I didn   t know nothing about them much. I wasn   t around them  much. They was done gone when I was big enough to know.  Finchum Well, had your father been married before?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Did he have children?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum How many on that side?  24  Pence He had two boys.  Finchum Pretty big family.  Pence Yeah. I tell you what, them old people, back then, my daddy and ones  his age, they all had a rough time. You take, they plowed down there.  That   s the reason that he left Texas. He had a big field. He   d raise that  cotton, one row at a time. Plowed it and all that kind of stuff. He didn   t  like it. He first made a school teacher. He quit and come to Texas and  put in a cotton farm. Gosh, you can   t hardly hire no help down there.  They won   t hardly let niggers stay down there. They   d run them off.  White people didn   t want to work. I   m glad he sold out before I got  started in it. (Laughs) It   s hard work.  Now then, I went to Colorado and I come back by Lubbock. I had a  nephew that lived out there and farming. I drove down by his house.  He   s out there in the cotton patch. I don   t know how many acres they  have, they have a lot, as far as you can see. He was out there with a hoe  walking around, see a weed and he   d cut it and he had his boy plowing.  He was plowing six rows at a time. He was plowing cotton, about that  high. He was plowing six rows at a time. When my dad had me plowing  it was just the one row. (Laughter)  Finchum Behind a mule.  Pence A mule. One time, just before he died, he had me in the cotton, it was  up about that high. He had me plowing it with a pair of mules, big old  mules, flopping down ears. About three o   clock, I got tired. I got them  lines and I tied the ropes real short. They were just a pulling me, you  see. (Laughs) He came around there and said,    Hey son, loosen them  lines. You   re aggravating them mules.    (Laughs) He wanted them to go  on down the row. He said,    Loosen them lines. You   re aggravating  them mules.    (Laughs) I was holding them back.  Finchum Did they have names?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum What were they?  Pence The mules?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Pence Mandy and June.  25  Finchum Mandy?  Pence And June.  Finchum And June.  Pence Big old mules. He used them mostly working on roads and things like  that. He could work all the time on the roads, railroads and what-not.  They was building roads. Them was the good old days they talk about.  (Laughs)  Finchum I know.  Pence You want to talk about the good old days, that   s them.  Finchum Well, would your mother make ice cream?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum Homemade Ice Cream?  Pence Made soap. (Laughs)  Finchum Made soap?  Pence Lye soap. It ain   t hard to make. Just pull a can of lye in a pot and  you   ve got to have some grease.  Finchum From the pork?  Pence Yeah, just any kind of old meat or anything, throw it in there.  Finchum Well, did she make quilts?  Pence Yeah.  Finchum How often would you get a new pair shoes?  Pence Well, we had to wear the ones we had out first. (Laughs) We usually  had to have two pairs to go to school with.  Bishop Did you ever have any good friends?  Pence Huh?  26  Finchum He asked did you have any good friends?  Pence Yeah, I had a lot of good friends. A lot of them, everybody was my  friend.  Finchum I believe it. Very many of them left?  Pence Not none that is as old as I am. I got some old friends that are still in  their eighties and like that, but I outlived them. You know, all the ones  my age.  Finchum You were saying when we got here that you still talk to them.  Pence Yeah, but they won   t talk back. (Laughs) They won   t say nothing. Last  week I went to two funerals. Both of them old people. One of them  lived out by me. They wasn   t as old as I is. One of them was ninety-three.  I have known him ever since he was a kid. One of them was  eighty-six, the one that lived by me. Buried one of them Thursday and  one Friday. They   re gradually dropping off. Next time I go out there  next time, I   ll say howdy to them and see if they   ll talk to me.  (Laughter)  Finchum What will you do if they do?  Pence I don   t know. (Laughter) I don   t know what   d happen if they  commenced talking. (Laughs) It   d be something new, I   d say.  Finchum Is that the Mount Olivet?  Pence Yeah, Mount Olivet.  Finchum That   s a pretty entrance. Did you help build it?  Pence No.  Finchum It   s stonework, isn   t it?  Pence WPA, I guess, done that.  Finchum It wasn   t part of yours?  Pence No.  Finchum It   s an interesting cemetery.  Pence Have you been out there?  27  Finchum Uh-huh.  Pence Yeah, there   s a lot of people buried out there.  Finchum The circus ones are neat.  Pence Yeah, the circus has a deal out there.  Finchum And Buster Brown.  Pence Yeah, Buster Brown   s out there.  Finchum I haven   t found his. I   ll have to look next time. Do you have anything  left on your bucket list you want to do?  Pence In life, you mean?  Finchum Yeah.  H. Pence Well yeah, I   d do anything I can do.  Finchum Anything in particular that you want to do?  Pence Well, ain   t no use in me wanting because if I can   t do it.  Finchum What would it be?  Pence Well, I   d go get my wife is the first thing I   d do. I   d say,    Come on let   s  go.    (Laughter)  Finchum Okay. And go fishing?  Pence I   d take her and we   d go fishing. She liked to fish, man.  Finchum Have you been on an airplane?  Pence I   ve been on one. I haven   t flown on one but I went on one. Just got on  to be getting on them.  Finchum Do you remember seeing one for the first time?  Pence Yeah, I remember the first one that I ever seen. There was one, a guy in  Hugo there. He went off and learned to be an aviator. He come back  here and there was a doctor there at Hugo. I don   t know what kind of  deal they had. The doctor and him flew an airplane. Brought it there to  28  Hugo, that   s the one that I got on. They   d take people riding every  Sunday, usually. Dr. Canaga, him and a guy by the name of Nash. They  had it some way or another and kept it there at Hugo. They had a little  air place out there by, sort of where the hospital is now. The hospital  wasn   t there then.  Finchum Would they charge you?  Pence Yeah. They charged so much, most people. Some of them they didn   t,  to fly. You know how that is.  Finchum Did you have to pay?  Pence No, I just got on it. I didn   t get in to fly. I didn   t want to fly. I was  scared of it. I was afraid of that thing would fall. I didn   t trust them  even. (Laughter)  Finchum Well, how about your first television?  Pence Well, the first television I had seen, I remember it. The guy was putting  in a grocery store. I was working in there. A meat salesman   I was  working there in the meat market doing some painting, and a meat  salesman come there and was going to take orders. He was going to sell  them meat, all the meat they wanted, see. He had a little old TV about  that big. He brought it in there and set it on the meat block and turned it  on. That was the first one I ever seen. Everybody that was working quit  when he turned it on. (Laughs) They were all watching it. That   s the  first one that I had ever seen. This meat salesman had it. He brought it  in there and turned it on. He was going to sell that guy a bunch of stuff.  That   s the first one that I   d ever seen.  Finchum Well, do you still carry a pocket knife?  Pence What   s that? (Reaching in his pant pocket)  Finchum What   s that, huh? Most people don   t anymore. I was curious. You  probably do.  Pence I   m supposed to have one.  Finchum There you go.  Pence It is a two-blade. I couldn   t do without a knife.  Finchum Did you have one when you were little, too?  29  Pence Yeah.  Finchum What would you do with it?  Pence Cut a fishing line. Cut a fish with it. Get a splinter out of your toe with  it. (Laughter)  Finchum But you   re very careful with it?  Pence Yeah, I am now days.  Finchum Do you have older ones?  Pence Yeah, I got two or three. I got one that   s about half this big. I carried  that thing until I about wore it out. This blade here is about like that  deal. I just got it in a drawer down at the house. I got one old big one in  there that   s broke, the spring broke on it.  Finchum You don   t leave home without it?  Pence I carry this one all the time now. I got this one so I carry it. (Snaps the  blade shut) That   s (gestures to another knife) what you call a frog  sticker. (Laughter) This one   s yours, isn   t it?  Hugh Yeah, you gave it to me. That   s one you carried for a long time.  Finchum Is it a Case, too? Yeah, cool. People don   t carry them much anymore.  Pence You can do a man up with one like that. (Gestures to another knife)  Finchum I guess if you wanted to. Yeah. You would do a number on your toe, too   Bishop I want to know, when history is written, what do you want it to say  about you? How do you want to be remember?  Pence Do what? I can   t understand you.  Finchum How do you want to be remembered?  Pence Oh, I just want to be honored just like an ordinary guy, always just kind  of a country guy.  Finchum Do you have a favorite church song?  Pence I like    Amazing Grace.    (Begins singing) Amazing grace     30  Finchum How sweet the sound   Pence I can   t sing. I never could sing. Like I said, had to put the tune in a  bucket if I carry it. (Laughter)  Finchum Well, is there anything else you want to tell us before we shut off?  Pence Well, I don   t know of it. I don   t nothing worth nothing, so there you  are.  Finchum Favorite childhood memory?  Pence Well, it   s all just a memory. Long gone. It would be good to go back in  time for a day or two. Wouldn   t it?  Finchum It would   Pence Go back and see my daddy and my mother, my wife, and my boy. I got  a boy that died last month.  Finchum It   s been a pretty good life?  Pence Well I think I have. You know I done a lot of work. That didn   t hurt me.  Finchum Hugo, Oklahoma is home.  Pence Home  I don   t want to go no further north, east or west. I don   t care  about going south. (Laughter) Just live it out here.  Finchum Well, we thank you for sharing your story with us.  Pence Well, it wasn   t no big task.  Finchum Well, we appreciate it.  Pence Huh?  Finchum We appreciate it.  Pence Thank you.  -------  ------- 
