 Finchum  Today is June 2, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Okeene, Oklahoma, to speak with Violet Stephenson.  Right.  And this is part of our 100 Year Life Project, so thank you so much for  having us today.  Most welcome.  Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  I was born in northern Blaine County, Oklahoma, one mile south of  Carlton, Oklahoma.  And when?  September 9, 1913.  And were you born at home?  Yes.  And you have brothers and sisters?  There were six of my family. I was number four: three girls and three  boys.  Okay, how many before you then, boys, girls?  5  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bill Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  One girl and two boys.  Okay and where did you go to elementary school?  It was called Broadview District number eighty-one, Blaine County. It  was just a mile from where I lived.  So would you walk or     Oh yes.  Take a horse or what?  We walked. It was a luxury if you had a horse.  What did your parents do for a living?  They were farmers. My father came here in in 1892, and he was a week  after the opening to stake his claim. The first wheat crop he raised on  that farm, he made thirty-seven dollars for the whole year. That   s all. He  decided he had to go elsewhere to live, to work, and he got on a freight  train and rode it to Denver. He worked at Denver awhile, and when they  found out he was a farm boy that could handle horses, they hired him at  Idaho Springs to drive a team, carrying the silver out of the mine. He  was quite a guy. He only got to go to school to the fourth grade, and his  father said that it was time for him to go to work, so he did. He was one  of ten children, five boys and five girls, but he was a man you   ll never  forget if you knew my father. Isn   t that right, Bill?  Yes.  He was one of a kind. When he died (he started, you remember, with just  a claim) he had eighteen quarters, plus. Enough for all the children to  have three quarters.  Did he keep the land when he went to Denver?  Yes.  He kept the land here?  His father lived right next to him. Didn   t amount to much. It   s not a very  good farm, but where we moved, we got a good land. We got lots of  good land over there. He was a big cattle man. What else can we say  about Dad, Bill? He definitely was one of a kind...  6  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Yes, that   s what I was getting ready to say.     and he didn   t believe in dilly-dallying around. You   re supposed to get  up and go to work. Have a reason to go to work and stay in there until it  was finished.  And what about your mother?  She was very intelligent. She graduated from high school in Idaho  Springs. Now that   s not a good combination, a fourth grader and a  graduate, but it worked out great. My two oldest brothers, we lived eight  miles from Canton. You won   t believe this, but, God help me, it   s the  truth. They rode horses to high school every day for four years. Now do  you know of anybody else that did that?  I do not.  They learned a lot from my father. He insisted that they get a good  education. Then the girls, the girls had to go to college. We couldn   t  work on the farm. Everybody had a job.  And what was yours?  Lots of chores. Everybody had their own little thing they had to do, and  mine was to clean up the table when they were through eating, carry the  dishes to the kitchen, wash the dishes. Oh, I had to do a lot of things.  Did I tell you I drove seven miles   when I got ready to go to high  school they couldn   t put me on a horse to go, so they had to teach me to  drive when I was thirteen.  Why couldn   t they put you on a horse?  Would you put a girl on a horse to ride seven miles for nine months? No.  You don   t do that, so they taught me to drive, and everybody got out of  the way. (Laughter)  What were the roads like?  Terrible. I had a gravel road for, I think, about two miles. The rest of it  was dirt roads. I remember one time I had to go through mud puddles.  You   re too young to know what it was like. It was horrible. The car died,  and the starter wouldn   t work, so I had to crank it. It kicked, and it  almost broke my arm. That wasn   t fun. I went four years to high school,  graduated at Southard, Oklahoma. You know where Southard is?  No.  7  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Oh my goodness, that girl is living a sheltered life. (Laughter)  Well, let   s back up. Where did you graduate from high school?  Southard.  Near Canton?  Bill, how far is Southard from Canton?  Six miles     About six miles.     east.  And what year?  What year did I graduate?  Yes.  Nineteen thirty-one. I entered in    27 and graduated in    31.  And how long would it take you to drive those seven miles?  If nobody was looking I could go pretty fast. Oh, I don   t know, maybe  thirty minutes. It   s just country roads, and they weren   t good.  Did you ever race your brothers? They were on horse, right?  Yes, they rode horses. They had to go to work on the farm. They were  plowing and doing everything, but my father said his girls didn   t work  on the farm. We just had to tend to the house. Take care of the chickens  and turkeys and things like that.  And help can?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. That was a big part of our life. We had a big cellar.  You know what a cellar is?  I do.  It was a nice cellar. You could put lots of things down there. It was just  like our   oh, what would you call it today? Anyway, all of your canning  8  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  and your fresh fruit and everything was in the cellar. That was one of my  jobs, go up and down those cellar steps, but it was all right. One  frightening thing in my life, (and I still remember it just like yesterday)  my brother brought me home from school in a storm, the middle of a  storm. The back door was open. I went in, and there wasn   t anybody  there. I thought,    What has happened to this world?    They were all in  the cave. That   s the only time they ever went to the cave, when the  storm was so bad. It didn   t take me long. I went to the cave, too.  Now, is the cave different from the cellar?  No, it   s all the same.  Same thing?  Yes. It was a great place. It was big, but you always felt safe down there.  I don   t know why both my folks made me do that, but it was good.  What was the rest of the house like?  Well, my house had five bedrooms, two story, two bedrooms upstairs  and a little sitting place up there on the second floor. The downstairs was  the kitchen and the dining room, the living room, and three bedrooms.  And then a big, big porch on the west. Had a big porch on the south, too.  It was a big house. It   s still standing.  Okay. And running water? Indoor plumbing?  Oh, no. I don   t know how to answer that. Our well was just out on the  outside of the big porch, but I got lots of muscles from that.  And was there an outhouse?  Well, sure.  A two-seater or a one?  Two.  Two. You were uptown.  We thought we were. (Laughter) Our whole world out there, it was a fun  place, lots of lively things going on out there, new baby colts and new  little calves, and the season rotates. He was a big cattleman. How big a  cattleman was he, Bill?  9  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  At one time he had three hundred cows.  Yes.  That   s a lot of cows for that day and age.  If you   re a city girl, you don   t know what that is, but that   s a big thing.  You got to feed them.  It took a lot of grass. That   s why he had so much land.  Bill was his first grandson. One time, (I don   t think Bill was six years  old) he went to the barn with Grandpa. Grandma was in Colorado  visiting, so I was out there taking care of things, and I got to worrying  about them. I hadn   t heard from him for a while, so I went down the path  and began to call. Before that, there was a horse that came around the  barn, ninety miles an hour, that thing hanging onto his mane. (Laughter)  That just about stops your heart. Anyway, I began to scream and yell,  and my dad came out of the barn and said,    Violet, you   re not raising a  sunflower.    (Laughter) He was raising a boy on a horse. He lived to tell  the story because there he is.  When I was about six years old we rode around Canton lake when they  was just starting it     Yes.     me and Grandpa. There was an Indian that tried to cut across the lake,  and he had to swim his horse quite a ways.  When he was a little boy, his conversation always started,    Me and my  Grandpa,    and then he   d tell you something.  Well, let   s back up a little bit. When you graduated from high school  what did you do?  Went to college at Northwestern  Oklahoma State University  at Alva  for two years. I just thought I knew everything I needed to know, so I  applied to teach the home school, and they let me for three years. Then  my youngest sister was eligible to be a teacher, so I said,    I will step  down, and you ask for this job and see if you get it,    and she did. Then I  taught just two miles east of where I lived. Let   s see. I taught there two  years, and then I got married and moved to Okeene. Here I   ve been ever  since.  How did you meet your husband?  10  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  At a dance. I was a good dancer, yes.  What kind of dancing, though?  What do you mean,    what kind   ?  Square dancing or ballroom or what?  Yes, ballroom. My kids are good dancers. Dancing was a big part of our  life.  And where would you dance?  Well, there was a public   what do you call it? What was Longdale,  Bill?  Dance hall.  Yes, it was a dance hall. Oh, my goodness. How many people would go?  Like maybe four hundred. It was a big thing. Dancing was real important  in those days. Not so much anymore.  How often would you go?  Once a week. They had a dance every Saturday night. Do you dance?  Only when no one   s watching.  Oh come on  (Laughter) It   s great exercise.  It sure is. How did you learn?  Just learned at home. My big brothers would dance with me. I had two  big brothers, and my sister and I would dance with my brothers. My  folks liked lots of music, and I do, too.  On the piano, or what would you use for music?  Radio.  Radio.  You know, when the radio first come out, (you won   t believe this) we  didn   t listen to it in the daytime. Everybody hurried up and had supper,  got all cleaned up, and we all went in the living room, sat down, and  11  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  listened to the radio. It was a good family time. We couldn   t believe we  was listening to somebody in Chicago or someplace else. That   s pretty  remarkable when you live a secluded life out there. Our little world was  pretty small, but it was a busy one.  So the farm had electricity then?  No.  No.  Batteries, so that   s why we didn   t listen to it all day long, and everybody  had a chance to listen at the same time. It was a family time. Kids don   t  believe that now, but that   s the way it was.  And some of the programs was music?  Oh, yes, lots of music.  Do you remember any particular song that was your favorite?  Oh, no, let   s see. I liked lots of music.     San Antonio Rose.     I liked lots of music.     San Antonio Rose?     That was a   oh, my gosh, I got to tell you this. The first year I taught  school I had thirty-seven children and all grades but the eighth grade,  and one little boy was in the third grade. His name was Bob Smith.  Every time I   d look at him that day, (that first day is etched in my mind)  he was just smiling like the world was just great. Then when I dismissed  them   back in those days, they marched out of the room and stood in  line until you said they were dismissed, and then they went home. Well,  after I said that he was dismissed, he come back, and he stood by my  side, and he took my hand, and he said,    Miss Haigler, you   re the  prettiest teacher we ever had.    (Laughter) When he grew up, he was  really a good dancer. We still went to all these dances, and he   d sing to  me. When they   d play    San Antonio Rose,    here he   d come.    Dance  with me, Teacher.    (Laughter) He was quite a guy. He turned out to be a  big auctioneer. How big a man was he, Bill?  How big a man?  12  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  I mean prominence and all. Wasn   t he important?  Oh, yes.  Very important in Fairview.  Yes.  Just come from nowhere, the sand hills, just like I did. He was a great  guy, but you know they   re all gone now. I don   t have any of them to talk  to anymore, and that   s sad because they were good kids. I don   t think I  had a little Indian that first year, (I can   t remember) but once in a while  there would be a Indian. Oh, yes, there was a Indian boy in the class,  too, yes, one. That was hard for them to go to our school. That was very  hard for them.  Tell them about that one that brought his daughter.  Oh. When my sister started teaching that time I told you, she had all her  students all lined out. Pretty soon something opened the door. Said it  was the tallest Indian she ever saw in her life and this little tiny girl he  was bringing. He wanted her to go to school. He brought her in, and she  got the desk assigned to her and got all settled. Then he went out by the  windows out farther away, but he could see in the windows. He laid his  blanket, and he sat there all day for three weeks, and then he   d take her  home. He wasn   t going to let any of those white kids mistreat his little  girl. Then after that, she would come in by herself. You never knew  where he was, but he was out there in the woods. He waited all day for  her and took her home.  Did she stay the whole school year?  Oh yes, yes, went clear through the eighth grade, but after the first year I  don   t know whether he stayed with her or not then. They didn   t have a  good feeling toward us. We were the outlaws in their world, but that was  an interesting thing to happen to a classroom. She was so shy, but she  was a sweet child. Her name was Lily Oldcamp.  Lily?  What was his name, Bill?  I don   t know, Mom.  I don   t remember that, either.  13  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Stephenson  I don   t know. Well his name was surely the same as hers?  Yes, he was an Oldcamp. I don   t remember an Oldcamp family, just  those two people, but there had to be.  I don   t either.  I don   t know that. I   ve forgotten quite a bit.  You remember quite a bit, too, though.  Really?  Yes. So how many children would be in your classroom?  Well, the first year I taught, there was thirty-seven, all grades but the  eighth grade. There would be close to forty. When I think about that  now, I don   t know how I ever made it. I don   t know why they put up  with me, but we all come out even somehow. (Laughs)  What would you do for lunch?  Your mother packed your lunch, and you took it with you.  And what would that usually be?  Oh, we always good sandwiches. We always had lots of food, too much  really. Had fresh fruit, and she made the best cinnamon rolls I ever ate  anywhere. They were good. You were lucky if you had a cinnamon roll  every day. You didn   t have one every day, and sometimes you would  have a bought cookie. They weren   t very good, but the cinnamon rolls  were good. Oh, and she made the best pies. Oh, boy. We had lots of  food.  You graduated from high school in    31? Is that what you said?  In (what did I say)    27 I entered,    31 I graduated, two years later I started  teaching.  So that   s kind of during the Depression time. Do you remember anything  in particular about that?  Oh, yes, everybody was in the same boat. We had nothing, but we just  kept going.  Did your mother make a lot of your own clothes?  14  Finchum  Bunnie Bond  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Oh, yes. Oh, I   ve got a   Bunnie, do you have picture of my first day of  school?  Not with me here.  Not here.  I don   t think     It   s over at her house. I had a new dress. Mother made me a new dress,  but my new shoes didn   t come. I had to wear my old shoes. I can  remember that very well. My first teacher, she wasn   t a lovable person. I  just wasn   t quite sure about her. My mother and father were very lovable  and very concerned about what you   re doing, all about your life, but this  lady was a different kind of person than I had ever met. I didn   t like her.  Nobody ought to say that about their first grade teacher.  What made you decide to be a teacher?  Back in those days, you could either be a teacher or a nurse. That   s all  there was. That   s all the choice you had. I didn   t want to be a nurse, so I  decided to be a teacher. I had some good teachers.  A favorite subject?  This sounds unreal: I loved science. I still do. I was going to be a science  teacher. I taught first grade for thirty-eight years.  Discovery. It   s the age of discovery.  Yes. The reason I became a first grade teacher, it was time for my  daughter to start to school. I enrolled her that morning that school was to  start. They didn   t have school that day, so I told my husband,    We ought  to take the children to the circus. They   ve never been to a circus yet.    He  said,    Okay, let   s do.    So we went up to Enid to the circus. Well, you  know, a circus, no air conditioning. It was torture, but Bill loved it. He  just   oh, my. (Laughs) When I came home my phone was ringing. I  said,    Hello?    He said,    This is Paul Kratz.    He   s the superintendent of  the school. Said,    I need to talk to you, Violet,    and he slammed the  receiver down. I thought,    I wonder what I   ve got into now.    He come  over, and he said his first grade teacher had enrolled over forty (I  remember this) first graders, got mad at him at noon, and resigned and  left town. He was up the creek for a teacher. That was   were we having  a war then? I don   t remember. Anyway, everybody was gone.  15  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  It was just the end of it.  He said,    If you   ll help me for two weeks, I   ll find somebody.    At  Christmas, he kept on coming over from time to time. He hadn   t found  anybody. That Christmas he said,    Don   t you think you can stay the rest  of the year?    Then I stayed (how many years did I teach) thirty-three  here in Okeene. I   d already taught eight years when I started, and that  made forty-one. I think so. That was weird. I had retired, see? I wasn   t  going to teach anymore. Don   t ever say you   re going to stop because  you don   t. You keep going.  What did your husband do for a living?  My first husband was an insurance man, but he didn   t much care for  children. I think I was married to him twenty-three years, and then we  were divorced. Then (you won   t believe this) forty-three years after I  had finished college, my college sweetheart come back, and we were  married. He   s a super guy. He   d lived in New Mexico most of the time.  He was a great guy. He come from a long line of doctors. His  grandfather was a doctor, his dad was a doctor, and several of his  nephews are doctors. Now they   re mostly settled near Wichita Falls,  Texas. My goodness, there   s so many I don   t know. I don   t know them  all. He was a great guy, but his health wasn   t good, and Oklahoma  wasn   t a good place for him to live, but he wanted to stay. He was really  a nice fellow. Don   t I have a picture of Carroll, Bunnie?  Yes.  I want them to see what Carroll looked like. He was good.  What role did church have in your life?  Well, we weren   t able to go to church when we were young. Now, isn   t  he a handsome guy?  He   s got a sweet smile.  He   s some kind of guy. That was my college sweetheart.  And how did he find you after all those years?  Well     Phonebook. (Laughter)  He came back to see his brother. His brother was a doctor in Alva, and  16  Bond  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Barnes  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  he came back. I think it was Thanksgiving time, to celebrate  Thanksgiving with his brother. When he got to Seiling, he thought,     Well, I wonder if Violet still lives in Okeene,    so he called me up. I  could not believe it, but he was a great guy. I   m glad he came back. We  had   how many years were Carroll and I married, Bunnie? I forget.  Close to twenty, I think. Wasn   t it?  I just   right now it   s all mixed up.  No, I   m sorry it wasn   t that much.  I don   t know.  She called me one day and said,    What do you think about if I go out on  a date?    (Laughter) I told her,    Hell, you   re twenty-one, ain   t you?     (Laughter)  So you got your son   s approval.  Yes, (Laughter) and if there were ever two people that were different, it  was Bill and Carroll, but they got along beautifully, yes.  Well, then we should probably go back and talk about your children.  You had two?  Yes, Bill and Bunnie.  Three.  Oh, yes. I lost the third one. He just lived five hours. That still bothers  me. I don   t like to think about that because he should   ve lived.  So Bill and Bunnie.  Bill and Bunnie. Her name   s Marilyn June, but nobody knows what it is.  I think I picked a pretty name.  Marilyn     June.  It is pretty.  Yes, and he was William Edward, too, named for his grandfathers. He  and his grandpa, they just run the world out here. What the rest of us  17  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  wanted, that wasn   t important, just what he and Grandpa were doing, but  it was a good training. I think my dad said it pretty good. He said,     Violet, you   re not raising a sunflower.    I was raising a boy. He was  making a man out of him.  What were holidays like?  Well, Christmas was a big thing, and Thanksgiving was, we always went  to your grandparents for Thanksgiving. Christmas was just a family  affair, but our family was pretty good size, so we had lots of things  going on.  What were some of the things you would do for fun besides dance?  Well, that was it.  Was it?  You worked all the rest of the time. You were supposed to be busy doing  stuff. It was a good life, though.  And we got sidetracked on church. Was church     See, we didn   t have a car, and we was eight miles from a church. You  can   t get to church in time. It   d be over by the time we went there in a  wagon. (Laughs) Mother made sure we knew what the Bible was and  lots of Bible stories. It was good. When I married and came over here, I  started attending church regularly. That   s my church over there,  Methodist Church.  You didn   t have far to walk.  No, I thought about that when I moved down here. I used to live five  blocks up the street, right across the street from the school.  So you walked to work?  Yes. Oh, yes. In fact, you did most of everything walking when I was a  youngster. You walked wherever you was going, but it was all right. It  was okay.  Okeene changed a lot during your time here?  Yes it has, just the people. The west acres, there   s a big housing addition  out there. That was just a wheat field. What year did that start, Bunnie?  18  Bond  Finchum  Bond  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  I think in the late   70s.  Yes. I came here   when did I get married? I can   t remember.  Thirty-seven.  Yes, 1937. This was originally a German town. Okeene was settled by  wheat farmers, mostly. Those days are gone now. You don   t hardly ever  see a combine. The street just always looked the same to me. Once in a  great while we   d come to Okeene after we got a car, but it was a day  trip. You came over usually right after lunch, but you   d get home about  five o   clock. It would take a long time to go eighteen miles. See, I lived  way out there, but it was a good place to live. I don   t know if I told you  my grandfather brought   did I tell you that he brought five girls and  five boys from Kansas when he came here? They all settled in a group,  and they still live in a group. That   s just Haigler country out there. It   s in  the third generation. Isn   t it the third generation now, Bill?  Yes.  Yes. We came to stay. (Laughter)  From Kansas, and then where before Kansas? Germany? Were they  German?  No, my father was born in Iowa.  That   s where she gets her longevity. I   m just joking (Laughs).  We had a   what did we have down at Roman Nose  State Park  a week  or two ago?  Family reunion.  A family reunion. There were between ninety and a hundred there. I  wouldn   t be able to tell you who they were. I don   t know them.  Were you the oldest?  Yes.  Did anyone else come close?  No, not that I know of. Did anyone else come to my age, Bill?  No   19  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  No.  Charlene. How old is she? She was younger than you, but     Well, she   s probably in her early seventies.  No, no, she   s older than that. She   s probably in her eighties because I   m  seventy-five almost.  Well, you better listen to Bunnie. She knows what   s going on.  (Laughter)  Did anyone else in your family live to be a hundred?  Yes, my oldest sister lived to be 102     Oh.     but she wasn   t living alone like I was. She was in a rest home. I   m not  going to a rest home. I tell Bill to drive fast when they get by a rest  home. (Laughter) I   m not stopping there.  So what do you think the secret is? Why do you think   what do you  attribute your long life to?  I have no idea. Pure accident. Don   t know. My mother lived to be  ninety-three, my dad was eighty-one, and my two brothers were in their  late eighties. My oldest-lived sister, like I said, was 102. My youngest  sister died before she was eighty, and my youngest brother   how old  was Jim? Was he in his eighties, Bunni? I think so.  I think so.  Yes.  I   m pretty sure he was.  We came to stay.  Well, did you ever expect to live to a hundred?  No. No, I didn   t.  But when your sister did, did you think,    I   m going to, too   ?  20  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Bond  Barnes  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Finchum  Barnes  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  She was a little over ten years older than I was. No, I didn   t think I   d  live to be a hundred. I still can   t believe it.  Well, you look great.  Oh, my goodness. Maybe you better have your eyes checked. (Laughter)  How did you celebrate your hundredth birthday?  What did we do, Bunnie?  We had a big party.  Had a big party across the street.  Oh, oh   Here   s the book if you want to look at it.  If you want somebody to dream up a party, get Bunnie. (Laughter) She  can do it. My land, I don   t know how many people came there.  Over 150 signed the book.  And I knew most of them.  Lots of kids come she taught in school.  Oh, yes. They weren   t kids anymore. (Laughter)  Well, no, but     Lots of them.  I   m not either.  To me you are.  Oh, yes. (Laughter)  I   m still working on him. (Laughter)  Well, is there anything left on your bucket list you want to do?  No, I just want to live every day and be comfortable and happy. I don   t  like stresses, and I don   t like traffic. Oh, it just drives me crazy when  21  Barnes  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Bond  cars are going by me every direction. I   ve been driving since when?  Lord knows, way back.  Thirteen.  Since you were thirteen.  Yes, but they   re not friendly anymore.  Roads are a little bit better though.  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. You don   t have mud puddles to run through and all  that stuff.  Well, would you go to Oklahoma City very often in your younger days?  No.  No.  That was just like a different country.  Well, the biggest town you would go to?  That was the biggest town. Later, I spent a summer in Europe. My  daughter   s husband was stationed somewhere in Germany. Where was  that, Bunnie?  Schweinfurt.  Yes, Schweinfurt. Took my grandson, my only grandson, and so I had to  go over there and see about him. I spoiled him pretty good. He   s a great  guy now. He   s a big architect out in Los Angeles, yes.  That   s a long way from Okeene.  Yes, it is. He went out there to manage a men   s clothing store, and he  heard about this program that was going on. Bunnie, can you tell them  how Dwight got into school?  How he got into school? No. (Laughs)  Anyway, he decided to finish up going to school. How did that all  happen, Bunnie?  Well, he went to OSU for a year and didn   t like what he was doing, so  22  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  he went to Tulsa and got a job with a clothing store. They eventually  moved him to California, and then he found a school up there that he  liked.  Yes. Then he married a lady that   s a nurse, a graduate nurse. They   re a  great couple.  What do you do for hobbies today? Do you read, garden?  I usually take naps. (Laughter)  Take naps?  Oh, let   s see. For my hobby I   ve always sewed a lot. I   ve just done lots  and lots of sewing, but I can   t do that anymore. My vision isn   t that  good anymore. I read some, but I listen to lots of   I   m a great music  fan. I could listen to music twenty-four hours a day. My TV has a music  station that plays all the   . I like that.  Do you have a favorite?  Not really, but I like modern swing. I like really good country, not trashy  country. I like to listen to that, too.  Well, how early in the morning do you get up?  Nowadays?  Nowadays.  About eight o   clock. I used to get up between five thirty and six all those  teaching years, but those days are gone.  And then how late do you stay up?  I usually wake up from my evening nap about eleven o   clock and go to  bed. (Laughter) I like to listen to music in the evening, and I put it on the  music station. It   s good to sleep by.  Did you belong to a homemaker club? No, you taught, so you wouldn   t  have had time to belong to a homemaker club. Did your mother?  Yes, and my sister, oldest sister. Oh, my young sister did, too, but I  didn   t. I just worked all my life, and then when I finally retired, I just let  it go.  23  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Do you have a philosophy of life or motto that you live by today?  No, not really. When you work all the time, you don   t think about those  things, or I don   t. Let   s see. How many years did I take off? I took off  four years to have my children, then I went back to work when Bunnie  took me to school for the two weeks that lasted thirty-three years. Yes,  that was a long two weeks, but it was a good one.  Did you have many more Indian children in your class?  No. There aren   t any Indians   are there any Indians around Okeene,  Bill?  No.  I don   t think so.  Do you remember your first airplane, seeing your first airplane?  No, I don   t remember that.  Remember much about World War II with the town you lived in?  World War II, it was hard to get certain foods. We couldn   t get enough  sugar in those days. You couldn   t buy shoes. I remember one pair I wore  so long I wondered how they even stayed on my feet. You couldn   t buy  shoes. It was hard. You were just allowed so much sugar in a month or  two weeks or whatever they measured it by in those days. You didn   t do  a lot of baking.  They didn   t have school lunches at that point, either, did they?  In what point?  In the   40s, during the war.  No. It was a little rough, but, you know, the people around Okeene, they  came here with a determination to stay and make a go of it, and they did.  They made it.  And then they got into rattlesnakes.  Oh, gosh. (Laughter) Everybody remembers that about Okeene. Oh, I do  my shopping early in that week and shut the doors, and I don   t go out.  Never went on a hunt?  24  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bond  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Barnes  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Bishop  Stephenson  Oh, no. Bill could tell you about the hunts, but I can   t tell you.  I sure wouldn   t go on one, either.  No. I don   t like snakes. That was one thing my father always told us  when we were riding a horse. Now what did he tell us about fences?     Don   t ever get off the horse at a fence row because that   s where the  weeds grow the highest. That   s where the snakes will be.    Did you know  that?  No. Makes sense, though, doesn   t it?  Yes. If you went ten miles out this direction, you   d see a big, big what  they call   what do they call that canyon, Bill?  The gypsum canyon?  Gypsum canyon. There   s a big gypsum plant out there, like a five-million-  dollar deal. It   s huge. It started very small, but it   s grown over  the years. Those hills are just gypsum. You dig in there, and it   s just  white. It   s gypsum. That   s what these walls are made of, here and lots of  other places. They used to make plasterboard out there. You know what  plasterboard is?  Yes, I do.  One time, Southard was the last plant that made plasterboard in  Oklahoma, but they don   t make it anymore, do they, Bill?  No.  It   s over, but they still mine a lot of stuff. It   s interesting, really, how the  good farm land is out there, and still under that ground is this gypsum,  big gypsum hill, big canyons. Now there   s big oil wells on top of the  canyons.  They   re all over this county, looks like.  Pretty much.  Well, I want to know, when history is written, what do you want it to say  about you?  About me?  25  Bishop  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Yes.  That I came from a great family, I had wonderful parents, great brothers  and sisters, and we all lived in this area where we could see each other  while we grew up. After they grow up and get married, they begin to  spread out and go different directions. I   d like them to know that I taught  school a long time, made lots of beautiful friends in the classroom. It  was a safe place to be. Nobody bothers a classroom. Can you think  anybody that went in and bothered the classroom?  Not back in those days.  No. Do they now?  Some.  What do they do?  Bad things.  Good heavens. That   s not right, is it?  No.  No. Well, let   s elect a new governor and pass a law, straighten it out.  (Laughter)  What   s your biggest challenge today? Being a hundred, what   s the  biggest challenge?  Gee, I don   t even know. My family   s still the big thing in my life. I have  a great-grandson that lives in Chicago, and, oh, he   s a joy. His name is  Benjamin, and he   s going to be in the first grade this year. When you  talk to him on the telephone, he   ll say,    This is Benjamin, and I   m going  to be in the first grade.    It   s a big thing for him.  And he   s not a sunflower, either, huh?  (Laughs) He   s great.  Well, do you remember voting for the first time?  Yes, I did. In fact, we didn   t have a car, and I rode in the wagon with my  dad. We went to vote, and all the way I said,    Dad, what am I? Am I a  republican or a democrat?    He said,    You   re a democrat.    So I   m still a  democrat. He told me. We didn   t know much about politics. All we had  26  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  Stephenson  Finchum  was the newspaper, and it came out from Wichita, Wichita Eagle. You  have no idea what life was like in those days, but, you know, it was a  good life. It really was. Everybody cared about everybody else, and they  were concerned about what was going on. In fact, I think I told you I  lived eight miles from Canton. That   s where the doctor lived. When I  was born, he came in a buggy, horse and buggy, my mother told me.  That   s how far back it was. Now I don   t know if they even have a doctor  in Canton. Okeene sends one over there every day, so one of our doctors  go over there. It was a different world. The Fourth of July was a big  thing. That was a big celebration because a carnival always came to  Canton, and that   s the only place we could get to see a carnival. We   d go  to the carnival, go to the Fourth of July, stay all day, go home, and just  think we had a great time.  Did they have rides at the carnival?  Oh, yes. You get to ride the merry-go-round. Oh, yes. That was great  stuff. I don   t ever remember a carnival coming to Okeene. I suppose it  did, but the snake hunts, oh my, I don   t like snakes hunts.  Anything else you want to add before we close off?  Well, I   m awfully glad you came here.  I am, too.  It   s a pleasure to know both of you.  Well, then we   ll say thank you for sharing your story with us today.  Well, you   re sure welcome.  All right.  -------  ------- 
