 Finchum  King  Today is April 2, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re here in Edmond, Oklahoma, to speak with Doris King,  who is 106, almost.  And three-quarters. (Laughter)  Thank you for having us today.  Oh, it   s a pleasure.  When is your birthday?  The fifth of June.  And you were born in 19     Seven.  Seven. And where?  In northwestern London.  London?  Yes.  What did your parents do for a living?  Well, my mother was a nurse, and my father was working at the post  office. In those days, everything was sorted by hand, and my father was  the chief sorter in the post office, yes.  5  Finchum  King  Bishop  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Did you have brothers and sisters?  I had one brother, six years younger than me, and what happened with  him. Oh, he was wonderful. I was sent away when I was (let   s see, how  old would I have been?) six or seven to stay with some neighbors, and  then I was taken back home. When I was taken back home, I was taken  upstairs, found my mother in bed. I thought,    Oh, well, I   ve been sent  away to be looked after,    when I was six or seven,    because my mother  was sick.    Just at that time, there was a funny little noise seemed to be  coming from the bed, and I said to my mother,    You must have a cat in  your bed.    She said,    Oh, no,    and she opened the bedclothes, and there  was this baby.  At that age, I had no idea that my mother was going to have a baby, that  she was pregnant. People didn   t talk about it, you see. So there was this  little baby, my brother, six years younger than me, and we were always  the very, very best of friends. He had said that if he could, if he died  before me, (I don   t know why he thought he might, because he was  younger than me) he said,    I   ll try and get in touch with you.    After he  died, he sent me an angel, yes. I   ve told you all this, haven   t I?  I can   t remember, yes.  Did the angel say something?  Well, what happened was, at the time, I was singing in a choir and with  my friend, a very good friend. We were on our way to choir practice one  night, and on the way, we were going to stop at a shop that sold herbs  and things. What kind of a shop is that? Pharmacy. We were going to  buy something there. Well, we got to the door, and my friend was  behind me, and as we got to the door, a man came and hugged me. Then  he wasn   t there  We asked in the shop if they knew who he was,  described him. Nobody knew who he was or anything. One minute he  was there, and the next minute he was gone. When we got back to the  church where we were in the choir, some people were already there.  Two young women that were there, they turned around, and they said to  me, you know, they said,    That was an angel because he was there and  then he wasn   t there.    So my brother had sent me an angel.  And gave you a hug.  And gave me a hug. It wasn   t like hugging him, anyway, because my  brother was tall and slim and bony, and this was sort of a shortish, well-set  man, but that didn   t matter. I had a hug, and he stroked my hair a  little bit and said,    You need comforting,    and then he wasn   t there.  6  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Well, what brought you to the United States?  Well, actually I had divorced my husband, with very good reason. The  trouble was he just left me because he left the house, the home, and had  brought a woman to the house to stay, and I could do what I liked about  it. Well, of course I couldn   t stay at the house with him there and this  woman and our boy, so my older son, Richard, he decided that he would  go and live with my parents. He could because he was eighteen years old  then, so he went and lived with my parents. I was left with my youngest  son, Eric, the one whose house this is. I was left with him and no home,  so of course life got very difficult. It   s all in a book that I   ve written.  Anyway, I stayed in England.  I finally managed to get back into the job that I was already in when I  had to leave, and that was with the H. J. Heinz Company. They had a  new factory there when I was about eighteen and had just left school. I  liked the job because math was my major, and everything in those days  was done in your head. There were no machines, no. Just one adding  machine was in the office, and that was to add up all the wages of the  week. The factory workers were paid weekly, and so that was a weekly  job with one machine. Otherwise, all their working cards and all their  pay and everything that had to be deducted was all done in your head,  but I loved it. Actually, when I was twenty-five I got married.  Did you stop working when you got married?  Yes, I stopped working when I got married. It was a long time later, as a  matter of fact. I went back there  H.J. Heinz  during the war, and I went  back there after my divorce. I managed to get back there then. Anyway,  I was in an office job at that time, and a sister-in-law who had a hair  dressing place in her home, she said, all she says is,    One of my clients  has a daughter who   s in America.    She was a GI bride, you know, and  apparently married somebody quite well off. She wanted to go home for  her parents    wedding anniversary. She wanted a housekeeper to be with  her, her husband, and a girl of fourteen, and a boy of seven. She wanted  a housekeeper while she was in England at her parents    wedding  anniversary, so my sister-in-law said,    Why don   t you see what this is  about?     I went to interview with the mother, and of course she was sizing me up,  but she was also telling me what it was a bit like in America. Came to  the time when I   because it was afternoon, and we   d had a cup of tea, of  course, and I was just going home. I said,    Well, all right, I   ll think  about it, and I   ll let you know.    It was a big step to make, to leave  England and go to America, because I had my other son there in  7  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  England, too. I set out to go up the road home, and then all of a sudden  the mother called down after me and said,    Shall I tell my daughter that  you   re coming?    I said,    Oh, yes.    I thought,    Great Scott  I   ve said I   ll  go to America     Having said that, I kept my word, so that   s how I came.  The dear Lord put those words in my mouth. I know he did because I  hadn   t begun to discuss to myself whether I would go to America or not.  I hadn   t made any decision at all, but as she said,    Shall I tell my  daughter you   re coming,    out it came,    Yes      In about what year was that?  Oh, dear, now I   ve got to and think. No, I don   t know.  1967   Okay. Well, then what brought you to Oklahoma?   I left the DC area to nurse my mother and when she passed I had  nowhere to go. Eric offered to buy a house for me in Edmond,  Oklahoma, where all I would pay would be the utilities and insurance.  With that as the best option, in 1977 I moved to Oklahoma.   Okay.  That was my first visit to  Washington D.C/Virginia , yes, to this  daughter   s place. I didn   t stay there very long, but then I got a job as a  housekeeper to somebody who worked at the CIA, the American CIA.  That was quite a nice job, that was. A man had lost his wife, and he had  a little girl. I was housekeeper and looked after the little girl, as well.  She was only about seven when I went there. That   s another story.  Well, you mentioned you sang in the choir.  Oh, yes. When I came to America, there was a Methodist church  in  Virginia , and that suited me all right. I joined the choir at this place.  The director of the choir and his wife, they were extremely helpful to  me. They were very, very nice people.  So you enjoy singing?  Oh, yes, I   ve sung all my life. I   ve sung solos in the church from the age  of about twelve. Then during the war I had the opportunity to get  professional teaching, and so at one point I was going to be a  professional singer. That didn   t work out, either. I think sometimes our  roads are crossed. Sometimes our roads are changed. We don   t always  have the answer ourselves, but it   s sort of given to us.  Well, do you sing today?  8  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Oh, I do if I want to cheer myself up. Apparently the lady that   s in the  room where I   m going likes classical music. Well, so do I, and I have a  lot of it on tape. I get to know a lot of the older songs, too, I know, and if  I want to cheer myself up, I start to sing.  Give us an example. What would you sing?  Well, I   ve had one recording made that was made in England, and one of  them was    Sleep, Baby, Sleep.    That   s a lullaby in the recording, and     The Lord Is My Shepherd, I Will Not Want.    No, that isn   t the one.     Sleep, Baby, Sleep.    Did I say that?  Can you sing it for me?  Oh, I don   t know. I don   t know about my voice now. It was all right  when I was fifty. (Laughter)  Give it a try.  What I will sing is the one that I sang the last. (Singing)    The Lord is my  light, my light and my salvation.    I   m sorry. (Laughter)  Better than I could do.  When I   m this age, it doesn   t come out so well. (Laughs) There were  four solos in this rendering. A friend of mine did it. We had a job getting  together because the organist lived in one place, and the one man friend  that was going to record it lived in another place, and the church where I  sang them, that was another place. Getting these people together at the  same time was no joke, (laughs) but we managed it in the end, and it   s  made a nice recording. Yes, I do have that.  You mentioned World War I. Do you have any particular memories from  that?  Oh, yes, of course. World War I started when I was seven, didn   t it?  Yes, that   s right. My mother happened to have TB, tuberculosis. They  sent her away to a sanatorium for a few months, so I was sent to some  cousins to stay. I was there for quite a part of the World War I. What did  amuse me later in life, I thought, when the sirens all went, my aunt or  uncle or whoever was looking after me, they woke me up, took me  downstairs because the lower floor would be safer than the upstairs, and  then said,    Now, go to sleep.    (Laughter) The guns were going, the  planes were going, the airplanes, the German planes, and the night sky  9  Finchum  King  was crisscrossed with the search lights trying to find the German planes  to be shot down.    Go to sleep,    they said. (Laughter)  So I was there during quite a while of World War I. My father was a  keen Bible student. He knew it was in there, it says    Thou shalt not kill,     so he didn   t want to go in the Army. My mother was convinced that he  wouldn   t have gone. For one reason, he was a lot older than the men that  were being called up. Another reason was the fact that as he was the  chief sorter at the post office, that was a sort of special job that he would  be needed for. Anyway, he joined up, but after a while, (it was after my  mother came back from the sanatorium) they took him out of the Army.  What the reason was, we really never knew, but he went back to being a  sorter again. World War I was a time when, of course, it was very, very  difficult to get lots of different kinds of food because in those days there  was too many submarines around getting rid of the English Navy. Where  did I get to?  There wasn   t much food?  Oh, all of the shops were little shops in those days when I was growing  up. The green grocery used to come around with a horse and cart  because there wasn   t any cars, you see. Then there would probably be a  shop   the rumor would go around,    Oh, there   s been a consignment of  sugar at such and such a shop.    Everybody went there, and they had, I  can   t remember if it was one or two bags of sugar each that they got  then. The food was short. Of course, in the second world war we had  rations, but in the first world war that was some time coming about. We  used to rush up to the shops when we knew there   d been a consignment  of food arriving. In those days when I was growing up, you either  walked, or you went by bicycle. You could ride a bike. There were only  trains, only trains and the horses on the land. As I say, you either  walked, or if you were lucky you had a bike.  I remember going to school on a bike later on. I got a scholarship to get  to be a teacher, and so I got a higher education than most of my neighbor  friends because most of them all left at the age of fourteen and went to  work. They had to be probably in a shop or do cleaning or something  like that. They did offer me another year, but then I thought,    Well, I  don   t know. All of my neighbors are going to work, my good neighbors     friends were going to work and providing something for the family.    I  felt,    I can   t be out of it.    It wasn   t a sure thing that I would pass the  next time I took the exam, so I decided that I   d leave school and get a  job and help with the family. That   s when I found out about the factory  being built near, within walking distance of my home, so that was all  right. As I say, I had many happy years working at H. J. Heinz  Company.  10  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Well, when you decided to come to America, how did you get here? By  boat or by plane?  Oh, I came by boat, yes. At that time, it worked out cheaper than coming  by air, and of course I had a pretty lot of luggage, too, as I was staying.  Do you remember getting your first  job ?  Oh, yes. I   d been working for a doctor, and he had the idea that when he  retired, he   d like Eric and me to go with him in his retirement. That  suited me because he was quite easy to get on with and he was good to  Eric. He really was good to Eric, so I was happy about that. Then his  sister came and says,    Oh, no, he   s going to live with me,    so that  knocked that out. Otherwise, I was going to retire with the doctor that I  was working for, but that didn   t work out, so I had to find something  else to do.  I think that was when I went back to   it was after the war, after the  second world war, you see. With not so many men coming home, they  had to cut out this order, the order that only men could work in the office  and not women. You couldn   t work in an office if you were married, a  woman. After the war, there were so many men gone, they had to  change their rules, so of course then the women started working in the  offices, too.  Do you remember getting your first car?   I did not have a car in England. Eric purchased one for me when I was  around seventy-six years old and was living in Oklahoma. I drove it until  I was ninety-three.   Did you enjoy cooking?  I love cooking, love cooking. I   ll tell you what I like: decorating them,  too. I did have a book, and I don   t know where it   s gone, whether it   s  lost between here and where I was living on my own in my own house  before I came here. I don   t know. It was a book full of pictures of all the  cakes that I   d decorated. When the kids were little, the children here,  (I   ve got great-grandchildren here) I would make, probably, a cake if it  was one of their birthdays. They   re great sports. I   d make a cake and  then put on the top a football field, and make it like that for the boys.  Until the last great-grandchild was born, they were all boys, great-grandchildren.  I   ve got four great-grandchildren in England, and I   ve got  how many here? One grandson has four. Let   s see. Seven great-grandchildren  here, yes.  11  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Bishop  Finchum  King  Bishop  Pretty good.  Yes, and they   re all such nice people. Oh, they   re such nice people, very  musical. One plays the bass, and the girl, she plays two instruments. I  can   t remember which two. My granddaughter, she   s a teacher, and she  gives teaching on the flute and the piano. They   re all very musical. It   s  great.  They got that from you?  Well, I hope I passed some of it down anyway, yes.  Well, did you ever think you would live to be a hundred?  I never gave it a thought, no. Well, one doesn   t, does one?  Not until you   re ninety-nine.  No. (Laughs) That   s right.  Did they have a big birthday party?  When I was a hundred they had one, and they brought out this book that  I   d written, not of my whole life but of  ninety-seven  years of it  anyway. My daughter-in-law here, she edited the book. I said to Eric,  my son,    Do we have anymore?    We didn   t put them on the bookshelf.  Eric and she, they bought a whole lot and gave them to friends, but I  think they   re coming to an end now. You can   t get one in a shop, but we  gave them away to friends. It was only recently I asked him if he had  any left anywhere because I said people are always popping up who   d  like one. I don   t know. If there is one available, did he give you one?  I don   t think they found one.  No.  Oh, well, if we do manage to find one somewhere, we   ll see about  giving you one because there   s about  ninety-seven  years of my life,  anyway, in it. After writing for about  twelve  years, I got a bit tired.  (Laughter)  When you were living in England, did you ever get a chance to see the  Royal Family?  12  King  Bishop  King  Finchum  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  Oh, yes because we lived in Wembley. It was just over the border from  northwest London. There was that great big place where they had sports  and races and all sorts of things, and sometimes the Royal Family would  go to these affairs, these games. It was just a walk up the hill to see them  go by, so that   s when I would see the Royal Family. I have a nephew in  Cornwall. Oh, you don   t know where Cornwall is. It   s southwest  England. Recently, he had an invitation to the Queen   s garden party, and  then found out afterwards that my nephew had been helping a lot with  boys. He   d been helping to teach them how to play the bagpipes because  he   s crazy about Scotland.  What about during World War II and the bombing of London? Were you  around that time?  Oh, I was in London during the Blitz. A house in the back of us had a  direct bomb hit, yes. We had an indoor shelter, and in one of my books  I   ve got a picture of the cover that they gave you to put in your house. It  was like a table with a deep metal top, and if you put it in the corner of a  house, two walls would guard it. Then at night, you would put a mattress  on the floor and a grating. You had two gratings to put up the other two  sides of the shelter. Well, that would save you from the blast because  these bombs did as much bad work at demolishing a house as they did  with the blast because that sort of spread out and of course destroyed  everything that it hit.  This one bomb that went down in the back of us, we never did find out  exactly what happened, whether there were any people in the house or  whether it was an empty house or not. I don   t know. Anyway, the blast  from that shot opened our back door, which was locked, and then  apparently went up the stairs because that was the way of least  resistance. It shot up the stairs. It got to the roof, and it couldn   t go any  further. It was dying of power, so it came back down, and with it, it  brought all the dust and dirt and everything that was in the attic. All we  got really was a lot of things falling off the wall and that, but our house  really escaped very well.  Scary times.  Oh, it was scary, all right.  Winston Churchill was a pretty important person at that time.  Yes, he was wonderful.  How influential do you think he was to you, or     13  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Yes, he was wonderful. I think so, yes. In London there   s Hyde Park.  That   s one of the parks. At the entrance to the park, there was a big arch,  arch in the park. In the basement, underneath the ground, there was an  office, war office, underneath a marble arch where it was the entrance to  the park. That was in London.  Now can you explain to me what exactly was the Heinz Company? You  said you worked for the Heinz Company.  Yes.  What did they produce?  Fifty-seven varieties. (Laughter)  Of what?  Well, of food, ketchup     Oh, ketchup, okay.     ketchup and sauce. HP sauce, that was great. Of course, working  there, we used to be able to buy them at cost, you see, and it was a very,  very good firm to work for. Every Christmas they gave a party to all the  employees    children. At one time, I did have a photograph of Richard,  my English boy, at one of the parties, but I don   t know where that is,  either.  Did you ever get a chance to meet the owners?  Well, no, he didn   t go to England very much from America. It   s an  American firm, and I believe he visited very, very seldom. No, I can   t  say that I ever saw the owner, no.  Do you have a secret to living to be 106?  Not at all. Not at all. All I   ve told you about what I do when I pray and  how prayers are answered, I think that   s   but then of course I haven   t  been doing that since I   m so old. (Laughs)  Well, do you have a motto?  I don   t think I have anything special, no, but the lady that comes and  gives me a shower, she had this beautiful saying that somebody who was  over a hundred had evidently written. The comments on it were just  wonderful, so I   m hoping that she   ll copy it for me because it gives you  14  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  Bishop  King  a lot of insight into how you can behave and how you should behave,  probably, yes.  How important has religion been in your life?  Very important. It means everything. I have a strong faith. You need a  faith that you understand, you know, no mystery about it, a faith that you  understand and that you can live by, and live by it the best you can. Yes,  I   ve always had a lot of questions, religious questions, and then I found  the   I know what brought it to me, you see.  I had married for better or for worse, and I intended to keep all of my  vows, but then Mr. King made it impossible because of what he did. He  brought home to my house, a woman and her child, and informed me  that they were staying and I could do what I liked. What choice did I  have? I just went. I had quite a time. As I say, my older boy, he was  eighteen so he could make a choice. He went and lived with my parents.  Well, there wasn   t room for Eric and me, as well, so we had to fend for  ourselves. That   s what the beginning part of that book is all about, me  trying to cope.  And was religion an important part of the coping process?  Yes, and how it happened, you see, I thought,    Well, there   s no  marriage, but I   d promised that I would stay to the end.    Then I thought  to myself,    Well, I don   t know. There   s something not quite right.    Then  I was introduced during the war to the Grail message, message of the  Holy Grail. I used to go and have my professional voice training, and  then one day she said,    After the evening   s done, we have a reading  from a religious book. Would you care to stay?    I said,    Of course, yes.     Mr. King was in the Army at that time, and  Richard , the  older  boy,  was evacuated away from the bombs of London. I said,    Sure, I   ll  listen,    and after the second lecture, my spirit was risen.  Eventually I came across one of the lectures that explained that in  heaven there is no marriage. The only thing that keeps two people  together is the love. The love lives on, but the marriage as an institution  is nothing. That freed me, you see, to get a divorce, didn   t it? So after  that, I sent for the book, and I started reading all the lectures. My  questions were just answered. They were just answered, and I thought,     This is what I believe, the Holy Grail.  And what about prayer? How important is prayer for you?  Prayer is very important. You must keep in touch with the Lord always,  and not forgetting to thank Him when things go right that you ask for,  15  Bishop  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Bishop  yes. Remember. There weren   t many Grail people here, and I used to  have the services at my house when I had my house. Then after that,  everybody that was a Grail person passing through Oklahoma used to  come, and I used to get them a dinner. We used to have services. That  was fine. Then of course it dwindled down. Several of the people who  used to come used to be going to the university. It   s only just a little way  away.  When they stopped coming, there wasn   t very many available to come,  so then what we did when I came here, because it wasn   t convenient to  have services here, we had a reading. Those that are left, the few of us  that are left, came once a month on a Sunday, and we had a reading from  the message. I don   t know what will happen now. Actually, two of the  people who come for the reading live in Guthrie, so I   m wondering if  something can   t be done. Maybe they wouldn   t mind taking on the  reading once a month to keep us in touch.  You   ve got, you   ve got to understand what you believe, and you   ve got  to believe it, and you   ve got to live it. That   s partly why I wear a cross.  When I accepted the Grail message, I had a cross. You get a cross. You  can   t buy it in a shop. You get a cross from them, and then it   s kind of a  reminder that this is what you believe and this is what you   re living by,  yes.  Well, what   s a typical day for you?  Well, now you   re covering a lot of years.  No, today, like this week.  This week?  Yes.  Well, it   s a bit confusing, to tell you the truth   putting some things in  boxes, and some of my things are staying here, and some things are  going to the new place. I don   t really know where I am. (Laughter) I   ll  find my feet one of these days, and I   ll make the best of it.  Positive attitude.  It   s got to be. You can   t have a negative attitude. You can   t. You really  can   t because that   ll foil you every time.  When history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  16  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  About me? Well, to the best of my ability I did my best, but I don   t have  the final answers of what the result will be, whether I passed any exams  or not. I do know that everything we do, whether we say it, whether we  pray it, whatever it does, has consequences. Sometimes we forget that,  but everything has a consequence, so it better be good. (Laughter)  Well, where do you call home? When someone asks you about home, is  that here     Well, it was.     or England?  Well, I was brought up in England, of course. I lived there most, well, I  lived there until I came here which was   I   m trying to give you a date,  but I   m not sure that I can.  Well, how old was Eric when you moved here? Maybe that   ll help.  Oh, yes, that might help, mightn   t it? He was about eighteen, I suppose.  He was given a   500  scholarship with one of the people that visited  England on a campaign. He   s not my religion, as you call it. He   s a  Church of Christ, he calls himself, and he and his wife pretty well run  the church, the  Dayspring  Church of Christ here in Edmond. So he was  about eighteen. Well, I had Richard when I was  twenty -nine. It was  three years after I got married. I got married when I was twenty-five,  well, about twenty-eight or twenty-nine when I had Richard. Then Eric  was born after the war in    46,    46, that   s right, he was born.  So in the early   60s is about when you came here then, 1960s?  Yes, yes.  1967   Okay. So Oklahoma   s home?  Well, it is now, oh yes. It is now. This little bit of it is at the moment, but  I don   t know where I   ll finally end up. I thought I was going to land up  here, but that didn   t work. The dear Lord knows when he   s going to take  me. I don   t.  Is there anything left on your wish list to do?  Well, no. Those sort of things have passed. I didn   t sing, and I didn   t  become a teacher, and I didn   t become a nurse. They were all paths that  just went off the board.  17  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  King  Finchum  But it   s been a good life overall?  Oh, I think so. I   ve had a lot of help. I certainly had a lot of help. I mean,  it seems to me all the people I meet are very, very nice. I don   t think I   ve  got anybody that I would dismiss, you know.  Well, we certainly appreciate you telling us your stories today.  Oh, thank you. (Laughs)  It   s been a pleasure.  Oh, well I   m glad about that.  All right. That   s enough isn   t it?  Yes, I think so.  Okay.  -------  ------- 
