 Finchum  Today is March 28, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Shawnee, Oklahoma, to speak with Jimmy Ray, and this is regarding our  100 Year Life Project. So thank you very much for having us today. Let   s  start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  I was born in Shawnee. I doubt very many around here now are born in  Shawnee unless they   re young. The older ones moved away or died. I  was born on October 19, 1913. My birth certificate says I was so many  miles one way and then a few miles the other way from Shawnee, but  now, it would be in Shawnee. Well, I think it   s across the road from the  Shawnee Country Club right now.  Born at home?  Born at home with a doctor and a midwife. The midwife was Mrs.  Mudd. I don   t know whether it was Mrs. or Miss at that time. She was a  customer of mine later on when I was running a lumberyard there on  Highland.  What did your parents do for a living?  Well, my mother worked as a home beauty operator. She learned to  marcel hair back in the   20s, right after the bobs come in, you know. She  just had a small shop. She   d cut hair and do marcelling. Dad, at that time  we   d been farming, but we got flooded out by the river and moved to  Ponca City. That   s where she started her business, and Dad started as a  concrete worker and worked up to be a finisher.  So where did you go to elementary school then?  5  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  I started here in Shawnee. I went to Musson school when it was a one-room  school with a big heater in the middle of the school and wood pile  and all that. It went from the first grade to the eighth grade, so you got a  well-rounded education no matter what grade you were in. But I only  went two years there. That was not really in my district. I was across the  river. I had to go across the river about two miles to school. The reason  that I did that, mostly, I think, was because I had two cousins that were  going to the same school that lived just across the river from our place,  and we were very close. We went back and forth all the time when we  were growing up until I moved.  What river?  North Canadian.  North Canadian, okay.  It used to be five miles east and two miles north of Shawnee. That would  be where the old country club used to be. (Laughter) Then I had to start  school at North Canadian School, which was about the same distance  away. After the flood of   23, when it just left about three foot of the   roof  comb of our house sticking out of the water   it   d been tied with  oil field cable to a elm tree or two. It would just bob it up and down. Of  course, it wasn   t a big house, anyway. My mother refused to move back,  (laughter) so we moved up on a little further north to a house that was  just about a mile north of where we were living. It was friends of ours;  they were going to move to town. I don   t know what he did then for a  while, but she put in a beauty shop. That   s where my mother learned,  from her. We farmed only about another year after the flood, and then  we moved to Ponca City.  What did you farm?  Just cotton and corn and   .  Did you have to pick?  I had to pick cotton, and that   s not my thing. (Laughter) Just not a  good   . This is kind of getting ahead, but we never did make any  money. I didn   t know that, but I found out we were just poor people.  When the Depression come along and Dad   s work just went out like  that, just about, because he was a small contractor, concrete contractor at  that time, and Mother wasn   t getting very much, they just quit.  This little nine-acre place that we had on the river was paid for, so Dad  tore down the old house and moved up on the south end of it, which was  6  supposedly higher. It was, because the water ran down hill, run down  that way, but when the water got up, it did that, just the same as it did on  the other one. We didn   t know that for sure at that time. Anyway, he  built a little three-room house, and we moved back to the farm to restore  prosperity. Didn   t do it.  In the meantime, we   d moved from Ponca City to Cushing and various  places. Moved back to Shawnee, like I say, to make two chickens in  every pot and all that with Hoover. It was hard to start out on the farm  for me because I   d been used to being in town and having friends all  around. Some of them had cars that they could use, and I   d go with them  and with the church group and all. I really enjoyed being at the age I  was. It was junior high and all that, and I moved back to Shawnee  because right at the depth of the Depression, you might say, I didn   t  have a car. Well, we had an old Essex, but I didn   t drive it because  usually it was flat and out of gas. (Laughs)  I hitchhiked to school, and took my last year at Shawnee. I knew a few  kids from a previous school, and my cousins was still here, but they had  changed quite a bit. Still went with him some. Had a boy and a girl, and  the girl had been married and was in other places, but the boy was still at  home. He had three ages. He had one for his birthday, one for the  company that he worked for, the Shell Pipeline Company, because they  didn   t take people as young as he was at that time. He just upped his age  a little bit.  Then, anyway, going to school, I walked the two miles south to the  Highway 270 and then hitchhiked the rest of the way and usually had  pretty good luck. That was before all this killing and stuff happened. I  didn   t like to carry a lunch because I had to carry books and papers and  stuff, and it slowed you down on getting a ride. I didn   t like to take a  lunch, either, so there was several of us that sat in the auditorium during  lunch hour. They didn   t have feed-the-kids deal, or anything like that. If  you didn   t have the money, you didn   t eat. Didn   t take much money.  Occasionally I   d get a dime, and you could eat on a dime. It   s  unbelievable, but you could get a hamburger and a pretty good deal for a  dime, it seemed to me like. (Laughs)  I made it through. I never did get really acquainted too much with  people because they were all in the same shape I was. I just didn   t know  it. Made not the best grades, but I made fair grades. Then I graduated. I  didn   t have any clothes to wear, but they give me a robe and a hat. I said,     I   d just as soon you hand me that, and I can go on home.    No, I had to  go through the process. Then I just waited four years after I got out of  high school before I could get a job other than picking cotton.  7  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  I started to tell about that awhile ago. I picked cotton beside a twelve-year-  old boy. We   d pick alongside one another. I   d pick two rows, and  he   d pick two rows. He   d get a hundred and fifty to two hundred pounds.  If I could get a hundred pounds, I was doing good. (Laughter) It didn   t  pay very much. That   d be a hundred pounds of cotton, I think was  twenty-five cents. I   m not sure. That   s how much I got out of the  picking. I worked two weeks and made, seems like, eighteen dollars, but  I   m not sure. I think that was about right. Anyway, I went to town and  bought a suit of clothes because the flood, and first one thing then  another. When I graduated, I got this diploma and nailed it up on the  wall about where a nail would be. That   s about five foot or something  like that. The water got five foot and eight inches in the house. Pretty  near ruined that diploma. (Laughter)  You said it took you four years to get a job.  Four years to get a job.  What was that job, your first job?  It was working at a lumberyard, working at the yard that I eventually  run. I worked up from just a, well, they hired me as a bookkeeper. That  wasn   t my thing, either, so they got another guy to do the bookkeeping.  That   s kind of a come-down from a bookkeeper to a yardman. Anyway,  it was more enjoyable. I liked it better. I didn   t know I liked it better, but  I did. (Laughter)  What year was that, that you started with the lumber company?  Let   s see. I started in 1936, and the first load that I took was to Van   s  Pig Stand in Shawnee, which is kind of a landmark now.  It   s a barbecue landmark.  Yes.  So you would   ve graduated from high school in 1930     Two, 1932.  Okay. That   s the tail-end of the Depression.  I started to work. I think my uncle got me the job because he was a  bricklayer and worked out of that lumberyard. The manager was kind of  talking about needing some help, and he knew I needed a job. He told  him about us. They just went out to the house and asked me if I wanted  8  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  to go to work. I said,    I sure do.    I changed clothes. I had one good pair  of overalls left, and I went to work that day. The manager could see that  I was kind of small. He wasn   t sure whether he was going to hire me or  not, but he was going to try me out. He said,    Give you five dollars a  week to start with, and if you pass, why, then I   ll give you a raise.    So I  started for five dollars a week. That was a little below the minimum  wage now. (Laughter)  How would you get there?  I stayed with my uncle in town. He told me that I could stay there. It  didn   t cost me anything for the first two or three weeks for room and  board. As I got more money, I eventually paid him, I think, three and a  half a week for my room and board, something like that, which they  were happy that I did that. (Laughs)  What was the name of the lumber company you started with?  It was Springer Lumber Company. It was a line yard. Their headquarters  were in Muskogee, and then they had a yard at Haskell. They had to  have three yards to be a line yard.  And how long were you with the company?  Until, well, I quit them in    50. I quit before, too, during the war and went  to Tinker Field, or I went to Norman first. Harmon-Cowen  and  Norton-  Tankersley  Company  was building a naval base there at Norman, and I  worked there for about two months or three or four. I don   t remember  now exactly. I   d already put my application in at Tinker. They called me  during that time, and I went to there. It was real interesting work. I  worked in a wood mill at Tinker and did a lot of detach service to Altus,   Oklahoma , and Salina, Kansas, and St. Louis, Missouri, and another  one, Fort in Nebraska, but I can   t think of the name of it right now. It  was just a small place.  Did you room and board there, too, at Tinker?  They give you six dollars a day per diem or whatever. That, in addition  to the other, made a pretty good check, and we were needing it with the  two kids and all that.  Well, then let   s back up. When did you get married?  Nineteen thirty-seven.  Thirty-seven, okay, so she went to Tinker with you?  9  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  No, she stayed home with the kids.  Okay.  I don   t think she worked any at that time, no.  And the children were born, you said were twins. When were they born?  In    40, 1940, just at a very good time for deferments because they were  drawing numbers out of the hat, fishbowl, or whatever it was they put  them in. I didn   t go to service. I did try to one time, but it didn   t work  out.  How had you met your wife?  Well, it was kind of a blind date. Our milkman was about my age, and  we   d run around together a little bit. He said that he had a date for me,  and I went with her. I   d been going with another girl but kind of dropped  out. (Laughter) She got married to somebody else. I did, too.  How long were you married?  Sixty-two years. She died. Then I got married again. (Laughter) That  wasn   t too good really, but it wasn   t bad. It wasn   t what I expected. She  had more money and had a nice house and all. I thought, well, that   d be  better, so I sold my house and moved in with her. It was still her house. I  thought we   d go places. She got in worse health, so she didn   t. We  didn   t go anyplace much unless it was a family reunion or something,  and not my family. It was her family, which is all right. I got acquainted  with some of them. They   re all good people, but it just didn   t turn out  quite like I thought it would. She died, too.  You didn   t divorce?  No, no divorce.  And your children, you said you had two children?  Wasn   t any children the next time because I was     Yes, but with your first wife, you had two children.  Yes, that   s all of them.  And boy, girl, or     10  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Boy and a girl.  Can you talk a little bit about   they were twins, right? So what was that  like, when you learned your wife was having twins?  Well, it wasn   t bad to know that she was having them. A friend of ours  had had twins and lived not too far from us. I didn   t worry about that too  much, but (Laughs) after they got there, it was a new experience for both  of   well, especially for me. Now, she had sisters, a small (when we  were married) that was about two years old I guess, a sister that she had.  Then there was some brothers and all, so she was in a family where she  had taken care of siblings, but I didn   t have any idea how much work it  would be.  You were an only child? Is that     Yes. That was during the war when I had to get up early and catch my  ride and go and get home at night. We had to take turns because I would  be gone twelve hours a day, to and from, and she   d be there to take care  of them, all by herself. I think her mother came up, though, and stayed  some, which wasn   t good either. (Laughs) Anyway, we made it. I know  I changed eighteen diapers in thirty minutes one time. Seemed to me like  it was thirty minutes. I know I changed eighteen diapers, anyway,  between the two of them. (Laughs) I couldn   t wait. I didn   t know it was  two or three o   clock in the morning, sleepy and tired, wanting to go to  bed. (Laughs)  Well, I   m surprised you changed diapers. Most men wouldn   t touch  them.  Well, that   s what I say. You had to because she   d already changed them  all day. (Laughter)  And that   s when they were cloth diapers.  That was when they were cloth. That didn   t count the washing and  drying. Going back to the lumberyard, when I started I was working for  about nine or ten dollars a week, something like that. When we got  married, I believe I was making twelve dollars a week. Anyway, I didn   t  get a raise for a long time, but I thought jobs were still pretty scarce.  Didn   t just go across the street and get another job. You had to know  about it and look for it and all that. I thought,    If I go in debt, build a  house, I   ll owe the company, and they   ll keep me on, won   t fire me or  anything or let me go,    so I borrowed five dollars from my cousin.  11  Finchum  Bishop  Ray  I had five. Put ten dollars on a down payment on a lot. Dad, of course,  was a carpenter by that time, and I dug the footing. I think he helped me  pour it or something, but wasn   t much of a footing at that time. It wasn   t  FHA or anything. It was just so big. My uncle was a brick layer. Him  and Dad laid the brick, or stone. I think it was concrete blocks for the  foundation. It was two blocks high. Anyway, I built this three-room  house with a path. Didn   t have a bath. It was a first-class path, though.  Had a WPA  outhouse  at that time. We were making them at the  lumberyard. It had a concrete floor and riser, stainless steel deal and all  that. A lot better than we had out in the country when I was farming.  After I   d made about four or five payments, I don   t know, quite a little  while, about four or five months, I guess, the owner from Muskogee  come over, and he talked to me. He says,    We can   t have that. You   ve  got to make it modern and get a loan on it because we got to have our  money.    I   d already built a bathroom in this house, I mean the room, and  I had to buy some fixtures. Got second-hand fixtures or whatever I could  get. Got it all built and got a loan on it, five hundred and some-odd  dollars. Payment was ten dollars a month, (Laugh) which was about  what I was paying, so it didn   t bother me too much on that, but it seemed  like it was a long time. Then after I went to work at Tinker, I put away a  war bond or something like that every payday, every two weeks, guess it  was, and pretty soon I had enough to pay it off. Felt good.  Happy day. (Laughter)  After the war, did you come back to work at the lumberyard?  Yes. I thought,    All these service people will be coming back. They   ll  have priority, and I   ll get laid off. I can get this job now, and it   d be  good.    Well, I did, and the manager decided he didn   t   they gave me  about what he was getting this time, and he   d been with them all during  the war and before. He didn   t much like for me to be getting as much as  he was, so he went in business for himself and made it all right. He  moved to Tecumseh, put in his own lumberyard. They made a living for  him and his boy. He was a pretty good trader. He could get things done,  better than I was really. I hadn   t had that much experience on that line.  The business wasn   t as good as it was previously. It   d get started pretty  good, but it was so much of it on a credit. The owners didn   t like it like  that. They wanted it more of a money deal, and I couldn   t make it like  that, so business fell off on my part. There was only thirteen  lumberyards for a while in Shawnee, which was a little over the market  line. Wasn   t that much demand. I worked there until, I want to say    58 or     59, someplace right in there. I still hadn   t had much of a raise since I   d  12  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  been in there, and everything else was going up but my salary.  (Laughter)  I told him, I said,    I   ve got to have       They   d had the lumberyard for  sale but no buyers, no takers. I said,    I went to a lumberyard sale where  they auctioned it off. You could do that with this one.    So they did. They  auctioned it off. Then I went to work for Bison Lumber Company,  which was owned by Link Cowen at that time, and he was building  some buildings at Stillwater for the college quite a bit. I worked there for  about eight years, and the manager there decided to go in business for  himself. He went across the road to the railroad property. They had an  old freight building there that he took over, made a lumberyard out of it.  It burned down. Then he put in another lumberyard on Independence,  and it   s there yet, White Lumber Company. It   s the only individual  lumberyard that I know of at this time.  In Shawnee?  They   ve got a yard at Seminole and one at Shawnee. He died just, oh, a  month or so ago.  It seemed like the lumber business was pretty competitive down here.  Oh, it was. (Laughs) While I was in it, it was very competitive.  Where would they get most of the lumber?  Mostly from the West Coast. Now, we did get some from Arkansas and  Louisiana, down in there. When I was with Springer, we got all of it  from Arkansas and Louisiana and all in there because it could be trucked  in. We were on railroad property, but we got very little from   we   d get  about one car a year or maybe two. We   d get cement by the carload, and  that was always good to unload. That was before fork trucks and dollies  and all that. You just picked it up and carried it.  I bet you were in good shape. (Laughs)  Oh, yes.  That   s hard work.  I have picked up three sacks of Portland  cement . At one time, now,  that   s quite a bit of weight. I didn   t really pick it up. It was all stacked. It  was just level, but I did hold it in my hands, carry it out to the truck, and  put it on the truck. Now, that   s pretty good. Now I can   t pick up a gallon  of milk. (Laughter)  13  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Did you wear Round House overalls?  Big part of the time. (Laughs)  That   s a big deal in Shawnee, wasn   t it?  Yes. (Laughs)  They made those there.  Did you stay in the same house, or did you build a bigger one?  Well, I stayed in the same house until I was made manager. I   d built on a  room during the war to take care of the kids, but I still worked at Tinker  at that time. After I got to be manager and all, I felt like we could do  better, so I built a house on Market Street that was real good. It   s still  there today. Well, both of them is, even the little deal, except for the  path. It   s gone. (Laughter) It don   t look as good as it used to, but it   s still  there. The one on Market looks just about as good as it did, but it was  built in    49, and that was before heating and air came in. You had to  have window deals and all that, so it hasn   t done too well. It   s a rent  place now.  Did church play an important role during all those years?  Not really. My wife and I didn   t feel like going to church. We   d go once  in a while. She didn   t want to go where I went, and I didn   t want to go  where she went, so we didn   t either one go. We did go to dances quite a  bit.  We need to talk about that a little bit, too, since you love dancing. How  did that all get started?  Well, that started back during the Depression. After I graduated from  high school, there wasn   t anybody coming to the house or nothing, you  know, nobody around, and I   d get lonesome. There, I had depression.  (Laughter)  During the Depression.  During the Depression. (Laughter) The good Lord was   well, it was  good. There was a big bunch of Possum grapes in one of the trees right  close to us, and I got all of them that I could get and put them in a tub  and walked on them like they did in the movies, and I made some wine.  Then I began to have company. (Laughter) It made it a lot different for  14  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  me. At that time, there wasn   t much music around except at the house.  Dad played the mandolin, and our very good friends that lived just north  of us, they played the violin, guitars. Had a piano, even. I knew that  music, but I didn   t know of any dances at that time.  These boys that come by, they knew about play parties, and we   d go to  play parties. That   s when you dance just like a square dance, kind of,  only you had to do the music yourself. You sang, like,    Pretty little girl  left behind me,    and all that. That way we could change partners, get  another girl, and dance. I don   t know if it was dancing, but it was kind of  dancing. Then they began to playing music and having square dances,  round dances, first one thing then another, in the houses, and go from  house to house. We had a little club that we called the Owl Club, and I  made cards, membership cards. I made about fifty. We had about fifty  members. I got to be a square dance caller. I can   t call one now. I can   t  hardly talk. (Laughter)  You could probably try. Try a short one for us.  I don   t know if I could now. (Laughs) That kind of come to a end like  everything does. After I went to work at the lumberyard, boy, didn   t get  to go as much, but we did still go some when we could. Had to hire  babysitters and all that. At that time, babysitters wasn   t so high, about  twenty-five cents an hour. You wasn   t gone all that long, and it wasn   t  too bad.  Do you still dance today?  I still dance today, but not like that, I mean, no square dancing. I have  thought a time or two that I   d like to do a square dance just to see if I  could, but I haven   t tried it yet.  So where do you go dancing today?  Oh, at the senior citizen center. There   s a community center. Senior  citizens have it Tuesday and Thursday from one o   clock until two thirty,  I believe it is. I   m pretty sure it   s one to two thirty. Then the community  center has it in the morning from ten until eleven thirty. This lady that I  have for my dance partner don   t like to drive at night, and I don   t either,  so a daytime dance is about all we go to.  So do you drive to the dances?  Yes, I drive.  I   ll be darned.  15  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  I got the little pickup out there. It   s manual, no power brakes, no power  steering.  And you drive.  And I drive. Jerry says when I get to where I can   t turn the corner, I   ve  got to quit. (Laughter) I   m pretty near there.  That means you   re not going to make it on time to the dance   Right  (Laughter) I let my driver   s license expire here a while back, and  you have to have your birth certificate to get a new license. Well, I  couldn   t find mine. I   d been carrying it in my billfold. Some place or  other it had slipped out and blew away, so I had to get a new one. Jerry  says,    I   m not driving to Oklahoma City to get your license. You   ll have  to do it by mail.    It took two weeks. That   s a long two weeks. (Laughter)  It kind of taught him because he had to take me. He didn   t take me every  time, but he took me part of the time.  You didn   t get to dance during those two weeks?  That   s what I   m talking about. He had to take me to my dance. (Laughs)  Okay. Okay.  He didn   t like that. (Laughs)  Well, you   re always a parent until the end, right?  Oh, yes.  So he had no choice. (Laughter)  On days you don   t dance what do you do? To spend your time, what do  you do?  Well, I visit with my dance partner some of the time. It   s been a help to  both of us because her husband died about the same time my last wife  died. She says it   s helped her, and it   s helped me, too.  How old is your dance partner?  She   s ninety, well, will be ninety this June 14.  I   ll be darned.  16  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  You   re not supposed to tell that.  Well, it   s all right. After you get past ninety, it   s kind of a honor to be a  little bit more.  And still dancing   Yes. Yes.  And driving. How early do you get up in the morning?  It varies quite a bit. I like to get up around six thirty, something like that,  but usually it has to get daylight. Like now, that   s seven thirty or  something.  And how late do you stay up?  I go to bed about nine thirty.  Do you do much reading during the day?  No, my eyes seem like they get tired real quick. I read the newspaper.  After I do that, that   s about all the reading I do. I read my Sunday  lesson, and that   s about the extent of it. I used to read a lot. I could read  a book in a short time, but now I can   t read a book too long.  Well, did you ever think you   d live to be a hundred?  Well, yes. I wanted to because my uncle was a kind of a politician and a  lawyer. I don   t know where he went to law school or how he ever went  to law school. I don   t think he did, but he got by as a lawyer somewhere  or other in Texas. He was a genealogist. He wrote a book, Tennessee  Cousins, and it   s in a lot of libraries. It showed that I had a ancestor, be a  great-great-uncle, I think, that lived to be 102 and had four wives. See, I  just had two. (Laughter) Anyway, I wanted to live as long as he did or a  little longer, just to be different, I guess, so I did get to be a hundred.  That   s pretty good, now. I   m pretty well satisfied. If I don   t make it to  102, I   ll be all right.  No, let   s aim for 103.  Well, I ain   t going to commit to anything. (Laughter)  I   ll come dance with you when you   re 103.  17  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  What do you attribute your longevity to?  Well     What   s your secret?  Just don   t die. (Laughter) That   s the only thing. I haven   t lived by any  rules or regulations at all. I eat what I want to, drink what I want to, and  do what I want to, pretty well. (Laughter)  Some people who are a hundred say they have a philosophy of life that  they live by. Do you have a philosophy that you live by?  Not that you could call it that, I don   t think. It   s just, well, you take what  you get and make the most of it. It   s about the only way that you get by.  Have any idea why you   re still here, what you attribute your longevity  to?  Good luck. Good Lord. (Laughs) There   s just no rhyme or reason. I  should   ve been dead a long time ago, by accident. I   ve been in some  places that I shouldn   t have got out of alive, but I did. A wonder I am  here. I know all these cousins that I   ve had, and there   s a bunch of them  from the age in there. They all had one or two or three or four or eight,  (Laughter) so there   s still quite a few of them left. I know my birthday  party, which was good, I   d started it about a year before it was going to  happen. Kids hadn   t said a word, so I made all the arrangements.  You planned your party yourself?  I planned my party. I was going to have one. (Laughs) I didn   t have  many birthday parties growing up, but I was going to have a birthday  party for my hundredth. I   d arranged for the orchestra and the hall and  for some of the deal. Then about three months before it, the boy said,     We been talking about your birthday.    I said,    I   ve got it arranged.     (Laughter) He says,    Are we invited?    I said,    Yes, you can come. You  can bring the cake.    Anyway, they took over. They paid for the orchestra  and did the cake, and did it up good. I had a hundred candles on the cake  and blew them all out.  Did you make a wish?  Oh, I don   t think I did. (Laughs)  You get them all out in one try?  18  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  No, it took two. (Laughter)  That   s pretty good.  I thought it was. I had this fireman with a fireman   s hat and all come by  and go up with me. (Laughs) He died yesterday or day before yesterday,  I guess it was. His picture is in the paper today. He   s a retired fire chief.  Sounds like humor   s been a part of your life, too.  Yes, yes. I tried to be a cartoonist one time. I wasn   t very good at it, but  I did draw when I lived in Durant. They had a little weekly newspaper,  and they had a big peanut. That was the deal down at city hall, was a big  peanut. It was supposed to be the biggest in the world or whatever. It  wasn   t. Was just named. Anyway, I drew a weekly cartoon for this  newspaper. I drew it for a year, and that was too much, too. (Laughs) I  didn   t want to do that anymore.  So you lived in Durant, too?  Yes, I lived there for about fourteen years.  How old were you when you moved there?  That was after I retired. We had moved to Cleveland to a lumberyard  after Bison. After the Bison lumberyard manager put in his own yard,  they made me manager. Then his sister, the owner   s sister, didn   t go  with the other manager, and so she was the manager, more or less. She  wasn   t in name, but she could override anything I did. We just didn   t get  along too well, and so I decided I   d quit. In fact, it was kind of a mutual  agreement that we both would quit. I went to Benson Lumber Company  at Cleveland (Cleveland, Oklahoma, that is) and lived there for fourteen  years. Then, in    80 I moved to Durant and lived there until my second  wife died. I can   t remember the date but it was in the   90s, I think. I got  my dates all mixed up now.  So Durant was like a retirement...  Yes. My wife wanted to move. I said,    We   ll move any place you want  to,    because I didn   t have anything there at Cleveland. Well, I did have a  boat storage and stuff that I   d built, but I wasn   t tied. We didn   t have  any kinfolks there. Kids didn   t like to go up there too far. I said,    We   ll  move any place you want to as long as it   s in Oklahoma.    We looked all  around and finally decided on Durant because it was close to Texoma,  which we would go to. When we lived here, we   d go to Texoma every  weekend nearly if we didn   t have a dance or something to go to.  19  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Bishop  Ray  Finchum  So it was like a family getaway.  Yes.  To fish or ski or what?  Yes, we fished     That   s a big lake.     and swam and water-skied, stuff like that. That was good while it  lasted, but then after we moved down there, we didn   t go at all. (Laughs)  Well, we did once in a while. We got a travel trailer and all that, but  we   d go to Texas because the daughter was in Texas. That   s not a good  place to go to, where they were, because it seemed like it always was a  place where it was a lot of mosquitos, swamps.  What brought you back to Shawnee, then?  My wife died. At that time, I was ninety-something, and I just wanted to  get closer to him  Jerry  because I could tell that I was going downhill.  There wasn   t no way that I was going to get better. In fact, we had  moved to her house, which I was supposed to move if she died. By law,  I could   ve stayed there until I died, but I was more acquainted with her  boys at that time, and their families. I didn   t want to put them through a  long rigmarole. The house was in pretty good shape at that time. I told  them, I says,    Just put it up for sale right now because another year or  two it   s going to have to have a coat of paint and all that, inside and out.  You can save that expense if you sell it now.    And they did. This boy  built this in thirty days, or a little over that, I guess, but just about. It   s  been just about right for what I want. When I   m gone, they can tear out  this petition, and we can put that old truck in and work on it, put it  together. (Laughter)  When history is written, what do you want it to say about you? What  would you like to remembered for?  I don   t know. I   ve done so many things, and all of them I don   t want in  history. (Laughter)  Well, how do you want others to remember you by?  Well, that I did a little good sometimes.  Anything you want to add before we close out?  20  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Bishop  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  Finchum  Ray  No, I better close out. (Laughs)  You   ve been great. Thank you very much.  Well, I don   t know if I can stand that when I listen to it or not.  (Laughter)  Well, I   m going to ask you a few questions.  We   ve been asking people that have moved several places, where do you  consider home?  Well, right now, this is home.  But before you landed here, what did you consider     Well, I still come back to Shawnee. Shawnee is more or less my  hometown and where I   m going to be buried and all that stuff.  Well, that brings me to my other ones. How did your parents happen to  be in Shawnee? How did they come to be here?  Well, my mother came by ox team from Rising Star, Texas. I think  probably the land being new and all is the reason they came. Dad  probably the same way, but he came by train from Denton, Texas. He  wasn   t in Alabama very long. He don   t even remember being there,  really. He came from Alabama in a basket or something. He was raised  around Denton, Texas, and he considered that his   I know when we   d  go on a trip, we had to go through Denton, Texas. He didn   t know  anybody unless he went to the graveyard. (Laughter)  Well, the farm you owned, was it 160 acres from the  land run?  No, we never did. This little place that we owned was   now, when we  moved from there temporarily, it was a bigger farm. It might   ve been  160 but probably more like 40. Acres didn   t mean much to me at the age  I was.  I just wondered if they had come for the run, one of the land runs.  Our little acreage, I think it was supposed to be fifteen acres to the  water   s edge, but the water   s edge kept coming this way, washing it  away. And now I don   t know whether it has washed out where we had  our barn and our house and all. It   s completely gone out to the road, and  21  Finchum  Ray  the road is gone. Have to go around where the road was to get through  on that road.  Okay, well I wanted to ask those, so thank you again.  Well, yes. You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
