 Finchum Today is December 18, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University and today we   re in  Stillwater to speak with Bob Williamson, so thank you for having us  today. I understand your birthday was December the 4th?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum And you were born in 1914? Is that right?  Williamson Nineteen fourteen, yeah.  Finchum And where?  Williamson Batesville, Arkansas.  Finchum How did you get to Oklahoma?  Williamson Wagon and team   covered wagon. We was fifteen days on the road.  Finchum Wow.  Williamson Cold and I rode one of the old horses ahead of it to keep   and we had  these two damn mules. They were bullheaded and wouldn   t go, you  know. So I rode that old gray mare ahead of them, and they followed  her, boy. They just go like that. (Laughs)  Finchum How old were you?  Williamson I think I was thirteen.  Finchum Was it in the winter? Cold weather?  5  Williamson Yeah, it was pretty cold.  Finchum So around your birthday?  Williamson Huh?  Finchum Were you traveling on your birthday?  Williamson Yeah, and Dad fixed me out a rice pudding. We pulled down under this  bridge. He fixed rice pudding for my birthday. We was on the road  fifteen days.  Finchum That   s a long time. Where did you cross the river?  Williamson We crossed one of them there at Batesville, and the other one you  crossed at Newport.  Finchum Why were you coming to Oklahoma?  Williamson I had an uncle and aunt out there, it was my mother   s sister, and they  wanted to come to Oklahoma.  Finchum What did your father do for a living?  Williamson He claimed to be a farmer. (Laughter) Damn poor living, though.  Finchum So you came to Perkins?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Did he farm when he got there?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Williamson I went to school in several places. We moved, you know.  Finchum Well high school, where did you go to high school?  Williamson I think Perkins. Perkins, Oklahoma.  Finchum Do you remember when you graduated?  Williamson I didn   t graduate.  6  Finchum Went to work instead?  Williamson Yes.  Finchum Where did you work?  Williamson Stillwater Milling Company.  Finchum What did you do for them?  Williamson I think I drove a truck. Of course that was years after that. I may be  getting ahead of the deal.  Finchum So what was your first job?  Williamson Lord, I don   t remember.  C. Webb Tell them about the caf   you bought in Agra.  Williamson Caf  ?  C. Webb Yes, the first one you bought. Don   t you know?  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb You remember the story?  Williamson My first adventure was a restaurant in Agra, Oklahoma. Boy  That was  a busy town.  Finchum Really?  Williamson Oh Lord, about forty people lived there.  Finchum Oh, that   s really busy. (Laughter)  C. Webb Can you tell them how much you paid for the equipment?  Williamson Yeah, paid twelve dollars for it, for all the equipment for this restaurant.  Traded it for two calves and what was it     C. Webb Twenty dollars you told me?  Williamson Huh?  7  C. Webb Twenty dollars you told me. Two cows and twenty dollars is the story  you told me.  Williamson I think so, yeah. (Laughs) Give the cows to my dad.  Finchum How long did you have that caf  ?  Williamson Why I traded that caf   for these two cows     C. Webb She wanted to know how long you had the caf  . Wasn   t it like seven  months or something like that?  Williamson I think so.  Finchum What did you do after that?  Williamson You got it wrote down?  C. Webb Do you want me to help you? You got married right?  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb And you and Mother moved to Stillwater.  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb Okay, can you tell her about that?  Bishop How did you meet your wife?  C. Webb Do you remember? At school wasn   t it?  Williamson I suppose.  Finchum When you moved to Stillwater, did you do that in a car or wagon and  horse?  Williamson No, I think we had a car     Finchum By then.  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Do you remember seeing your first car?  8  Williamson Yes. I think this guy, B. Vandenberg was his name, he had this car and  we all rode in it. I don   t know what it was   what kind of car it was.  Bishop Do you remember the Great Depression?  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop What was it like for you?  Williamson That   s when they killed all these cattle and just buried them, you know.  Didn   t have no feed, running out of feed to feed them.  Bishop Were the times pretty tough?  Williamson Yes, it was tough. Sure was.  Bishop Did you ever work for the WPA  Works Progress Administration ?  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop What   d you do for them?  Williamson I think I drove a team.  Finchum What were you doing with the team?  Williamson We was running   what was we doing?  C. Webb Was that when you helped build the bridge on the way to Cushing  outside of Perkins?  Williamson Might   ve been.  Finchum When you worked for the Milling Company did you have to help women  pick out feedsacks?  C. Webb No.  Williamson No.  C. Webb Tell her what you did for the Milling Company. You drove a truck and  where you went   tell her.  Williamson Yeah, I drove a truck.  9  C. Webb Do you remember where you delivered the feed to? You used to tell  me   or flour. Do you remember taking it to the prison someplace?  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb What prison was it?  Williamson Oklahoma State Prison in McAlester.  Bishop So you drove a truck from Stillwater to McAlester?  C. Webb Yes, and he delivered flour.  Williamson And we   d go down there, and we didn   t go there all the time, every day.  Finchum That took a little while.  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum So in Blackwell you had another caf  ?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum What was it called?  Williamson Blackwell it was Bob   s Grill.  Finchum Bob   s Grill.  Williamson It   s still sitting there, same way I made it, just they don   t serve but one  meal a day, I think.  Bishop Did you cook?  Williamson I done all the cooking.  Bishop What was your specialty?  Williamson Pies, I think.  Bishop Pies. Did you make the pies?  Williamson Yeah. I   d make twenty, twenty-five crusts. Roll them out and bake them  off and then I   d use them. They didn   t sit very long. (Laughter)  Bishop Are you saying they sold pretty quickly?  10  C. Webb They were out by supper or before suppertime.  Bishop Was there a favorite pie that people bought?  Williamson Coconut, I think.  Bishop Coconut cream?  Williamson Yes.  C. Webb He also makes a mean pecan pie. (Laughter) That   s my husband   s  favorite. Here, this might help.  Finchum If you cooked at work, who cooked at home?  Williamson Cooked at home?  Finchum Yeah, you or your wife? Who cooked at home?  Williamson We didn   t need anybody to cook at home. We eat there where we  worked.  Finchum That makes sense.  Bishop How long did you own Bob   s Diner?  Finchum Grill.  Bishop Oh, Grill.  Williamson Oh it think twenty-five years.  Bishop Twenty-five years.  Finchum Did you do chicken fried steak?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Were you open breakfast, lunch, and dinner?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum All three.  11  C. Webb Tell her about when you were open twenty-four hours for the smelter  people to come in. Do you remember?  Williamson Yeah, I was open twenty-four hours a day.  Bishop Was this back in the    40s and    50s?  C. Webb It was in the    50s, until the smelters closed down and it was a while  after that, I think.  Bishop Did you have a jukebox in your diner?  Williamson Jukebox? Yeah I had at each     T. Webb Booth.  Williamson Booth, yeah.  Finchum That   s pretty cool, too.  Bishop That was a big deal.  Williamson I made more out of the jukebox than we made out of the restaurant.  (Laughter)  C. Webb It was kind of fun, but he worked a lot of hours.  Bishop Do you have any funny stories about the restaurant?  Williamson The chicken-fried steak was   I heard about it all over the country.  C. Webb They loved his brown gravy.  Williamson I had this man and woman come by and drove way out of the way, you  know, to come by there and eat that chicken-fried steak.  Bishop What was your secret ingredient?  Williamson I don   t know.  C. Webb He didn   t use to share that. (Laughs)  Williamson Huh?  C. Webb I said, you wouldn   t share your brown gravy recipe with anybody.  12  Bishop Did you work at the smelter company? At the smelter in Blackwell?  Williamson Did I work there?  Bishop Yes.  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop And what did you do?  Williamson I drawed metal.  Bishop I didn   t catch that, what was it?  C. Webb It was during the war.  Bishop During the war?  C. Webb It was considered a critical job.  Bishop Drawing metal?  Williamson Railroad track run right along this side of it and up close, you know.  You   d stand up and had a cart, we had a cart, you stand up in that cart  and draw the metal. Then you   d turn a wheel and move it on   just keep  going, you know.  Bishop Did you serve in World War II?  Williamson No.  Bishop No.  C. Webb That was a job that if you had     Bishop They put you to work instead.  Williamson I was working there and I got a deferment, I guess.  Bishop And the restaurant came after that period of time?  C. Webb Yes, and he also owned a grocery store in Lamont, a grocery store in  Tonkawa, and a place called the Club Caf   in Tonkawa. He can  probably tell you   we moved a lot. (Laughs)  13  Bishop Your daughter was saying that you owned other restaurants and  grocery stores around the area.  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop Can you tell us about that?  Williamson Oh I don   t know.  C. Webb Do you remember the names?  Bishop What   d you own in Tonkawa?  Williamson I had a little caf   there but Harvey, my brother, he had a hotel caf  .  C. Webb And then both of you together ran a grocery store. Do you remember  the name?  Williamson Huh?  C. Webb The name of the grocery store you ran? Do you remember, in Tonkawa?  Williamson B and H.  C. Webb Yes.  Williamson Yeah, Bob and Harvey. (Laughter)  Bishop Now we know.  Williamson Huh?  Bishop Now we know what that stood for.(Laughter)  Williamson Harvey was three years older than me; a little over three years.  Bishop Were you pretty close?  Williamson Yeah, sure was.  T. Webb Tell them about the trouble you got into when Harvey took you on the  trolley ride.  C. Webb Tell them about hitchhiking to Arkansas. Do you remember?  Williamson What?  14  Bishop You hitchhiked back to Arkansas.  Williamson Oh, me and Harvey started hitchhiking back to Arkansas. I was thirteen  and he was about sixteen. We had a little suitcase about the size of that  (laughs)   cabinet there. We got as far as Warner, the other side of  Tulsa. We didn   t think we was getting there very good and we decided  that we   d just   every which way we could get a ride we   d take it, back  or forward. (Laughs)  Finchum So which one did you get?  Williamson One back.  Bishop Why did you leave?  Williamson Just cause we wanted to I guess.  C. Webb Were you going to go see your grandpa?  Williamson Huh?  C. Webb Weren   t you going to see your Grandpa Gilmore? No?  Bishop Who picked you up on the way?  Williamson Some woman and boy, she really raked us down. (Laughter)  C. Webb She got onto his brother for taking him because he was so young.  Williamson She picked us up and took us to Tulsa, put us on   streetcars run from  Tulsa, oh, to Sand Springs and places.  Bishop Did she send you home?  Williamson Yeah, she talked to us and told us that we had no business out there.  Bishop She was looking out for you.  Williamson Yeah. She   s a nice lady.  Bishop Did you have any other brothers or sisters?  Williamson I had five brothers.  Bishop Five brothers.  15  Williamson No sisters. My wife had four sisters and no brothers (Laughs).  T. Webb How about the firewood incident when you didn   t chop the wood?  C. Webb It wasn   t him. That was about Grandma.  T. Webb Oh okay.  C. Webb Do you remember the story about Grandma   when they left Grandma  in charge of her brothers and they didn   t chop wood, how she got wood  for her fireplace?  Williamson The rail fence, she just chopped it up and cooked with it. (Laughter)  C. Webb Then what did they have to do in the Spring? When she used the fence,  how did it get replaced?  Williamson How did it what?  Bishop How did they replace the fence?  Williamson I don   t know whether they replaced it or not.  C. Webb Her dad made the boys, because they were too lazy to chop wood for  her, go out and replace it. (Laughs) He does great stories.  Bishop Do you ever remember Christmas time in your family?  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop Did you ever receive a favorite gift?  Williamson We didn   t get gifts.  Bishop What   d you get?  Williamson Fruit, all kinds of fruits, and candies, and stuff like that. Didn   t have no  money to get gifts with.  Finchum Can you describe the house that you grew up in?  Williamson I don   t know how old I was when they   I lived in a lot of houses.  Finchum Any log cabins?  16  Williamson Yeah, had a hallway in it and rooms on each side.  Finchum And where was the bathroom?  Williamson Out back. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have to share a bed with your brother?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum How did they heat the house   oh, with wood.  Williamson Fireplace.  Bishop How about bath time?  Williamson Bath? We   d go swimming. (Laughter)  Bishop Even in the winter?  Williamson No. She had a big kettle, sat on wagon or buggy hubs, sat down in there  and you build a fire under it and heat the water.  Bishop And then you   d get in.  Williamson Yeah.  T. Webb Talking about outhouses, tell them about your orneriness.  C. Webb Tell them about Halloween in Perkins, what you boys did.  Williamson Oh, yeah. We always, a whole bunch of us, get on the horses and just  raise hell is all we done.  Bishop Did you cause some problems during a Halloween?  Williamson I   d imagine.  C. Webb They got a surprise. Do you remember when all you boys were running  to push over the outhouse? Can you tell them the story?  Williamson Do what?  C. Webb Tell them the story about   you were going to push over the outside  toilet, outhouse, about that boy. Do you remember his name?  17  Williamson Yeah, his dad was Cooper, wasn   t it?  C. Webb I thought it was Holbrook, wasn   t it?  Williamson Holbrook, yeah.  C. Webb Let me see.  Williamson I think one was Holbrook, yeah.  C. Webb Holbrook. What were you doing?  Williamson Huh?  C. Webb Tell them the story. A whole bunch of you boys went out.  Williamson Oh, I don   t     C. Webb Oh, you don   t want them to know that huh? Okay, (Laughs) I thought it  was funny.  Bishop Did you always follow your father   s advice?  Williamson I probably didn   t. (Laughs)  Bishop I remember last time I came you told me about working at Safeway.  Williamson No, we never did work at Safeway.  C. Webb No.  Williamson Dad   we was working at the smelter drawing metal. Dad come out  there and boy, it was hot. (Laughs) Trying to get us to quit and go to  work for Safeway. We wouldn   t do it.  Bishop Didn   t do it.  C. Webb I didn   t know that.  Finchum Who taught you how to cook?  Williamson I don   t know, I guess myself.  Bishop Did you cook from scratch?  Williamson Yeah.  18  Bishop You didn   t follow a recipe?  Williamson I never had a recipe.  Bishop You had your own.  Williamson Yep.  Finchum Was your mother a good cook?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Did you have chickens?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Did you have to help butcher those?  Williamson Chickens? I think my mother killed them. Just get them by the neck and  wring their head off.  Finchum I figured with six boys they would   ve done it.  Williamson She wouldn   t let them.  Bishop What was your favorite meal she made?  Williamson That she made? Seems to me like it was biscuits and gravy, and  sorghum molasses, and butter.  Finchum Did she make your clothes? Did she sew?  Williamson She did. I never   I wore overalls until I was thirty-five years old.  (Laughter) I wore overalls a long time, striped overalls. Yes.  Finchum Even when you were the cook?  Williamson No.  Finchum Switched then.  Williamson That was when I was a kid.  Bishop You lived in Perkins. Did you ever see Pistol Pete?  19  Williamson Yeah, used to go down to the blacksmith   s shop and talk to him a lot.  Finchum Frank Eaton.  Williamson Yeah, he   s cross-eyed.  Bishop Frank Eaton was cross-eyed?  Williamson Yeah, you couldn   t tell what he was looking at. (Laughs) Pistol Pete.  Bishop Did he carry is pistol with him?  Williamson I imagine, yeah. Out back there was a block of wood or tree block with  an anvil sitting on it. He   d take that pistol and shoot into the block. I  don   t know why. I know when my grandpa come back there to visit,  why he   d go down there and he   d visit Pistol more than anything.  Bishop What would they talk about?  Williamson I don   t know.  C. Webb They target practiced, I think.  Bishop You worked at Stillwater Milling. Did you ever know a man by the name  of Haskell Cudd?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum I think he made it to 100, too.  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb Didn   t you go visit him after you left there a couple of times? I thought  you did.  Williamson Yeah, I   d stop and visit with him.  Finchum Did you ever think you would live to 100?  Williamson I didn   t even give it a thought, I don   t guess.  Bishop What do you think your secret to living long has been?  Williamson I don   t know.  Finchum All that pie he ate. It   s all that pie you ate.  20  Williamson Pie?  C. Webb He made a lot of it. I don   t think he ate a lot of it. (Laughter)  Bishop Just because you made it doesn   t mean you ate it.  Williamson No. (Laughter) Used to have them stand up out in front   line up out in  front, stand there, waiting to get in to eat at noon.  Bishop How much would a whole pie cost?  Williamson Gosh, I don   t remember.  C. Webb He sold it by the slice, but I don   t remember   Do you remember how  much it was a slice, Daddy?  Williamson Huh?  C. Webb Oh, here it might tell on this menu what it was in the    50s. I can   t  remember if the pies are on there or not.  Bishop Pie a la mode. Oh my, homemade pie, fifteen cents   Williamson Fifteen cents     Bishop Fifteen cents?  Williamson Yeah.  C. Webb That was in the    50s.  Bishop What was it the other day,  6.99 a slice? And what was your wife   s  name?  Williamson Arletta.  Bishop Arletta, and was she was from Blackwell or Stillwater or     Williamson We come from the same place down there, Perkins.  Bishop Perkins.  Williamson Really, my wife lived in Vinco, south of Perkins, south of the river.  T. Webb That house is still there.  21  C. Webb The house is still there.  Williamson Yeah, it   s still there.  C. Webb It was one that was built by the people that founded Vinco. The Mains  were their name.  Bishop how many kids do you have?  Williamson My children? Two. They   re still living. She   s one of them and then I   ve  got a son. He lives in Blackwell.  Bishop Did you enjoy being a father?  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop Did you ever go on vacations or trips?  Williamson Every summer.  Bishop Where would you go?  Williamson Just as far as that car would drive. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you ever have a favorite place or a spot?  Williamson Oh, I don   t know. We never went and stayed anywhere in one place  very long. We just traveled, just see the country.  Finchum Did you make it to every state?  Williamson No.  C. Webb He lacked two.  Finchum If the grill was open twenty-four hours, what would you do for fun?  Williamson For fun?  Finchum Yes.  Williamson Work. (Laughter)  Finchum Wrong answer. (Laughter)  22  C. Webb You actually brought up dinners and then he would work through noon  and then he would come home, but he went up     Williamson Yeah, I cooked all the dinners, brought up all the   done it all by  myself.  C. Webb Made good noodles, too.  Bishop Did your family help in the diner   or in the grill?  Williamson My wife     C. Webb Mother did later after we...  Williamson I run out of cook one time, and my wife come in and she cooked  breakfast every morning. She   d work until about ten thirty and a woman  that come on run dinners.  C. Webb Mother stayed with us when we were younger, and she didn   t work  until after we were   my brother was probably a junior in high school. I  worked sometimes. Don   t you remember those days when you   d come  out and get me because somebody didn   t show up? (Laughs)  Williamson Yeah. (Laughs)  C. Webb It was fun.  Finchum You didn   t have to work for free did you?  C. Webb Yes   well, for a while. I worked there when my husband went overseas  for a little while. He had his teeth all out and didn   t want to go up front,  but he worked.  Williamson What?  C. Webb I said, when you had your teeth pulled I helped up in front for a little bit  there when Tommy was overseas. She asked me if you paid me and I  said you did when I did that. Did you hear me? No.  Finchum Sometimes you paid her and sometimes you didn   t.  Williamson I guess.  C. Webb The junior high was across the street. So at noon I would always go eat.  He would let me fill glasses, I thought it was fun. (Laughs) I don   t think  Bobby ever did, but he actually ended up running the caf  , later.  23  Bishop Sounds like your caf   was in a good location.  C. Webb It was just good food.  Williamson Yeah it was a good location. I tore the old building, fifty-foot front  building, down. Hauled the brick off, couldn   t sell it. Just hauled it  somewhere and stacked it. I don   t know whatever happened to it.  Bishop So how did you celebrate your 100th birthday?  Williamson How did I?  C. Webb We went to Drew   s.  Williamson Drew?  C. Webb Yes.  Williamson Oh yeah.  C. Webb Do you remember when you went over to Drew   s and we had cake and  a dinner?  Williamson Yeah.  Bishop Was church a very important part of your life?  Williamson No, not necessarily.  Bishop Too busy cooking.  C. Webb He was always working and he was a deacon, I think, for a while and he  helped support them, because Mother took us and went. But he always  had to go clean the caf   and mop the floors and wax it on Sunday.  Bishop Get ready for the week.  C. Webb Getting ready   it was the only day it was closed.  Bishop If history were to be written about you, what would you want it to say?  Williamson I don   t know.  Bishop How do you want other people to remember you?  24  Williamson I never give it a thought, I guess.  Finchum Did you make rice pudding in your grill?  Williamson I don   t think so.  Finchum I wondered since your dad made you rice pudding if you made it later.  No?  C. Webb I think he   s getting tired.  Finchum I think we   ll stop right here, okay?  Williamson Yeah.  Finchum Thank you for sharing with us today.  Williamson Okay, thank you.  -------  ------- 
