 Finchum  Today is December the 19, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum, along  with Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today  we   re in Norman, Oklahoma to speak with Mildred Vandaveer. This is in  regards to our 100 Year Life project, so thank you for having us today.  Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  I was born in Dibble, Oklahoma, at home, in 1913 on October 17, 1913.  On a farm?  On a farm.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  Yes, I have four, three sisters and a brother.  And where do you fall?  The second one.  The second.  From the oldest.  Okay, and what did your parents do for a living?  Well, my daddy farmed and he had a little store in Dibble in 1925, but it  burnt down. He had a store in Phoenix, Arizona for a little while, but  most of the time it was on the farm.  And did you have chores?  5  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  I certainly had chores.  What were a few of them?  What were a few of them? Just anything that a man did. (Laughter)  Mostly it was   Lola and I had to start washing dishes when I was quite  young, and just did whatever would come necessary around the farm to  do. I milked cows and all that stuff, and I   ve done just everything that  they did on a farm.  Gathered eggs?  Gather eggs, yes. I   ve delivered eggs at Norman for about fifteen years.  Oh, you delivered them, sold them?  Yes.  Pretty good sized farm?  No, we just, no. We weren   t farming at that time. My husband was a  welder, and I was just a homebody and raised the chickens to help put  my kids through school.  Okay, well where did you go to school?  I went to school at Dibble and at Newcastle and Blanchard. I started to  school, though, in Arizona, I forgot I did that.  When did you graduate from high school?  Graduated from high school in 1933.  And from where?  Blanchard.  Blanchard, okay. What was your favorite subject in high school?  Oh, arithmetic and algebra. I didn   t like any of school. (Laughter) We  had to stay out of school so much and pick cotton and work.  Pick cotton every year?  One year, in    25, we picked from September until February.  6  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Hard work.  Hard work, and if it wasn   t raining, we didn   t get to  go to school . We  got to go to school when it rained, and you know, you lose interest when  you have to do that.  Sure. About how many children were in your class once you got there? A  small country school?  Yeah, I think maybe we was one of the largest when I graduated, that  graduated from Blanchard, but I can   t remember for sure how many it  was, twenty something I think.  Not very big.  Not very many people, no.  Once you graduated, what did you do?  Got married. (Laughs)  How did you meet your husband?  Well, we was going to school together at that time, and that   s how we  met, when we was in school. We had a friend that told us that there was  two good-looking boys coming to start to Blanchard, and my sister-in-law,  now, said,    I   ll get one,    and I said,    I   ll get the other one,    and we  did. (Laughter) Had no idea what they looked like or anything. We were  just being foolish.  And so what would you do for a date?  I can   t even remember. A lot of times we   d just sit together at home, go  to the show once in a while.  Blanchard had a movie theater?  Yes.  Did it?  Yes.  And so when did you get married?  7  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Finchum  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  In 1935, September the 27th.  Right during the Depression.  Yeah.  Do you have any memories about those days, in the    30s?  Well, I just know that we had to work hard, that   s all. We never went  hungry. We didn   t have the best of food either, but we didn   t never go  hungry. I remember one time, we had gravy for breakfast every  morning, and as long as we had pork, lard, it was all right, and  one  time  we had to buy the lard and I said,    I can   t eat this gravy.    My  daddy said,    Well, you can when you get hungry.    So you really can.  It   s not been an easy life, but I wouldn   t take anything for it, except for  the loss of my family. I wish that hadn   t of happened but it did. You  have to go on.  So in 1935 you get married. Did you stay in Blanchard after you got  married?  We lived in Blanchard until, let   s see,    39 I guess. No wait a minute,  yeah. Sharon was born in    39 and we moved out by Franklin and lived  there until    41 and then moved to California, because Raymond went in  the service in    43, and he   d taken me and Sharon to California to live  with my sister. We stayed there then until    51, he came out of service in     45, and come back to Norman, and been here since.  What branch of the service was he in?  What is it called? He built the roads. I can   t think what it was called.  Gerry, do you remember what Daddy   ?  He was an engineer in the Army.  In the Army?  Yeah, the engineers, they went before and changed bridges and built  bridges. Momma, tell them how come Daddy got drafted.  Oh, his mother had passed away and he was working in the shipyards.  No, she was sick, and he came back to Oklahoma to be with her. Well  then he went to work at Tinker Field, and he quit. He said,    I never saw  such lazy people in my life, standing around or hid in places,    and he  just quit. When he did, the Army picked him up (snaps fingers) just like  that. He got to stay there long enough until his mother was passed.  She   8  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  was buried before he went into the service.  And you said you worked in the shipyard?  Did I?  Yeah.  No, he did.  He did.  Yeah, and when he was in the Army, he was a sharpshooter until he  found out what he would have to do. He decided that wasn   t what he  wanted to do because he would be the one that would go out first. She   s  a good shooter, too. (Laughs)  So what were you doing while he was doing that?  I stayed with his daddy until he got sent overseas, and they gave him  time for him to take me to California to be with my sister.  And did you work while you were out there?  Just in their home.  In their home.  They both worked, and I just cleaned the house and washed, done  everything that was to be done. My daughter started school at California.  So you have how many children?  Two girls.  Two girls.  Sharon and Gerry. Nine years apart.  And you worked in the orange groves?  Not a lot, I did a little bit. While Ray was in service I worked a little bit  in picking oranges and stuff but not a lot. We was picking, and the  people that was helping him, they were people that was just kind of  travelling through the country, working. I forgot what the word was for  them, but they shook the trees. Now, the peaches was mostly what   and  9  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Finchum  they fell on the ground and they was just soft, and my sister-in-law was  packing them. He came down there, the man did, and said,    You don   t  shake the trees,    and I told him, I said,    I don   t shake the trees.    He said,     I know. You don   t pick them up on the ladder, you stay on the ground.  Make those other people pick them off the tree.    But it was a shame that  they did that.  That a little bit easier than picking cotton?  Oh yeah, that was fun because I got paid for that. (Laughter) Papa would  give us   shoot what was it   for two hundred pounds a day, a quarter I  think it was. He   d give us a quarter if we picked two hundred pounds a  day. My sister and brothers picked it with two hands and I picked it with  one and got the two hundred the same as they did. I picked in this hand  and put it in this hand and then I   d get another handful and put it in this  hand, put it in my sack. I didn   t even put it in a sack with my right hand.  I might could pick a burr if it was real fluffy and pull it out, but I usually  didn   t get all of the cotton when I did that.  And how had you injured your hand?  How did I injure it? I fell when my mother was scalding tomatoes, and  my sister said it was black as his shirt, and it smelled so bad you  couldn   t hardly stay in the house. I had a scar right there until I was fifty  years old, and I still don   t use that hand very much. I don   t think I could  feed myself with it, but it   s done a lot of work (laughter), but this (left  hand) has done the most. When I was getting my nails done, the lady  said this is my pretty hand. (Laughs)  So how old were you when this accident happened?  I was between one and two. I don   t know how long ago it was, really.  So they taught you to write with your left hand, then?  Yes.  Whether it was natural or not, you learned to use your left?  Yeah, yeah. I do everything I do with it.  Ask her about her wedding day.  Okay, well back up a little bit and let   s talk a little bit about your  wedding day. What can you tell us about that?  10  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Well, my husband always said he was going to marry when he was  twenty-one. We went together for four years, and when he turned  twenty-one, I was twenty-one. He just came up one day and said he was  going to get married, and I went to Montgomery Ward   s and bought my  dress and put it on and went out to the justice of peace in Oklahoma City  and was married. (Laughter)  Did you parents know?  Oh, sure. (Laughs) Yeah, sure.  And then what did you do?  And I turned twenty-two, then, in October after. We was both twenty-one  when we married, though.  And did you go on a honeymoon?  Oh, no. We went back to my mother   s house and she fixed us dinner,  and we went to bed in my bed where we slept all the time. (Laughter)  We spent our first night together at my home. It   s a different world from  what they are today, I   ll tell you. But I wouldn   t take anything for the  experience.  Did you move into your own place after that?  No, hon. We didn   t own. His daddy had a little house on his farm, and  we moved in it and lived there until    41. Then we moved out to Franklin  over here by Norman. I think we just farmed there one year and then we  went to California. We went there and farmed one year and went to  California then, and then stayed until his mother got sick in    43 and we  come back. Then I   ve told you that he     Then the military.  Yeah.  What did he do for a living after he got out of the military?  He was a welder.  Was a welder.  And done a lot of welding.  And did you work outside of the home after that?  11  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Only cleaning houses. I went to California when my sister   s son died,  and he let all my chickens  starve . He quit feeding them and they quit  laying, and I come home and killed them all and put them in the freezer.  Then I started cleaning house in Norman, and I cleaned two houses a  week for several years.  Did you have a special technique for butchering your chickens?  Yeah, I cut their heads off with an axe. I   d lay it on a block and cut its  head off. Otherwise I wrung it off. When I was in California, the ladies  next door was wanting their chicken killed, and I said,    I can kill it for  you,    and I went over there and wrung the head off, and they looked at  me so funny. They didn   t know what to think. (Laughs) But when you   re  killing two hundred chickens, you don   t wring their heads off that way.  And that was before deep freezes?  I bought milk cartons and put chicken in that, and water. It was a really a  nice way to put them away. It was really nice when you took them out.  Did you have a big garden?  I had a garden before we ever married. (Laughter) My husband bought  food jars for me, and my daddy gave me a place to make a garden, and I  made a garden and canned. We wasn   t rich by any means, but we had  plenty to eat. I remember one Sunday my uncle and his wife came, my  uncle and Aunt Nettie, and I fixed dinner for them. Most of it was from  the jars, you know, and oh, he bragged on it and made me feel so good.  (Laughs)  How had you learned to can? Did you mother teach you, or home  demonstration, or what?  Well, I think demonstration maybe. I don   t remember Momma canning a  whole lot of stuff. Peaches and fruit, but not vegetables because they  didn   t have a way. I had a pressure cooker but we didn   t have that until  Raymond bought it for me after we married. It pressured them and you  could put a can of beans and stuff away that way. I guess you could have  put them in hot water but we never did do that. Momma, most of her  canning was fruit because her mother had an orchard and we had a lot of  fruit to help to eat.  Did you have a cellar?  Yes. My daddy   there was a cyclone one year, I remember, I don   t  12  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  know how old I was at the time, not very old, and he could whistle and it  would go so far, and he whistled. He said,    Didn   t you hear me whistle?  I said you were supposed to come to me when I whistle. There   s a  cyclone coming over the hill.    It never did get down close but he  thought it might, you know. We went to the cellar. I didn   t tell you that  my daddy, after my mother died in    21, he married   no, she died in     In 1925, I think.  Yeah,    21. He married his brother   s wife, which she lost her husband in  1918 with the flu, and she was carrying a little boy at the time. They  married and raised us then after that, and a wonderful person she was.  She died in    36, a year after I married.  And I remember the first visit you talked about your  step mother  making clothes. She made her own clothes, I remember you talking  about she would look and dress you very fancy.  Now say that again, hon.  That, tell us a little bit about your mother made clothes, your  stepmother.  Oh, she made some of the most beautiful clothes, and she never used a  pattern. We   d pick up the catalogue and we   d say,    Momma, we want  that dress right there,    and she   d make it. I remember in high school, I  had, it was a black satin, satin I think it was called, and it had pretty  flowers on it. The teacher told me how pretty it was and made me feel so  good. I   d wash it by myself, by hand, and iron it, and put it back on  where I could wear it back to school because I was so proud of that  dress. I really don   t know where Momma got the material. I know she  ordered some stuff from the catalogue, but I can   t remember where  she   she didn   t go to town a lot so I can   t remember where she really  got the material.  And it was different besides feed sack?  Oh yeah, but I   ve had a little bit of that, too. Before Raymond and I  married, I wore feed sack dresses to work in. I don   t know that I ever  wore them to go to town but I have worn them.  So when you say    Momma,    that   s your stepmother?  My stepmother, yeah, and sometimes she wouldn   t have material to  make our panties the same as the dress so she   d put a flour sack up at the  top and the other down in the bottom and we   d have them to match our  13  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  dress.  You make do, don   t you?  Yeah, we made do. Yeah. We never really went hungry. I can   t say that  we went hungry. In high school then, I went to town and I would stay all  night sometimes with friends, you know, and I thought,    We   re a lot  better off than they are. They have the better home, but we have the  better food.    There was eight of us that lived in a three-room house.  Sometimes I can   t even imagine where we all slept?  That was going to be my question, where did you sleep?  When the store burnt down, we was living in this little house, and that  was at Dibble, and it had the front room, what we called the front room,  but my mother and dad had a bedroom in there. Then we had a kitchen,  and a dining room. That was what we had, and very small it was with six  children.  Had to share a bed with your sister?  Yes.  Dibble, didn   t you say your husband played on the baseball   ?  My daddy did.  Your daddy did.  Yeah, my daddy did, yeah, yeah.  So was education important when you were growing up?  No. I was the only one who finished high school, and I told them I was  the dumbest one of the bunch. (Laughter) Because they all got out and  went out in the world and was around people and stuff and learned a lot,  you know, that way, but, and I didn   t go to school to learn. I went to  school because my daddy said he   d put me straddling a plow and  plowing every day, and I knew he would. (Laughs) So I went to school  to finish school, and it wasn   t easy because we didn   t get to go any when  we was picking cotton, only when it rained. We went to school and  maybe missed two or three days, then it rained, and felt as dumb as you  could be. You couldn   t have felt any dumber. I had good kids that would  just come by and ask me if I needed help, you know. I couldn   t ever say  it was cheating because it was just help. In a way it was, I guess, because  one of my girlfriends made every book report for me I ever turned in as  14  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  far as I could remember, because I didn   t have time to read it. She   d  come by and she   d say,    You want me to make you a book report?    Of  course I did. (Laughter)  Do you ever remember the first car or first airplane you ever saw?  Oh yes, honey. The first airplane, we were in the cotton patch, and it  went over us and we couldn   t imagine what in the world it was, and I  remember then after, it was just a little two-seater, you know, at the  time. They was having a show with airplanes in Oklahoma City, and I  can   t remember what year that was, and we went up there and we got out  and went around and walked around the plane and looked at it, you  know, and the guy, pilot got in it and went up in the air and come down.  He come down just like he was going to  run over us  and every one of  us kids just dipped down and laid on the ground. (Laughs) We just knew  he was going to fall on us and he got the biggest kick out of that.  And your first car?  Well, we had an old Ford that had the, what would you call it, a cloth  top. I remember one time my oldest sister and we kids were somewhere,  and it was on a hill, and we pushed her off down that hill, and she drove.  We jumped in and my daddy scolded us because he said she didn   t really  know how to drive. I don   t know what   we were just doing things like  kids do.  Got into a little bit of trouble?  Did I get into trouble? Oh, no. My daddy, he didn   t get on to us, he just  told us we shouldn   t have done it.  Well, what were holidays like at your house?  Well, after Papa and Momma married, we always had her side of the  family usually at our house, because we had a pretty nice house in  Blanchard after we moved out there. It was the nicest home I ever lived  in as a child, and it was a brick home, and it   s still there. It had a kitchen  and a sink, and a bathtub, and a dining room and a front room, and two  bedrooms upstairs, and a basement. Us four girls slept in the basement  and the two boys slept in the bedroom upstairs because there wasn   t  enough room for four girls. It was the nicest home we ever lived in, and  Momma   s folks come there usually, and I said they came there because  they knew there was older kids that could wash dishes after the dinner.  (Laughs) Mostly Christmas, but as far as a gift, our daddy never gave us  a gift for just our self. It was always something for the   we had a little  red wagon one Christmas, and we had a croquet set one Christmas, and  15  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  really that   s all I can remember we ever got.  A croquet set?  Yeah.  Did you play?  Oh yes, and Raymond, my husband, and them had a croquet set, too, and  after we married, my sister and brother-in-law was playing out there, but  I was carrying my baby then so I was just sitting watching them. One of  my sister-in-laws said she went through the bracket and she didn   t.  (Laughs) My husband stepped up and said,    You didn   t go through  that     And she knew she didn   t but she told them she did, because she  couldn   t go on until it went through that bracket. (Laughter) There was  lots of good times, and there was a lot of bad times.  Was church an important part of your life?  It was, honey, until my mother   after my mother died, we kids went to  church but Papa never did go to church, that I can remember, after  Momma died, but they was faithful in it. This is not very good to tell,  but Momma, they went to every service, and she had us laying down on  a pallet, and the minister   s wife said,    Argie, what did you feed those  babies before you brought them over here?    And he said,    Sweet  potatoes.    So you can imagine the outcome of what was going on, but  after Momma died, I don   t know why Papa quit. We kids went on to  church, and we would walk three miles at night back to church.  My oldest sister one night, we left the house. When it came time for the  kids to come to our house, the boys came to our home, but they never  did go to the other homes, and Momma would have dinner ready for us.  My sister had baked a cake or something, on Saturday, so it was all  prepared, and we never saw Momma sometimes. She   d go in, she made  her a bed in the bathtub, because we didn   t have running water, and  she   d go in there and read. Sometimes we wouldn   t even see her hardly  at all while they were there.  Then we left that house one evening, and my sister was going with a boy  then and I wasn   t dating at the time, and my younger sister and two other  girls was ahead of us, and Oneta and I was real close friends, just like a  sister, was in between Lola and Walter. Someone come along and picked  Lola and Walter up and we didn   t know it. We come to a little bridge  close to the church, and there was a car stopped on it, and we didn   t  know the car. We didn   t know who was in it so she and I ran out in the  pasture and hid, and they finally went on, and we went to church, but  16  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Lola was sending her husband, our friend, back out there to find us, see  what happened to us because they knew we should be there. It was  different time, and I   m glad I had to go through them, because I think it  helps you. I can   t say I liked going through losing   I   ve lost all my  sisters and brothers and that   s not easy, and my oldest daughter, I lost  her.  Well, what do you attribute your longevity to?  I don   t know, honey. I   ve said a million times the Lord felt sorry for me  when I burned my hand so he gave me many years, but I prayed that I  could do this and do that, see this and that, and I got to. I asked the Lord,     Let me see my children graduate from high school.    I asked the Lord to  have me in a home, let me see that, and I asked him to let me see my  grandchildren.  I   ve got two grandchildren, four great-grandchildren, four great-great-grandchildren.  It   s odd, they was born almost twenty-five years apart.  My first granddaughter, I would have turned fifty in September, October  I mean, and she was born in January. Then my grandson, I was seventy-five,  and it was two little girls in between that, and then this year I  turned 100, and I had a little great-grandson that was a day before or day  after my birthday, and I can   t remember which it was. And my oldest,  well, let me think, granddaughter was born close to my husband   s  birthday, and they named her Kyra Ray Mildred. I said I knew Ray  would be on it regardless of what, boy or girl, but I didn   t think about  them putting Mildred on it, but they did.  And this little grandson that we helped raise, he just worshipped both of  us, and we did him, too. That   s his two little girls. They live out here. I  don   t see them very often, but I see them pretty often.  You said you helped raise the grandchild?  Do what?  Did you help raise a grandchild? Is that what you said?  Yeah, his mother and dad both worked, and they would bring him by the  house, because we lived out there on Franklin Road, not Franklin Road,  on Robinson. They   d bring him, and we   d put him in a bed with us when  they brought him in because we   d still be in bed. After Raymond had his  heart attack, I think he was kind of afraid to go to bed. It wasn   t nothing  for us to be up till twelve o   clock, and we slept late, which I still do the  same.  17  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  What   s a typical day for you? When do you wake up, go to bed?  Well, I usually go to bed just a while before   about eleven or eleven-thirty,  and I read the bible usually then. It   s probably twelve o   clock  before I go to sleep, and it may be twelve or one, two, or whatever.  And then when do you wake up?  Sometime I wake up early and sometimes I   m not awake until ten or  eleven. Sometimes I lay there and don   t sleep. I get to thinking about my  grandkids, nieces, nephews, and I don   t want to forget their names, and  it   s not easy to keep up with as many as I   ve got. (Laughs) And I   ll start  counting them and sometimes I have to say one of them that   s married,  and then I can finally think of the other one.  And what   s a typical day in your life? What types of things do you do, or  you know, when you get up?  I don   t do a whole lot. I usually keep the kitchen clean, and I   ll vacuum  once in a while, and make my own bed. She helps me bathe most of the  time because that   s how I broke my ankle. I was trying to get over the  bathtub and I hung my toe. We had a sliding glass door, and I hung my  toe on that. My grandson made a bar for me and I had a hold of the bar  and I held it as long as I  could . I just sat down. She was with me and  she said,    Momma, don   t get up. Don   t move.    I had broke my ankle.  That   s my trouble, I   m clumsy. I broke a hip and I broke an ankle. I  broke ribs and I   ve cracked three ribs. Well, what else did I break,  Gerry? I forgot.  That   s it, I think.  So that   s why I have a  walker . Sometimes I walk if I can touch, touch  things, you know, where I won   t fall. I   m very clumsy. I   ve been that all  my life.  And do you have a motto that you live by, or a philosophy of life?  Well, I guess in a way I want to be a good person. I love people, and my  family has always meant so much to me, and I know I   m loved by them.  (Laughter)  When did you give up driving?  Ninety-seven, when I was ninety-seven. Wasn   t that right, Gerry?  Ninety-seven. I still drove some and went to church and bought my  groceries, but she and her husband have been with me the last three  18  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  years.  Ninety-seven, that   s pretty good though.  Yeah.  You said you used to drive to church. Do you still go to church today?  I haven   t been going too much because I don   t hear a thing that   s going  on, and I   m ashamed of myself but I read the bible and I pray, and ask  the Lord to bless me but we haven   t been faithful in going like we  should.  You said you read the bible. Do you read often?  Every night.  But other books, do you read any?  No, I   m not a reader.  A lot of the hundred-year-olds we meet read a lot.  No, we never had anything  to read . We never had a newspaper to read.  We didn   t have anything to read at home. We worked. It was all work.  When my brother left home, after my mother died, he went to California  with an uncle, and he couldn   t read at all, and his uncle made him learn  to read papers. He built homes and done anything he wanted to do. He  was a hard worker and he learned to read. I know one time he was going  with a girl and she moved away, and he said,    I can   t write letters to her  so I   ll just not even try.    He didn   t know how to write a letter.  A lot of individuals will tell us that they, for leisure time or fun time,  would read. What did you do, since you didn   t read a lot or you didn   t  have books at home? What did you do for fun as a child?  Fussed and fought. (Laughter) I remember one time, I can   t remember  what, anyway, me and my brother had got into it about, over something.  I was in high school at the time, and my daddy just stood there and  watched us. He give me one of the blackest eyes you ever saw, and I  said,    I guess you   d just sit there and let him kill me,    and he said,    I  just wanted to see what you   d do.    (Laughter) But we did, we fussed and  fought a lot.  He let you work it out on your own.  19  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Huh?  He was letting you work it out on your own.  Yeah, we worked it out on our own. Now, my sister next to me, she was  stout as she could be, and of course I couldn   t do anything when my  brother   I   d just sit down on him and hold him. I couldn   t, but Hazel  would stay in a fist fight with him. I remember one time we was hoeing  cotton and something happened, and she pulled off his hat and throwed  it and told him to go get it. He wouldn   t do it, and when it got out there.  No, it was her bonnet and he just threw it further, and they got into it.  (Laughs) We still loved each other. I wouldn   t take anything for my  brother and sisters.  Now, when history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  Well, I had a hard life, I can say that, but I   m glad that I lived the way  that I lived it. It taught you a lot about life. There was parts of it I wish I  never had to go through, but as I said, I think it   s been easier for me to  lose them, because I   ve always felt that   s part of what we was here for.  We can   t live forever.  How did you celebrate your 100th birthday?  Oh, I had, what was it, about 125, Gerry? And honey I got so confused.  You can   t imagine how, there were so many. We waited until most of  them were there, Gerry thought that would be the best, and when I went  in there and all those people, it was just like they were thrown at me,  seemed like or something, I don   t know. I couldn   t even tell you who all  was there. I couldn   t remember the names or the faces, but my little  niece had taken pictures of all of them so I can go back and look and see  who all was there, but it was overwhelming.  I see your napkin says,    One hundred. The party continues.     Yeah. (Laughter) I had from California, Tennessee, Colorado. Oh, where  was those other kids from? There was one other state, I think.  Indiana and Ohio.  I wouldn   t take a million dollars for the time.  Did you ever expect to live to 100?  No.  20  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Finchum  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  No?  I didn   t, but my sister got ninety-six, my oldest sister, and she was just  sitting in a chair and threw her head back and that was it. My sister next  to me was seventy, and she had cancer, and then my youngest sister next  to her, well my brother was in between them, and she died with cancer at  sixty-seven. I don   t know why. I just   I prayed for those things and the  Lord answered me is all I can say, but I never thought of being 100 years  old.  Was there a point when you realized you might make it?  I was happy.  What   s that?  I said I was happy that I   ve made it to 100. My health is better than my  daughter   s, one of the doctors, he said that. I   m clumsy and I   ve been  that all my life so I don   t except anything.  They said that right hand, because it didn   t develop, it curled and it  affected the whole right side of her body. The leg is shorter, the  muscular did not develop. The shoulder   s shorter, and I have to alter all  of her clothes.  But the doctor said, what was he talking about mine was better than his?  Oxygen. I don   t even take a pill.  No high-blood pressure?  Other than the hand, the arm when you were a child, have you had any  other major illness, or things like cancer, diabetes, or anything?  No.  And no medication?  I don   t take meds. That   s my medications right there. Vitamins.  Vitamins.  She got a serious intestinal thing on a home demonstration trip once     Oh, yeah.     that killed a lot of women. I can   t remember what it was.  21  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  G. Vandaveer  Vandaveer  Bishop  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  I   ve been blessed.  She was in the hospital with that.  I think I ate a piece of pie that no one else seemed to eat, and it sort of  got through     There were three women that died on that trip.  Put me in the hospital.  Three women that died on that trip?  Huh?  A home demonstration trip.  Yeah. There was several that got sick and some of them didn   t even     they didn   t know what, you know, happened. After the doctor diagnosed  one, they kind of diagnosed that they got something, too. At least two or  three of them.  Tell them what you called it, Momma.  Huh?  Tell them what you called the disease. What did you call the disease?  Gosh, I   ve forgot?  She called it    Shitmonella   . (Laughter)  Because that   s what I had to do.  You can keep that for the record. (Laughter)  So you were a member of a home demonstration club?  Oh yeah.  Did you?  I enjoyed that.  Do you remember the name of it?  22  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Bishop  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Willing Workers.  Willing Workers. You don   t have too many of those anymore.  You have some good friends in there that you know. Of course they   re  all gone, but I   ve got one little girl that was the age of my oldest sister  that was with us, and she still   her and her husband was just like my  kids. They   d come and do anything in the world, and she can   t look at  me, hardly, without crying. (Laughs) She   d had to come and hug me and  cry for my 100th birthday. We had some good times together. Raymond,  we played forty-two, and the last time we played forty-two was with  them over at the     What   s forty-two?  Well, it   s a card game, that you play with cards, and Raymond was  getting mixed up because he was, you know, not well at that time, and  she said,    That   s okay, Raymond.    She and him played together as  partners, and her husband and I played as partners. She said,    That   s  okay, Raymond. I   ll just tell you what to do.    (Laughs) They was just  real good friends.  And when did you lose him?  When did I lose him? Fourteen years ago.  So you were married over fifty years?  We had sixty-four years.  A long time.  That year. Now it would be seventy-eight.  That   s a long time.  So I had a good long married life and wish it   d been longer but it wasn   t.  But he had cancer of the prostate gland. (Dog barking) Oh, he   s the  sweetest thing sometimes, and he can be so ornery sometimes. My  grandson and his wife raised this   good dog   and they had lost theirs,  and they brought it up and give him to me. And we   ve taken him back to  Colorado in a van on a pillow because every time we   d hit a bump, it   d  scare him to death. I told Gerry, I said,    I used to carry Sharon on my  pillow in my lap when we travelled,    and I said,    Let   s put him on one  this trip,    and it didn   t get the jarring he got otherwise. He   s been around  23  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Vandaveer  Finchum  Bishop  Finchum  Vandaveer  for several years himself.  He   s good company.  He   s good to mind at times, too, and other times he   s not so good, but he  comes to see me every morning before I get out of bed, and he   ll sleep in  the hallway sometimes where he can see in here, because Fred stays in  the front room quite a bit, and he really don   t sleep his legs jump so bad  till he can   t sleep in bed so he   ll sleeps in that chair and she sleeps in  another and I sleep in another and he   ll lay in the hallway where he can  see all four rooms.  He takes care of all three of you.  Yes. I don   t know what I   d do without them. They   re both so good to  me.  Well, is there anything else you want to add before we sign off?  No, honey. I guess I   ve probably done all I know and maybe more.  (Laughs)  No, you   ve done great.  You were great.  Thank you so much.  Thank you. I appreciate it.  -------  ------- 
