 Finchum  Weeks  Today is August 7, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re in Grove, Oklahoma today to speak with Ralph Weeks.  Right.  And this is part of our Oklahoma 100 Year Life project, so thank you for  having us today. Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you  were born.  I was born August the 10th, 1913, in Enterprise, Kansas, which is a  small town east of, oh, it   s     Abilene.  Abilene.  Abilene, Kansas. I know where Enterprise is.  Yeah, and what was the rest of that?  That was it. What did your parents do for a living?  Well, when I was old enough to worry about that, or consider that, I was  in Independence. My parents had moved to Oswego, where my dad   s  parents were, and somewhere along the line they moved to  Independence during World War II. And at that time, Dad and Mom had  three kids, and they didn   t draft people with two kids for fear of what  might happen to the family. And Dad worked for International Harvester  Company, I think, and then he went to a farm near Parsons, Kansas  where his father and mother were. They were getting along in years and  they couldn   t hack it by themselves, so we moved to the country for  5  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  about a year, and then Dad moved into Parsons and became the Chamber  of Commerce manager, and the rest was history for him.  Did your mother work?  No, my mother   yes, she worked, but not for salary. She had her hands  full raising us two kids, three kids. By that time, they had another kid,  my little sister. And then later on they had one more, a boy. We ended  up in Pittsburg, Kansas which, I think that showed it, the questionnaire  showed it, I believe. What have I missed? (Laughs)  No, you   re doing fine. Where did you go to school?  Well, you mean college?  Elementary.  Oh, in elementary, I went to the first grade, second grade and beginning  of the third grade in Independence, Kansas when we moved to the  country that I spoke about.  Was that a very big school?  Big school?  Was it?  Not into third grade. It was not a country school. It was an independent  school, a city school. Back in those days I could walk home in perfect  safety. Nobody would bother me. Down Laurel Street, I believe it was,  and felt perfectly safe all the way through, including Pittsburg, Kansas.  We moved there when I was a junior in high school, and among other  things I did, I played golf for Pittsburg College High it was called. There  was only about thirty-five students in the whole school. We were the  guinea pigs, going to College High School, to, they had to have some  students to practice on. I really got a good education, because the  students would practice teach.  Okay.  And they   d take their turns, and we had several teachers.  And you played golf?  I played golf and we did pretty well at golf, and College High had a  basketball team, and we, in my senior year, we got squared away and we  6  Finchum  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  did alright in basketball. We didn   t lose a game. Won all of our games,  and that may sound like I   m bragging, but we went to the state  tournament undefeated at  Buhler , Kansas. And we won our first game  out there, but we got knocked off the second game and we were out.  When you get beat at those state tournaments, you   re out.  You went home.  But we were really happy.  Who beat you?  What?  Who beat you?  Who beat you?  Buhler, I think the name of the team was. Buhler, Kansas.  What year was that? That would have been     Oh boy.  If you were born in thirteen and you   re eighteen it   d be    31. Around in  there. Did you play on the team?  Yes.  What position?  Forward, left forward. Back in those days when you made a basket, we   d  walk back to the center part of the court and jump for the ball again.  That there brings up a story. That center they had in Buhler, they had a  forward that guarded it for them, and he was twenty feet tall and had an  out-reach of   it wouldn   t stop. I practically got no shots. So I just quit  trying and passed the ball to some of my teammates. And he was a very  important member of that Buhler basketball team. They won.  All the way through.  Buhler won it, the state tournament. Class B. That   s judged on total  enrollment and we were, our enrollment was so small that we were rated  Class B. So most things kind of stick with you.  Well, did you have to work while you were in high school?  7  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  No, I didn   t work in high school, but when I graduated from high school,  I laid out a year. That   s what I was fishing for. I laid out a year, it was,  that was during the Depression. Do you know what 1929 life was like?  Tell us.  It was a depression that wouldn   t stop, and my dad did all he could and I  wanted to help him out. So I got a job in Safeway Grocery Store, which  had just opened up. I worked for the Safeway Grocery Store for about a  year, and then I went back to college. And from there, my brother found  me a job, helped find me a job in Wichita, Kansas selling telephones  house to house. We were down on our knees begging people to take  telephone service, and I worked six weeks without making a single sale.  Finally things started easing up. World War II was coming along and  that sort of thing and got to getting better and better as far as selling  telephones. Not the mechanical part of telephones, but selling a working  model telephone that people used. Boy  That was the day. (Laughs) In  the meantime, before we reached that point, me and some of my buddies  played golf against Wichita and Pleasanton, Kansas and other places  around southeast Kansas, and that was really fun. And I got up to, what  do I want to say? I got up to three and a half years of college, and Uncle  Sam told me they wanted me. (Laughs) I didn   t want them, but they  wanted me. Oh, I   m just kidding. They wanted me. By that time, I had a  boy. My wife and I had one child, which is why I didn   t get drafted right  away. Oh, I guess I made as much as I could out of my college years.  From then on, things got better.  At what college was that? What was the name of the college?  Kansas State Teachers College.  Okay.  And the logo was a gorilla, and they were nicknamed the Gorillas, but  they couldn   t overpower Uncle Sam, so I off went to the wild blue  yonder. I was always proud of the fact that I got enough points to  graduate, but they were in the wrong subjects. What subjects they were,  I don   t know. I did at the time, but I didn   t pay any attention to it,  because I couldn   t a degree with what I got those subjects were for.  Were you planning to teach?  No, they had a very good curriculum that would give you a degree just  like any teachers college. They called it Kansas State Teachers College,  8  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Pittsburg. More formal, and you could get a degree teaching school right  there, but I didn   t take the teaching degree. I, frankly I studied the first  semester in college. I took engineering my freshman year, engineering.  And my dad was unhappy with my grades, and I come home one  evening and he was there waiting for me, and he says, he looked at the  report card, grade card, and he says,    You think you can do better than  that?    And I said, I knew he wasn   t fooling, and I said,    Yes, I do,    and  he said,    Get those grades up,    and flipped the grade card over to me.  I couldn   t hack the engineering, algebra, chemistry, physiology and all  that engineering stuff. It was a little bit too much for me. (Laughs) I  guess it was. Of course, the second semester I did much better and  taking history and social science as a major, and that   s, that   s pretty  much   well, what is it? It   s, it   s kind of an all-inclusive sort of a thing.  It included economics and history and social science and the like. It  helped me. It helped me plenty, but not in the engineering. I was going  to go to South America and build bridges until the first semester hit me.  (Laughter)  Well, when Uncle Sam called you, what branch were you in?  The Infantry of the Army. I was drafted into the service and it was the  Army. By that time, I was pretty much along the line of three and a half  years of college, and my dad had three kids by that time, and it   s pretty  hard to correlate those things all together.  Did you have to go overseas?  What?  Did you go overseas?  Yes. We got indoctrinated into a shooting war in a little town called in  France. It was on the Moselle River. And I never will forget it, because  we hit the, those places I just named, the whole division was down there  on the Moselle River, and they raised grapes for wine. Well what I   m  trying to say is the   here comes the Alzheimer   s. It   s, it   s mortar. We  were down in a big railroad bridge. I mean we were down at water level,  and they were pestering us, pestering our positions by plopping   what  did I say?  Mortars?  Mortars. I need help. (Laughs) And they were firing that mortar down on  the lower level, and to installations across the river, quite a ways off, and  the guys were, had the mortar out on, wide open. No, protected positions  9  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  or anything, and what I   m getting at is what I got into. So I made them  get off of that unprotected area, down low. I said,    Get up there in the  grapevines and knock them down.    Of course, you could put a mortar  shell out about that far and hit a grapevine and it   ll explode. You only do  it once, too, and so I said,    Be sure you knock those grapevines down,     and I said,    fire a couple of shells over that building across the river,     quite a ways. And they fired a couple of shells, a couple of them way  out. I said,    Fire a couple more,    and they fired one of the loudest,  awful-sounding shells you ever heard in your life. It went off,    BOOM      It was something else. That   s the only time we fired those two shells.  We had them, some more, but don   t fire them around me. Those were  the loudest things I ever heard in my life, and that   s all we had to fire.  And I knew we had some new shells, but I didn   t know what they were  until the guys fired them. Well, from then on it was walking.  Walking?  Yep. Never got into transportation again for the rest of the war. Well, I  take it back. General, you may know who I   m talking about is, Patton.  Patton.  Patton. We joined Patton   s army, and we got in forty and eights. I have  to correct myself. Well, they had us on forty and eights, no, yeah, forty  and eights. A box car would haul forty horses. I mean eight horses and  forty men. Eight, I mean forty, what   s the   hommes is  French for   men. And they   d get us unloaded every once in a while and we   d fire a  few rounds and get back on the trucks and fire a few rounds, but the rest  of the time, we were walking, and had some near misses. But Patton, do  you know who he is?  Yes, a little.  Patton was relieved of his duty for slapping a soldier in the hospital.  Eisenhower put him at the silent right fast. But he won battles, I   ll tell  you that. Well, I didn   t win the war by myself. (Laughter)  How long were you over there?  Altogether, let me put it that way, altogether I was drafted and in battle  overseas and in army of occupation a year for a total of three years. Just  about a third, a third, a third. They gave you good training and gave you  good equipment, and there was a big hill, almost a mountain. Well, like  these hills around here, and we were advancing down a road and the hill  was up there and we were going this way, and they were firing     10  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Mortar?  Mortar. Don   t go away. And it was, they, they had to get over that hill  and they couldn   t do it, and they, they were on the other side of the hill.  Who, I don   t know, but they were firing at us and we were advancing,  and they could get to the top of that hill but they couldn   t get over it,  which would bring it down in the bottom of the hill. If they had done  that   there were blown up trees at the top of the hill and they couldn   t  get over it, and they was down there at the bottom. I thought,    Hey,  that   s got to be somebody looking after us.    Oh, there   s lots of stories.  During those three years, did you get to come back stateside?  What?  During those three years, did you get to come back home?  Yes, after three.  No, during that time.  What?  During those three years, during that time did you get to come back  home?  Oh, no. No, but that reminds me, which I was pretty proud of. The war is  over, and by that time I was a second lieutenant. I was a second  lieutenant during the war. I was a second lieutenant before we left  stateside, and when the war was over they assigned me to headquarters  USFA: United States Forces in Austria. I spent a year there, and the  colonel came to me in, oh I don   t know, about June or July, and he said,     You   re due for rotation, but if you   ll sign on for another year I   ll see  that you get your captaincy.    I thought,    Man, captain.    Well, by that  time I   d been without contact with my son and my wife, and I said,     Well, thank you very much sir. If I have any choice in the matter, I  haven   t seen my wife and my son and my folks, and I believe I want to  go back home.    But I could have been a captain, but they don   t tell you  how long you   re going to stay in the Army, either. They get things  mixed up a little bit I think, but anyway I got my first lieutenancy, and  that   s high enough for me.  Going back, how did you meet your wife?  How did I meet her?  11  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Yes.  At Pittsburg Teachers College. Her father was a doctor, Dr. Scott, but he  passed away before I met my wife. She took a, got a degree in art, a  teaching degree in art, and she got her degree. I got three and a half  years and Uncle Sam said he needed me worse than Teacher   s College  did, so away I went.  What was your first date? How did you court her? Can you talk about  your first date?  First date?  Yeah.  Gosh, I don   t     Taking you way back.  I don   t know. I don   t know where I met her. Probably at the Teachers  College there on campus.  Well during the war, did she write you?  What?  During the war, did you receive letters from her?  Yes. They would give you a little rest period in two or three days and  you could write her and your parents, and those days were few and far  between. Maybe two or three months in between, writing letters. Now  you   ve got me going. Where did I meet her? I don   t know.  Where did you take her on your first date? Don   t know that either.  (Laughs)  I sure don   t.  What did you do after the war?  Before the war, you said after, but before the war I worked for the  telephone company, and I sold directory advertising. You know, the ads  that are in the directory. I sold directory advertising on a commission  basis and I did real well and we were married by that time. I just don   t  remember. We probably, we spent a lot of time out of class at the  College Inn. We   d get in there and get a table together and, I mean  12  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Bishop  Weeks  several people, and chew the fat and go home. That was before selling  directory advertising, but when I first went to work for the telephone  company, I sold telephones. In seven, six weeks I didn   t ever make a  sale. I got eleven dollars a week, and I stayed at the YMCA, God bless  them, (laughs) and you could get a good meal for thirty-five cents. We  were married at that time.  Did you go back to work with the telephone company after the war?  Yes, yes I did.  What telephone company was it?  Southwestern Bell. Yeah, well I didn   t go back to work selling directory  advertising. Let   s put it that way. I got assigned to the division office,  and they are committed to the federal government to hire employees that  were drafted, to hire them back and give them the jobs that they had.  Well, they did more than that for me. They gave me some   oh, I don   t  know what to say, what to call it. I didn   t sell directory advertising. I  was put in the division office, and I didn   t know it but they were  grooming me for a manager   s job. As time went on I began to smell a  rat, and finally they opened up the deal and asked me how I   d like to go  to Emporia, which is a teacher   s college just like Pittsburg State. I said,     That would be fine, that would be fine. I   d like that,    and they sent me.  I went to Topeka from there, and retired from the telephone company at  that place, and I   ve been down here ever since. Thirty years, thirty-some  years.  So this is where you retired, in the Grove area?  What?  You retired to the Grove area?  Yes. We were familiar with this area down here. My brother who lived  in Coffeyville was married to a Coffeyville girl, and we   d meet him  down here every once in a while, like Fourth of July and it was different  then. Not as developed as it is now, but Lakeside Restaurant, do you  know where that it is? Do you know where it is?  No.  No.  Go back to the stop light in town and go straight out on the main drag,  and it   s that big boat dock down there. Now that I   ve given you the  13  Finchum  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  location     What were you going to tell us? (Laughs)  You said you would meet your brother over there.  Yeah, yeah, and some other people from out of town would be there.  What year did you retire?  In 1978.  Then you moved?  September, I think.  Okay.  September or October, and you had to retire. From the president of  AT T, which was Mother Bell, from that one on down to the janitor  you had to retire at sixty-five.  There are a lot of changes in telephones over that time period.  Yes, that   s right. You   re so right. Tulsa has and Oklahoma City has  remnants of the AT T. It   s AT T now. They bought out Southern Bell.  Thirteen, thirteen towns, now that   s not real estate, that   s the telephone  system. Thirteen towns added on to Southwestern Bell holdings in  Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and that was AT T. They   re the  largest telephone company. Well, the New York Telephone Company  was the next biggest.  So what do you think of cell phones?  Cell phones? I think they   re the greatest thing since sliced bread. I do. If  somebody had told me that we   d have such a thing thirty years ago when  I retired I   d say,    You   re out of your mind.    We talked last night over  the telephone. We talked to Hawaii last night where we have two  nephews. There   s a cyclone headed toward Hawaii, you know. Have you  seen the news?  Yes.  Okay, we talked to them in the midst of a hurricane, and let   s see, some  other things they   ve done. They didn   t have cell phones, and this is not a  cell phone (gestures to portable phone), but we can walk around in here  14  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  and out there and down the highway. It has batteries that recharge  themselves. Excuse me Rosie (speaking to dog). When I was selling  telephones house to house and only making one sale in seven weeks, we  had the old fashioned telephones on a cradle, and you   d dial. This, we  don   t attach it to a wire, and then I don   t know. Oh, satellite. I think it   s  the satellite that enables us to go outside and walk around and talk on it.  Well, do you remember your first car? Your first vehicle?  You wouldn   t want to know, but our first vehicle was in Parsons,  Kansas, and my brother, older brother, he became friends   he was the  coach of the YMCA, and Bailey Ricketts was football coach at the high  school and junior college at Parsons. And I think his wife probably gave  him an ultimatum that she   s not going to ride in that Model-T Ford.  Anyway, he got rid of it through giving it as a gift to my brother.  (Laughter) I didn   t have the nerve to ask him how come, but I drove that  thing mainly   you know what a Model-T is?  Yes.  Okay. I drove that thing myself, mainly, and when you   re driving at  night, the faster you go, the brighter the lights get, you know, on  magnetos. When I wouldn   t drive it my brother would park it in the field  just over the fence from our place, which was inside the city limits.  Well, I think we were about   I can   t put words together at times. About  three miles out in the country was a golf course, Parson   s Country Club,  and it had a low-water dam. Well, low-water, maybe that way, and the  water come over and left a gap of air. And it rained like the dickens this  particular day, and I got my friend across the street to get in the car with  me, in the Model-T, and go out and get in that gap, and the golf balls  would roll over the top of the dam, small dam.  On the way out we had, well, we blew a tire. I   ll just put it that way, and  here I am holding the steering wheel like this and my friend, across the  street from me, was sitting over here, and we had it wide open. Pulled  the ears down so to speak, and we had it wide open to get to the country  club, and the right front tire, right tire, blew out. And I don   t remember  anything except I was upside down, and my friend was lying across a  barbed wire fence. He wasn   t hurt, I wasn   t hurt, but that Model-T Ford  didn   t go anywhere from then on. Somebody come along and stole a  wheel and the battery until it was just pulled into a junkyard. (Laughs)  That was our first car. It wasn   t much of a car.  Oh, one time, in the meantime, my brother talked me into going to  Abilene, Kansas, where my mother   s brother worked. That was before  the blow out on the tire. And he brought us back, because I wasn   t much  15  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  interested in anything except getting back home. I   ll tell you the truth.  There   s a lot of things I left out I can   t remember.  Well, did you ever think you   d live to be 100?  I really didn   t give it much thought, but every once in a while I would  think about it. I didn   t think I would be this strong.  Anyone else in your family live to be 100?  My mother     Did she?     lived to be just under 100. I mean by that, months. And my dad, he  had cancer, and he passed away about the time he was eighty-nine or  ninety, about that. I never met him, but my great-grand father  had  reached 100 years at Champagne, Illinois. He was the oldest Civil War  veteran that anyone was at the time, and the President, it was his policy  to   what did I want to say? Well, he reached 100, and then the President  generally sent a letter to every single Civil War veteran as they reached  100 years on their birthday. I didn   t think, really, give it much thought.  What was his name, your great-grandfather? If you don   t remember  that   s okay.  I sure don   t. Well, his name would be same as mine, wouldn   t it be?  Weeks would be the last name. Your paternal great-grandfather, your  father   s grandfather, right?  Paternal? I think so. He was reaching for the top step, and what he was  doing up there I don   t know, and he fell all the way to the bottom, and  that   s all. And I, gosh, I   m 101 and I   m alright as long as I sit down.  When I get up and walk around, oh boy.  What do you think has contributed to your longevity? What   s your  secret?  Secret? I really don   t have a secret. I know when I started going  downhill. One night about midnight we took my wife to the hospital.  What had happened, I felt like I was in this position, and my feet gave  away, and I, just about like this position is now.  Maybe it   s Weeks. I never met him, of course.  16  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Why do you think you have lived so long?  Darned if I know.  Have you done anything, do you think, that has contributed to your long  life?  No. Well, I watch my diet pretty well. I don   t smoke. I gave up  cigarettes and cigars and pipes and all that stuff back in nineteen, let   s  see, I retired in    78, probably about 1965, a long time ago. I gave them  up. They just weren   t doing anything for me. I felt tired and I knew they  weren   t, they began ballyhooing the fact that  cigarettes caused cancer .  What   s that date I gave you,    60?  Yeah,    60,    65.  Sixty-five.  Sixty-five.  That   s about when they came out with that  1964 Surgeon   s General  Report . Did you continue to play golf?  Yes. Yes, I played. Incidentally, after I retired I wanted something to do,  and I went to work for Shangri-La as a marshal. That   s a big sounding  name. I worked with Zach Hamilton, a friend of mine who is a school  principal over at, just right straight through here. I don   t know how to  explain that. Well anyway Zach Hamilton was a school principal, and he  hired out on Saturdays and Sundays. He just loved the game, and Jimmy  Gray, good friend of mine, his wife sold real estate over there and  Jimmy Gray worked at the Pro-Shop, running the Pro-Shop. And I  generally worked just, except for over the summertime when things were  hot and heavy, I worked hot and heavy. (Laughs)  Well that   s your secret then, play golf. That   s your secret, play golf.  Yeah. (Laughs)  Did you ever get a hole-in-one?  Yes, I got two of them in my life.  Okay.  I got several close ones, but I couldn   t swing a club today.  17  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Weeks  Bishop  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Can you explain what   s a typical day like for you today?  Today?  Yeah, what time do you get up? What do you usually do, and what time  do you go to bed?  Well, in the recent past, I   ve started going to bed at just about dark, and I  sleep. Last night I didn   t hear that rain. I understood that it thundered  and lightening and rained, and I didn   t hear that, but I was in bed.  What time you usually wake up?  Oh, eight, nine o   clock. Haven   t got anything else to do. (Laughter)  And what do you do during the day? What do you typically do during the  day?  During the day?  Yes.  Well, play solitaire and watch T.V., and that   s the reason why it don   t  bother me too much, the fact that I   m going into the never-never land. I  don   t want to, but I   m going to. As long as I can go to bed at dark and  get up at daylight or thereabouts. It gets kind of boring, you know?  What would you say is your motto? What   s your motto in life, or  philosophy?  Do you have a philosophy or motto?  I don   t think so, but I don   t know. I don   t think I   ve got a motto.  Anything left on your bucket list?  On my what?  Bucket list. Things you want to do and haven   t gotten done? Wish list.  Oh, small things. Things that take a short time. We have a cemetery out  here along the highway. Do you know where I mean? We have eight  burial sites out there, four and four, and my grandson may use one of  them, I don   t know. This little mutt right here     Keeps you a lot of company, doesn   t she?  18  Weeks  Finchum  Bishop  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Weeks  Finchum  Yeah, yeah that   s her favorite spot. There and over there with my  daughter.  Well how do you want to be remembered?  If history were written today, what would you want it to say about you?  If what was written?  History.  History?  Yes.  Well, I   ve been a church-goer all my life, and that   s due to my mother  and father, and I   ve never been away from it. Never been away from  church. I   m not trying to say,    I   m holier than thou    and all of that stuff,  but yeah, I said a few Hail Marys when I was overseas in the Army.  What was the question again?  What do you want history to say about you?  Well, I don   t know. None of these things I   ve been talking about are    I  don   t believe there   s anything that I want history to believe about me,  other   what in the world am I saying? Well, let   s put it this way, I think  I   ve hit it.  You think you   ve hit it. (Laughs) Well, I thank you very much for sharing  with us.  Here   s my daughter.  Well, thank you very much.  You   re sure welcome.  You   ve been great.  -------  ------- 
