 Finchum  S. McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  Today is September 24, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Oklahoma City to speak with Murrel McMahan. Did I say that right?  Yes, you did.  McMahan. And this is part of our Oklahoma 100 Year Life project, so  thank you for having us today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Born in Washington, Oklahoma, June 23, 1914.  Alright, and what did your parents do for a living?  Well, my father grew up a farmer and he went to work for the railroad,  and worked the railroad for a number of years. I don   t know how many  years, a few. He didn   t like people. Well, he didn   t like two bosses. Let   s  put it that way. He didn   t mind working for any one man, but he  wouldn   t   two of them got involved, one of them got laid off. He quit  the railroad and went back to farming and farmed the rest of his life.  Well, up until he retired.  Which railroad did he work for?  Santa Fe.  And what did he farm?  5  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  Well, just general crops through that neighborhood down there, mostly  cotton and corn, feed, various livestock.  Did you grow up on a farm?  Yes ma   am.  And what were some of your chores?  Just general farm.  Do you remember your first tractor?  Well, my first tractor?  Tractor.  My first tractor was a little bitty John Deere, and then I got a little  bigger. That one wasn   t a John Deere, but it was a bigger tractor than the  one I had.  How many brothers and sisters do you have?  Well, I had, counting my twin that passed away as an infant, I had four  sisters and two brothers. One of them passed away at a very young age. I  don   t know just how old he was, two or three years old. Then my one  that survived, he was sixteen when he died. My sisters, had a set of twin  sisters and then an older sister. They all lived up into their sixties and  seventies, but all of them are gone.  So there were two sets of twins?  Yeah.  Two sets. That   s unusual in one family to have two sets.  Well, my mother was bearing another set of twins when she took the flu.  If a lady was with child and got the flu, you might as well knock them in  the head because they was gone.  How old were you?  Four.  Four, so 1918, the flu epidemic?  6  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  Yes. It was three of my mother   s sisters, as well as my mother, and my  grandmother on Dad   s side all passed away with the flu in 1918.  Well, did they send you away so you wouldn   t get it?  No, I was there with them.  Did your father remarry?  No. Well he did, he had those three girls and my brother and me. He  promised my mother before she died that he would not bring a  stepmother over her babies. He didn   t get married until my oldest son  was about two weeks old, and he finally got married again.  So he pretty much raised you on his own?  He raised all the five of us until we were out on our own by his own  will.  Can you describe the house you grew up in?  Well, I grew up in about half a dozen houses. (Laughter)  Okay, the one you were in the longest, then.  They was just ordinary farmhouses, ordinary for the day and time. We  were living in a little two-room house back in    20, 1920. Dad had just  bought   all the kids was old enough to go to school, bought their school  clothes and everything. He went to the gin with a bale of cotton, and us  kids all went down to the creek and played. Directly we looked up and  seen the smoke a boiling. We run back up to our house   burned down.  Burned everything we had except the clothes we had on. Then we  moved into another house for a couple of years I guess, and then out of  that one and into another one. (Laughs) They was just ordinary  farmhouses.  No electricity?  Electricity? What   s that? (Laughter)  No?  No electricity, no telephone, no television, no radio.  Running water?  7  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Yeah, we   d run down to the well and get a bucket and run back to the  house. (Laughter)  Well who did the cooking for you? Who did the cooking?  Well, the girls done some of the cooking. When dad was there he did  most of the cooking. After the girls got married and it was just Dad and I  there. Well, before the girls got married really, if I got hungry I went and  cooked me what I wanted or got something that was leftover and ate.  Dad, he run a row binder. Of course, you don   t know what that it. It   s  just cane and stuff that they planted to feed their livestock. Had to  bundle it up, cut it and bundle it, and he ran a binder for the neighbors  quite a bit. That was about the only time he was away from home.  Would be when he   d be out somewhere working for somebody that way.  Where did you go to elementary school?  Where did I go?  Where did you go to school?  Iron Chapel.  Iron Chapel? How many grades?  Well it went to the eighth grade, but I just went through the fourth, and  then started the fifth. Quit, and started making a farm hand. Farmed until  I was, I guess I was twenty years old when I went to work for Wilson   s  Meat Packers.  That   s here in Oklahoma City?  Yes.  How did you get that job?  I just went up there and stood on the line. That was back kindly in the  end of the Depression. We was starting to trying to climb out of the  Depression. We hadn   t made much success of it until then. Working on  the farm ten cents an hour and dinner   and one of my twin sisters and  her husband went to work for Wilson   s. They kept   every time that  they   d get back home over the weekend they was trying to talk me into  going to the city and going to work up there. Finally, I went with them  and I went out there Monday morning, Tuesday morning. That  Wednesday I told him, I told my brother-in-law, I said,    Well, if I don   t  get to go to work out there today, I   m going back home. Catch one of the  8  neighbors,    he farmed watermelons and hauled watermelons through to  the neighbors, bring them up to the market. I said,    I   m going to catch  the watermelon truck back home. Forget this stuff.    Well, there wasn   t  but about seventy-five or eighty of us sitting out there on the curb  wanting a job. His brother-in-law   s boss had a man on vacation and he  needed somebody just for a couple of weeks. He come out there and  picked me out of the bunch. He told me, he said,    I can use you for a  couple of weeks, but,    he said,    that   s all I can promise.    I said,    Well,  about two weeks is all I want. I   m going to be going back home.     So I went in and started working, driving a horse to a two-wheeled cart,  cleaning up on the yard there. So when those two weeks was up,  somebody else went on a vacation so he gave me another two weeks.  When that time was up, my boss went over to the machine shop and  talked to the foreman over there, and he said he could use me for a  couple of weeks. So I just bounced from machine shop back over to that  job there for over a year, and I never was out of a job. Always somebody  else over there could use me for a couple of weeks. (Laughs)  Then I got a chance to go to the powerhouse. We generated our own  electricity, and had our boilers, and generators. We was responsible for  the air-conditioning, all of the cooling and everything around there. A  friend of mine come and asked me if I would like to go to the  powerhouse to work. I told him I sure would. He said,    Well      he had  the promise of the next job opening in the powerhouse, and he said,     You go in there and talk to the foreman down there. Talk to Charlie. Go  down there and talk to him. If he   ll give you the job, I   ll forfeit my claim  on it and let you have it.    The reason they had that opening in the  powerhouse is one of our men in the powerhouse that had a brother-in-law  working over in the shop, they got in some kind of a racket over the  weekend. One of them used a knife on the other, and of course they fired  both of them, and that left that opening in the powerhouse. I went down  there and went to work.  My boss come by after I   d talked to that fellow that said he   d move over  to let me go down there. I asked my boss, I said,    Can you get me a  transfer to the powerhouse?    He said,    Sure, you can go down there and  you   re just about starting a better job than what you   d ever work up to  where you   re at.    He said,    You can go down and go to work. Go right  ahead.    That   s the last I heard about it until the next morning and I went  in to work. Had to go buy the watchman   s office and pick up your  identification tag. I went by and picked my tag up and that old boy said,     They told me to tell you to go to the powerhouse this morning.    I said,     Well, I didn   t think about things maturing that quick.    (Laughs) I went  on down to the barn and dressing room and changed over into my work  clothes and went to the powerhouse. Worked in there then. I put in forty-  9  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  three and a half years with Wilson   s.  That   s quite a long time.  Only job I ever asked for. Only public job I ever had. I   d tell her  mother,    I missed a lot in life. I never got to ask for a job.    (Laughs)  Well, when you first came to Oklahoma City, where did you live?  I stayed with my sister and brother-in-law for, I guess, about a month.  And it looked like I was going to be up there for quite a while, so I went  and got me a room in a rooming house down back of town there. Lived  there, well, I guess I lived there for a while. After a while I got married.  When did you get married?  In 1934.  And how did you meet your wife?  Well, that   s a good story, really, in itself. (Laughter) When I met my  wife she was going to school over at Dibble. They had started having  high school at Dibble. Actually, they went to union grades. Went ahead  and had full curriculum of the high school. They was having their  graduation program at the end of the term, and I run around with about  five other kids that had horses. We all   well, three of them was going to  school over there. We went over there for the graduation program, and  they had five of the graduating girls, and then they   d put up a big sheet  across the front of the stadium and drawed a big sunflower on it, one for  each one of the girls. Where the seed pod goes was those girls    face.  That   s all you could see was their face.  After the program was over, those five girls came out and started down  to the store and the school is about a couple of the blocks from the store  down there. They started down to the store to get them some  refreshments, and all of us boys were standing out there in that group.  Some of the boys went to school there, and the others were the hoodlum  bunch out there visiting. The girls come out by us and they stopped, and  I guess I was the only one of the bunch they didn   t know and they  introduced me to the girls. They went on. We went on and got on our  horses and started home, stopped over there a mile from the school. One  of the boys left the crowd there to go up to his house.  We was all standing there and visiting there at the graveyard. Somebody  said something about the girls. I mean, we were thirteen and fourteen  year old kids, but we still realized there was some girls somewhere. And  10  I told them boys, I said,    I   m going to marry Opal.    They all liked to fell  off their horses laughing. They said that was the stupidest thing they  ever heard of. She was a little over five years older than I was. They  said,    You don   t think she   s going to wait around for you to get old  enough to get married, do you?    I said,    Well, just hang around and  watch us.    Well, I didn   t see her again until, I guess about two and half,  three years.  I started running into her at the dances or parties. Finally I started dating  her, and we dated for about, I guess around four years, and I   d gone to  work up here at Wilson   s by that time. I   d go home just about every  weekend. But then one weekend, about time to leave to go home,    Can I  come back to see you?    And I asked her if she   d marry me. She said     Yeah.    She said,    When?    I said,    Well, I   ll have to work around,  change days off with a friend of mine that I worked with,    because a  marriage license was just good for three days, if you didn   t use it. The  courthouse wasn   t open on Saturday. I said,    I   ll have to swap off so I  can be off Monday.    So of course I immediately come back to the city.     We can get your mother and dad to go with us, and we can run down to  Purcell and go down to the courthouse and get our license and go  upstairs there and get the JP  Justice of the Peace  to marry us.    She  said,    Now, I   ve got a question.    She said,    You think you are ready to  settle down with me and leave these other women alone?    I said,    Well,  I think so.    So the next weekend we went down to Purcell and went  upstairs and the JP married us, and went home.  All of my friends and her friends and people that knew us started taking  guesses about how long that would last. Some of them it was thirty days,  some of them gave us six months, but about six months was about as  long as any of them. Well, it lasted sixty-three and a half years, and the  sixty-three and a half years that we was married, and about four years of  dating off and on, we never had an argument or a fuss. We didn   t always  agree on everything, but if we didn   t agree on it we just, well, we just  agreed to disagree and forget it. We never lost our temper when we  would differ on a problem. We   d just go ahead and let whoever was  wrong be wrong. (Laughs) We didn   t argue about it.  One night we was playing dominoes with my sister and her husband.  Something come up about something that had happened two or three  years before that. I was telling the story and when I got through my wife  said,    No, that wasn   t the way it happened,    and she gave her version of  the same thing. I said,    Well, that   s the way you remember it, and that   s  the way I remember it, so it don   t make a difference anyhow. That   s two  years in the past.    That was the end of the discussion. After a while, my  sis said,    I didn   t realize that us girls had raised such a milquetoast,    and  I said,    Why? What   s       and she said,    You always let Opal win the  11  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  argument.    I said,    Well, whatever. It don   t make a difference anyhow.  It don   t amount to nothing.    She said,    I wouldn   t let Pete win all the  arguments,    and I said,    Well, you never heard me and Opal screaming  around at each other and calling them things that we would be ashamed  of.    I said,    You and him fuss at just about as much of the time that  you   re enjoying your visit.    I said,    It don   t make a difference when  something   s already passed and gone,    but we never lost our temper  with each other on any of them little old things that   d come up.  How many children did the two of you have?  Five. Had three sons and two daughters, and we got a whole tribe now of  grandchildren, great-grandchildren, great-great-grandchildren. (Laughs)  Well who was the disciplinarian?  Do what?  Who disciplined the children? You or your wife?  Well, just whichever one of us happened to be there to do it. I had one of  the best women in the world. She was a good mother, she was a good  wife. Everybody loved Opal, and I think she done a great job. I   ve got  five kids and a whole swarm of grandkids. There   s not a one of the  bunch, unless it   s the one that   s in the Navy, I haven   t been around him  any since he got out of the Navy, but as far as I know   well, we visited  with him out there a couple of weeks here, a couple of years ago, and he  didn   t do any drinking. He didn   t use any bad language while we was  around him. As far as I know, not an offspring in the whole twenty-some-  odd that uses bad language or none of them drinks or smokes or  chews or dips. They don   t take any other kind of dope, so somebody  done a good job. (Laughs)  Or somebodies, more than one.  Raising that bunch of kids, and all of them   well, all of them that   s old  enough to know what they   re doing have joined the church. They   re  living Christian lives, and living for the Lord.  Well, how important was religion in your life?  We   re all Baptist.  And did you go to church as a child?  Well, after Mother passed away, Dad just never did feel like getting up  12  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  and getting five kids ready to go to church. Basically we was all out of  church until we got grown and got out on our own. All three of my boys  are deacons in their churches, and I was   well, I   m still on the Deacon  roll, but I   m not very active as a deacon anymore. I was very active for a  lot of years before I kindly let up.  What got you back into church?  What took me back to church?  Yes.  Well, our boys was big enough that they started going back to church  once in a while. My oldest daughter, she   d go. Had a good neighbor  down there that would come by and pick our kids up and take them to  church. One Sunday morning I was doing something outside, working  on something. I always had an old car out I was working on or  something like that. I went in the house for something and the kids  wasn   t getting ready to go to church. I said,    What   s the matter you  kids? You   re not getting ready to go to church. Mr. Carr will be by here  pretty soon and you ought to be ready.    My oldest son said,    Well Dad,  we just got to thinking about this, and we   re not going back to church  until you and Mother start going with us.    He said,    We   re tired of  having somebody else having to pick us up and take us to church and  then bring us home.    So I just turned around and went on about my  business, and then next Sunday morning we got up and I started getting  ready. I said,    Now, I   m going to take you kids to church this morning  so let   s all get ready,    and we all got ready to go.  We started going to church down there in Newcastle, and we never  missed a church service in   I bet I   d been going back I guess about,  probably a year and a half, two years when I was saved and joined the  church. My wife, well, when I went up and made my profession of faith,  she went up with me and made her profession of faith. I think she had  actually accepted Christ quite a while before that, but just never did say  anything about it.  I was saved the last week of August, and when they started selecting  their teachers, getting their teachers ready together for the new church  year, my pastor   he was kindly over the committee that was working on  getting teachers. He come to me, and he said,    We want you to teach  younger, intermediate boys,    and I looked at him and I said,    You don   t  want me to teach them boys.    I said,    I   m not qualified for that.    I  hadn   t been saved but about two weeks.    He said,    Well, that   s who the  whole group wants. They want you to take them intermediate boys.    He  said,    It   s been a woman teaching them, but you got a couple of other  13  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  problems in there that she can   t handle.    He said,    They want you to  take them.    I said,    Well, I   ll see what I can do with them,    and I started  teaching them kids.  I found out that her problem was that my nephew that we helped raise,  his mother and dad separated and they both worked. We kept him for  most of the time there until he got in high school. Him and his little  buddy would get to cutting up in class, and that woman couldn   t do  anything with them. I got up there and started my classes and they got to  nudging each other back there. They sat in a row seats right in front of  my teaching. I called them by name and I said,    You sit right there. Sit  right down in front of me,    and I never had a bit of trouble in the world  with them. (Laughs)  I taught them for a little over a year and Young Married People, their  teacher was an elderly gentleman and his wife passed away and his girl  and her husband was living at Moore. They wanted the old gentleman to  move in with them so they could kindly help see after him. He was  getting pretty well up in age, so he left the church and moved to Moore.  The pastor come and he said,    Murrel, that Young Married class wants  you to teach it.    I said,    Preacher, I   ve got no business trying to teach  that bunch of young married people. I don   t have an education, hadn   t  been studying the bible very long,    and I said,    You   ve got almost every  one of those young married men has got some college work behind  them. Some of them are almost ready to graduate from college, and me  try to teach them?       Well,    he said,    you   re the one that they want.  They   ve asked us to get you to teach them.    I said,    Well, if that   s what  they want, here I go.    (Laughter)  Well, you seem to do a lot of service for church. Have you done any  other volunteer service or other service in your life?  I   ve done a little of everything in the church down there besides preach.  I   ve sung in the choir     Did you ever build a church?  Did I ever build a church?  Yes.  I put in between thirty and thirty-five years volunteering with the  Campers on Missions. What we done: we constructed church buildings,  repaired church buildings, whatever needed to be done. Tear down  petitions and move them so they   d have different space for different  things, and I worked with them for about thirty years.  14  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  Bishop  Was that before or after retirement? Did you do that before retirement,  or after retirement?  After retirement. Well I   ve done a little work on two. On one building,  me and another guy, with a little Indian help, put up a building for the  Indians down close to Lake Texoma before I retired. But then after I  retired is when I   ve done most of my volunteer church building, church  work.  Are you still actively doing that today?  Sir?  Are you still actively doing that type of work today?  Oh, about four years ago our guy that done most of the leading, most of  the finding the churches that are making the decisions where they would  work and the groups going to somebody that needs some church work  done, they   d come and talk to Bob about it and Bob would follow up on  it and get the jobs located and everything and make all the arrangements.  He dropped out. Well, his wife   s health got so bad and his began to fail,  too. This other guy that took over just never did call me when they   d  start a job, and it was along back there when this kindly recession  started. The church building just went to the bottom. It wasn   t doing  very much, and he never did call me.  All the work got done after Bob dropped it was in his church down there  in Lubbock. They was putting up a three-story building for the young  people, just a young people   s building, and Bob called me on that and I  went down. I guess I worked about two weeks and they run out of  money. They was just building as they got money to build. They was  paying as they went. I went back the second time and worked about two  and a half weeks then they run out of money, but they finally finished it  all up. I sat around here for a while doing nothing.  Sue was already volunteering at the hospital and she and the girl that at  that time was seeing after most of the volunteers. Sue got me to go up  and go to work at the hospital. So I went up and talked to that gal, and I  told her, I said,    Now I   ll help you, but if they get a church building job  set up,    I said,    I   ll go back and help them until they get through and  then I   ll come back here and go to work for you. Do you want me on  those terms?    She said,    Come up and go to work.     And what hospital is it? What hospital?  15  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Southwest Medical.  Southwest Medical. What do you do there?  Well, I take people around. I work with the registration department.  They come in and register, and then one of us volunteers takes them to  wherever they need to go.  Sort of like a transporter. How many days a week do you do that?  I work Mondays, Tuesdays, and Fridays up there.  And what are your hours?  From nine until four.  Nine to four. So what do you do on your day off? (Laughs) That a full-time  job.  Well, this is one of my days off. (Laughter)  Talking to us   I put in most of my days off catching up on the junk mail and the paper.  Do you read a lot today? Do you read a lot?  Yeah, I   ve usually got something, reading it, if I   m not doing anything  else.  Did you serve in the military during WWII?  No. The powerhouse worked around the clock, twenty-four hours a day,  three hundred and sixty-five days out of the year. Had four shifts   three  shifts. When I went to work in the powerhouse, I went to work with the  aim of learning everything there was in that powerhouse to learn as  quick as I could. If I wasn   t working on something and I seen one of the  other boys doing something that was on his job, I went and helped him  until I knew every job connected to the powerhouse. There was twenty-six  of us fellows in the powerhouse. By that time the boiler room, when  I went to work down there, the boiler room was just considered a  different department altogether, but they, of course there was just a wall  between them. They finally put the boiler room on the same payroll with  the rest of the powerhouse.  When the draft come up   I could  do most jobs in the powerhouse  and  16  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  if something happened or somebody didn   t show up or got sick or  something, the boss just called me and would tell me to come in on  whatever job it was that I was needed on. And he got it in his head that  he needed me worse than the Army did, and he would intercept my draft  notices and I   d never see them. I never did see but one of my draft  notices. Some way or another it got around and I got it before he did, but  when he come in and found out I had it he told one of the other boys, he  said,    Tell Murrel to get up here. I need to talk to him.    I went up there  and he said,    Where   s that draft notice?    I had it in my pocket. He said,     I want it.    I said,    Well, I ain   t any better than these other boys. If they  want me down there   .    He said,    I want your draft notice,    and he said,     I can tell them guys enough lies on you that you couldn   t go to work for  them at all.    I gave it to him and I never did see another draft notice. He  said,    You   re just about as much in service as any of them guys.    He  said,    You   re packing meat for them to eat.     So I never was, never was drafted. There was, I guess four of our boys  that went to service. I think one of them was the only one of our four  that was in actual combat. The rest of them   some of them hadn   t been  in long enough to be in combat. I think there was one of them that got  into some other part of it, and the one that was in combat, he got a whole  muscle shot off of one leg. He come back and went back to work with  us, but he always limped on that leg.  Going back earlier, you were a twin. Did your twin die in infancy?  My twin     Your twin.     passed away. I don   t know just how old she was, but she passed away  when she was little bitty. She, I think, was just a few months old.  Just a few months old. And you had a brother that passed away too. You  also had a brother that passed away early? At sixteen.  Yeah.  Was that the flu epidemic, too?  We had a little old young filly that he was breaking to ride. He got on  her one day there and, just bareback got on her, don   t know whether he  even had a bridle on her or not. Dad had a spot between the house and  the barn. Our barn and house was about, oh, 135, 140 yards apart, and he  had a spot out there where his equipment   when something would get  wore out, he   d just leave it sitting out there in the middle of the   in this  17  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  spot. We   d put anything else out there that we didn   t want, and we   d  thrown a   one of our chairs broke down and we throwed the part that  was left out there in that yard. That little old pony, when he got on her,  she come down, went right across there and she got tangled up in that  old chair bottom and fell with him, and one of them chair posts bruised  his appendix.  He was sick around there for two or three days before Dad realized how  sick he was. He called a neighbor that had a car and they come down  and picked Dad and brother up and took them to Blanchard to the  doctor. As soon as the doctor looked at him he said,    Get him in my car  and let   s take him to hospital.    So they brought him to the city, to the  hospital. They operated on him, and his appendix had busted. They got  through operating on him, took him back to his room, and he was  running a high temperature and the doctor put a special nurse over him.  He said,    Don   t you leave that room. You stay right there with him and  take care of him until he gets over this surgery.    Dad had been up there  two or three days and he hadn   t even had time to take a bath or anything  else. So after they got that special nurse with him, Dad come over to his  sister   s that lived on Twenty-fifth Street down there, to get him a bath  and change clothes and everything. Before he got through and got back  to the hospital they called and said for him to get back over as quick as  he could. When he got back Brother was already gone. That nurse   they  had maneuvered around someway and got her to leave the room for a  minute for something he wanted. Just as soon as she walked out, he took  the cap off of his icepack and drank the water. That is, well, he died just  a few minutes after he emptied that icepack.  About what year would that have been?  What?  About what year would that have been?  That was in    24, I believe.  So you were about ten?  Yes.  You had a strong father.  Huh?  Your father was a pretty strong man. Did you ever think that you   d make  it to 100?  18  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Bishop  Well, I never did even give it a thought. I can   t remember ever thinking  anything at all about it, but     Well, what do you think some of your secrets are? What   s your secret to  a long life, do you think?  Well, the only thing I   ve ever done to   hard work, stayed busy, but I  think the only reason I   m here today is because God ain   t through with  me. I don   t know what he   s got laid out for me, but I think there   s  something that God wants me to be involved in, and I think that   s the  only reason I   m here today.  Tanya usually likes to ask this question, but do you have anything on  your bucket list?  Do what?  Anything on your bucket list you want to do?  No.  No? You went on a lot of hunting and camping trips, right? You don   t  want to go on one last hunting, or fishing trip, or camping trip?  Well, I   d like to go on another fishing trip, but none of the kids ever  have time to go with me. They   d just have a fit if I was to talk about     I   ve got a boat sitting down in one of my boy   s barns. Been in there for  about four and a half, five years. I guess it   s been about five or six years.  I pulled it out twice, brought it up here and cleaned it up, changed plugs  in it and cleaned it up and got it to running. The last time I had it up  here, I took it I guess out to  Lake  Draper and run it around out there a  little bit and brought it back. Took it back down there and set it in the  barn.  Now every good fisherman has a story. Do you have a good fisherman   s  story?  Oh, I don   t reckon I   ve got any.  The biggest one you ever caught? (Laughter)  Well, I guess about the biggest one I ever caught was about ten pounds. I  never did actually fish for big fish. I like channel cat and crappie.  Did you ever noodle? Did you ever go noodling?  19  McMahan  Bishop  S. McMahan  McMahan  S. McMahan  McMahan  S. McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  I never was a noodler. (Laughter) If I   d ever had a good dedicated  noodler as a friend, I may have took up noodling.  (Laughs)  He can swim well enough, he could have.  The nearest thing I   ve ever done to noodling was down there on the  South Canadian. Me and my brother-in-law went over there one day, and  some of the kids were with us. I don   t know whether Sue was in the  bunch or not, but anyhow, some of my kids and some of his kids went  over there with us. We was just around that shallow water and there   s a  bunch of bushes out there that the water was up over. We got over there,  and I was feeling around in there. I think we picked up one or two little  fish. Directly I felt something in there   a snake. So I just raised him up  and throwed him out on the bank, and you talk about everybody   s kids  scattering. (Laughter) But some of them killed it. My brother-in-law was  in there with me, but boy, he took off for the bank. (Laughter) I never  did give the snake a chance to do anything. I had a hold of it just about  the middle it. It was about that long. (Gestures arm length) When I come  out of that brush I already had its feet up, and I turned it loose and  throwed it out there on that bank.  Dad has an elk head and a deer head in his bedroom that are trophies  from a couple of his shoots   his hunts. He likes to hunt.  We was fishing one day. I don   t remember now what lake we was on. I  believe it was back over where we were fishing that time, but anyhow,  Sue hooked in to something and she messed with it around there a while  and dragged it out. It was a rod and a reel somebody had lost out there.  Pretty soon she was ready to go to the house. I think her mother asked  her what she wanted to go to the house for or something. She said,    I  may get ahold of another one of them rods and reels, and it may have a  man ahold to it. The other end of it.    (Laughter)  Well that was a time when they had found a body, one or two bodies, in  Texoma, and one in I think it was Thunderbird, and one in Eufaula. We  were fishing at   I think it was at Thunderbird. I said,    Nuh-uh   .  Well, when history is written, what would you like it to say about you?  Do what?  When history is written, what do you want it to say about you? Or what  would you like it to say about you?  20  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  Bishop  McMahan  S. McMahan  McMahan  S. McMahan  McMahan  Oh, it doesn   t make me much difference what they say about me after  I   m gone. (Laughs)  What do you want to be remembered for?  Well     What would be your legacy?  I guess about the best thing they could say about me is about my service  for the Lord and church building. I used to do a lot of visitation work     personal witnessing.  You worked with the young people, Boy Scouts and at church, and took  the FFA  Future Farmers of America  on trips and did all sorts of things  with young people. He had a big impact.  When Bob Martin was kindly overseeing this group, he took a bunch out  to Glorieta, a Baptist installation out in New Mexico. He made an  agreement with the fellow that was over the installation out there at that  time, that we would come out there every year for ten years and do  whatever kind of work they needed. One year out there they would  have   every summer there   d be one week of youth working, one week  of preachers, and one week of something else, all down the road there.  We got there one year and most of them had already come on back  home. It was me and   oh, I don   t, two or three other couples still out  there, and we went down to eat breakfast one morning. I was kind of the  tail-end of the bunch getting down there. I was getting my breakfast.  This man come in, he picked up his breakfast, and he said,    Well, how  about me joining you folks,    and the rest of them just sat at the table  down there. I said,    Well, come on down on and join us.    As everybody  was getting their breakfast and getting on down there, this guy said  something to me that just gave me the impression that he didn   t know  Jesus as his personal savior. That was the last day for the Catholic  preachers, whatever they call them.  Priests.  And we got over there and sat down and I introduced him to the others  around there. He was a Catholic minister. He started eating and I figured  him   something told me that the old boy wasn   t a child of God, that he  never had been saved. So I started and I just took him right down what  the Baptists called the    Road to Baptism,    and I was giving him the full  works. You never saw a fellow eat so fast in all your life. He ate that  meal and just as soon as he got through he jumped up and took off. I  21  Finchum  McMahan  S. McMahan  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  S. McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  McMahan  Finchum  think he began to realize that there was something wrong here. That  he   something that he didn   t have that he ought to, but he was over  there by himself with the others getting ready to go home. I was giving  the plan of salvation to a Catholic bishop. It didn   t make me any  difference what he was claiming. If he didn   t know Christ, I wanted him  to know how to get there.  Do you have a favorite church song?  Oh, not really. I loved just about all of those old hymns that we used to  sing so much.  If you stick around, he sings    Amazing Grace.    That   s his favorite.  I wouldn   t know which one to sing.     Amazing Grace?     Well, I liked it.  Can you sing it for us?  No, it   s been too long. (Laughter)  Okay. We   ll just hum it then.  (Singing) Amazing grace.  Did you ever consider moving away from Oklahoma?  No, I never have had any desire to live anywhere besides Oklahoma.  Where do you consider home here?  Well I guess, actually, if I was saying where I considered my hometown  here would be Newcastle. I have lived all around Oklahoma City. I  bought a piece of land out by Luther and we lived out there five years,  but I guess I   ve got   actually, as far as the concentration of friends, I   ve  probably got more friends at Newcastle than I have any other one place.  We buried a lady Monday that I   one of the first families that I got  acquainted with after we   actually, after we moved to Newcastle. She  was 101 years old, almost a year older than me. Most all of my old  friends have already gone to heaven. They   re up there waiting for me to  get there. (Laughter)  Well, I   m glad you waited long enough to talk to us. We appreciate you  22  McMahan  sharing your stories with us today. Thank you.  You   re welcome.  -------  ------- 
