 Finchum  Today is May 20, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Hennessey,  Oklahoma , to speak with Ivan Holder, and this is part of  our Oklahoma 100 Year Life project. Thank you for having us today.  Let   s start with having you tell us when you were born.  Four, seventeen, fourteen.  And where?  In Dacoma, Oklahoma.  And did you have brothers and sisters?  Yeah, one sister and three brothers.  Were you the oldest or the youngest or in between?  I was next to the last.  Next to the last. What did your parents do for a living? What did your  father do for a living?  Oh, he farmed some, and he did general work, whatever he could pick  up, working his horses and mules.  You grew up on a farm?  No, we lived in town and farmed in the country.  Did you have chores?  5  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Yeah.  Milk the cow?  Yeah.  Feed the chickens?  Yeah, anything you throw out will feed the chickens or a pig.  And where did you go to elementary school?  I attended seven schools in nine years.  Too many to go through, then.  Yeah.  What about high school?  I went to some in Texas, some in Oklahoma, and I graduated in   Clayton, New Mexico .  What year?  Thirty-two, I believe.  Right about the Depression time.  Yeah.  Do you have any stories from that time period?  Terrible, a lot of dirt, no money. Stock wasn   t worth much. Just take  what you could get.  Well, once you graduated from high school, what did you do?  Oh, I   d go to college, and then I run out of money. I had to quit college  and work until I had enough to go back again. I graduated from high  school, I say, probably    32,    33 and finished college in 1940.  From where?  At Alva, Northwestern  Oklahoma State University .  6  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Bishop  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Pat Moery  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  And what was your degree in?  I had a double major in industrial arts and mechanical drawing, and in  the   50s I got a master   s degree.  From where?  From Stillwater, naturally, or you wouldn   t be here.  She saw your  University of Oklahoma  sign and got confused. (Laughs)  I have got a grandson was over there. Randy, he went to Stillwater, but  that was a gift, a birthday gift.  So what year did you graduate from Oklahoma A M, in fifty-what?  Oh, fifty-   I don   t remember exactly.  Was it still A M then, or was it Oklahoma State?  I can   t answer that.  I think it changed in, like,    58. They changed their name. So were you a  shop teacher in high school?  Yes. I could teach now. I had a lifetime certificate for the eighth grade  up.  They don   t teach that anymore, I don   t think.  No. No, you have to go back every so often to get another shot.  You were a history teacher, too.  What?  She said you taught history, too.  Yeah. Social studies, and that   s what I really know. Some things I didn   t  want.  And where did you teach?  Oh, all over. I started out at a little ol    rural country school out there  between Woodward and Seiling. Out around Seiling there was a little  7  Moery  Holder  Moery  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  place called Richmond.  Richmond.  Richmond School. Then I went from there to Oklahoma City over there  for a year, and they put a lake there. I moved back to western Oklahoma  out around Vici and then went from there to     Waukomis?  I was up there at Waukomis a few years and went from Waukomis to  Garber for twenty-six years. When I retired over there in    74, then I  moved over here when I retired, not right in here  care center , but in  town. Then I went to three hospitals, and then I   ve been in here since  about, oh, probably,   10, whatever it is.  Did you enjoy teaching?  Oh, yes and no. I just told you back there I would change my  occupation, and here you are asking me again.  What would you change it to?  Oh, I like to be outside, working outside in the weather.  So be a farmer?  I would some, farm, but you know it takes money to make money, and I  never had either one.  Well, were you in the military?  Yes. Took an act of Congress to make me a PFC  Private First Class .  (Laughter)  Tell us about it.  Oh, no. It   s done. Did time over the seas.  What branch were you in?  Well, I took basic training in three or four different branches of the  Army. I took training for occupational MP for when the Army took over  a town you were supposed to go ahead and take over as a whole group,  so I took it. Well, war was over the water. Basic training was over the  water. I walked out a pair of shoes in twenty-eight days down in Florida  8  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  in basic training.  Wore out a pair of shoes in twenty-eight days?  Yeah, the soles on the bottom.  A lot of walking.  Yeah, well it was the wet sand, you know. A lot of sand in the streets  down there, and you just walked and walked and walked.  Was that in the 1940s?  Around    41,    42 along in there. I joined the Army on six, seven, forty-three   June 7, 1943 . Spent, oh, I guess about fourteen months or more  on the water. Never went off the boat. Then when I moved on land, took  more training, and then was overseas. One thing, I was in one section of  the Army and the Navy. I had Army clothes and Navy clothes. I had to  jump off the tower into the water. I don   t know what they call that now.  Just whatever they told you to do.  You decided not to make it a career?  Oh, I didn   t want it in the first place, but you don   t have a choice. I was  too old to go in the first place. Well, I thought I was too old.  Well, speaking of your wife, how did you meet her?  We was in school at Alva, college at Alva.  Did she work?  She was a teacher.  Teacher. What did she teach?  Basic writing, in grade schools.  So you both had summers off.  Yes. Well, I say yes, but if you don   t have something to do, you don   t  eat. When you   re old, you just take what you can get. Little fun, some  work.  Well, you mentioned earlier that you liked to dance.  9  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Bishop  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Yes.  What kind of dance?  Ballroom.  Ballroom?  I wasn   t a tap dancer. (Laughter)  Where did you go ballroom dancing?  Where did you go ballroom dancing?  Out here in the Moose Lodge a lot and up around the college when they  had dances, wherever I was, but most of it here in the Moose Lodge.  How did you learn how to ballroom dance? Who taught you?  Oh, I   d just go from one place to the other and just pick it up. No  professional lessons. I mean, I wasn   t what you   d call a real shiner.  Just enjoyed it.  Yeah.  Did you play sports when you were in high school?  I was too little.  Too little?  Oh, I guess I could say I played football. I played end. I mean, I was on  the end on the bench and guarded the water bucket. (Laughter) When I  got married I weighed 150 pounds, and then when I was onboard the  ship, I got out up to 190 pounds. I come in here, and I got down to 119  pounds. That   s about what I weigh now is about 119 pounds. Skinny and  old, right? (Laughter)  Well, do you remember your first car?  Well, Barbara and I bought it together. We bought a Model A. Then we  went from that, after we got rid of that one, we got new cars both times.  Found out early you can   t make payments and pay for a new car at the  same time. You got to buckle down.  10  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Did you travel much?  Well, I don   t know. I went across both oceans. Went to Ireland, overseas  there, and Germany and France and Spain. I went over the west way and  went to Army airbases over there. We bought a house trailer and a  pickup. We went to south Texas four or five years, and then we started  going to Arizona for the winter and here for the summer. I guess you   d  say we made almost all the states in the Union, all the way from Maine  down to south Texas from Florida. I took basic training in Florida, and  then I never got up there to Alaska. Barbara wanted to go to the islands,  so we went to the islands instead of going to Alaska. That   s what you  do, you know. You have to be able to be real strong or weak. You just  do what everybody else wants to do. We had a good life, if that   s what  you   re trying to figure out.  Did you have a favorite place that you visited?  I don   t know. I guess if you keep going back enough times to the same  place, you must like it. Must have had one. We went to Arizona more  than we did any place else. That   s one place. After we got the trailer  house and got rid of the pull trailer, we just put the trailer out there in  Arizona and left it. We   d go back to it every winter.  Oklahoma was home, though. You would come back to Oklahoma  instead of move?  In the summertime. Wintertime here, we   d go back to Arizona out there.  We did go to Greely, Colorado. One winter, Barbara was in school  finishing her art degree, so we went there one summer.  And how many children do you have?  Three. Two boys and a girl. A boy and a girl and a boy.  Were they involved with 4-H?  Oh, Barbara was for a while. Pat was in, when she was six, Girl Scouts. I  don   t know whether they called it Girl Scouts or what, something like  that. My granddad was in the Lodge and that way she got in, and they  done a lot.  Well, did you ever think you   d live to be 100?  No. If I had to do it over, I wouldn   t. Course I wouldn   t commit suicide.  That   s the coward   s way out. I can complain, and I can   t complain, so  just take what you get.  11  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Were you the first in your family to live to a hundred?  Well, complete hundred, yes. Granddad wasn   t as old as I was, but he  got pretty close to a hundred. He wanted to get married again, so he  marked off, wrote in his family bible, he took two years off his  age . If I  was going to take off some years to get married, I   d write more than two  years. (Laughter) He lived to be in his nineties. My oldest brother lived  to be in the  nineties , and then a daughter came next, and then another  brother, then me. We lost little   my brother Lloyd died when I was  eight years old. A little sister died at eighteen  months , somewhere in  there. I had two sisters and three brothers.  What   s your secret to living to a hundred?  I knew you was going to ask that. There   s no secret to it. You just take  what you get. Just eat good, don   t drink much, don   t use no tobacco, no  drugs. It   s, like I say, a clean life. I never was a heavy drinker. I danced.  When we went to Arizona we danced out there, naturally. Of course they  had a dance every week out there, and I   d snort a couple of snorts   mixed drinks  every Saturday night. That would be about enough.  Did you ever smoke?  No.  Not while you were in the military?  No. No tobacco, not much whiskey. Just, like I said, Saturday night.  Was church an important part of your life?  Yes. Oh, I didn   t preach or anything, but I just went to church, First  Christian Church, Disciples of Christ, just like this one down here. My  kid Pat, her husband Mickey is a preacher at this church down here.  Then in college I went to where the church was, First Christian Church.  My folks were, they were Church of God, they called it. I went to  college up in Alva, and they was in Alva, but they were different than  what I went to.  Well, when you were in Stillwater, where did you live?  Well, part of the time I drove from Garber, and then part of the time I  lived in a dorm. The family had not exactly a dorm, but mostly it was  some little school building.  12  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Kind of like a boarding house?  Well, the whole family moved. I had to go, you know, part of the time  be on campus.  Did the GI Bill help pay for that?  Yes. Yes, and now I have three deals. I get a teacher   s retirement, an old  age pension, and military. I get three incomes.  Every little bit helps.  Yes. I   m lucky to have it. A lot of people don   t have it, and they   re old,  too.  Do you remember your first television?  Yes, a little thirteen inch, all the big it was. You   d only get certain  programs were on it. It was black and white when I got my first one.  You   re not going in very many circles like what   s-his-name. (Laughter)  No. We   re just talking about your life. My questions aren   t tough. Did  you follow politics any?  No. To me that   s a bunch of bologna.  I just wondered if you voted for Henry Bellmon.  Well, I suppose so. You know, Henry Bellmon, if you lived over in  there, you couldn   t hardly miss him. He was in a lot of things.  Well, do you remember seeing your first airplane?  No. I don   t.  How about driving the tractor for the first time? Did you drive a tractor  any?  Oh, yeah. A lot of different ones, though. Tractors, you said? Yeah, I  worked for people that had all different kinds of tractors. Well, I had a  lot of them. I could name some you people never would have heard  about them. I had a Bull Tractor. It was a three-wheel tractor. I had a  Russell Tractor. It was a tractor with, instead of having a wheel on the  back, it had a big cylinder-like with flanks on it. Then I had a Case  tractor, an Aultman-Taylor.  13  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  How about a John Deere?  Yeah. I had a John Deere, a Case     The only other one I can think of is a McCormick.  Yeah. You   re doing better than I am. I can   t remember. (Laughter)  Massey Harris combines. Run combines and tractors, both, every time.  Not both at the same time.  Did you work on a threshing crew?  Yes, with wheat, working with the threshing machine. Sometimes I   d  haul hay bales or wheat bales or grain bales, oats, barley, maize, kaffir  corn, all those good things.  Hard work.  Yes, especially for a little ol    skinny kid. Slept on top of loads of wheat  sometimes when you couldn   t get to the elevator. Sometimes we slept on  the hay grain, putting up alfalfa and things like that. We   d sleep on top  of that and any place you could get some rest. If I told the truth here  you   d think I was lying back there, see? (Laughter) You just never knew  where you were going to be sometimes.  What were holidays like?  Not worth telling you. Sometime nothing to do during the holiday. If  you could find some work, you   d work. If you didn   t, you   d just get by  with what you could get.  What was the favorite thing your mother cooked for you?  Back in those days you didn   t just cook for one person. Everybody ate  what was on the table. Now kids have favorites, you know. We had  same things they got here, lots of pudding, but that wasn   t the best.  Apple pie or some kind of pie. It was okay, but anything you could get.  In the summertime you canned. I helped. My hands are small, so I got to  do all the washing of glassware      Mason jars?     yes, washing the inside of them so they could put something in them.  We always would go out in the summer and pick sand plums or  blackberries and get some peaches, apples. I never cared much for  oranges. They make my tongue swell up. I was fighting it right now, and  14  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  I get some of it in here sometimes when you get orange juice.  When I took to south Texas   the first five years we had the trailer we  went down there, and later we   d go down to old Mexico and spend part  of the summer. I covered pretty well the whole United States. You   re not  telling me you   re running out of questions?  No, but you   re getting tired on me. Did a tornado ever get close to you?  Yes, a half a mile from this place right here.  That   s a little too close.  Yes. My mother was scared when storms came. We always went to the  cellar. I can remember doing that, and out that way it flooded. We had a  good cellar, though.  That   s where she kept her canned goods?  Yes.  Did she can meat, too?  Oh, I don   t remember that. Probably sausage, put it down in grease.  When the eggs were scarce, why, you put eggs down in the big jars. I  don   t remember what they used except for grease or something.  Well, is there anything on your bucket list you   d like to do that you  haven   t?  Oh, no. It wouldn   t do any good having to worry about it, anyhow.  (Laughs)  Humor has had a part in your life, hasn   t it?  Oh, I like to have fun, yeah.  Well, do you have a philosophy you live by?  No.  One day at a time.  One day at a time.  Any advice you want to give to us?  15  Holder  Moery  Holder  Moery  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Holder  Finchum  Yeah. Keep your body trained and your mind clean. Stay off of drugs,  whiskey, alcohol, and tobacco. Not get too friendly with too many  women. (Laughter)  Dad   That wasn   t very nice, not when there were women in here.  Yeah, there   s too many women in here. Shame on you. (Laughter)  No, I wasn   t that kind of a rambler. I lived in a lot of homes with  families that was mostly women, but not any real close ones while I was  young.  Is there anything else you want to add before I ask my last question?  Well, no. Anything comes to me, I   ll cut in.  Well, my last question is, when history   s written about you, what would  you like for it to say?  Well, just say,    Hello    and    Goodbye.    That   s all there is left to say.  All right. Well, I   ll say hello and goodbye and thank you.  You come in in a squall and you go out the other way. Either that or you  just   my dad fell down and hit his head on the sink in the bathroom and  never did come out of it. One brother died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Jim  fell and bumped his head and died. Dale, my youngest brother, got shot  down overseas. He was a tail gunner on an airplane that was shot down.  My sister lived to be quite old. We   re scattered all over from  Washington to Texas to Oklahoma. That   s all I have. I   m slowing down  a little.  Well, thank you for sharing your story with us today.  Well, it   s not much.  Yes, it is. Thank you very much.  Lot of people have big stories to tell, you know, how great everything  was, but I felt lucky to live.  I   m sure you influenced a lot of lives teaching for twenty-something  years. You were a teacher, so you did good. Thank you.  16  Holder  Yes.  -------  ------- 
