 Finchum Today is October 20, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Coweta, Oklahoma, to speak with Travis Carter. Thank you for having  us today.  Carter Thank you.  Finchum Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born?  Carter Two miles north of town up here, and I   ve lived in two miles of it ever  since. All my life. I always lived within two miles of where I was born.  I   ve never lived nowhere else.  Finchum When were you born?  Carter Well, October 26, 1913.  Finchum So almost your birthday   Carter Yeah.  Finchum We   re six days from your birthday. Well, happy birthday early   Carter Thank you.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Carter Farm.  Finchum What did they grow?  5  Carter Oh, cotton, corn, small grains, stuff like that. Whatever farmers  usually     Finchum Did your dad have a job off the farm?  Carter No.  Finchum How many brothers and sisters do you have?  Carter I have a sister, stillborn brother.  Finchum It   s just the two of you then?  Carter Yes.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  Carter The name of the school was Prairie Glade.  Finchum Glade. Okay, Prairie Glade.  Carter Yes, little country school.  Finchum One-room or two?  Carter I never went to high school.  Finchum So through what grade?  Carter Eighth.  Finchum Was it a one-room?  Carter Yes.  Finchum How many were in your grade?  Carter Oh, I think there was about five or six.  Finchum You knew everybody then.  Carter Oh yeah. (Laughs)  Finchum How would you get there?  Carter Walk. I lived in a quarter a mile of the schoolhouse.  6  Finchum Okay, walk rain, or shine, or snow.  Carter Yep.  Finchum Where would your parents have to take their crop to market?  Carter Coweta.  Finchum What were some of your chores?  Carter (Laughs) Well, I done a little bit of everything that needs to be done on  the farm. Taking care of the stock and stuff like that.  Finchum Had to milk the cows?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Did you have to butcher the chicken?  Carter No, I didn   t do that. Left that up to the woman.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject in school?  Carter Not especially. I liked geography, was my best one.  Finchum That   s pretty good, especially since you didn   t go two miles from home.  Carter (Laughter) That   s why I was interested in what was going on way off  away from me. I never got a chance to see any of it. I love to read about  it.  Finchum That makes sense to me.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Was church an important part of growing up?  Carter Yes. My parents were religious people. We went to church all the time.  Finchum What denomination?  Carter Free Will Baptist.  Finchum Baptist, okay. Well, once you got out of school what did you do?  7  Carter Well, I worked at different places, at different things. I can   t remember  all the different places I worked.  Finchum What was the primary place?  Carter Douglas Aircraft had a school in Broken Arrow I went to.  Finchum Did you serve in the military?  Carter No.  Finchum No.  Carter I come within two weeks of having to go. I never tried to volunteer, but  I was almost summoned, you know.  Finchum Drafted.  Carter Yeah, drafted. It just happened that it was over about two weeks before  I had to go. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you work for Douglas Aircraft?  Carter Yeah.  Bishop What did you do?  Carter I was a machinist.  Finchum During the Depression were you living here in this area?  Carter I lived out on a farm then.  Finchum Do you have any memories about that time period?  Carter Yeah, I remember the dry year we had in 1936. Dry, draught with no  rain. First, I ever seen. That   s all I remember about that.  Finchum Did your mother have a large garden?  Carter Well, it wasn   t no big great thing. It was just an average garden.  Finchum Did a lot of canning?  Carter Yes she did. Of course, I had to get some of it ready sometimes.  (Laughs)  8  Finchum Did your father plow with a tractor or horses?  Carter Well, his was all horses. He never did get a tractor. I got that when I  married. I was thankful for it.  Finchum (Laughs) When did you get married?  Carter You mean what year?  Finchum Yes.  Carter Well, let   s see. Must   ve been along around about  1934 .  Finchum And how did you meet your wife?  Carter Well, I don   t rightfully remember right now. I imagine it was church,  because they were church people.  Finchum Well, do you remember how you asked the question? How you popped  the question?  Carter (Laughs) Yeah, I do remember it well. We were visiting a neighbor, and  we was sitting out in the yard. Happened to be by ourselves at that time  was when I asked her.  Finchum She said yes right away, huh?  Carter Yeah, she didn   t refuse. (Laughter)  Finchum Well, do you remember getting your first car?  Carter Yeah, it was a 1928 Chevy Coupe.  Finchum New or used?  Carter It was used.  Finchum Used.  Carter I couldn   t afford a new one. (Laughs)  Finchum How were the roads back then?  Carter Well, they wasn   t too good out in the country like they are now. Most  of them   s paved now.  9  Finchum Had to change quite a few tires?  Carter Yeah.  Bishop Did you play sports when you were younger?  Carter Oh yes, see that picture over there, that ball team?  Bishop Yes.  Carter Yeah, we won the baseball tournament. I was a member of it. My  picture   s there in the team.  Finchum Baseball.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum What was the name of the team?  Carter Prairie Glade.  Finchum What position did you play?  Carter I was the fielder, left fielder.  Finchum Knock any homeruns?  Carter Oh, once in a while. Not very many.  Finchum What year would that have been?  Carter In 1932.  Bishop Do you remember the team you played for the championship?  Carter No, I don   t. There was a bunch of us, bunch of them. We had a  tournament, you see. We played different ones, but we happened to be  the best.  Bishop Now, back then did they give out a trophy?  Carter No.  Finchum How did you celebrate?  10  Carter (Laughs) Well, I don   t remember. I   m sure we were all satisfied with it.  Finchum Can you describe for me the house that you grew up in?  Carter Well, it was just an ordinary one-story house, just a small farmhouse.  Finchum Did it get electricity before you got out of school?  Carter No, I don   t think so.  Finchum Running water?  Carter Yeah. You say running water?  Finchum Yes.  Carter No, no, we had to carry it. We didn   t have electric then.  Finchum You had to run to get it, and run back?  Carter Yeah.  Bishop Now, you worked at Douglas, but did you farm?  Carter Well, I probably was farming a little bit, but not much. I didn   t have  time. I was working there every day.  Finchum Did your wife work?  Carter No, she stayed at home.  Finchum How many children did you have?  Carter Two.  Finchum Boy, girl?  Carter Yes.  Finchum One of each. They didn   t grow up on the farm?  Carter First part of it they did, yeah.  Bishop What did you used to do for entertainment when you were on the farm  as a child?  11  Carter For entertainment?  Bishop Yeah.  Carter Well, like I said, I played baseball. You mean at just the house itself?  Bishop Yeah.  Carter Well, we had a radio, watched the radio all the time. Of the night, of  course.  Bishop What   d you listen to?  Carter (Laughs) Oh, that   s too far back. I can   t remember.  Finchum (Laughter) Well, what were holidays like?  Carter Well, we observed most of them, especially Christmas and  Thanksgiving.  Finchum Would you have pie suppers at the little school?  Carter Yeah, yeah.  Bishop You said you observed Christmas. Did you ever have a favorite gift?  Carter Oh, I don   t remember. (Laughs) I always got some of some kind.  Bishop Did your family have any traditions?  Carter Not especially.  Bishop Fourth of July?  Carter Well yeah, the Fourth of July I used to have a firecracker display. On  the Fourth of July I had a neighbor come in. We   d shoot firecrackers, up  to one point. (Laughs) Somebody throwed one and it hit his leg. Made a  bad place on his leg. That stopped the firecracker deal.  Finchum Well, you said you got a tractor. What kind was it?  Carter Oh my     Finchum A John Deere or a     Carter No, it wasn   t a John Deere.  12  Finchum A Case?  Carter No.  Lindsey Farmall.  Finchum A Farmall?  Lindsey Yeah, Farmall and an Allis-Chalmers.  Carter Allis-Chalmers.  Finchum I always forget that one.  Lindsey Allis, yeah.  Finchum Allis-Chalmers.  Lindsey We still have it.  Finchum You still have it? Does it still work?  Lindsey Mmm, sometime. (Laughter)  Finchum With a little pampering, huh? Some people talk about popping  Johnnies, and I had to figure out what that is     Carter John Deere.  Finchum Yeah, I learned. Wasn   t sure what that was the first time I heard it.  Carter (Laughs)  Finchum After you got married, did you stay involved with church? Were you a  deacon or a Sunday school teacher?  Carter Yes, I   ve been a deacon for forty years.  Finchum Have a favorite bible verse?  Carter All of them.  Finchum All of them? Good answer. (Laughter) Did you every think you   d make  100?  13  Carter No.  Finchum No?  Carter No.  Lindsey His granddad did, but not his dad. His granddad did.  Bishop When did you realize you were going to make it?  Carter (Laughs) Well, it ain   t been too long ago.  Finchum How did you celebrate?  Carter I don   t know. We had something here.  Finchum A big party.  Bishop What do you think your secret is to a long life?  Carter Taking care of your body. No drinking, smoking, messing with drugs.  It   s no good. I never messed with it. Now, I   m glad that I didn   t. If I had  I probably wouldn   t be here today.  Bishop It   s true.  Carter That smoking, boy. That   s killing lots of people.  Finchum Do you have a philosophy or a motto that you live by?  Carter Yeah, serving the Lord the best of my ability. It   s my main thing. I   ve  lived this long in this life, and I want to go where I can live long up  there.  Finchum That   s a pretty good plan.  Carter I don   t know of a better one.  Finchum Well, have you watched what you   ve eaten through the years too, or just  eaten what you wanted?  Carter Do what?  Finchum Have you watched what you   ve eaten through the years? Do you eat a  lot of fried foods? That type of thing.  14  Carter Well, just average. I don   t eat a great lot of anything at one time  anymore.  Bishop Should ask you, what   s your favorite food?  Carter Banana pudding.  Bishop Banana pudding. (Laughter) Did your mom used to make that?  Carter Yes.  Lindsey And my mom.  Finchum Your wife learned how to make it like your mother?  Carter Yeah.  Bishop Now, was that dessert or was that used as a snack?  Carter Dessert.  Bishop Okay.  Finchum Did your dad raise cotton?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Did you have to pick cotton?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Good, bad, or     Carter And I was the good one, too.  Finchum What makes a good one?  Carter Working hard at it, yeah. I went out there to get every pound I could get  when I went to the field.  Finchum Would you get the money from it or just your dad did?  Carter Well, it depends, when I work for others or working for myself. I raised  it too, you know.  Finchum No, I didn   t know. You raised cotton too?  15  Carter Oh yeah.  Lindsey Yes.  Finchum I take it your daughter helped pick a little bit of that, too? (Laughter)  Lindsey Mom made my cotton sack. I was small. Ask him how many hundred  pounds he could pull.  Finchum How many hundred pounds could you pull?  Carter Well, I could pick 100 pounds easy, a day.  Finchum A day?  Carter Yeah. I had a nine-foot sack that I picked in, and when you pick that  full it   s heavy.  Finchum Have to pull it or carry it?  Carter I pulled it.  Finchum You pull it?  Carter Pull it.  Finchum How young were you when you started doing that?  Carter Oh, I was in my twenties I guess.  Finchum I understand it   s very hard work.  Carter Very. Course, you can make it easy, or you can make it hard. Depends  on your determination of how much you want to get.  Finchum Would you wear a hat while you were doing it?  Carter Oh yes.  Finchum Did you? A straw hat or     Carter Yes.  Finchum Straw. Not a baseball hat?  16  Carter No.  Finchum How often would you get new shoes when you were growing up?  Carter Oh, probably once a year.  Finchum When school started?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Did your mother sew much? Make quilts?  Carter Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Finchum How was the house heated?  Carter With wood, yeah.  Finchum You have to share a room with your sister?  Carter Well, we had an upstairs in the house. She had her bed, and I had mine.  Finchum Would the heat get up there in the wintertime?  Carter Well, it wasn   t too bad. See the chimney went up through the upstairs  room, and when there was a fire it kept it warm.  Finchum Would you have a family pet?  Carter Yeah, we always had a dog.  Finchum Any particular kind?  Carter Shepherd.  Finchum Did you retire from Douglas?  Carter No, I just quit. (Laughter)  Lindsey Just like that.  Bishop Why did you decide to quit?  Carter Well, I had other     Lindsey He   s a lead man.  17  Carter    jobs to take care of. I was still living on a farm.  Bishop Was farming your true passion?  Carter Yeah, I loved to raise things.  Finchum Do you still have the farm?  Carter Do I still own it?  Finchum Yes.  Carter No, I turned it over to my kids.  Finchum It   s still in the family, though?  Carter Oh yeah.  Lindsey He raised tomatoes for the whole community. (Laughter)  Carter Yeah, that was my specialty.  Finchum Nothing is as good as a homegrown tomato.  Bishop What kind of tomato?  Carter Well, it was them big round red ones. I forget the name of them.  Bishop You raised them, but did you like to eat them?  Carter Yeah.  Bishop Okay. (Laughs)  Carter Yes sir.  Bishop What kind of changes have you seen in the community of Coweta?  You   ve lived here your whole life, what are some things that you   ve  seen that have changed quite a bit?  Carter Well, it seems like the people have changed from when I was growing  up. Of course, I guess it   s that way anywhere. A community changes  with time and people. Different people coming and going through it,  makes a difference.  18  Bishop What do you feel has changed about the people?  Carter (Laughs) Well, depends on what nationality they are, their education.  Finchum Did the town have a movie theater?  Carter Oh yeah. Yeah, I went.  Finchum You went?  Carter Oh yeah, we went to it on Saturday night.  Bishop What types of movies did you go see?  Carter Westerns. That   s the only kind I liked.  Finchum Were they talking ones or silent?  Carter Well, they started out silent.  Finchum Okay. Would they have an intermission with an organ player or a piano  player?  Carter No, no, no.  Finchum Would the circus or the carnival come through town?  Carter Yeah, yeah. Probably once a year.  Bishop Did you get to go?  Carter Once in a while, (laughs) if I had any money.  Bishop What would you do if you had money at the carnival?  Carter Oh, they probably all had trinkets and stuff you could buy, souvenirs, if  you had the money.  Bishop Now the picture show, I   m curious, did you have a favorite actor or  actress?  Carter I   m sure I did, but I can   t remember all of them.  Finchum Would you get to have popcorn and Coke, if you had the money?  Carter Yeah, yeah.  19  Finchum If you had the money.  Carter I wasn   t much on Coke. I just ate popcorn.  Bishop Now, in your lifetime, what   s been one of the greatest changes you   ve  seen? Inventions or whatever it may be.  Carter Well, you would know as much about that as I would. People change, it  depends a lot on their education and their nationality and there   s a  difference in all people, as a rule.  Bishop I guess what I   m trying to ask is what   s the greatest invention you   ve  ever seen?  Carter The greatest invention?  Bishop Yes.  Carter TV.  Bishop Why TV?  Carter Well, it was so entertaining. Something to watch, when they came  along.  Lindsey The news, about the world.  Carter It was interesting then to see all the stuff that was going on that you  didn   t know about, if you had a TV.  Finchum A little bit more geography, right?  Carter A lot more   Finchum Did you ever think of moving out away from Oklahoma?  Carter No.  Finchum Nope?  Carter Nope. I   ve never found a place   seen anything I   d rather be than right  here. I   m a homebody. (Laughter)  Finchum I never would   ve guessed. (Laughter) Two miles from home.  20  Carter That   s right. I   ve always lived in two miles from where I was born,  right up here north of town.  Bishop Did you ever go to Tulsa?  Carter Back there then when I was young? Oh yeah, I   d go over with Dad once  in a while. Then, when I growed up and married I   d take stuff that I  raised up there to sell.  Lindsey Market.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Have a farmer   s market?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Were you involved with 4-H or FFA?  Carter No.  Finchum Neither one of those. Compete in the county fair?  Carter Do what?  Finchum Did you take any of your produce to the county fair to compete?  Carter No, no, no.  Finchum Was your wife a member of a home demonstration or homemaker club?  Carter Yeah.  Lindsey Tell them about the club adopting the cemetery, to care for the  cemetery. The home demonstration club took over the care of Shahan  Cemetery for years.  Finchum For years?  Lindsey For years and years.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum A good project.  21  Bishop What   s a typical day like for you today at 100? What time do you  usually get up, and what are some of the things you do?  Carter You   re seeing me do it right now. (Laughter) You   ll know when you  get there. (Laughter)  Lindsey Your Bible study, Dad.  Finchum What were you doing before we came?  Carter Before you came?  Finchum Yes.  Carter We had a Bible study this morning.  Finchum Okay.  Lindsey Twice a week, you go to it twice a week.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum How early do you get up?  Carter I get up about seven.  Finchum Yeah, and go to bed?  Carter Well, I go to bed about six, mostly.  Finchum You get plenty of sleep then.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Watch the news first, then go to bed?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Get much reading done during the day?  Carter No, I don   t read much. My eyes are not too good.  Lindsey You get it on TV.  Finchum You listen on the TV? Yeah.  22  Lindsey All the religious programs, he watches those.  Finchum Were your parents born here too, or did they come to Oklahoma from  somewhere else?  Carter They came from somewhere else. I think it was Illinois...  Lindsey Grandpa.  Carter    was where they was born     Lindsey Grandpa.  Carter    raised.  Finchum Illinois?  Lindsey Grandma was Tennessee, wasn   t it? Grandma was in Tennessee.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Come to Oklahoma as part of any of the runs? Land runs?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Maybe?  Carter I wasn   t part of it.  Finchum No, you weren   t part of it. (Laughs) What was your father   s name?  Carter Leslie.  Finchum Leslie.  Carter Yeah, L.C. Carter.  Finchum Carter.  Carter Leslie Charles.  Finchum Your mother?  Carter Bessie.  Finchum Bessie.  23  Carter Yes, Bessie Mable.  Lindsey Mable. And her last name was Travis. And he   s Charles Travis Carter.  Finchum Named after both your parents. Pretty good deal.  Carter Couldn   t beat it. (Laughter)  Finchum When you got in trouble, which parent disciplined you?  Carter Dad, yeah.  Finchum What did he do?  Carter He beat my britches off  (Laughter)  Finchum I figured you were going to tell me you didn   t get in trouble. (Laughter)  Carter Oh well, we all get into it once in a while.  Finchum Yeah. Use a belt or a hickory?  Carter Hickory.  Lindsey Remember that question about that picture? What were you thinking  there? Does that tell you that you ever got in trouble when you grew  up? Probably didn   t get too many spankings at that age, did you?  Finchum How would your mom do the laundry?  Carter On a tub.  Finchum A washboard and a tub?  Carter Yeah, and I was the one that carried the water for the pot to heat the  water. The creek was nearby. She wanted that Salt Creek water to wash  the clothes in, so I carried it up there and let her use it. (Laughs)  Finchum Once a week or more than that?  Carter No, it was maybe once every two or three weeks.  Lindsey They had a big dug well in their yard. Do you remember digging the  well there in the yard?  24  Carter Yes.  Lindsey You probably drew water out of that, didn   t you?  Carter Yeah.  Lindsey You can tell them, not me. (Laughter) Big hand-dug well, right in the  yard.  Carter Well, it was a dug well, and we had two. We had it. It was right next to  the house, and we had another drilled well. See that was a dug well next  to the house, then we had a drilled well out close to the barn where we  drawed the water out.  Finchum Had a windmill?  Carter No.  Finchum No?  Lindsey They didn   t ever have a windmill.  Finchum Would you butcher hogs?  Carter Do what?  Finchum Would you butcher hogs in the fall?  Carter Oh yeah, every year.  Finchum What was your job for that?  Carter Well, my dad done the killing with the rifle, and I was the one that stuck  it, so it would bleed. That was my job.  Finchum How would they cure the meat?  Carter Well, you hung it up and had a smokehouse we put it in. It had a small  iron pot in there. You build a fire in that and smoke the meat. It   s under  the meat a hanging up.  Finchum You actually smoked it?  Carter Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Finchum How long would that take?  25  Carter Oh it   d take a day or two. All day long, you know. You had to keep it  fixed to where it wouldn   t flame, but just keep it poked up together,  keep it from building up a flame because all I wanted was the smoke  out of it.  Finchum What kind of wood?  Carter Hickory if we could     Finchum If you could get it?  Carter    get it.  Finchum Sounds like some good eating.  Carter Oh yeah, you couldn   t beat that hickory smoked meat.  Finchum Well, once it was finished curing, how would she store it?  Carter Well, we   d put it in a big paper sack and hang it up in the smokehouse.  Finchum Just leave it?  Carter Yeah.  Lindsey In cold weather.  Finchum Would she make sausage?  Carter Yeah.  Lindsey Grandma used every part of the hog, even the squeal (laughter) she  would say. She didn   t throw anything away. She used the whole hog,  some way.  Finchum Make lye soap?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Even soap?  Lindsey Oh yes. Do you remember going to town to take butter, homemade  butter and eggs, when you were small?  Bishop What was bath time like?  26  Carter What?  Bishop Bath time.  Carter Bath time, once a week. Once a week.  Bishop In the tub?  Lindsey Yeah.  Bishop Would you have to heat the water?  Carter Well, it depends whether it   s winter or summer. (Laughter)  Bishop Do you have to share the water?  Carter No.  Finchum Was it inside or outside?  Carter Inside.  Finchum Like in the kitchen or something?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum A number two tub?  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Sometimes the younger child would get to go first, and then they went  up the line in the same water.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Not you, you had your own water.  Carter Well, sometimes.  Lindsey Depending on the weather.  Finchum Would you have to get it from the creek, too?  Carter No.  27  Finchum Just from the well?  Carter Yeah.  Lindsey It was probably about fifteen steps from the kitchen door out there.  Maybe fifteen.  Bishop Well, when history is written, what would you like it to say about you?  Carter That I done the best I could, yeah. I made it. Some of it was tough,  some of it wasn   t so tough. That   s all part of life. Especially out on a  farm place like that. You do things different than you do to living in  town. It   s a different way of life.  Finchum Little bit slower at least, isn   t it? And harder at the same time.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Was humor something that you had throughout? Did you like to make  jokes, and do pranks and things?  Carter Well, not too much.  Finchum I noticed your thing says a content man. Are you content?  Carter Well, most of the time.  Finchum That may be the secret to living to 100.  Carter Yeah, part of it.  Finchum Part of it.  Bishop Now, you have a birthday coming up in a few days. How are you going  to celebrate?  Carter I don   t know. It   s up to family. (Laughter)  Lindsey He   ll just be there, he said. (Laughs)  Bishop You   ll show up.  Carter Yeah, yeah.  Finchum And hope for banana pudding?  28  Carter Yeah, yeah.  Lindsey (Laughs) We   ll see. That could happen.  Bishop We   re giving your daughter a hint.  Lindsey Yeah, hint, hint. (Laughter) He has those here that spoil him with  banana pudding   friends here. Occasionally.  Bishop Did you ever have any good friends?  Carter Did I ever have any?  Bishop Yes.  Carter Sure.  Bishop Do you have a story about one you   d like to share?  Carter Well, I   ve had so many. I wouldn   t know which one to pick on.  (Laughter) I   ve met a lot of people in my lifetime.  Lindsey He   s outlived them.  Finchum Did you play cards with them? Bridge or rook, or whatever?  Carter Pitch   Lindsey Pitch.  Finchum Pitch.  Lindsey Grew up hearing that.  Carter That used to be a Saturday night deal with neighbors or friends that I  had.  Finchum You play in teams? I don   t know how to play pitch.  Lindsey Partners.  Finchum Oh, you had a partner.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Would you go dancing?  29  Carter No, I never was a dancer. Never in my life, never cared nothing about  it.  Lindsey Didn   t have time. (Laughs)  Finchum No time. No rhythm?  Carter No.  Bishop I   d say with all that cotton you picked, you were probably too tired.  (Laughs)  Finchum How about music?  Carter Well, I love good music.  Lindsey Not the last several years, but previously he would sing at church,  gospel.  Finchum    I   ll Fly Away   ?  Lindsey    The Lighthouse.     Carter (Singing) I   ll fly away, oh glory  (Laughs)  Lindsey He sings in Bible study once in a while.  Finchum Do you have a favorite church song?  Carter Oh, I like them all.  Finchum You like them all.  Lindsey    The Lighthouse.     Carter Yeah that   s     Lindsey You sang,    The Lighthouse.     Carter Yeah, that   s my favorite.  Finchum I don   t know that one.  Carter You don   t?  30  Finchum No, how does it go?  Carter (Laughs) Oh, I can   t remember.  Finchum Just a little bit.  Carter (Singing) There   s a lighthouse on a hillside that overlooks     Lindsey Life   s sea.  Carter    the town. (Singing stops) Something like that, I don   t know.  Lindsey He sang it for years.  Finchum Well, I   ll have to look it up when I get back.  Lindsey To hear someone else sing, Red Foley was his favorite. Oh,    Peace in  the Valley.    He sings    Peace in the Valley.     Finchum    Peace in the Valley.     Lindsey    Peace in the Valley    and he took that from Red Foley.  Finchum Now    Peace in the Valley    I   ve heard. I like that one too.  Carter (Singing) There will be peace in the valley for me someday   Finchum And there will be, right? I   ve been looking at this picture over here on  the wall. Who are those folks?  Carter That   s all my wife   s kinfolks.  Finchum Your wife   s kinfolks.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum Looks like it was made in the    40s or    50s.  Carter Yeah, pretty old.  Finchum And what was her name?  Carter Your what?  Finchum Your wife   s name.  31  Carter Altha, Altha, A-L-T-H-A.  Finchum A-L-T-H-A. Altha. She was an Oklahoma girl?  Carter Yep. That   s her there. That   s her parents there.  Finchum Pretty big crew.  Carter Yeah.  Finchum They   ve got flowers on. It must   ve been a special occasion.  Carter It   s probably somebody   s birthday.  Finchum Anything else you want to tell us before we shut it off?  Carter I think you   ve covered it pretty well.  Finchum (Laughs) Well, I certainly appreciate you talking to us today. It   s been a  pleasure.  Carter Well, you   re welcome.  Finchum Thank you.  -------  -------   
