 Finchum  Sessions  Today is March 5, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and this is our 100 Year  Life Project. Today we   re in Stillwater to speak with Theatus Sessions,  our 100 year old. Can you tell us when and where you were born?  I was born in 1913 near Wilson, Oklahoma. Wilson, you know where  Wilson is, that   s where I was born. It was out in the country, but my  address was Wilson.  You were born at home?  I   m sure I was, and all my children were born at home.  And where did you go to school?  I went to Ingram Lane, and it was out in the country. It was near Wilson  and Ringling, along in that area. My son-in-law has got the picture of the  building where I started to school, Ingram Lane. It acted as a  schoolhouse and also the church house. The upstairs part was for the  church, and the lower part was for school.  And how would you get there?  I walked most of the time, or my daddy would take me in a buggy. It  was about, I   d say, about a mile and a half from our home, somewhere  along there. I could cut through a pasture, though, and it   d be a little bit  shorter. (Laughs)  And what would you take for lunch?  Well, usually I carried my lunch in a little lunch pail. Sometimes our  5  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  teacher, in the wintertime we would have the stove, and she   d have us to  bring different vegetables, and she   d make a pot of soup for a hot lunch  for our students. They just went through the eighth grade, of course.  What was your favorite subject?  My what?  Favorite subject?  Oh, reading. I didn   t like numbers. I was dumb as I could be on  arithmetic, but I loved reading and spelling.  And after the eighth grade did you go on to high school?  I graduated high school when I was seventeen, but we moved. Our  school consolidated to Zaneis, it   s a school. It was a high school, a  modern high school. We just thought it was wonderful. It was about  halfway between Ringling and Wilson. Zaneis, it was out in the country  and it was a high school.  About how many were in your class?  Oh, well when I first started school, I don   t know, probably five or six,  and that was when I was out in the country at Ingram Lane. After we  moved to the other school, I guess we had about, oh, I   d say fifteen or  twenty, something like that, because several schools consolidated and  we had a school bus then. We didn   t have a school bus, and we didn   t  have electricity. We had outside toilets, and a pump, I guess. I don   t  remember if we had a pump. I guess we had a pump that we pumped  water. I   m pretty sure we didn   t carry it. We had a pump, and then I  moved to Springer after Zaneis, and you know where Springer is? It   s  directly north of Ardmore about ten miles. Had a tall red brick building,  an old tall red brick building, and it wasn   t modern. We burned coal, and  we had a pump in the yard. It was very countrified, and I didn   t like it  after I had a taste of Zaneis. We had to go back to our outhouses.  (Laughter)  And what would you do for recess?  Well, at Ingram Lane it was kind of a little wooded area. We would play  out there. It was a lot of trees and things, and we played out, oh, I guess  hide-and-seek and just all kinds of things out in the yard, yard games,  but we had modern equipment after we moved to Zaneis. We had swings  and see-saws and all that. It was a really good place.  6  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  You went uptown. (Laughter)  I graduated Springer. We moved into Springer. I think I was in the third  or fourth grade when we moved to Springer. My daddy was a farmer.  What did he raise? What did he grow?  Cotton and corn.  Did you have to pick cotton?  Yes. I started picking cotton when I was just, I guess by the time I  started school. They made me a little sack. The others had sacks, and  they made me sack. They put a little strap on a flour sack or something,  and I picked that cotton and put it in that sack.  And did you get paid?  Huh?  Did you get paid?  No. Back then my parents didn   t have enough to live on, much less to  pay me. After I got old enough, I did pick cotton to buy my winter  clothes. My dad, he moved into Springer. He was a blacksmith, too.  He   d learned blacksmithing and horseshoeing, and he finally decided he  could make a living. He wasn   t a farmer, it was hard. He wasn   t a very  good farmer. He didn   t like farming too good, and when we moved into  Springer, then, he swapped in horses or mules or whatever it was, in on a  house in Springer. It was all run down and full of hay, and my daddy and  stepmother worked that house over, and we moved into it in Springer.  So we lived in town, then, if you could call it a town.  Did you have indoor plumbing then?  Oh, no. We didn   t have plumbing for years and years later. I was grown  and married before my daddy and mother had electricity, even.  So tell us a little bit about your brothers and sisters.  Well, my stepbrother was two years older than I was. My mother died  when she was twenty-eight years old, and my stepmother   s husband died  early. He was diabetic, and what did you ask me about? About my  brother?  Just to tell us about them.  7  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Oh, we got on pretty good, yeah, and when we were smaller. As we got  older, we didn   t get along so well. (Laughs)  When your mother passed away, how old were you?  Nine years old.  Nine, so pretty young.  She died with pneumonia. They had the flu, and my little sister died a  week later.  Did the doctor come to your house when everybody was sick?  Yes, but there wasn   t anything they could do for them then, pneumonia.  They did everything they could, but they didn   t give you anything, drugs  or anything, didn   t give you a thing for it. They used some kind of a  plaster they   d put on their chest, and I found out later that that just shuts  the air off. They didn   t know it, they hadn   t treated pneumonia. That  pneumonia, you see, was deadly. My daddy and my mother and little  sister were all in the bed with pneumonia. I was okay. I was immune I  guess, but it was winter. There was ice all over the ground like we   ve  been having, and we didn   t have an ambulance or anything.  When my mother died, they put her on a cot. They came to the house  and had a little service in the house. My daddy was still in the bed with  the flu, with pneumonia, and they had a little service in the house. There  was a few of our kinfolks there, and they put my mother in a coffin and  strapped it onto a flatbed truck and moved it to the cemetery. I didn   t get  to go because the weather was so bad. They wouldn   t let me go out, and  a week later it had cleared up, and I did get to go to when my little sister  died. I went to her funeral. It was an old funeral  home  near Wilson,  and they   re buried in that cemetery.  And then he remarried?  Yeah, I married when I was nearly twenty. (Laughs)  And how did you meet your husband?  Oh, that   s too long a story. (Laughter)  We   ve got time.  Well, we started together at that Ingram Lane school, and his sister was  8  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  my best friend. That   s where she started to school, and he had an older  brother and he teased me, and I didn   t like him. In fact, I don   t even  remember my husband then. His sister was my best friend. Well, later  on, a lot of things transpired in that time. It   s another story. I had an aunt  and uncle that lived near them, and after I got out of high school, I went  to live with my aunt and uncle. They had a big family, and my husband  was a boyfriend of one of my cousins. Well, she got a job in Ardmore.  She moved away and left home. Back then, girls didn   t have much of a  choice, but she did get a job in Ardmore, to stay with some people.  Well, we had parties out in the country. We had parties. That   s the way  we had fun, and we went to this little party one night down at my  cousin   s house. Mike Porter was with my husband. Well, it was about a  quarter of a mile to where they lived. Well, when we started home, he  wanted to know if he could walk home with me. I tore my sandals, and  he carried my sandals, and we had to go by my cousin   s house. Of  course, he   d been dating my cousin.  His sister, Sabra, was my favorite  friend . She had a boyfriend, and she  had a date. My would-be husband sent  my friend  and knocked on the  door. We didn   t have telephones. You couldn   t make a date on a  telephone, we didn   t have telephones. She asked if I would go with her  brother on a double date, and I don   t know what my aunt and uncle  thought. I went with him and from that time on then he was my  boyfriend. He said he didn   t really like my cousin anyway. (Laughter)  And where did you go on your date?  I don   t remember.  You don   t remember.  We didn   t have any money to go up to the show and things. We just  usually drove around or went to a party or something like that.  And how did he propose?  Well, he finally told me he thought he was falling in love with me.  (Laughs) I didn   t know if he was or not, but you know, I was getting   older . I didn   t have any home life much after that, and I was getting  older and my cousin married off. I was nearly twenty years old, and I  took him up on it and got married. (Laughter) And we had four children,  and she   s the oldest one.  And what did he do for a living?  9  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Roe  Teague  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Well, he tried to farm. (Laughs) He wasn   t a farmer. He didn   t have any  equipment to farm, and we didn   t own a house. We moved from one  place to another. He finally got a job tearing down, you know those big  old tanks they used to store grain? They were getting to tearing those  down and he got a job doing that. Then later on he just, you know,  finally one job and another. We got married during the Depression, if  that tells you anything. We really had a hard time.  And what year did you get married?  Well, we got married in, I can   t even remember,    41?  It better have been    34, because I was born in    35. (Laughter) And I was  supposed to be legitimate.  Well, she was twenty. It would have sometime     She was born in 1935. We got married in 1934. We got married in June,  and she was born next August.  And did you go on a honeymoon?  Huh?  Did you go on a honeymoon?  Oh no, we didn   t know what a honeymoon was. We did have a house  though. His grandmother was in Texas visiting, and she had a little  house next to her, his father   s mother. She was down visiting some of  her other children in Texas, and we could stay in her house until she got  back. Then he got a job in Wilson and we moved. Then we moved, I  don   t know how many times we moved all during those times. We never  did move in a house that had an upstairs or a fireplace. We burned wood  stoves, and we were country, country.  When we got married, we got three new things. We got a new mattress,  and a linoleum rug, and two wood cook stoves, brand new. That   s what  we started with, and we got some secondhand furniture, and we moved  that stuff until we wore it out. (Laughs)  When the war came he got a job at an airplane place. He moved to  California, and believe it or not, he had to work about four months  before he had made enough money to get us. We had four children, and  she (Glenda) was seven years old the day we got there. I took those four  kids to California to be with him, and we moved into a furnished house.  I couldn   t do it now. The baby was sixteen and a half months old, and  10  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  she was seven years old the day we got out there.  Did you fly or drive?  Oh, we went on train   On a train. That must have been pretty exciting.  And that was when you couldn   t get  a bed . We didn   t have a bed to  sleep in because the soldier boys had all the Pullmans. We had children,  and the women had the front train, and we had a nurse with that, and  they helped me with those babies when we   d get off. We   d stop every so  often. It was get off and take a little break and then get back on the train.  We were supposed to get out there on a Monday, and something held the  train up. We didn   t have any breakfast that last morning, because they  didn   t fix any breakfast for us on Monday morning, and we had to wait  until the next morning. We had to go without breakfast. Well, we had  some fruit and stuff like that, and I had some powdered milk, you know,  what baby food was. I could feed that to the baby because you mix water  with it. My husband, I scared him to death when he saw us. He thought  we looked like a bunch of orphans.  I had two train seats. You know how some are facing each other?  Glenda and Marsha, they had one end and John the other. He was two  and a half years old, and the baby was sixteen and a half. I put a pillow  across one of them, and the baby could sleep on that, and the little boy  could sleep on one, and the girls, and I managed pretty good. Because I  was short, I could stretch out when I had a whole seat. It was a pretty  good bed.  And how long was the trip?  Huh?  How long did it take you? Did it take a week?  To what?  To get there.  No, we left on Sunday and got there Tuesday morning. We were  supposed to have got there on Monday, but the train was held up. Well,  we got there but we was about dead. (Laughs)  And how long did you stay?  11  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Two years.  Two years.  He got transferred. The war wasn   t over, but he didn   t like California at  all. I loved it, because I didn   t like that real cold weather and all that. I  thought it was wonderful, but he got transferred to Oklahoma City, and  that   s when we came back to Oklahoma.  So Oklahoma   s home.  And then when the war ended, we moved to Texas. He couldn   t find a  job in Oklahoma, but he got a job in Texas so we moved to Texas, and  we lived there fifty-something years. That   s where my children all went  to school, except Glenda went one year to Zaneis, but the rest of the  children all went to school in Saginaw, Texas near Fort Worth.  So what brought you back to Oklahoma?  Huh?  What brought you back to Oklahoma? Why did you move back to  Oklahoma?  Why?  Once you were in Texas and then you moved back to Oklahoma, why?  Me? Well, I moved back myself to Oklahoma. My husband died.  Okay.  He got sick. He was ninety-four years old, and I was ninety-two. I  wasn   t able to take care of him, and we had to move back up here for my  daughters. He was in a nursing home. He never did get to live in our  home. My son-in-law had this house built next door. I live next door to  my daughters, and he built that house but my husband never did get to  live in it. He died in a nursing home, and he   ll be going back to Texas.  He   ll be buried in Texas, though.  And did you work?  I worked, four kids. I didn   t work out. I   m talking about I didn   t work  for the public or anything. I worked one time, for two or three months, at  Saginaw, because one of the school board members was elected to a  12  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Roe  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  school board, and his wife couldn   t work at the lunchroom if her  husband  was on the board . It was three months until school was out,  and they asked me if I would work in her place until school was out.  That nearly killed me. That was the biggest job I ever had. It was the  only time I ever worked out. I guess I must have worked pretty good,  because at the end of school they asked me if I wanted that job, and I  said,    No thank you.    (Laughter) You can   t breathe if you ever work in a  lunchroom. The pots would be that big, and you   d have to wash them in  a big old thing. It was just horrible because I was so small a person, I  couldn   t reach up high and all that. And of course, I   ve gotten smaller  now.  Well did you sew very much? Did you sew?  I made all my children   s clothes, all of my clothes, even my husband   s  underwear. I did all my sewing. I don   t think my girls had a store-bought  dress. I sewed every one of them. I made my son   s shirts. I did all my  sewing.  Did you quilt?  Huh?  Did you quilt?  Yes. You can see one quilt through there. I don   t know how many quilts  I   ve made. And I painted the pictures. I   ve done a little bit of everything.  I   ve just been all     You   re a painter.  No.  Are you a painter?  Yes, she   s a painter.  No, I quit because I did oil painting, and the frames got so high. Oh, I  sold paintings, but the frames cost so much and the oil was so messy. I  never did learn to watercolor or anything like that, and I finally ended  that. I just quit.  Well, how did you learn to paint?  Well, I had a neighbor, a real good neighbor, and I   d go to her house and  I thought her pictures were so pretty. She said,    Well, you could learn. I  13  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  paint myself, and you could learn,    and I said,    Oh, I   d never be able to  paint a picture.    Well, she bought me, for Christmas, a little oil painting  set, a little starter set, and we took lessons from a self-made teacher.  We   d go once a week and paint. She got me to go with her one night,  and my first picture   s in the closet. I took it home and my husband and  son couldn   t believe I   d painted that picture. (Laughs) And from that  time on, I just loved painting. I just loved to do that oil painting, but it  got so messy, so     And these are all your paintings on the wall?  Yes.  Wow.  You   re welcome to look. I don   t know what I   ll do with some of them.  People don   t use those kinds of pictures now. They paint all these, and I  never did learn to do all that modern painting like they do now. I wanted  something that looked like   and I took pictures of old barns. My  favorite things was old barns, and I don   t think I even have one now. I  liked to paint old houses, and I   d go and take pictures of old houses and  barns. And some of them I would look at others.  She   s good.  That   s the way I learned, and there they are.  They   re very good. Well, was religion important growing up?  Huh?  Church.  Church?  Church.  Yes. I was saved when I was fourteen years old, and I was baptized at  Honey Creek. You know where Turner Falls is? Honey Creek is  between Turner Falls and Springer, and I was baptized at Honey Creek.  In the creek.  Oh, I   ve been real active at church. That   s one thing that I wouldn   t give  up for anything.  14  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Do you still go today?  Huh?  Do you still go to services today?  Do you go to church today?  Yes. I don   t drive anymore, I had to quit driving. I go with Glenda and  Bobby. We go to First Baptist Church in Stillwater. He   s associate  pastor, and she   s a Sunday school teacher, and I taught Sunday School  for fifty some-odd years. That   s my first love.  Do you remember seeing your first car?  Oh, that was another story. I didn   t get a driver   s license until my oldest  son, he was sixteen, and I got my driver   s license the day he got his. I  think I was forty-something, or something like that, and I was sick after.  I studied the instructions and everything, but when I went to take my  test, I was just scared to death. I believe if I wouldn   t have passed that  first written test, I never would have had the nerve to go back and try  again. I was sick for a week after I got my driver   s license. I said,    Oh,  I   ll probably just drive around here in Saginaw, because I won   t ever  venture any further than that.     Well, you can   t believe it, but I promised the Lord, if he gave me a car, I  would use it to take people to the doctor and stuff. Well, finally I got an  old second-hand car, and I took people to the doctor. I would take people  to the hospital and to get their medicine. I would take them for all kinds  of things, all over Fort Worth, and I couldn   t believe it. I guess the Lord   answered .  I was in some accidents. It wasn   t my fault, but, only one time.  (Laughter) The only time it was, it was pouring down rain and we went  to the Senior Citizen Center. We had a little entertainment there, and I  took a woman home, and I dropped her off. As I was going home, my  brakes went out, and this woman had stopped right in front of me, and  there was no way I could stop my car, and I hit. Were in several  accidents. One woman ran into me with a great big Dodge pickup. I  stopped at a light, and she didn   t stop. She hit me from the rear. And we  were going on a trip to see my son, in Maryland I think it was, and this  car pulled right in front of us. I wasn   t driving, my husband was driving,  and this car just went right in front of us, and we just hit him. There  wasn   t anything you could do. We   ve been in several accidents, but I   ve  survived those, too.  15  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Roe  Sessions  Did you ever think you   d live to be 100?  No, I never thought of that, and I didn   t intend to. (Laughter) I didn   t  plan on it.  Do you know what the secret is?  I have no idea.  No.  I   ve worked hard all my life. I   ve always been busy. I guess I   ve been a  workaholic. I   ve always got to be doing something. I even crochet  dishrags and stuff like that if I don   t have anything else to do. I   ve just  always been busy.  When did you celebrate your birthday? Your 100th birthday?  When?  Yes.  Last November the second.  And what did you do?  Oh  Well, they gave me the biggest, not the biggest, bash you ever saw   They got a horse and little pony with a buckboard and come and picked  me up, and they had the entertainment. I can   t tell you where it is, they   ll  tell you where they celebrated it. What was the name of that place?  The Wyndham Gardens, right over here at Perkins and McElroy.  They came and got and took me in that. They showed the difference in  the buckboard times and the times now.  My granddaughter  had got a  brand new car, big nice car, and she drove up to the thing and brought  me home to show the difference in the hundred years. Automobiles, you  know how much they were 100 years ago. And airplanes, if we ever  heard one, a teacher would let us run to the window and look and see the  airplanes when they   d fly over. If we heard an airplane, the teachers  would let us go and look out the window and see that airplane. (Laughs)  It was  hard , but you know, I wouldn   t trade it. All the things that I   ve  been through, that, I just think how wonderful it   s been, and if the things  happened in the next hundred years, that has happened in this past  hundred years, I can   t imagine it. There   s no way I can stretch my  imagination to what it will be like, can you?  16  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  No. What was your favorite thing that changed?  Well, I don   t know. I think I appreciated not having to draw water (and  things like that) out of wells. I   d rather have running water, and not have  to clean the lamp chimneys, to keep oil light. I like that kind of things  too, because I was a housekeeper. I like that easier way of washing. I  didn   t like rubbing on a rub board, and I had to draw my own water out  of the well, because my husband would be off working and he couldn   t,  you know. Well, I don   t know. I think it   s good for the women, though.  We have it too easy now. (Laughter) I wouldn   t swap it.  What was the favorite thing you cooked?  Cooked?  Yes.  Oh, I guess pinto beans. (Laughs) We had beans every day. Oh, I liked  to make cakes. I learned to make cakes real early in life. I like to make  cakes, desserts. I did fine. I didn   t learn to cook. My stepmother didn   t  teach me, but I had a real good friend and she lived in a big family, and I  learned how to cook from her. She could cut up a chicken and all those  things. My stepmother didn   t teach me those things, but I learned a lot of  those things from Wanda, my good friend. She was younger than I was,  but she knew how to cook and take care of that family. She had a big  family, and she had to.  Well, did you raise chickens?  Oh, yeah. Yeah we raised chickens, and one year we raised turkeys. We  lived out in the country. We had a creek and everything, and we worked  turkeys. We had a big bunch of them we were saving on to. We were  going to sell them that fall, and I needed some stuff, and we didn   t have  any money much at all. My husband finally got a school bus driver  job   for forty dollars a month. We got, as I say, these turkey eggs some way.  My husband took them and had them hatch at a hatchery, and we had  these little turkeys, and they grew. When fall got here, before that,  though, a bunch of wild dogs got in and killed a bunch of them. We only  had about twelve left. We sold those turkeys and I bought my first     Glenda was born, and Marsha, and I didn   t have a rocking chair to rock  my babies. I   d hook my toes over the edge of the bed and rock them in a  cane bottom chair, to rock those babies, and I bought a rocking chair. I  ordered that rocking chair, and I had it to rock my two sons in when they  were born. I rocked those babies in that, and I   ve still got that rocking  chair.  17  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  And where did you order it from?  Huh?  Where did you order it from?  Oh, probably Sears and Roebuck. (Laughs) That   s what there was, Sears  and Roebuck. It   s kind of like that one that over there. It   s in yonder in  that back bedroom, but I had a rocking chair. (Laughs)  Were you a member of a homemaker club?  Huh?  Were you a member of a homemaker club?  No, I didn   t. We didn   t learn to sew. Springer didn   t have things like that  when we moved to Springer. That   s where I graduated. We didn   t learn  cooking. They didn   t have any kind of teaching like that so we had to  learn it some other way. I went to the Senior Citizens. I belonged to a  quilting club at Saginaw, and it seems like there at my church would be  a WMU, a women   s missionary society. I belonged to that. I was real  active in church work.  Did you belong to a home demonstration club?  No. Well, I don   t have a way to go anymore now. I have to go with  someone else. Marsha doesn   t see well and she doesn   t drive anymore,  and I can   t drive anymore so Glenda has to get us. We all three go to the  grocery store together. (Laughs)  Well, what time do you get up in the morning?  Six o   clock, just about every morning. I would like to sleep longer. I  wake up every morning at the same time, before six, and I just kind of  lay there until six, and finally I get up. In the winter it   s too cold to get  up.  And then what do you do?  Well, I fix my own breakfast so far, I don   t know how much longer. I fix  my own breakfast and clean up my kitchen. I have a dishwasher but no  more dishes than I dirty up, usually I wash them by hand because I have  a sink and hot water. (Laughs) Which, used to have a dishpan, and you  washed them, and you threw your dishwater out the back door. Your  18  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  grandmothers probably did the same, some of them.  And then what would you do? After breakfast, what?  Well, usually I had to wash or whatever I had to do. I   d hurry up, and  then I quilted. I usually kept a quilt up, but I don   t quilt now. I think I   ve  quilted my last quilt. I can   t, my hands, I can   t do anymore, and my  eyesight is not good anymore.  Well today, what do you do? What would you do today?  Well, we went and got groceries this morning. (Laughs) And in our  church on Wednesday night the church fixes supper, and it   s real good,  and we pay for it. The people can come early. They have meetings to go  to and they don   t have time so that gives them a chance to come and eat,  and then they can do choir practice and all of the things that they have  that goes on in churches, you know. I usually go with them, and we have  a prayer meeting, we call it, and come home and go to bed. I like to read.  I read. I read a lot, and I like fiction. We have a nice church library, and  I think I   ve read most of the Amish books in that library. I keep  something to read all the time. I read about a book a week.  And then what time do you go to bed?  I try to get into bed by ten. Sometimes I get sleepy and go to sleep  watching television, and I might as well go to bed. I try to get in bed by  ten o   clock. Every once in a while, if I have company sometimes we stay  up later. I don   t have much company anymore, though. I have two  daughters, and grandchildren and great-grandchildren that live here, and  I have a good many kinfolk that live in Saginaw, and they take real good  care of me. I couldn   t stay here if it wasn   t for Glenda, because she picks  up most of my medicine and sees that I get taken care of. I   m just  fortunate. I   m just blessed more than I deserve. Not a thing that I   ve  done to earn anything. It   s by the grace of God that I am what I am.  Do you have a philosophy of life, or motto you live by?  Well, I guess just clean living. That   s what my doctor said. I   ve never  smoked a cigarette in my life, and I never drank as far as I know. I think  when I was little, my dad would mix a little whiskey, a little toddy, and  let me have a little taste of it every once in a while. I never did drink or  anything, and I tried to eat what I could get, which, I tried to eat  reasonable, and that   s all I know.  And when history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  19  Sessions  Bishop  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Finchum  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Huh?  When history is written, what would you like it to say about you?  How do you want to be remembered?  Well, I don   t know, I don   t want to hear. (Laughs) I know my children  respected me. I never had any disobedient children ever. I think we  raised a pretty good family. They might not always agree, I don   t like  some of their lifestyles maybe, but that   s their lives. They   re responsible  for their own lives, and I   m responsible for mine, and there   s not a thing  I   m ashamed of. I guess when you have four children you   re liable to  have some you question. (Laughter)  Even with one.  Well, anyway     Alex knows. He   s got four.  Huh?  Alex has four.  Is that right? Boys or girls?  Girls.  All girls.  Oh, my grandson, Marsha   s son, they have three girls.  They keep you busy.  I had two girls first, and I just knew that when I expected the third one, it  was going to be another girl, and it was a little boy. We was so glad we  had a boy. (Laughter) I had this friend, her mother had seven girls.  Wow. That   s too many.  Not a boy.  Well, is there something you wish you had done that you haven   t?  Huh?  20  Bishop  Sessions  Bishop  Finchum  Sessions  Teague  Sessions  Finchum  Sessions  Bishop  Sessions  Finchum  Is there something you wish you could do that you haven   t done before?  Yes, I never did get to go up in a balloon. I wanted to go up in a balloon,  and I wanted a red car. I never had a red car. (Laughter)  Well, the police would pull you over then.  Red cars have more wrecks. (Laughter) They do.  Well, my granddaughter, Marsha   s daughter, she   s always wanted to  drive   and I don   t think Becky ever did get to drive one of those big  old   Becky, she   s my oldest granddaughter.  She wanted to drive a bulldozer.  And she wanted to drive one of those big old road things they work with.  She hasn   t got to yet, but she   s probably working on it. She lives here in  Stillwater. I   ve got two granddaughters that live here, two  granddaughters, and two daughters, and one of my sons lives in Florida,  and the other one lives in Arlington, Texas. He   s an ex-school teacher,  but he still subs. He   s substituting now, and I don   t really know what  that one in Florida does. He does some kind of spray-painting or  something, some kind of business.  Have you got to travel much?  Huh?  Have you travelled a lot? Did you go on trips, vacations?  Oh yes, I   ve been lots of trips. Marsha, they have a motor coach. My  husband didn   t like to travel, but he wanted me to travel, and he would  pay my way. They took two-week vacations, and we   d be gone two  weeks, and I   d get homesick sometimes, but I went every chance I got.  I   ve been to Mexico seven times. My son, who taught school, was a  sponsor for a Spanish club, and when they   d go on one trip in the spring  every year, and I could go with them. Of course I had to pay my way,  but my husband would pay my way. We   d be gone about four days or  something like that, and I enjoyed every one of those. I   ve even been  over in Canada one time, I think. We went over the border to say I   ve  been there. We   ve seen, oh, all kinds of things. I   ve got to see what I  never would have seen before, and I think my children didn   t mind me  doing it, and I didn   t mind me doing it. I   ve just really had a full life, and  I can   t complain at all. I don   t think I   ve missed much.  Then we   ll close out. Thank you so much for sharing with us today.  21  Sessions  Finchum  Okay.  It   s been a pleasure.  -------  ------- 
