 Finchum Today is September 9, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Oklahoma City to speak with Leora Henderson. This is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project, so thank you for having us today.  Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Henderson I was born in a little town in the panhandle of Texas called Goodnight.  Finchum Goodnight. (Laughs) And when?  Henderson In 1908.  Finchum And the month?  Henderson May 4.  Finchum May 4 of 1908. What did your parents do for a living?  Henderson Well, my father was a preacher, mostly, and we had a farm.  Finchum And what did they raise?  Henderson Cotton.  Finchum Did you have to pick cotton?  Henderson Oh, yes, I was raised in the cotton patch. (Laughs)  Finchum Hard work or easy work?  Henderson I   ve always had hard work.  5  Finchum Would you have to actually help them pick cotton?  Henderson Oh, yes.  Finchum Even as a young girl?  Henderson Well, I started as a regular hand to it. I was about eight.  Finchum Eight, that   s pretty young.  Henderson Everybody did then.  Finchum And would you get paid, or would it go to the     Henderson Oh, my father would pay us a little bit sometimes.  Finchum And did you have brothers and sisters?  Henderson I had four brothers and two sisters.  Finchum And where were you in the order?  Henderson I was third from the top.  Finchum Third from the top, okay. Where did you go to elementary school?  Henderson Well, I started at a little school named Mesquite. Didn   t go very much,  so I went to another little school called Lakeview. That way I didn   t go  much. Then we went to Greer County, and we had a little school called  Lake Creek. That was where I graduated.  Finchum Okay, and Greer County, so you moved to Oklahoma at some point?  Henderson Most of the time it was Oklahoma. I think I  moved to  Oklahoma when  I was about thirteen and stayed the rest of the time.  Finchum So from Goodnight, Texas, to Greer County, how did you get there?  Henderson Well, we went from Goodnight to Hall County. We went in a covered  wagon drawn by horses. That was common back then. We didn   t have a  lot of cars. Most doctors had cars when I was a little older, but none  when I was real young.  Finchum Do you remember much from that trip?  6  Henderson Well, I remember going from Hall County to Oklahoma, and then I  remember going back to Texas, where I grew up in Texas. Then I was  thirteen when I came back to Oklahoma.  Finchum Well, on the wagon trip was it a long time, take a long trip?  Henderson Well, just from one place to the other, it wasn   t. It seemed like a long  time then, but it was only a few days, I think.  Finchum (Laughs) Well, did you get to ride, or would you have to walk?  Henderson No, we rode in the wagon. My father had a little stove called a bachelor  stove that we had in the front of the wagon to keep us warm. It was  wintertime usually when we traveled.  Finchum And what would your mother fix for food?  Henderson We had crackers and cheese a lot because there wasn   t any way to cook.  It   s just things that she could get out of a can that could be eaten.  Finchum Okay, so when you got to Greer County and started in that school, did it  go through the eighth grade or through the twelfth grade?  Henderson I went through high school, yes.  Finchum High school, okay.  Henderson Went through high school and college.  Finchum In the high school how many kids were in your class?  Henderson I think there was about twelve in the senior class.  Finchum So small, a pretty small group?  Henderson The other classes, it was different all the time.  Finchum Describe the house that you grew up in.  Henderson Well, it was a little house about four or five little rooms. We had a  living room. You wouldn   t believe it. There were ten of us at one time  living in those little houses.  Finchum You had to like each other. (Laughter)  7  Henderson Can you imagine my mother cooking three meals a day on a wood stove  for ten people?  Finchum No.  Henderson That   s what she did.  Finchum Where would you all sleep?  Henderson Well, we all had beds. Sometimes we   d have two or three beds in a  room. My sister and I and my grandparents usually had a room to  ourselves.  Finchum The bathroom, I   m assuming, was outside?  Henderson It was.  Finchum Would your mother have a big garden?  Henderson Oh, yeah, we raised most of our food.  Finchum And she canned?  Henderson She would can lots and lots of cans, and we   d buy peaches. We would  can over a hundred jars a year because it took a lot of food for ten  people.  Finchum Sure. Would she sew?  Henderson Oh, yes, she made all of our clothes.  Finchum Where would she get her fabric?  Henderson Well, we had little stores. One of them was called Granite  Oklahoma ,  and one was called Mangum  Oklahoma , down in Greer County. Those  little towns still exist.  Finchum They do.  Henderson The school   s gone, but the towns are still there.  Finchum Well, did your father grow cotton when you came to Oklahoma, too?  Did he grow cotton, still, when he was in Greer County?  Henderson Oh, yes, that   s the way we made our living. He was gone a lot of times.  He held meetings, and he always had a church.  8  Finchum So he preached, and he farmed?  Henderson Oh, yeah.  Bishop What church did he preach in?  Henderson Baptist. Do you want the name of the church?  Bishop Yes.  Finchum If you know.  Henderson Do you know Greer County?  Bishop I don   t.  Henderson I can   t think of the little churches. One of them was Willow   Oklahoma . We lived in a little place called   well, our school was  called Lake Creek. There was a church there. Honey, you   re asking me  to answer questions that happened ninety years ago. (Laughter)  Finchum You   re doing great   Henderson We had that little church at Lake Creek for a long, long time. It started  out as a one-room church, and it grew and grew. Pretty good-sized  church now, I understand.  Finchum Would you sing in the choir?  Henderson I didn   t have a choir voice, (laughter) but I did sometimes.  Finchum Did your mother work outside of the home?  Henderson No, with six children and a grandmother and grandfather, she didn   t  have time to work anywhere else. (Laughter)  Finchum About that time, 1919, 1918, the flu came through. Did it impact your  family any, the flu epidemic?  Henderson In 1918?  Finchum Yes.  9  Henderson Yes, we all had the flu. That year I missed almost all school. I had  whooping cough and the flu in the same year. I didn   t get much  schooling that year.  Finchum Did the doctor make house calls?  Henderson They did, but it was too far. We didn   t have them to come out then. It   d  be too far.  Finchum Did anyone you know go to World War I?  Henderson Yes, there   s a bunch of people around home did, and I had one uncle  that went to World War I. Yes, that   s pretty vivid in my mind. I  remember a lot about that war because it affected us so much, and we   d  run out of food. They didn   t have any at the grocery stores. We ran out  of flour. The whole county did. I guess we couldn   t get it at the stores  anymore, so we had cornbread breakfast every night. (Laughs) Life  wasn   t easy back then, at least for us.  Finchum Did he make it back, your uncle?  Henderson Oh, yes, he came back. He didn   t get into the big wars. He was a  preacher, too, and I think he did a lot of preaching while he was   . He  did go to France.  Finchum So, when did you graduate from high school?  Henderson In 1928.  Finchum About the time the Depression was starting.  Henderson Yes, and I went to college through the Depression. I had to miss several  years, and then went to college. Finally got a job and worked my way  through. Not too many people in my class got to go to college. It was  just that our life was hard, and they knew they couldn   t go to college, so  the girls would get married early.  Finchum Yes. Well, how did you manage to go to college?  Henderson My sister was a schoolteacher. She sent me the first year. Then I got a  job the rest of the time and worked my way through college in the  school library.  Finchum And what college did you go too?  10  Henderson It was called Central State  Teachers College , then, but I don   t know  what it   s called now. It   s in middle Oklahoma.  Finchum University of Central Oklahoma, UCO.  Henderson Yes.  Finchum So how long did it take you to get through?  Henderson Just about four years.  Finchum Okay, and you worked in the library the entire time?  Henderson Yes.  Finchum And where did you live?  Henderson Well, we didn   t have dormitories at that time, so I had to live at a  boarding house, not really a boarding house. It was a family home, and  they kept students. We had the upstairs   I don   t think they ever came  upstairs. They had about three or four rooms upstairs and a kitchen, and  we did our own cooking most of the time.  Finchum Well, would you get to go home some?  Henderson I   d go home over Christmas, and that was it.  Finchum How would you get there?  Henderson My dad had a car, a little car. It   d take forever to go anywhere in it.  (Laughter)  Finchum Roads probably weren   t too good, either, were they?  Henderson The roads were just dirt roads. We did have a few paved. Highway 66  was built during the time I was in college, and we came home part of  the way. We didn   t come all the way on the highway because it didn   t  run through (oh, I   ve forgotten how many miles) twenty or thirty miles  north of us. We had to come the rest of the way on dirt roads.  Finchum So you became a teacher?  Henderson No, I never did teach. Right at the last of college I got married.  (Laughs)  Finchum How did you meet your husband?  11  Henderson In school.  He was a student, too.   Finchum So he was a teacher?  Henderson He was a teacher, yes, for a while, first five or six years, then he got a  job over here in Oklahoma City.  Finchum So you moved to Oklahoma City in the early    40s-ish?  Henderson Oh, this time, I don   t know, thirty or forty years.  We moved to  Oklahoma City in 1942.   Finchum When you moved here, what did he do if he didn   t teach? What did your  husband do when he moved here?  Henderson He left from teaching. He taught until he moved here.  Finchum And then what did he do?  Henderson He worked at a grocery store.  Finchum Okay.  Henderson He was produce manager at a grocery store.  Finchum And did you work?  Henderson I worked after the children were grown, not grown, but up in  junior   high school. I worked, started working as a school secretary. I worked  as a school secretary for twenty years.  Finchum Education was important part, then.  Henderson Yeah, I liked that I was with children a lot, and I enjoyed that.  Finchum How many children do you have?  Henderson Two.  Finchum Two. Boys, girls?  Henderson Two girls.  Finchum Two girls.  12  Bishop What was the Depression like during that time?  Henderson Well, it was pretty rough. There was very little money. Would you  believe my husband worked at a grocery store for fifteen dollars a  week? That   s what we lived on. We paid rent, we bought our groceries,  all of our expenses on fifteen dollars a week.  Finchum Had to be a good budgeter, money manager.  Henderson We had no extra money, very little     Joan Woolley Greer County is where the Dust Bowl was.  Henderson    but we managed it. We had two daughters at that time.  Bishop What about the Dust Bowl? Were you in the Dust Bowl any?  Henderson You know, they talk about the Dust Bowl, but I grew up in Greer  County where we had sandstorms every summer. I can   t remember  which one they called the Dust Bowl. (Laughter) I   ve heard of the Dust  Bowl for years. Everybody asks me that. I was in so many, I don   t know  what they   re talking about.  Finchum What would you do during a sandstorm?  Henderson Mostly stay in the house. It was too rough to get out. I had been riding  in a car where you couldn   t see. It looked like a snowstorm. You  couldn   t see any better than you could in a big snowstorm. Turning a  corner, you couldn   t see the corner.  Finchum Mercy.  Henderson The sand was terrible.  Finchum How would they keep it out of the house?  Henderson We didn   t. (Laughs) There was no way you could keep it out of the  house. People that had bigger, better houses than we did had the sand in  it, too. You just couldn   t keep it out.  Finchum Would they have to do anything special in the kitchen to try to keep it  out?  Henderson You washed your dishes before you set the table. (Laughter) Then  sometimes you   d find sand in your food. You   d be gritty. It   s just  impossible to keep it out.  13  Finchum Would all ten of you be around the dinner table?  Henderson When I was little. As we got older, of course, they dropped out. Yeah,  we had ten around the table for a long time.  Finchum What was one of your favorite dishes your mother fixed?  Henderson She could cook anything. Generally, we had potatoes and beans, some  kind of meat all the time. We   d grow the beans and potatoes, canned the  green beans during the summer. We   d can lots of tomatoes.  Finchum Was she a member of a homemaker club?  Henderson Yes, she was for a while. It was hard because we didn   t have a car at  that time, and wagons weren   t very fast. (Laughter) We did have a  buggy at times, and we   d go in the buggy, but most of time we went  where we wanted to go in the wagon.  Finchum So how many horses would you have?  Henderson We had six or eight because we   d have two for the plows, two for the  wagon. We had about four that we used on the wagon and then several  others. We   d have six or eight horses all the time, and the cows, too.  We milked our own cows.  Finchum You milked?  Henderson Oh, sure.  Finchum Was that hard to learn how to do?  Henderson Yes because you have to do your hand a certain way, and that certain  way was kind of hard. I finally learned it.  Finchum What were some of your chores?  Henderson Chopping wood and then tending to the    I didn   t do much chopping. I  had to pick the wood up, carry it in the house. Watering chickens and  taking care of the chickens was mostly my job.  Finchum Gathering the eggs?  Henderson I   d hunt the eggs. Hens would make nests out in the pasture. Anywhere  within a quarter of a mile, you   d find hens in their nests. They didn   t  like the hen house. They liked the outside. (Laughter)  14  Finchum So you   d have to go on an egg hunt?  Henderson Oh, yeah, we hunted eggs every evening. We   d listen to where the hens  would cackle, and then we   d go. Most of the time we could find their  nests. We had shinnery, what they call a shinnery. Do you know what  that is?  Bishop No.  Henderson Well, it   s a miniature oak. It doesn   t grow but six or eight feet high. It   s  just a little tiny oak tree, only they come in bunches. They have acorns,  and they spread easily.  Finchum And the chickens would roost in those?  Henderson The chickens would get in those patches of shinnery. We   d have to  work our way through them because they grew so close together you  had to push your way through so much. You wouldn   t imagine what  country life was like.  Finchum Well, did your mother have some home remedies?  Henderson Oh, we had all kinds of home remedies. When you had an earache you  got a bag of hot salt to put on your ear. You   d lay on that. That was our  most common thing, I think. At least all of us had earaches.  Finchum And did it work? Did the salt on the ear work?  Henderson I never could tell that it worked. It still hurt. (Laughter)  Finchum Would you have to worry about snakes and snake bites?  Henderson Snakes?  Finchum Yes.  Henderson Well, my mother and I were both scared of snakes. Boys would handle  the snakes for us. We didn   t have a lot of rattlesnakes, but we did have  some. Most of them was what we   d call chicken snakes, and they would  crawl into the chicken nest and get the eggs. We   d have to watch the  hens. They   d get our little chickens.  Finchum Whose job was it to kill the chickens when it was time to cook them?  Who killed the chickens when it was times to do that?  15  Henderson I think all of us did.  Finchum Did you?  Henderson I know I   d go out, run a chicken down, kill it, and cook it. I could  outrun them when they got tired. (Laughter)  Finchum How would you get to school?  Henderson We had a school bus.  Finchum Really?  Henderson At times when we were little we had to walk, but when we moved to  Greer County we had school buses. Sometimes at first they were drawn  by horses, but then we got some that had a more   can you imagine  riding to school in a school bus drawn by horses?  Finchum No. (Laughs)  Henderson We lived six miles from the school, so we went six miles. We   d have to  get up at five or six o    clock, get ready to catch the bus early because  our bus driver had two great big horses that he, kind of, I think he  idolized those horses. He wouldn   t make them go very fast. He took  care of those horses on the route. We went slow.  Finchum About how long would it take you to go six miles?  Henderson Oh, it   d take more than an hour sometimes     Finchum Wow.  Henderson    so you can imagine getting up, getting on the bus. We   d get on the  bus around seven o   clock every morning. It wasn   t easy.  Finchum No, and in the wintertime was it cold on the bus?  Henderson Oh, yes. He had a little stove he kept at the front of the wagon that gave  a little bit of heat, a little wood stove.  Finchum What would you do for lunch?  Henderson We carried it in a paper sack to school.  Finchum What would it be?  16  Henderson Well, mostly sandwiches, anything that we happened to have.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject, favorite class?  Henderson In school?  Finchum Yes.  Henderson I think I liked English and history.  Finchum Did you play sports?  Henderson I was on the second team of basketball. At least, I was on the practice  team, but I never did get to play at a real basketball game. As I said, my  dad was a preacher. He would not let me wear the uniform. I made the  team every year, but I couldn   t go with them.  Finchum Well, what was the uniform?  Henderson At first they were just bloomers, and then they got to be real short  shorts.  Finchum And your father wouldn   t let you wear either one?  Henderson Well, I was too little when they wore the bloomers. I wasn   t old enough  for the basketball team.  Finchum What were holidays like growing up?  Henderson We didn   t have to go to school. (Laughter) We usually had a big dinner  or something like that, but we didn   t celebrate holidays like they do  now. At least out in the country where we lived, they didn   t.  Finchum Would school let out for cotton picking time?  Henderson We   d go to school through August and September, and then they   d let  out school through October, sometimes November if we didn   t get all  the cotton up. We   d go to school two months in the summer, then out  about two months, and go back to school and start over again.  Finchum Well, would you go to the cotton gin with your father?  Henderson I did one time, and it was not good. He knew it wouldn   t be good. I  didn   t like the gin, I didn   t like all the dust, and I didn   t like staying  away from the activity. I stayed in the wagon, so he only let me go one  17  time, I think, because I begged so much. He   d take the boys, but he  wouldn   t take me. (Laughter)  Finchum I   ve never been in a cotton gin. Can you tell us anything else about  that?  Henderson I was pretty little, and you   re asking me to tell you something eighty  years, ninety years ago.  Finchum That   s okay if you don   t remember. That   s fine.  Henderson I remember the yard, I remember the cotton wagons, and I remember  the noise of the gin, but that   s all I can remember about it.  Finchum Okay, so there were things that girls could do and boys could do?  Henderson We had parties all the time, and we played Slip.  Finchum I don   t know what that it is.  Henderson It   s a kind of running game. At school we   d play Black Ben all the time.  Finchum Black Ben?  Henderson It was a race. We   d divide one group down at one end from the other,  and then we   d try to run the fastest. We always had running games on  the school ground. Wasn   t anything else to do. One school, we had  some swings for a while, but they   d keep breaking, and we   d fall. They  took them down. (Laughter) Then we had some seesaws, and that was  about the only activity on the school ground. As much of us as could  would get on the seesaws. When we couldn   t get on it, we   d play Black  Ben. It was quite different than it is now.  Finchum Quite.  Henderson I don   t know what they do in the country schools. I think they have a  gym, even. I think they have school teachers that take care of the  activity anymore.  Finchum They consolidated a lot of them.  Henderson Yes, I wouldn   t know now because, well, I worked at a school for  twenty years, and we had seesaws and swings on the school ground. I  worked in the Buchanan school. Do you know where that is?  Finchum I don   t.  18  Henderson It   s not very far from here. It   s  in the city, about five miles from here .  Finchum Do you remember voting for the first time?  Henderson Yeah, I remember that, and I remember them talking about   I  remember when women could vote for the first time, and that was quite  a topic for people that came. They always talked about the women  voting, and you know most of the men were against it? They didn   t  want women to vote. They weren   t supposed to take care of  government. Men were supposed to do those things.  Finchum That was, like, 1920, around in there, 1920.  Bishop What about World War II?  Henderson World War II?  Bishop Yes.  Henderson World War I, I   m thinking about, I think. In 1918, that   s when World  War I was. World War II, yeah, I remember it real well.  Bishop What were you doing at the time?  Henderson My husband was a schoolteacher. That   s when the children were little.  It wasn   t a lot different than life, anyway. Salaries went up, prices went  up. You   d go to town, go down the street, you wouldn   t see any men  walking the streets. You   d go out into a crowd, and there   d be no men.  We lived there in Oklahoma City.  Finchum Did you have to do rationing then?  Henderson Oh, yes, did a lot of rationing on the gasoline, especially on cars. Not  too much food was rationed. I hadn   t thought too much about it lately.  You   d go downtown, walk down the street, everybody would be  women. You just wouldn   t see any men. I remember after the Armistice  was signed, we walked downtown and saw men for the first time  (Laughs) out there milling in the streets. That was quite a different  thing.  Bishop Did you have any family in World War II?  Henderson I had a brother. He was killed in the  Marines . I had two brothers. The  other one came home. My youngest brother was killed in the  Marines .  My other two brothers took government jobs. They were both 4-F, and  19  they just couldn   t stand it because they were 4-F. My youngest brother  went into the  Marines . One brother went through the war in the Army,  lived in El Paso. He worked for the government all the time through the  war. I think he worked for the government afterwards. He was a little  older than they   d take, so he tried to join twice. He said if they wouldn   t  take him twice, he wouldn   t go back. (Laughter) He wouldn   t try again.  Woolley And the one who was killed was a Marine. Ovid was a Marine rather  than in the Army, wasn   t he?  Henderson Yes, my youngest brother was in the Marines. He was killed just about  the time the war started, one of the first ones that lost his life.  Finchum What was his name?  Henderson Ovid Walter Campbell.  Finchum First name was     Henderson Ovid. O-V-I-D.  Finchum That   s different, too. Your mother came up with some different names.  Henderson Oh, yeah, that   s what they did to us. (Laughter) When he was in high  school he changed his name to Walter, so he went through the Army  and high school called Walter. He dropped the Ovid altogether.  Finchum And Leora, where did they get that?  Henderson I think she saw it in a paper or something. She saw that somewhere, and  she   d never heard anybody named Leora before. I have never learned a  Leora     Finchum I haven   t either.  Henderson    but there has been one here in Oklahoma City not far from here  because one of the therapists that I had had both of us for patients, and  she kept telling me about the other Leora.  Finchum What were the other names for your brothers and sisters?  Henderson I had one brother named Troy, and one Lloyd, one Lindsey and one  Ovid. I had two sisters. One was named Jean, the other one Letha.  There were seven of us altogether. Letha and Lloyd were older. They  weren   t home very much when Jean was a baby.  20  Bishop When you were raising your children, did you ever take any vacations,  any family vacations?  Henderson No, we didn   t. There just wasn   t any time or any money, either, to take  vacations. Once in a while one would get to go by themselves, and  sometimes it   d be Mama and Dad. Sometimes it   d be one of us, but not  the whole family.  Bishop And what were some of the things that you did when you were a parent?  Henderson When I was married?  Bishop When you were married and a parent, were there any things that you  did for family fun that you remember?  Henderson Several things. We moved to Oklahoma City when I think Joan was  about two years old. We moved to Oklahoma City, and I was pretty  well tied down, so we didn   t go on vacations. We just did things at  home. We played little games in the house, and in the summer we  played outside but nothing spectacular. We had games that we   d play,  mostly domino games. We didn   t ever play cards much. We had a  Forty-Two club that our church, a bunch of us, bunch of the members,  formed a little club. We   d play Forty-Two every week.  Bishop What   s Forty-Two?  Henderson (Laughs) It   s just a domino game that you play with dominoes. No  betting. You think of games like that as gambling games, but they  weren   t. We played a few card games that had no gambling at all. I  never did learn the gambling games. I didn   t learn the others very well.  (Laughter)  Bishop Given that your father was a preacher, was church always a central  part of your life?  Henderson Yes. We came to Oklahoma City, first thing we did, we hunted a  church. We found Olivet  Baptist Church , and that   s the one I   m still a  member of. I   ve been there over seventy years.  Bishop I bet you   re their oldest member.  Henderson There are   well, maybe I am, I guess. (Laughter) I haven   t been to  church in over a year, and it just really upsets me because I always went  to church. That was a major part of our life. It   s been over a year since  I   ve been. Since I had that stroke, I think it   s been two years, and I  haven   t been able to walk since.  21  Finchum Well, there was a time when you couldn   t wear pants to church.  Henderson We could when I was going last. They still can.  Finchum But when you were younger?  Henderson When I was younger, no. Children were grown and gone before I ever  wore pants to school and church, and not very much, then.  Finchum Felt strange to do that, didn   t it?  Henderson Yes. For a while everybody did, now I don   t know whether they do now  or not.  Finchum It   s a mix.  Henderson It   s been over two years since I   ve been in a church building.  Bishop I assume as a child that you heard your father preach. Did you ever  hear your father preach?  Henderson Oh, yeah, lots of times.  Bishop Did you ever have a favorite sermon or favorite     Henderson I remember a lot of things he said when he was preaching because we  had to grow up like he preached. (Laughter) He was pretty strict with us  as we were growing up.  Bishop What   s something you remember him saying or preaching about?  Henderson Oh, so many things. He quoted lots of scripture. He told a lot of stories.  His sermons were very much like the sermons you hear today.  Woolley Tell them about the weddings, the weddings he performed.  Henderson Yeah, he had weddings. One time I was at the cotton patch, and a  couple came out and   wanted to know where we could find a preacher.  My dad was over in a little while, had a cotton sack on his shoulder, so  we got him. He pulled his cotton sack off and his knee  pads  and went  over to the wagon where they were and married them right there in the  wagon. Another time, we were on our way to the river to fish. We all  had our fishing clothes on. We were about 200 to 300 yards from the  road, and they called us back from their car. Dad married a couple out  there on the road. (Laughter)  22  Bishop Now, did he marry you and your husband?  Henderson Yes, he did. They   d come to the house. Lots of times they   d come to  our house to get married. He   d marry them sitting in the car or   . It was  different back then (laughter) when I was a child.  Bishop Now, did you get married in a church or a car or     Henderson I was married at home in my home. My dad married me.  Bishop Who was there? Were all the family present?  Henderson Just family members, we did not have any friends or anybody. I don   t  think they knew it because I was just coming home from college, and  they had to meet me at the school to take me home. We just got home  and was married that night.  Bishop Now, did your husband ask your father for your hand in marriage?  Henderson (Laughter) I don   t think he did because we were engaged in college.  Finchum How did he pop the question?  Henderson I had a very short   he did the regular questions that you have to have,  but it was a very short ceremony. He said he   d never do that again.  (Laughter) He was actually nervous when he married us. I thought he   d  be just real calm, that he   d married so many couples. We were coming  home in those little cars, and it was after dark when we got there, we  had so many flats. In those days you could mend your flats. You can   t  now. They   d take the tire off, and we   d have a uniform   not uniform.  What am I trying to say? Anyway, we   d have a rubber inner tire inside  the other one. You   ve seen the old tires, haven   t you?  Bishop Yes     Woolley The inner tube.  Bishop    with the inner tube.  Henderson They had all the equipment to fix the holes in the inner tube. I think we  had seven on the way home. (Laughter) It was hard to buy tires when  you didn   t have any money. They didn   t pay teachers much after this     would you believe he got ninety dollars a month? At first, salaries were  ninety dollars a month. After he taught a year or two, they raised it to a  hundred. We lived on that. Then others, when my sister started  23  teaching, she got seventy-five dollars a month her first salary, so you  see how much they used to pay teachers. Now you can live on a  teacher   s salary. You couldn   t back then.  Bishop So how did you celebrate your most recent birthday?  Henderson In bed     Bishop In bed?  Henderson    in Texas. (Laughter)  Bishop Did you ever think you would live to be a hundred or over a hundred?  Henderson That was my intention, to live to 110. When we were kids, we   d talk to  each other about how old we were going to be, and I was always 110.  Bishop Has anyone in your family lived to be a hundred other than you?  Henderson No, not that I know of, not my grandparents or   I think I   m the only  one that I   ve ever known of that lived to be a hundred.  Bishop You have four more years to go.  Henderson Yeah, (laughs) three more. I   m 107, or am I 106 yet? I think I was 107  last May.  Woolley You   re 106.  Bishop Hundred and six     Woolley Yes.  Bishop    yeah, on your birthday.  Henderson Should know I   m 106. I guess I   m just 106.  Finchum Just? (Laughter)  Henderson I forget real easily. You   ll tell me something one minute, and I   ll forget  it the next.  Bishop What   s a typical day like for you today? What time do you usually get  up, and what do you do during the day, and what time do you go to  bed?  24  Henderson (Laughs) I have breakfast about ten, usually, because I don   t wake up.  No one wakes me up, so I sleep as long as I want to. Sometimes I get  up, and sometimes I don   t, but they just let me stay in bed as long as I  want to in the morning.  Bishop You have breakfast, and then what do you do during the day?  Henderson (Laughs) Nothing.  Bishop Do you read?  Henderson I can   t read anymore. I used to read all the time, but I can   t see anymore  to read.  Bishop What was your favorite thing to read?  Henderson I read novels a lot.  Woolley You read the Bible, too, quite a bit.  Henderson I didn   t hear that.  Finchum She said you read the Bible quite a bit. Then what time would you go to  bed?  Henderson I was in bed between eight and ten, whichever time they got ready to  get me to bed.  Finchum Would you read a lot as a youngster?  Henderson That was our main activity. Our whole family would read, and at night  we had kerosene lamps. We had a little table that we   d sit in the middle  of the floor. We   d all sit around that little table to read night after night.  Finchum Read out loud or to yourself?  Henderson Mostly to ourselves. Sometimes we   d find something interesting that  they wanted to read with all of us here.  Finchum Where would you get your books?  Henderson I don   t remember. I know they had a lot of them, but as I got   oh, I  know now. We would order our books from the state library. They got  them through the state. I guess they still have that program.  Finchum They do.  25  Henderson We ordered a lot of them through there. Of course, we   d have to send  them back. Then we had school libraries that we would get them. We  had one library, (Granite, I believe) we   d get books. Then some of us  read papers. I can   t remember when we didn   t get a daily paper. I  remember when I was first married, we lived in a little town called  Bluejacket  Oklahoma . Do you know where that is?  Bishop I don   t, but I   ve heard of it.  Henderson It   s out close to Vinita and Miami, Oklahoma, out there. We did read a  lot. I was trying to think of that   it wasn   t Billy Graham. It was a  missionary before Billy Graham. I can   t think of his name right now.  Woolley Billy Sunday.  Henderson That was who?  Woolley Billy Sunday.  Henderson Well, it was Billy Sunday   s time, but there was another one. He was  there, too, and he preached a lot of sermons. They   d be printed in the  newspaper. Either Dad or Mother would read those sermons to us at  night. It was Billy Sunday   s time, and I can   t think of his name. Billy  Sunday     Finchum How was the house heated, the house heated when you were little?  Henderson It was work. We had a   you   ve seen the brooms at the store. I   m sure  you never had one at home. We used those to sweep with. Of course,  we had to dust and sweep every day, and we didn   t have running water  for dishwater. We   d have to carry it from the well. In fact, we didn   t  have running water at all. We had well water that came in a big bucket.  Finchum How was bath time then?  Henderson A pan of water and a washrag. (Laughter) Sometimes we   d put water in  tubs, but they   re kind of hard to sit in.  Finchum How would she do her laundry, your mother?  Henderson Had a washtub and a rubboard. We didn   t have washing machines. We  didn   t have electricity. Now it   s not much difference in the country than  it is in town because there   s electricity everywhere now. When I was  young, they didn   t have electricity in the country.  26  Finchum Would you go to the movies very much, go to the movies, theater,  movies?  Henderson We   d seldom ever go. Once in a great while, we   d get to go to a movie.  They had them at Mangum and Granite, both, but we didn   t go to them.  We finally got a radio when I was in college. My first year, I came  home from college they had a radio at home. They had told me they  were going to surprise me, and they did, (Laughs) so we had those old  fashioned shows on the radio. We got the news on radio. That   s the  thing we watched more than anything else. We had learned to have the  news from everywhere. We were just really thrilled to get fresh news  like that because we   d always gotten it from a paper. We always took a  daily paper. I can   t remember a time in our home when we didn   t have a  daily newspaper. Sometimes it would be late because it   d have to come  through the mail, but it was there. Sometimes we   d get two at a time.  Sometimes we   d miss it altogether.  Bishop Was there a particular section of the paper you enjoyed reading the  most?  Henderson (Laughs) The comics. (Laughter)  Bishop The comics? What was your favorite comic?  Henderson Mutt and Jeff and Jiggs, and then we had another one. I can   t think of  the name of it. It was about two little lonely boys. Oh, I can   t think of  the name of that paper. It   s been nearly a hundred years since it  happened, or more than a hundred years. You   re making me remember  that long. (Laughter)  Finchum You   re doing great.  Bishop You   re doing a pretty good job.  Henderson I do remember some things that when I was a hundred, though, before I  was a hundred. Well, yeah.  Bishop What do you think has been the greatest invention that you   ve seen, the  greatest invention that you   ve seen in your lifetime?  Henderson Convention?  Bishop Invention.  27  Henderson Oh, inventions? I remember my first car ride. We had cars, and then all  the farm equipment was equipped. After I quit picking cotton they  actually had a cotton picker, and I never did get to use that. (Laughter)  Bishop You were finished.  Henderson After I got married. I left home. I never did go back to the farm after I  was married. Just to visit, very short visits. In those days there wasn   t  any money. At least we didn   t have any.  Finchum You remember your first television?  Henderson First time I came home from college I walked in the room, and they had  a television.  Woolley Not a television.  Finchum A television or a radio? Television.  Henderson We had a radio all the time. I can   t remember when we didn   t have  radios because I remember when I was quite young. I remember our  first television. They got kind of popular while I was in school, and  neighbors started buying them, and I   d hear about the television. The  house where I was staying bought a television. That was something.  Woolley I don   t think so.  Finchum Radios instead of television?  Woolley Yes, because I was ten years old before we had a television.  Henderson She probably remembers our first television.  Bishop Today do you have a philosophy or a motto? Do you have a philosophy  or a motto that you live by?  Henderson Oh, I didn   t understand what you said. Do I have a what?  Bishop A philosophy or a motto that you live by?  Henderson I   m sorry, I can   t     Bishop Do you have a philosophy of life or a motto in life.  Henderson Oh, yeah, I guess I did. I was going to be a schoolteacher. I have a  certificate, life certificate, to teach school, but I never used it. (Laughs)  28  Bishop But today at 106 years of age, do you have a philosophy that you live  by?  Henderson That I live by?  Bishop Yes.  Henderson Yeah, I think it   s my religious training because I   ve been taught  religious. I was given two Bibles a while back, and I read both of them  right through. I can   t read now.  Bishop What do you think the secret to your long life is?  Henderson The secret to my life?  Bishop Yes, living so long.  Henderson Well, everybody tells me it   s because I never did drink or anything like  that, so I don   t know. My mother died at eighty-three, and my father  was, I think he was  seventy-nine . We never had alcohol in our home,  and I never smoked, so I don   t know whether that had anything to do  with it or not. Some people just don   t die. (Laughter) That   s the main  reason.  Bishop When history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  Henderson What do I want history to say about me?  Bishop Yes.  Henderson I want it to forget me. I don   t think I want to be in the histories because  I didn   t accomplish any spectacular things.  Bishop Well, how do you want others to remember you?  Henderson Well, just as a grandmother, I guess. Grandmothers are generally all  alike. No, I really want them to remember as a good mother if they can  because I never accomplished anything spectacular. I was just a mother,  part of the time a working wife. My husband died a long time ago.  Finchum You have a favorite memory or two from your childhood?  Henderson I don   t think it   s something that I   m proud of or anything, but I  remember my first and only bad, bad accident, not for me but for  somebody else. It was on one Sunday afternoon. My dad and oldest  29  sister had gone out of the community to another church, and here came  a wagon running, horses were running, and they turned into our drive.  They stopped at our lot. We ran out, and the man was under the wagon,  under the wagon with his leg in a wheel going around and round and  round, just twisted it, twisted it. That   s the worst tragedy I ever saw, and  I guess maybe it   s because I was just about ten years old when it  happened. That was on Sunday. No one was home. My mother worked  that leg out of that wheel, laid him down, and there he was, bleeding on  the ground. We had him that way, covered up. It was hot summer. We  covered him. We held a sheet up over him, our wagon sheet, to keep the  sun off of him for hours.  Finally people started coming home from church. After they got home  from church, it seemed like the whole crowd came. I was standing by  the side of him, holding a sheet up to put the shade on him so he  wouldn   t be in the hot sun. Finally they came, and I went in the house  and kind of hid. I couldn   t take it any longer. Finally the family came,  and they got a car. I believe they got somebody   s car. Somebody took  him twenty miles to the little town where there was a hospital. Of  course, he lost his leg. I think that   s the worst tragedy I ever saw. I  know I haven   t seen one worse since, but seeing a man lose his leg is  pretty bad.  Finchum That   s pretty hard.  Henderson And he lay there. He moaned a little, but he didn   t holler or anything.  He just lay there and took the pain all that time. It must   ve been a  couple of hours before anybody came to our aid. It was tragic. I think  everything about that stands out in memory so much because it was the  only real tragedy I ever saw.  Finchum And you didn   t want to be a nurse after that.  Henderson I intended to be a nurse, but then time changed, and I decided to be a  schoolteacher. I went through college, had my degree and my teaching  certificate, lifetime teaching certificate, got married, then come home.  (Laughs) I never taught. I   ve done quite a bit of substitute teaching but  never had a school.  Finchum Did you teach Sunday school?  Henderson I taught Sunday school, same class of seven-year-olds for forty years.  Finchum Wow.  Bishop There   s your teaching   30  Henderson Olivet Baptist Church.  Bishop So you were a teacher.  Henderson I worked in the school. I was school secretary. That was Buchanan. Do  you know where Buchanan is?  Bishop No.  Henderson I worked at Buchanan for twenty years.  Finchum Teaching seven-year-olds for forty years, though, takes a lot of  patience.  Henderson I taught seven-year-olds in Sunday school for forty years     Finchum A lot of patience.  Henderson    so everybody in church knew me from the time they were little. I   ve  been at Olivet for seventy years.  Finchum And you didn   t sing in their choir, either?  Henderson No, I didn   t have a choir voice. I always wanted to, but I never could.  Woolley Sometimes she   d play piano.  Finchum Did you play the piano?  Henderson I played a little while. I played for our Sunday school department, and I  did play for the church one time at night when no one else was there.  (Laughs)  Finchum How had you learned how to play?  Henderson Somebody gave me a book, (I was in my teens) gave me a textbook on  playing, and I taught myself. I think as I was older I had a few lessons  but not more than ten in all, so I was self-taught. You can do it if you  want to. Anybody can learn if they want to, and I wanted to. I remember  the first song I learned to play.  Finchum What was it?  Henderson I think it was    Amazing Grace.    It was a little short one, and it was in a  good key. It was hard for me to play the keys of it through the third key,  31  three flats, about three sharps. I never did get through the higher keys.  When I could do it on the piano I could do as much as five but not  good. I never was a real pianist. I just learned. My daughter had a  perfect ear, good ear. She learned the piano young. She   s played in a lot  of churches. In fact, she still plays in a church, but I never did have that  kind of an ear at it. I could hear the sounds of music, but I couldn   t play  them. She had perfect pitch.  Finchum Did they have traveling revivals back in those days? Do you remember  many?  Henderson Oh, yeah, my dad went on one every year without traveling, but he   d go  to another church. In the summertime he   d hold meetings at several  different churches.  Finchum Tent revivals?  Henderson Sometimes every week, sometimes every ten or twelve days, sometimes  two weeks, so he was gone most of the summer. Sometimes he   d be at a  home church, and then he   d get to go every night.  Finchum Well, what advice would you give someone that wanted to live to be a  hundred?  Henderson I don   t know. I think I was a small child. I didn   t really want to be it   s  just all play, and I think we all played that.  Bishop What advice would you give someone who wants to live one hundred  years? What type of advice would you give?  Henderson Don   t drink and don   t take drugs. That   s the main thing. I think that  causes more trouble than anything I know of.  Finchum And read the funnies, read the comics.  Henderson Read the comics (laughter) and read the Bible, and just don   t be a  shoplifter. So many kids are. Just be good. That   s all. That describes it.  Finchum I think that   s a good place to stop, so thank you for talking with us  today.  Henderson Well, I   ve enjoyed you.  Finchum It was great, thank you.  -------  ------- 
