 Finchum  Moss  Today is July 30, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum,  along with Alex  Bishop . We   re with Oklahoma State University. We   re working the  Oklahoma 100 Year Life  project focusing on  people who have lived to  be 100 or more. Today we   re in Tulsa with Opal Bennefield Clark     that   s what she uses most of the time for her business   but she is also  married. Her last name now is Moss. So thank you for having us today.  Let   s start with learning a little bit about you. Can you tell us when and  where you were born?  I was born in a town that no longer exists. However, when I went to try  to find it, after they had moved the town to put the Okmulgee Byway  across where it was, they moved the town   you can hardly find it. One  nice man that did a piece on me said he couldn   t find the town of  Bennefield, but it was there. I found where they had changed the  graveyard and I couldn   t find my father   s grave, but I found a lot of  other Bennefields, and my grandfather and grandmother   s grave. I  couldn   t find my father   s that I had found in the old graveyard, but It is  probably there. That is why one man who was interviewing me said I  was the woman without a town.  When were you born?  I was born in 1912, on May 20, 1912.  So 101?  I am now 101.  How did you celebrate your 100th birthday?  The town gave me a party. The town of Sand Springs gave me a party,  5  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  along with a party for the town, because I was one day older than the  town. My birthday was May 20 and the town was incorporated on May  22. The day in between made me one day older than the town. They had  a cake for me.  A lot of people, then.  A lot of people were there. The town really turned out. I was so  overwhelmed that I couldn   t even say anything but    thank you    to them  when they gave me a lot of awards   even something from the governor.  I don   t understand a lot of the things I received, but Zachary inducted  me into the Centurion Club. I guess it is a club   others were giving me  some sort of awards. I was so overwhelmed that she asked if I wanted to  say anything, and sadly I didn   t. I couldn   t think of anything to say. I  wish I had introduced my family, because my whole family, in-laws and  all, came clear from California to see me receive that honor. I   m sad that  I didn   t think to thank everybody for all they had done. They have been  so good to me. Everybody has been so good to me. I wanted to thank  them.  It   s just like I didn   t think Daddy Page. I wrote this book Fool   s  Enterprise: The Life of Charles Page as a thank you to him. I felt like he  didn   t take   he didn   t put his name on anything because he had a  superstitious streak in him that told him if he put his name on the things  and everything, the big fellow wouldn   t like it and his luck would  change. He had just gotten lucky in the oil business. He said his luck  might change. He said,    I   ve got too many little mouths to feed for me to  take any chances with the Lord getting angry at me for taking credit for  this town.    He said,    I   m just a steward of his finances and that  everything belongs to him.    He believed when the Bible says,    Don   t let  your right hand know what your left hand gives,    he believes that   s what  it means   don   t put your name on things that belong to God. So he  called the town Sand Springs, because the Indians had called the big  spring that was so important to both Tulsa and Sand Springs, because it  piped water so Tulsa could have spring water. He piped it to Tulsa for  them, too. He didn   t give the town a name for himself. He just called it  Sand Springs on account of the big spring.  How did you come to be in Sand Springs?  When my father died, my mother had a very hard time trying to make a  living for the four children that she had. She had lost two children that  had died in infancy. She had four of us. She had a very hard time making  a living. I don   t know what in the world she did, but she moved in a little  bit with her mother, whose husband had died. And moved out because     I don   t know enough, because I was too young to know all about how  6  Finchum  Moss  she did. But she became ill and she heard the neighbors talking about  giving us away, like Anne of Green Gables was given away, you know?  She didn   t want us to become little unpaid servants to somebody, and  mainly didn   t want the family broken up. So she had heard of a town  called Sand Springs, and there was an orphanage there that a man was  taking care of children that were orphans, in a home, and that he didn   t  let any child be adopted from the home because he didn   t believe in  separating siblings. He says, that   s all they have is each other. He  wouldn   t let any of them be adopted. People had asked him to let them  adopt a child, but he never took just one child. He let someone adopt that  child because it was better off to belong to a family, but where there  were more than one child, he took them into the home. He said,    You  are mine. No child will have to worry about an adoption.     He had rescued the orphans from Tulsa   s Children Home, when there  were a lot of accidents that took the father away from the family during  a coal mining disaster, and then the oil. So the citizens, the men of the  city, built a home to take care of the children so their mothers could go  to work, mothers with children under school age, so they could find a  job. You couldn   t leave underage children and go to work. So they could  put them in there, and then there were a lot of orphans besides. So they  had them in the  Tulsa Children  Home, and they went broke in the 1909  depression. The home went broke because people were feeding them by  donations from different people. The donations fell off.  Mr. Page, he had Mr. Breeding, a Salvation Army captain, to take care  of the children. When he rescued the twenty-one orphans, he went out to  see how they were doing. He was appalled to know they were giving  away little brothers and sisters from the other children. They were all sad  about it. He told them,    Don   t give another child away, and get those  you gave away back, if you can.    Of course, they couldn   t. People  wanted them. He told the children, then, when he took them out to this  piece of land that he named Sand Springs. He put them in tents. He only  had one little house built, to put other people in. He had tents up for old  folks and old men and women. He put up tents and took care of the  children so there wouldn   t be any of them separated from each other.  So your mother put you and your siblings there?  Well, it was later. Yes. She prayed she could live long enough to get her  children to that place. She took us. She got well enough with the help of  a nephew   s wife. First, she got married again. She got better. That was  later, but she got better. So she got us there in the home. Then later, she  got married again and she had another child. She thought she could   he  had three children. She thought, well, she could get her children then,  maybe, but he didn   t. The oldest girl was sixteen. She didn   t want my  7  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  mother to come in. I don   t know if her mother was dead or what, but she  resented her coming into the home and was mean to her children. So she  just stayed there a couple of years. Then she got pregnant with another  child and it got to be too much for her, for this girl who didn   t want her  there. She was fighting her, slapping her children around   so she left.  She came to Sand Springs to live to be near us.  What kind of memories do you have from your time at the orphanage?  Oh, well     Did you have chores?  Mr. Page says it   s good for children to have something to do, so give  them little chores to do. They gave us   during the summer, we had  certain jobs they gave us. One summer, I had to keep our play room  swept and put the dolls and things up on the   we had a big, big chest of  drawers so each child could have a great big drawer of their own, and we  had our toys out on the floor. So this was after I was in school. I didn   t  have anything to do when I was in the nursery. By the time they had  boarded us out because they had no room in the home they built for the  children, the first home they built for the children   it was in 1915   so  by then, they had a home built for all the children that they had. I came  before they had the big home finished. So I lived in the first home.  Then on Christmas, they had the big home that was three stories and a  basement. It was a big, beautiful home. They had an upstairs nursery for  those who were under school age. I went up to the nursery. I was in the  nursery for a little while, but by then I was right about five years old, I  think. So when I started going to school   when they had the nursery,  they had one of the houses that they had earlier built for the children,  before they built the children   s home. They used those little houses, one  of them, for a nursery. That was when it was in the first home, that they  used the house for the nursery for the underage school children. They  built other houses for the older girls and for the boys. They had the boys  in tents with the wooden floor in the tents. They had a lot of older  women and one man who had no   he was seventy-five years old and he  came and he worked in the flowers and in the garden. Another man that  had planted lots of flowers   so Mr. Page made him a greenhouse  because he had put so many flowers on the hill and made it look so  pretty.  When I went to the home, I mean to the bigger home, it was on  Christmas when they had it finished. That was in 1916. So I guess I  would have been about four in 1916. I can   t remember too much about it  except that in the nursery it had a blacktop and walls all around the roof,  8  and a big eagle was on the emblem thing that was carved or something  up at the top and the wall all around that we kids couldn   t climb. They  had play things out there, slides and swings, on the blacktop. The  blacktop in the summer was so hot for our little feet that they put boards  across it then and made a wooden floor for us. So that was where we  were until we went to school. When we became six and went to school,  well, we went downstairs and we were one of the little girls. To make it  more simple, whenever they wanted to call all the little girls or the  bigger girls, or so and so, they called us little girls from six to twelve.  You were middle sized girls from twelve, and they had the playroom.  We each had a playroom, the little ones from six to twelve. Then from  twelve, they had another playroom, and it was for the older girls and  they were just alike.  Then in the newer home, they had separate rooms for all the older girls  who were sixteen and older. They had curtains on the front and it opened  at the top so the heat from the radiators would circulate good throughout  the home and make it comfortable. They had a great big marble hall. If  we did anything and got the marks, that she called it, she had a board up  here   if you got punished, she   d give you a mark. Then you had to do  something to get the mark off the board, or you couldn   t go to the show  on Saturday or something. The way she kept the halls shining was  making them mop the big long hall. It seemed like it was a mile long. It  had a sewing room. They had a parlor at the end with pianos, and a  library that had books in there. I spent a lot of time in there. They didn   t  have any books for children, though. In that day, we didn   t have  children   s books. My first day of school was glorious to me because I  was going to get a book.  It was a beautiful home. Oh, it was a gorgeous home. He believed in  children getting lots of fresh air. He had porches all around the first  home he had built. On every floor, he   d have porches around it so you  could get the sunshine. On this place, it had porches all around the west  end of it. The other end of it was our bedrooms. We had one big  bedroom that made a square, you know, around the back. And then on  the sides, and then on the inside and then a large opening into the  hallway. My bed was on the left hand side because my sister Beulah,  who was three years older than I was, they wanted her to be next to me  to look after me. They expected her to not let me get hurt or anything.  But instead, they got after her   if I did anything, she got in trouble, too.  (Laughter) But I wasn   t too bad a kid.  I did get into trouble with the other kids. One time, like when the  peaches were ripe   the peach orchard was right in front of us, there,  around the playgrounds. That was too much of a temptation to have  those gorgeous peaches out there. So my sister was more of a leader.  9  People are born leaders, you know, and they have followers. She taught  us all   she had a spit band. She called it a spit band, because we had  combs and paper wrapped around it. We marched up and down the  cement walls and she could keep a band doing her arms and feet and  tongue all at the same time, I mean her mouth.  Makes sounds with her  mouth and feet  She   d blow through her lips and stomp her foot and  wave her arms, and lean and walk backwards, and we all marched after  her with our combs and our tin cans and everything, and even Mr. Page  wanted to hear the band. She was a leader, but she sometimes got into  mischief. So she said,    I want one of those peaches.    I knew that she  meant,    I want one for me and one for Opal,    because she always looked  out for Opal. I didn   t have to be naughty. She was naughty for me.  (Laughs)  So because I was small for my age, they could hoist me, together, up on  top of a little drinking fountain that is still there on the grounds, that was  built with stones, and it had a fountain on the inside of it. A hydrant,  rather. So if we were out playing, we could get us a drink of water. It  had a slanted roof and the roof was facing the home. We could see from  the front door if anybody came out. So they hoisted me up there and I  think just my head was over, so I could see the door. We had a word  that   kids always make up things, you know   we   d say,    Cheese it     if  we saw anybody coming. So they said,    Cheese it     When some of the  braver girls were in the orchard getting a lap full of peaches so we could  all have some, I yell,    Cheese it     because Mrs. McDonald, one of the  matrons, was coming out the door with a big pitcher of lemonade. We  didn   t dream she was going to do that. She had ice cold lemonade for us.  I scramble down from the top of there, and the peaches begin to fly in  the air. They didn   t want to be caught with a peach. That was a funny  scene, seeing all of those peaches. She was a good sport. She said,     Well, girls, I am going to have to report you. I wouldn   t have known  you had a peach in your hand if you hadn   t thrown it.    (Laughter) So she  said,    You told on yourself and I have to report you.    So we all had to  march up to the girl   s matron and take a big dose of castor oil. She had  us to bend over on her chair and she gave us one good hard slap with a  razor strap. That   s what she used. She gave us one big strap. The castor  oil was worse than the licking. (Laughs) So we all had to go up on the  porch and couldn   t play anymore that afternoon. We had to play out on  the porch. So they weren   t cruel to us or anything like that, but they used  that razor strap, and it hurt, too. If we needed it, or they more often  punished us with getting the work done around the place by having us to  do the job.  They did assign us jobs. Like one time, school was out, I had the job of  washing down the basement steps from the dining room. They had a  10  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  bathroom right at the end of the dining room and the stairs went down.  There was where the cold storage for all the fruit, all the ice   they made  their own ice. I enjoyed that job because I would sweep the bathroom  and sweep down the stairs to the basement. Mr. Abie, John Abie was in  charge of the storage. They had meat. People came up and bought meat  from them, even. They had so much meat. They had a storage  room ,  and this was way before refrigeration, you know. People had small ice  boxes in the stores. I guess the stores had meat, too, I   ve heard since. I  wouldn   t have known because I was in the home when it happened. But  I had different people say they went up when they wanted to buy some  meat, they went up there and Mr. Abie would cut them off however  much they wanted. He was a very nice man.  What fascinated me was the way they made the ice. They had these great  big oblong square tin things that went down into the ground, under the  floor. They had doors open and he had a big wheel, a great big wheel,  about that big around, and a chain. He   d hook it on the sides of the ice  thing, take the floor up, and put it on an ice bucket and do this (gestures)  to get the three-hundred pound. That would be a three-hundred pound  ice block up, and he   d turn it over and wheel it on the chain to the room  where they kept the big cakes of ice for the freezer. So that fascinated  me. I made my arms very strong by   he let me pull that chain. I  couldn   t pull it at first, but I kept on every day, going down there and  pulling it up. I had my arms so strong that one day I laid my arm against  the door facing like this, and one of the little kids put his arms around it  like this and raised his feet up and I could hold him. That   s pretty strong,  isn   t it?  That   s pretty strong.  So I guess that   s where I got my strong arms, even now, but I   m hurting  my back because my strong arms keep lifting things I shouldn   t lift.  (Laughs)  Did you ever think about running away?  I hate to tell this, but I have still got a little throat problem. I always had  a throat problem. I got a sore throat easy. I guess I had weak lungs or  something. I   d have to miss school sometimes because of my sore throat.  I had been sick. I couldn   t talk my throat would get so sore. If I missed  any school, math was always hard for me so I would have to really make  up. We had a study hall that we went to twice a week. It was a library  and study hall. It was on the boys    floor because the big boys had a  building of their own, and they kept the little boys up in the elementary  classes. Our matrons were all old maids, except Mrs. McDonald, and the  music and piano teachers had been married, and the school teacher had  11  been married. The other matrons had never been married.  Miss Lindsey was so strict. She was the head matron. She was the first  one that came so that made her the head matron. She was so strict that if  the boys were there to eat   they eat there at the home, but they lived a  piece away from the home in a rock house   the girls, if they stopped on  the stairway to talk to each other, she   d say,    Outside  Outside,    to the  boy, you know. Wouldn   t let them even talk to the girls. So they made  jokes about it because she was so afraid that they would get into  mischief, I guess.  We went to study hall to study one time and one of the girls who was in  the same room in school with me was right across the table from me.  Kids make signs, you know. We can talk a lot with signs. So the first  thing, they had a substitute. We had a good matron that helped us if we  needed help with our work. She would help us. She was on vacation, and  this one, her name was Hanson. I heard, to my back, you know, the boys  had their tables over here, and we had a table here for ours. She was over  there where the boys were, and she cracked somebody over the head  with a ruler. She said,    We will have no talking in here.    So we all  looked at each other like,    The old bat,    or something. (Laughs) So I  was working on a problem and I shoved it across the table to Alma and I  said,    Is that the way you do it?    I don   t know what it was,    Is this  right?    She came over to my back and WHACK, like that, with that  ruler. They have a sharp edge on them, and it really hurt. It made me so  mad. Of course, I didn   t say a word. I just sat there, but it hurt. I was full  of anger so I wrote a note to vent my anger.  As I already told you, the girls used to ask me to see if I could make a  rhyme with this or that, because that was my funny thing that I did. I  thought,    I just hate that old woman,    so I said,    Old Lady Hanson, she  was as big as a man.    I mean big all over. I don   t mean fat. She was as  big as a man. She was a big thing. I said,    Old Lady Hanson, she   s as  big as an ox. She thinks she is about as smart as a fox.    I tried to think of  an angry word to end it with. I said,    The old       and I couldn   t think of  an angry word. One of the girls, just a few days earlier, had been  reprimanded by Miss Lindsey   that was the last resort. No, Mr.  Breeding was the last resort. We had a girls    matron. She punished us or  whatever. If she got mad enough, she   d send you down to Miss Lindsey,  and Miss Lindsey would really give it to you. So she was coming up  from being sent down to Miss Lindsey and she said,    I hate that old  hussy.    So I thought, hmm, that   s a good angry word and I wrote it  down there,    The old hussy       so I folded it up, the paper, real small. I  put it in my shoe and kicked Alma, because she was one of the girls  across the table from me. She reached down and got it and she read it,  and she grinned and just wadded it up and threw it to the center of the  12  table where we were supposed to throw our trash.  So after the study hall, the boy Leo Simons   it was his job to take a big  waste basket and brush all the wastepaper off of the tables. The paper  had sort of come open and he saw my name. He told me this later, how  this all came about. He was apologizing. It really made him feel bad. So  he opened it and he was reading it, and she reached over his head and  took it out of his hand and read it. She went in and gave it to Miss  Lindsey. The next morning, I was eating breakfast and one of the girls  said,    Opal, Miss Lindsey wants you to come up to her room when you  get through eating breakfast.    I was happy. I thought I was going to get a  new pair of shoes, because if she saw any of us with a flopping shoe,  you know how kids get their shoes, or your shoes look bad, she   d take  you into the shoe room and give you a new pair of shoes. I thought,    Oh,  I   m going to get a new pair of shoes,    because that was the only time she  ever called me into her room. Not her own room, but downstairs where  her business was.  So I went up there and she picked up the paper and said,    Did you write  this?    I said,    Yes, ma   am.    Looked down at my feet,    Yes, ma   am.     She said,    You know what that word means?    I said,    No, ma   am.    She  said,    That means that is a filthy woman  A filthy woman who sells  herself.    I thought,    How could a woman sell herself?    I didn   t know  anything, you know. We were innocent as we could be. She said,    You  are a filthy mouthed little girl.    I began to cry because I was called a  filthy mouthed little girl and I figured I had the name and everybody is  going to start calling me filthy mouthed little girl. I was only fourteen  years old, but that is a very impressionable age. I had already gotten my  complex because my older sister said my ears were too big. I thought if  anybody looked at me twice, they thought,    How could anybody have  such big ears?     So I   d already gotten a complex, and I began to cry. I said,    Daddy  Page, he had two weeks earlier told me that if I get too lonesome for my  two sisters       they had both gone from the home, he said,    If I was too  lonesome from them, I could go home to my mother. She was well  now.    I hadn   t given it a thought, I was happy. I   d been there since I was  three. Here I was fourteen. It was home. I had friends. They were my  sisters and my brothers, and I was happy. I got to see Mother when I  wanted to. No I didn   t either, I didn   t see her very often at all, but I was  happy where I was. I just hadn   t given it a thought. But when she said  that I said,    Daddy Page said I could go live with my momma if I  wanted to and I don   t like it here anymore.    I was afraid everybody was  going to call me filthy mouth little girl. I was just crushed.  When I said,    I don   t like it here anymore,    she   she was a good  13  woman. She was just too strict. She just didn   t know that it crushed me  like that. Anyway, I just went all to pieces and she said,    I   ll give you a  good spanking before you go and you can tell your mother about that.     She had me to lean over the chair and she took the razor strap and gave  me a good spanking with that razor strap. She said,    Now, go on to  school.    So I ran out the door, I ran downstairs and ran out the door, and  I just started running. I was crying and it was in October. It was a cold  October day, but I didn   t know that I went off without my coat or  anything. I just kept running. I couldn   t tell you where I went. It   s  absolutely   I don   t know. I didn   t know how I got where I was when I  finally realized I was cold.  I stopped   Mr. Page had built one end of the town for the colored folks,  you know, the black people, because they were nice people. He had  some of them working so he just let one of them be a realtor and bring  their people there. Of course, it was when it was Jim Crow laws, you  know. Some of the white people complained about it. So he says,     They   re people, too, and they   re nice people. You can give them jobs.  They will help you with your ironing.    So anyway, that   s where I was. I  was down there where the town was, where they had their houses, where  the black people lived. I never had been down there, and I didn   t know  how I got down there. I was cold, and I stopped and thought,    What am I  going to do? I don   t know whether to go to school. I can   t go home and  get my coat. I don   t know what to do. Will I even get to stay in the home  anymore?     Just about that time, the mail carrier that took the mail across the river to  the folks on the other side stopped and asked me if I wanted a ride. This  was in 1926 when people were still safe riding on the fender of a car. Of  course, he invited me in. I didn   t want to get in with him. I wasn   t afraid,  but I just didn   t know what to do. I said,    Do you know a Cap Haney?    I  knew my mother had married a man named Cap Haney, because they  had come to see me when they had the new babies. He said,    I have a  newspaper for him. I   ll be stopping at their door. Don   t be afraid of me,  I   m the mail carrier. I bring folks back and forth from here all the time.     Of course, they had a lot of people who hitched across the river like that.  It was common. I got in the car and he let me out in front of the house.  I ran to Momma, and she looked like this through the screen, and she  saw me coming and she came out. I jumped up on the porch and I said,     Momma, do you love me?    She said,    Well, of course I love you.    I  said,    Miss Lindsey said you gave us away.    She said,    Opal, I was so  sick. I couldn   t take care of five children and he offered to take care of  you all for me. I couldn   t take care of myself       and so forth. She said,     I saw that you were taken so good care of and you were learning. I  went to get you when I got married. I thought I could bring you back and  14  take care of you then but Mr. Page asked me to leave them there because  Beulah was a very talented piano player. He said,    All of your girls have  good voices, and we   re giving the oldest daughter opera singing,    and  said,    I can do so much more for them, and what can you do? If you  took them, you couldn   t bring them back. I   ve had to make rules because  one woman, when I first started this, kept bringing her children back and  taking them. A child has to have a place of permanence. They have to  know that they are loved and have someone, and you can   t jerk children  around.    This woman would say,    This is your new daddy,    and she   d  take them out and come back and come back with another man who was  their new daddy.  So he legally adopted us all. Not in the sense that you   re going to inherit  his money, but in the sense that it   s like a corporation. You belong to  him. He said,    I want them to have a sense of permanence, of belonging,  of knowing that they   re loved. A lot of times a stepchild is not always  welcomed by the stepfather. Why don   t you wait a while and see how  your marriage turns out, so you can be very sure because you can   t bring  them back.    So my mother considered it all and she thought the greater  love is for your children and they   re better off where they are. So she left  us in there.  When my stepfather came home, I thought it was going to be wonderful.  I   m going to have a daddy. I   m going to have a daddy and a momma, but  it didn   t turn out that way. He was real nice to me at first, but he had it in  his mind that a kid that is raised in an orphanage has learned how to do  everything. He didn   t know this orphanage was not the kind of  orphanage where you make little workers out of  the children . We had  all the cultural advantages, but we didn   t know how to cook, we didn   t  know how to   we had everything done for us. I didn   t know that he was  expecting me to do a lot of work and everything. I don   t know why he  didn   t like me. I just loved him. He soon found out that I liked to read. I  would get a book and study at night. My sister, that never brought a  book home, she would grab a broom once in a while. I mean, I had Lois.  My mother, for that second marriage, she had another baby and her  name was Lois. She was about four years younger than me, but she was  a real clean   she wanted to clean house all the time. She would get a  broom and sweep the sand out. We didn   t have carpets. They had  linoleum on the farm there. She would sweep the sand out and fuss  about it and go around and straighten things up. I sat there and read a  book and that was the only thing I could think of, because I thought,     I   ve got to get my lessons.     So right when I came home from school, I would help with washing the  dishes. Lois and I would wash and dry the dishes. I think she only  started doing that after I came because I think Cap expected me to do the  15  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  dishes, scrub the floors and take care of the children. The first time he  took me to see all his kinfolks, you know, and everything like that   I  called him Daddy a time or two, but it didn   t stick because Momma was  calling him Cap, Cap, Cap, all the time. He was called Cap because he  had been captain of an anti-horse-thief association. He had a picture of  himself that they had given him, in a horseshoe. Down here, they got a  rock cemented into the bottom like this for all the horse thieves you  caught. So he got stuck with the name Cap. His name was Oscar. Oscar  David. My husband   s father   s name was David Oscar and I get mixed  up   the other was Oscar David. He soon got to resenting me, and I  didn   t know why. I had been raised to grab a broom and start sweeping  and all of that, like Lois did, but I just thought,    I   ve got to get my  education.    I wanted to study my lessons. He would hit me and liked to  have broken my nose one time. I just loved him, and I wanted to read to  him, because he liked my momma to read.  He would come home from work and lay down in the floor, wherever it  was cool on the linoleum. His two babies, as he called them   one was  about three and the other was about five. They weren   t in school. The  one that was five, they had picked at her, and he had let his brothers tell  her to    Tell your dad to go to H-E-Double-L    and things like that, and  she   d say it to her daddy and he   d laugh. When they wanted to do my  child that way, I said,    She   ll get spanked right in front of you if she  does, if she says that to me.    I wouldn   t let anyone tell her things just so  they could get a laugh, and mess her up. So they had messed her up. She  was just a little mean thing. She would admit it   I mean, later. She  regretted that she was that way. She was throwing rocks at me and he  had   any time there was any work to do he said,    My babies don   t have  to do anything as long as we   ve got those       and he called us these vile  names that I don   t want to repeat. He   d think of awful, nasty, awful  names to call us. I don   t know why, he just resented me being there. I  found out that he had already carried my brother off and left him with  relatives.  So you went back to the home, then?  No, I never did go back.  Where did you go to high school?  I walked from   are you familiar with anything in Sand Springs?  Not very much, no.  Do you know where the Salvation Army has a nursery, sort of, that they  keep   do you know where that is?  16  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  Paul Moss  Moss  I do.  Well, that was the school that I went to, to finish. I was in the sixth grade  when I left the home. I finished to go to the ninth at Sand Springs. I  walked from the Salvation Army place down   what is that road that  goes east and west called? You know where the Wal-Mart used to be in  Sand Springs?  Yes.  Well, where the Wal-Mart used to be, I walked from a way up there. Do  you know where the Green Tree Assisted Living is?  A little bit, yes.  That land was my stepfather   s land. He had forty acres. Our house was,  his house I mean, was just down to the corner going north, going down  to the main road that went across there. I walked from there and across  the bridge and up to the high school. I don   t know. About how far is  that, honey?  Probably two miles.  I walked to school in the cold winter. It was, oh,    29. It was the coldest  we   ve ever had, since, they   ve said. This was in    29, and I walked to  high school. It snowed a deep snow that went way up under my dress.  We wore dresses. We never wore trousers like we do now. My  stockings, Cap never   my mother bought me, in a catalog, enough  material to make me a dress one time and that   s all. He never did buy me  anything, you know. She was afraid to, because he resented her children,  me, taking away from his children. My legs never froze because I had  the same stockings that I had coming from the home two years earlier. I  had doubled the toes when the heels went out. We learned to darn our  own socks, when we got a hole rubbed into them, you know? But I  didn   t have any darning cotton and I didn   t dare ask for anything. So I  just doubled my hose under, until my socks were right here. (Gestures  just above the knee) I had some inner tube garters. I guess it was from a  bicycle   Momma made me some garters to hold them up there. When I  stepped out for a car to go by, it was clear up to here because I   m short. I  have short legs.  I was so cold one day in    29, it was the coldest we ever had. I was wet,  my shoes were soaking wet and my socks. By the time I got to the  school, I was nearly frozen. I stopped at the steel mill that had just  opened. I stopped there. I wanted to get warm and I just couldn   t go on. I  17  had to go on because my socks were wet and my shoes were wet, but I  had to go on to school. I couldn   t stay there. I took my socks off and  tried to hold them up there to dry them, but that just warmed them. I had  to put them back on and go on to school. By the time I walked back  home, Cap had a car, but he always went to work early in the morning.  He worked for an oil company for somebody. He was a water   the man  that kept the water flowing or something for the oil wells. I don   t  understand it. He was a water man for some oil company. Anyway, he  wouldn   t have taken me to school. There was no bus to take you to  school. There was a bus that would take the children that were at the  elementary, before they go to the ninth grade. They took them there  from the country, but there was no bus that took kids that walked to  school to go to high school. So most of them just quit in the eighth  grade.  I went on and walked all that way. By the time I had walked back home,  I was so sick. I was so sick, I had pneumonia. My mother told me to go  to bed and she got campho and put it on my chest trying to doctor me.  When Cap came home, she had supper ready, and I didn   t come to the  table. I didn   t want to eat. I was too sick. My mother brought me  something to the bed for me to eat. He said,    Let her come to the table.  If she can   t come to the table, let her die. God damn her.    So my mother,  then, had to start sneaking me something to eat before he came home at  five o   clock. She nursed me back to health and everything.  When I ran away from the home, though, I forgot to tell you this part.  Mr. Page, they missed me that night. They told Mr. Page that I had run  away from the home and he sent his detective out. He knew where I   d  go. I don   t know how he knew everything, but he knew everything, it  seemed like. So he sent him out there. His name was Max, that came to  get me. I said,    I don   t want to go. I don   t want to go.    He said,    Well,  honey, you have to go. You have to go. Daddy Page has sent for you.    I  said,    Let me go see him.    I was going to tell him that my heart was  broken and everything. So he called him and said,    She doesn   t want to  go back.    He said,    Well, let her spend the night with her mother and go  get her tomorrow evening.    He said,    Okay.    So the next day he came  and got me. That day, I went up to the school, the day he let me, before  school was out. I was feeling good because I was going to have a  momma and a papa. So I went up to the school. I liked it there, and I was  the new girl and they were all crowding around me and everything. My  sister Lois was in school already. She was proud of me, you know, and I  was proud of her. I thought,    Well, I like this, having a father and  mother. I think I   ll stay here.    He said,    If she doesn   t want to come  back, she won   t have to.     I went to see him the next day, then, that next evening. He put his arm  18  around me and said,    I   m sorry that you   re not happy.    I started crying  and I couldn   t talk. I couldn   t tell him anything. All I did was just keep  (weeping noise). You know how it is. I don   t cry pretty. Some people  can cry pretty but I don   t. I just kept crying until finally he said,    Well,  honey, you go spend a few weeks with your mother, and if you want to  come back, you can come back.    So they took me on back to my  mother   s. It wasn   t three weeks until I sensed that I wasn   t going to be  wanted by Cap. I got lonesome for the girls, but I didn   t go back. I loved  being with my mother. She was such a sweet and wonderful woman. She  was one of these kind of women who never quarrels. She never would  say anything back when Cap would say awful things to her. She was just  very sweet. Everybody loved her, even the girls    husbands. Everybody  loved her, she was just so sweet. I liked being with her.  It came to the time that   I got well, and I went on and went to school. I  didn   t have any money to buy the books. The teacher loaned me the  books, but I knew they were getting tired of me borrowing their book  because I couldn   t get any books to study. I had too much pride to go  back to the home to ask if they would give me books. They would have  helped me any way they could, but I had too much pride to go back. So I  didn   t ask them. It became so difficult for me to go to school there. But I  saw Mr. Breeding one day and I said,    I would like to       I didn   t tell  him I couldn   t buy any of my books. I just said,    Does the home own the  business       they had a business study, what do you call it? Anyway, I  said,    Does the home own that?    and he said,    Yes, it does.    He said,     Do you   ?    I said,    I can   t afford to go to high school. Can I go to the  business school so I can get me a good job?    He said,    Well, yes,    and I  wouldn   t have to pay. So he bought me my books, but I didn   t think to  tell him I needed paper. So I didn   t want to go back. I never did run into  him anymore. I forgot something about that   that was later, that that all  happened.  When I was sick, Momma got me well and I was able to get up and  come to the table and eat. I said,    When Cap gets the groceries       He  would go get the groceries. She stayed home with the kids. So when he  got the groceries, they often had dried fruit that he would buy. He never  bought fresh fruit, but he   d buy dried fruit. Momma would make fruit  pies and everything, you know. I said,    Momma, I   m hungry for some  apricots. Would you have him to get some? Don   t let him know that I  asked you to get some apricots.    She put it on the list. So he got the  apricots and that night, all I wanted was apricots. I didn   t want anything  to eat. I didn   t have any taste, but I hungered for something kind of sour  and sweet.  So when I got to the table, the dining room   my bed, the extra bed was  in the dining room. Then there was the big round table, and then was a  19  stove, that was an oil burner, over here. It was against the wall and the  table. My stepfather sat on that side of the stove to eat. His two little  ones sat on that side of the stove to eat where it was warm. Lois and I sat  on the back side and my sister Beulah, when she did come home. She  had been run off and she didn   t come back. Anyway. We sat on lard  cans because we didn   t have enough chairs to go around the table. They  bought their lard in those big lard cans. Farmers used to do that. They  made nice chairs. So we sat on the other side on the lard cans and my  mother sat between Cap and us.  Momma moved Virginia. She was a little rascal   moved Virginia over a  little and let me sit next to the fire because I had just gotten out of bed  from being sick. That didn   t sit well with Virginia. She wouldn   t sit on  the can. She stood up next to me. She was mad. So she started picking  apricots out of my plate and eating them. I said,    Momma, Virginia is  putting her       I was sixteen by then and you know how picky you are  when you   re sixteen. I said,    She   s putting her dirty fingers in my plate  and grabbing the apricots out of it.    She said,    Virginia, you stop that.     So Virginia spit my plate. I said,    Oh, Momma, she spit in my plate.     Cap jumped up and he started to hit me from across the stove, and my  mother jumped up and said,    Opal, you and Lois get your coats on. I   ve  suffered over my children enough. I just can   t take it anymore.    She  said,    Don   t you touch her,    to him.  We got our coats on and here it was. I just got out of bed with  pneumonia, and she took pneumonia every year because he never fixed a  thing on the place, there were cracks on the windows. She   d stuff a  pillow in the window. It had an upstairs but they never did finish  building the house on the inside. It had an upstairs that had just the     well, you could almost see through it. It was just the paneling, so far up.  We could hear the rats running at night up above the stairs. Anyway, my  mother had tacked a quilt up there. My mother was someone   she could  draw anything. I got my talent from her. She could draw anything. She  could make quilts. She took his old work pants and made quilts so heavy  you could hardly stand them. The best parts of his old pants and things.  She nailed a quilt up there to keep some of the wind out.  Anyhow, she said,    Get your coats. We   re going to Gertrude   s.    That  was my oldest sister that lived in Sand Springs. The Depression was on,  you know. She was living in a two-room house because her husband was  a violinist and he didn   t have but one customer. They were living in his  mother   s house. They had two babies, two little boys. She couldn   t take  care of us, but we went to her house. We started out to her house. We  got about half a mile from her house when one of the neighbors came by  and saw us. We stepped out of the ruts to let it go by and he stopped and  asked where we were going. She told him she was going to Sand Springs  20  to her daughter   s house. So he gave us a ride. Otherwise, we would have  all probably died with pneumonia because that was such a bitter, bitter  cold winter. She took pneumonia easy, and I had just gotten over it. So I  feel thankful. I think the Lord intervened. She took me to my sister   s  house, then. She spent the night and she got to worrying about her two  babies she left at home. He had to go to work, so she was worried about  the two little ones. She called him the next day to come and get her and  she went back home.  After that, there was a time, one time, I was married and everything was  all right. I got work through the school. I don   t know why I was so  driven to keep going to school, but I was. I was just driven. It was  different things. I was used to being around a lot of people. I liked  people. I was lonesome without them. Besides, something drove me to  want to get an education. So the teachers would find you. People would  call the school sometimes and they   d find out if there is any kids who  want to work. I worked for nothing   for a roof over my head and my  keep, my board   room and board. I went to school and one of them  gave me fifty cents a week and that kept me enough so that I could pay  my bus fare, and I think we could ride for ten cents on the bus to school.  I took care of her two children and another one. I put them to bed, I gave  them their bath, I did all those things, you know. I helped her in the  kitchen. I didn   t do any cooking. They always did the cooking. I just  washed the dishes. I would become unhappy, or if I got sick, I   d go back  out to the farm and Cap was there. He   d didn   t run me off. I   d go back  out there and stay maybe until I got well. Then I   d go find another job in  another place and I   d go to school.  I missed a lot and fell in the cracks, you see. Like I use too many  commas because during the time they were telling, I never did  understand why you don   t put a comma  after a pause . When I was  growing up, we put a comma after every time there is a pause in the  sentence. I wanted to do that, and that was one thing. I evidently got into  the business of writing, and I got too many commas. So anyway, I did  get through the ninth grade and I believe I was in the eleventh grade  when I got married. I got married instead of going on. But then I went  back when my daughter was in school, taking typing. I started getting  the yen to write poetry.  I had every kind of   in the    30s   every kind of ailment it seemed like  there was to have. I had bursitis so bad. That just hurt. I had hay fever. I  was allergic to everything. I took a test with all those needles in your  back, you know. It looked like everything made me sneeze or cough. I  had blisters on my nose. At the same time, I was teaching a Sunday  school class of children. I love children. I was teaching a youth class in  the evening. My husband wouldn   t let me work. He had been married  21  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  P. Moss  Finchum  Moss  once before and his wife told him that after they got the divorce, how  many times she had been going with an insurance man and this and that.  So he wouldn   t let me work. He didn   t trust it anymore. He didn   t trust  women anymore. If I even took a course    if I read in the paper  somebody was going to give a course in art or something, I would sign  up for it and he would come down there sometimes to be sure I was  there. He finally found out that I was happy. I just wanted to learn. I just  wanted to learn all I could. I had a yearning to write books. So in    61   I  took twenty-five years to finish that book because I was not satisfied that  it was the best I could do. I   m a perfectionist.  What was the title of your book?  A Fool   s Enterprise: The Life of Charles Page. One of those articles will  give you my   Paul, show him that article:    What I found I can do  because I tried.     Oh, yeah.  It   s a short article.    What I found out because I tried.    I was trying to be  a writer and there was a woman that had a class. She said,    You all have  to write an article.    I said,    I can   t write articles.    I   d never written one.  So this is what I wrote. I couldn   t write an article, but I tried. I told her  different things I had done because I tried, that I thought I couldn   t do. I  thought I couldn   t write this book. I had this complex that I didn   t think I  was worth much. So I didn   t think I could do very much, anything,  worthwhile. But I tried. So I wrote the article. I wish he had been  reading it out loud.  That   s okay, I   d rather you recite one of your poems that you wrote. Do  you have one of those memorized?  She has all of them memorized. (Laughter)  A favorite one?  One of them that I won a lot of awards on, I haven   t sent the others out,  but I went to college   I still wanted to write when I got married. When  my husband passed away, I said,    I   m, going to go to college,    because I  belonged to a writer   s club. I just loved being with other writers. I joined  the club and one of the writer   s names was Susan Jarvis. She   s married  now, Susan King. We would give to the crowd of writers   we   d take  turns about reading what we had written for critique purposes. So she  said,    You people who spend your money taking these two-week  courses, you only get at the very most two weeks. They   re never more  than that. You pay as much as you pay to go get a term in college,    and  22  P. Moss  Moss  P. Moss  Moss  Bishop  Moss  said,    and you get sixteen weeks. How about that?    I said,    Well, how  about that.    I enrolled and I just thoroughly enjoyed it because I was  there with a bunch of writers and they were great writers. There are  some awfully great writers in this world. I made straight A   s, only they  called it a four. Is that the highest grade in college?  Four-point-o.  Well, whatever it was, one day they sent a reporter to the school because  they started letting senior citizens go free. You didn   t get any credits, but  I didn   t care about credits. I just wanted to learn. Anyway, the man that  was over this said that some people   there were one or two people that  had come to class just because they wanted to hear everybody   s stories.  They got a kick out of   it was a hobby for them to go hear us working  on our stories. They didn   t want to write. They got to go free because  they were older. He said,    We   ve got to get rid of them. They   ve got to  make a grade to show they   re really writing.    We had to look at our  grades. The teacher showed me mine and it was a four. I said,    I just  made four points?    And she said,    Honey, four is the same as an A.    She  said,    We grade you different, now.    He ran across a certificate that I  got for being on the president   s  honor roll     What is it?  Honor list.  I had some certificates that I had won on poetry and stuff. One of them  said I was on the president   s honor roll for having straight A   s. I mean,  straight whatever. I don   t know and I don   t care about what it was.  Do you have a favorite poem that you know by heart?  Oh, I know a lot of them. Maybe you   d like a little short one.  I took my paints and brush in hand  To paint a scene of sea and sand  Mesmerized by the rumbling sound  I laid my paints and brushes down  My easel served as shade that day  As my thoughts wandered far away  The sea, the sea, the restless sea  The waves come in and cover me  You throw strange shells upon the shore  To make me fantasize some more  I did not know an artist   s hand  Had sketched me sprawled upon the sand  With easel shading me  And capturing the seductive sea  23  Finchum  Bishop  Moss  Bishop  Moss  That   s very good.  So Opal, what is your secret to longevity? Do you have a secret?  I never did even think of dying, so I don   t know. I just went on doing  everything. I wasn   t worrying about dying. I   m ready to go if I had to  go. I   m still restless because I can   t finish the books I   ve got started. I  can turn the font up so I can read what they put out there, and I know the  keyboard, but I can   t see the  toolbar . I wish they would make a strip of  some kind to magnify the top so people could see that, too, or make it  enlarged because you   ve got to use those things to compose   to erase  things, if you want to put a square around your work   all of those  things, and to change the fonts and so forth. So that makes it so difficult.  I would have to get a little magnifying glass.  Do you have a motto you live by?  Do I have a motto? I have a motto. The motto I grew up with is,    Think  right.    Mr. Page adopted that as his motto when he was a boy. His  mother was always telling him,    Keep your thinking right.    When he  was a little boy and his father died and left her with eight children to  support, he was cutting wood for other people and for himself and for  the stove. I stood at his knee and he told me this: He said,    Opal, when I  was a boy, I cut wood for the family. I was the biggest boy in the  family.    He wasn   t the oldest but he was the largest. He was big like his  father   s people. He was a big man   he stood 6   3   . He wasn   t fat, he was  just big. He said,    I was the biggest of the boys and I wanted myself to  make the living for the family. I told Ma that I was going to drive the  freight wagon that Dad had driven and take the goods from the boats to  the Stevens Point  Wisconsin  stores,    because they needed the money.  It was sad that the railroad, the Northern Pacific, was being built to run  through Stevens Point. It took his job away from him because it started  coming by train.  Anyhow, he told her,    It   s not right for people       He was eleven when  his father died and that was when he said this to her. He saw her  washing other people   s clothes and her tears were falling into the tub.  She missed her husband, of course, and was sad things turned out like  they had. She didn   t know what to do. So he tried to help her every way  he could. His children   I lived in Sand Springs, and he had his  relatives   gave them all jobs or something if they   d come there. I got to  talk to them. They told me a lot of things. His wife was living and his  daughter was living. Then, Mr. Breeding, who was with him from the  beginning of the project that they called,    A Fool   s Enterprise.    He was  there to tell me, and he had a memory like a Mead filing cabinet. He  24  Bishop  Moss  Bishop  Moss  Finchum  Moss  Finchum  could just pull it out of there. So I had all the help I could ever have  asked for.  You wrote a book on the history of the man, but what I want to  know   when history is written about you, what do you want it to say?  Oh, you asked me a question, what was my motto? I guess I already  answered that, it was    Think right,    but I wanted to tell you   when I put  that in the book that that was his motto, the town adopted it and they  gave the school kids a bracelet saying,    Think right.    He taught us,    If  you keep your thinking right, you   re going to do all right.     When someone comes back years from now and says,    I want to know  about Opal Bennefield Clark Moss.    What do you want history to say  about you?  That I was an author, that I was a writer, and that I wrote good stuff. I  didn   t write any old filthy stuff. I couldn   t stand it when people would  use that awful filthy language   they think that   s what sells. That is what  spoils your    I would say,    I cannot believe a person as nice looking, as  educated, as wonderful as you are   I can   t fathom you wanting to dirty  up your image by writing that filthy stuff. I don   t understand that.    I  said,    Who gets any benefit from it?    They said,    Well, that   s what sells.  I want a book in print.    I said,    Is it worth your name? Your own  image?    I don   t know. I   ve just been me. I just believe you ought to pass  something along that does somebody some good. Not something that is  going to sell a book.  I had a brother-in-law who wanted my daughter to say things to me  because they knew I was such an old maid, they called me when I was  married because I had so many principles that I   d preach. This brother-in-  law would tell my little daughter, like they did my sister-in-law   she  regretted that all her life because she was the one who ran me off from  my mother the second time. It was because my mother couldn   t keep me  when she spit in my plate and he liked to have broken my nose.  Well, I think we   re done for the day, don   t you?  Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing your story.  -------  ------- 
