 Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Today is August 19, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop. We   re in Tecumseh, Oklahoma to speak with Frank Macarty,  and this is regarding our One Hundred Year Life project. So thank you  for having us today.  Thank you for having us today.  Oh yes, come any time. If Cathy can put up with you, I can. (Laughter)  Well, let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  When were you born? When were you born? Your birthday.  Oh, twenty-third of September.  And what year?  What year? 1908.  Yeah, 1908.  And where?  Well, it   s Choctaw now. It used to be Harrah. They   ve changed things  around a little bit there at home, but it   s still the same place.  What did you parents do for a living?  What did your parents do for a living?  They were farmers, a happy life. They worked hard, enjoyed, and of  5  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  course they fought for everything they had. They worked hard for the  stuff that they did have. I think that   s the reason maybe that they were  happy. They had to work for what they had.  What did they farm?  What did they do on the farm?  They raised corn, alfalfa hay, and they did just about everything a farmer  would do. Hard-working people, and appreciated, were thankful for  what they did accomplish. They were great people. Treated us kids  good.  How many kids were there?  How many kids were there?  I had two brothers and a sister.  And did you have chores? Chores?  Chores?  Yeah. What were your chores?  That   s all we knew was chores. (Laughter) We worked in the field until  dark, and did the chores after we got back with lanterns, kerosene  lanterns. Gave about as much light as a candle, but we didn   t know any  better so we was happy.  Do you remember elementary school? What do you remember?  What do you remember in elementary school, grade school?  What do I remember about it?  Yes. You used to tell me how   what school you went to when you first  started school.  Oh yeah, yeah. My school teacher, first school teacher, lived about   oh,  about three miles from school. She drove an old horse and buggy there  to that school. Kept the horse up until the evening, and then she went  home. She was a very good teacher. She taught us kids a lot of things. A  lot of things she didn   t teach us I guess, but we appreciated it anyway.  What was the name of the school?  6  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  What was the name of that school?  Home Valley.  I knew it was Valley something.  Yeah, little one school   one-room school. This one teacher taught all  the grades. I   m sure she put up with a lot of stuff. (Laughs)  Well, how would you get there? How would you get there?  Well, we rode a horse to school, an old farm horse that Dad used during  the day. Then in the evenings we   d get her hitched up to the wagon and  do whatever we were supposed to do. All our transportation was by  wagon or a buggy. I don   t know whether you know what a buggy is or  not, but anyway, we was happy, and the old horse seemed to be happy.  Always anxious to get home, get a good feed, but we had a happy life  even though it was common. I guess not very exciting or anything?  (Laughs) But we had a good life.  Did your horse have a name?  Oh, Prince was the horse. We kept him up in a stable in the barn, so he  could pull the old car around to get it started, but he was a good horse.  He never failed to pull the old car around down through the bushes and  all that.  What would you do for fun?  Batted tin cans around, mostly. Once in a while we   d have, they had a  school literary they called it then. Everybody would bring some cakes  and pies and so on, and us kids would have a big feast. They called it a  literary at that time, but they had quite a bit of entertainment that way.  They   d have pie suppers. You know what a pie supper is don   t you?  No, tell me.  It   s where everybody brought a pie and they auctioned it off, and you ate  with whoever you bought their pie from. We really enjoyed everybody,  you know, mingled with one another, tell big stories, and whether they  were true or not I don   t know. But anyway, we had a lot of fun when I  was growing up. We visited one another quite a bit with the old wagon,  team and wagon, one place to another. We didn   t know any better, so we  thought we   d had a lot of fun. We   d go to town, which was about   oh,  two and a half hours from home. Mother and Dad would ride in the old  7  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  spring seat. You don   t know what that is, but     Probably bounce?  Yeah, us kids would ride in the back end of the old wagon. Usually it  had some cotton in it, or hay or something like that. We   d fight.  Fight?  Yeah. (Laughs) We didn   t call it fighting, but we enjoyed one another.  As I remember, it was a great life growing up with my brothers, my  sister.  Were you the baby?  I was the baby boy.  Baby boy.  I had a sister that was younger than I, but I was the baby boy. My two  brothers were older. They called me    Tiny    most of the time. Anything  had happened that was undesirable, Tiny was the one that did it.  (Laughter)  And did your parents know better?  Huh?  Did your parents know better?  We didn   t have them fooled very much. (Laughter) They could read our  minds, I think, pretty well. We didn   t know that they could identify  some things, but they   we   d work hard in the field during the day, do  chores after dark.  And what about bath time? Bath time?  How did you all take baths? Was it in a big old tub or what?  Oh, a bath?  Yeah.  Yes, it was a number three tub. We had a, what   s it called, a cook stove  that was the one that Mother cooked on, so we   d open that oven door for  heat while we was taking a bath. We made the bath pretty much in an  8  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  old three tub. I think we all took the same bath in the same water.  (Laughs)  Can you imagine? (Laughs)  We didn   t know any better, so     And how often?  Huh?  How often?  Once a week at least.  And how would she do her laundry? Laundry?  My dad and us boys did it on the old rub board, our overalls and things  like that. Mother had a   she done the ironing. The ironing board was in  one room, and the   she had those old three irons over the heat while she  was ironing, and she   d go back and get her another iron and do some  more ironing. I think they ironed everything that they had. I think even  the socks maybe they ironed. Mother was very particular about her  ironing. We didn   t know much better so everything seemed just right.  Well, where did you go to high school?  At Harrah, Oklahoma. We had some good teachers, and they taught by  example more than anything else. An old teacher of mine, Mr. Ferguson,  he was an old man, he would teach us kids a lot of stuff. Every year we  had a place where they went for tournaments and things. They   d tell us  how we were supposed to act. Of course, we didn   t know any better than  to act out like we were supposed to, but they taught a whole lot more by  example than they did by teaching, you know.  Did you ever get paddled?  I got hit on the wrist several times with a ruler, but I never did get a  whipping. (Laughs)  What year did you graduate?  What year was it I graduated?  Well, I   m not for sure. Was it 1926? You would have been eighteen.  9  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Bishop  Yeah, I guess it must have been that year, yeah.  What did you do after you graduated?  I went to work for Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company. Worked for  them for forty years. Retired in    73. I   ve enjoyed every minute of it  since. (Laughs)  Well, were you in the military?  About two years overseas, European theater. We went over to   I went  overseas on the Queen Elizabeth. They converted it into a troop ship and  it was about eight days of going overseas, I believe. There wasn   t any  hurry to get us back home. I think we was about sixteen days of getting  back home.  Did you see combat?  I don   t know whether you call it combat or not, but I was   my title was  an engineer, but I wasn   t an engineer. They classed me as that. We  assembled and disassembled pontoon bridges to cross creeks and lakes  and things of that nature.  Ask him if he got shot at when he was doing that.  Yeah, I was so glad that I got home all in one piece. My company, the  Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company, they kept my job for me while I  was gone. When I came back, I didn   t have to worry about, you know,  going out and looking for work and stuff.  Did you get shot at while you were over there?  Oh, we got struck at a few times, but there wasn   t a direct hit on any of  us, that I was with.  Did you ever cross paths with Patton? General Patton?  Yeah, General Patton, he was the head of the Army. He was quite a  character. (Laughs) He was just one of the boys.  Were you married before you went or after?  I was married before I went to the service, yeah.  What about the Great Depression?  10  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Sanders  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Do you have any memories of the Great Depression?  Oh yes, I remember it very distinctly. We didn   t, or I didn   t anyway,  really experience the Great Depression because everybody else was the  same way. Nobody had anything. We thought we had it good, but I  guess it wasn   t too good. We didn   t experience having, you know, a lot,  but we didn   t have anything before we went in. We didn   t have anything  when it was over.  But you worked through it? You had a job during that time?  Well, like I say, I worked for OG E for forty years. That pretty well,  took care of that part. Company was very good to me and kept my job  while I was gone to the Army, and always treated me real nice. We had,  we didn   t have a lot of   they didn   t furnish us a whole lot, but we had a  lot of side benefits like vacation. If we had to be off, they   d let us off.  When my dad died out in California, they allowed me to go out there,  paid me while I was gone.  California? What took him to California? Why did your dad go to  California?  Well, he was a   we called him a pipefitter. Of course he farmed all his  life, and he went out there. He liked that because he   d get paid every,  instead of once a year, he   d get paid once a month. He was, like I say, a  pipefitter. He liked that kind of work. He liked that payday every two  weeks, three weeks.  Sure. Well, did you ever think you would live to 100?  Me?  Yes.  No, I didn   t know any reason why I should, (laughs) but I   ve appreciated  it, that I know.  Sure.  I   ll be 106 before very long.  And what   s your secret? (Laughs) He   s not telling.  I don   t guess I   ve had any secret. I just live, try to live for the Lord every  day, and he   s treated me so good. Had a lot of benefits that other people  didn   t have.  11  Bishop  Sanders  Macarty  Bishop  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Bishop  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Do you have a philosophy or a motto you live by?  Do you have a motto that you live by?  No, I try to live like I   d like other people to live, like me. Never had any  fights or anything like that. I wasn   t the adventurous type of guy and  tried to stay out of trouble. Of course, my parents were always, you  know, on my side regardless of whether I was good or bad.  How important was church when you were growing up?  How important was church while you were growing up?  We went to church all the time. We didn   t know what it was to stay  home from church. We   d just team and wagon most of the time, about  two and a quarter miles, something like that. We   d drive the old team  and wagon; tied them up while church was going on. Get home we   d  have to feed them, unharness them and all that stuff, but we never knew  was it was to miss church.  And what would your mother fix for Sunday dinner?  Usually fried chicken. That   s about all we had, was chicken.  Was it good?  Yeah, we   d usually buy about 100 baby chicks and raise them. The  pullets we called them, the mother   chickens, we   d keep them and  usually fry the roosters.  I   ve never heard that.  Whose job was it to kill the chicken?  Dad always did. He killed the chicken, and picked it, and singed it. You  know what that means.  Doesn   t smell too good.  Take an old newspaper and put it on top of the wood stove and singe the  hair off of the chicken. He   d always cut up the chicken, Dad would.  Mother would do the frying.  Did your mother sew? Make clothes?  12  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Finchum  Macarty  Bishop  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Yeah, she made I don   t know how many quilts. She kept a quilt in the  frames, wooden frames, all the time over the table. When we ate she   d  pull that old quilt up over the table.  What do you remember about your first car?  First car?  Yes, your first car.  I didn   t think there was such a thing as a car. We had an old   first car  we had was a Regal, and we had to keep this old horse up to pull it to  start the old Regal. You   d finally get it started, and we   d drive it to town.  We   d park up at the top of the hill there in town, and push it down the  hill to get it started.  Well, when you worked for OG E what was your job?  I was   oh, in a storage department then. They kept   oh, parts for every  part of the power plants. They had different power plants different  places. We kept parts there. It was to ship things from where I was, in  the general store and all out to the power plants. Whatever they needed.  And you retired in    73?  Yes.  Then what did you do?  Nothing. (Laughter)  But you did a lot of   a lot of nothing.  And what do you do today?  Same thing. (Laughter)  What   s a typical day like for you? What is a typical day like for you  today?  How early do you get up today? What time did you get up this morning?  You don   t even look at the clock. (Laughs)  I haven   t hardly got up yet. (Laughter)  13  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Bishop  Sanders  Bishop  Finchum  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  About nine thirty.  Yeah, about nine thirty.  Yes, and then we eat, do exercises, go take a nap, eat again, take a nap.  (Laughs)  And when would go to bed? What time do you go to bed?  Well, when I was on the farm we went to bed at, we used to say we went  to bed with the chickens and got up with the chickens. But spent most of  our time out of bed it seemed like. Had to get up and do the chores.  Listen to radio any? The radio?  Oh yes, had to have the old batteries charged and so on, and we thought  the radio was a wonderful piece of machinery. We   d meet down at the  drugstore there in Harrah looking to watch that old, old     Did you do much dancing?  Did you do much dancing?  Oh, no     He was a Baptist.  My parents were Baptist and they didn   t believe in dancing, so we  didn   t. I never did learn to dance. (Laughs)  How did he meet his wife? I think that would be a     Which one?  Yeah, he was married twice.  Tell us about your wife. How did you meet your wife?  How did you meet your first wife?  Oh, my first wife I met, they had a restaurant and rooming house and I  met her. She was, you know, was in the home there. That   s where I met  her first.  What about your second wife, where did you meet Billie?  14  Macarty  Sanders  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Bishop  Sanders  Macarty  Bishop  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  I met her at my friend   s house. She was a prince. She always treated me  good, and she was a wonderful wife.  There   s a lot more to that story.  And how many children do you have? Children?  I had two children, two boys     And? (Laughs) And?  And Cathy.  And Carol.  Yeah, Carol.  You can see the whole order of kids (Laughs), and Tommy.  Yeah.  That   s your stepson.  Yeah, I never did adopt Tommy. I adopted the girl, but     Tommy was older.  And were you a good father?  Were you a good father?  I guess I   ll let someone else answer that. (Laughter)  You were probably a busy father.  Kind of busy? You were busy. With that many children, you were busy.  I think so.  Well, did you travel much? Did you travel?  I   ve done all my travelling in the service. I was all over Europe, but I  was ready to settle down when I got home.  Did you volunteer or were you drafted? Did you volunteer for the  military or were you drafted?  15  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Bishop  Finchum  Sanders  Finchum  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Drafted.  Drafted.  I wasn   t looking for trouble. (Laughs)  And why did you pick the Army?  Well, I was really drafted, I didn   t volunteer.  They picked for you then. And you came back by boat? You came back  from the war by boat?  Yeah.  By ship. Then how did you get back to Oklahoma?  Well, I was discharged in Arkansas, and from Arkansas I came back to  Oklahoma where I was before I went in.  On a train or by car?  Well, I came from New York to my discharge in Arkansas. I came back  by train. They had locomotives at that time. (Laughs)  Well I want to know when history is written, what would you like it to  say about you?  How do you want to be remembered?  How do you want to be remembered? Never thought about it, have you  Daddy?  Tough question.  Not as a convict, anyway. (Laughter)  How do you not want to be remembered? (Laughs)  I, you know they   ve got a state penitentiary at McAlister, you know?  Yes.  And I have, oh I don   t know, two or three guards there that are my  cousins   extended. So we liked to go there and I   ll never forget how  16  Sanders  Macarty  Sanders  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  Finchum  Macarty  those old penitentiary   how they   the noise they made when they close  those penitentiary doors. Some of the old boys in there for 100 years and  some for one year and so on and so forth.  What do you think you   ve accomplished?  What have I accomplished?  Yes, what do you think? What do you want people to remember you by?  I don   t feel like I   ve accomplished very much other than worked all my  life. I   d like to be remembered as a   not a loafer. (Laughs) I have  kinfolks that are loafers and gamblers, all that stuff, but I hate to be  remembered in that group. One of my uncles shot and killed his nephew.  Supposed to have been in self-defense, but never did serve any time in  the penitentiary or anything. He claimed it was self-defense and all those  things, but my dad was a different type of guy than the rest of them was.  He always went to church and always respected other people, but I had  this other uncle that was always in trouble. If he wasn   t in trouble he  would make trouble.  It   s been a pretty good life?  Well, nothing to brag about, but I managed to stay out of trouble  anyway.  Well, then I will say thank you for talking with us today. Thank you.  Well, you   re sure welcome. Come back any time you can.  -------  -------   
