 Finchum Today is November the 25, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along  with Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today  we   re in Stuart, Oklahoma, to speak with Mattie Brooks. This is part of  our One Hundred Year Life project, so thank you for having us today.  M. Brooks Thank you.  Finchum Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  M. Brooks I was born in Konowa (Oklahoma), December 9.  Kareen Brooks What year?  M. Brooks In 1911.  Finchum You have a birthday coming up. What did you do for your 100th  birthday?  M. Brooks Well, they gave me a big party. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you ever think you would live to a hundred?  M. Brooks No.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  M. Brooks Farm, mostly. Run the store sometimes, but mostly farm.  Finchum Around here?  M. Brooks In Stuart, around Stuart.  5  Finchum What did they farm?  M. Brooks Just corn, cotton, some foodstuff, and hay.  Finchum Did you have to help?  M. Brooks Well, you know, I didn   t like to hoe that cotton, (laughs) but I did.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  M. Brooks I had two brothers and one sister.  Finchum Were you in the middle?  M. Brooks No, I   m the baby.  Finchum Are you the first one to live to a hundred?  M. Brooks Yes.  Finchum Where did you go to school?  M. Brooks Well, I went to most of my schooling was at White Chimney Country  School, and I went to Stuart for a little bit.  Finchum How far did you get?  M. Brooks Eighth grade.  Finchum At the little school, was it a one-room?  M. Brooks No, we was a two-room school.  Finchum How did you get there?  M. Brooks Walked.  Finchum How far?  M. Brooks About two miles.  Finchum One way?  M. Brooks Yes.  6  Finchum Wow. Even in the snow?  M. Brooks No, we didn   t go if it snowed. They called school out for snow.  Finchum Tell us a little bit about the house you grew up in.  M. Brooks Well, different ones mostly, just a regular farm about   one of them we  just had about four big rooms. When I was born I think we just had two  rooms, and then we finally built our own house with six rooms.  Finchum How was the house heated?  M. Brooks Wood, mostly. One year we had coal, and we finally got gas.  Finchum Well, when you were younger, did you have running water?  M. Brooks No, well, part of the time I did. We didn   t for when I was growing up.  Well, we first had, they dug a cistern, my daddy did, and then we  moved to another place that had a cistern and he drilled a well and so  we   d have plenty of water.  Finchum Had to pump?  M. Brooks No, got it with a rope.  Finchum Oh, with a bucket.  M. Brooks Drawed it up out of the well with our rope, and a bucket, with our  hands.  Finchum And how would you do bath time?  M. Brooks Had to have a bath in a washtub. But we finally got running water out in  the country and electric lights, electricity. While I was growing up, we  didn   t. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you remember your first electricity?  M. Brooks Yes.  Finchum Do you?  M. Brooks Yeah.  Finchum What was the first thing your mother did?  7  M. Brooks Well, my mother wasn   t living by the time we got electricity out here in  the country. And after we married, we lived out in California part of  time and of course, we lived in town and had all of the utilities.  Finchum So when did you move to California?  M. Brooks In    what year did we move?  K. Brooks I think you said    32. LeRoy was about four. Is that right?  M. Brooks I think so.  K. Brooks So about 1932.  M. Brooks I   m not sure. I forget, half I never knew. (Laughs)  Finchum Around the Depression time, during the Depression.  M. Brooks Well, it was kind of hard, but we made it. (Laughs)  Finchum How did your parents make it?  M. Brooks Well, parents died, my mother   what year did she die? Anyway, and  my father     K. Brooks When you went to California, were they still living?  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks Yeah? What did they do during the Depression when you were in  California?  M. Brooks What did we do?  K. Brooks No, Momma and Papa.  M. Brooks They lived back here, Momma and Papa lived back here on the farm  and they both got old enough to draw a pension.  Finchum So how did you meet your husband?  M. Brooks Well, we went to school together, some. The first I met him, his daddy  was a preacher and he   d come down there by us to Stuart to hold a  meeting and I got acquainted with him. His family come with him when  he   d come to preach, and I met him then and we went to school  together.  8  Finchum And got married when?  M. Brooks Too early, when I was sixteen.  Finchum So 1927?  K. Brooks Actually early    28.  M. Brooks Too young, but we made it. (Laughs)  Finchum And how many children?  M. Brooks Two.  Finchum Boy and a girl?  M. Brooks Boy and a girl. They   re both gone.  Finchum Well, did you work?  M. Brooks I didn   t work. Oh, I cut grapes. (Laughter)  K. Brooks In California.  M. Brooks My husband was a carpenter but when we was in California, I cut  grapes.  Bishop What part of California did you move to?  K. Brooks What part of California?  M. Brooks San Bernardino (California).  Bishop San Bernardino.  K. Brooks Tell her how much you got paid for cutting grapes and about your coat.  M. Brooks We had a big square box about this big and about this deep and we got  paid four cents a piece for each filled box. Got four cents out of it and if  you got the quota that they had set for you to get, why, they   d give you  a cent extra. We   d cut grapes and get four cents a box.  K. Brooks And how much was the bonus?  M. Brooks Was two cents.  9  K. Brooks And you cut enough and saved up enough to do what?  M. Brooks And I got enough to get me a coat. (Laughs)  K. Brooks On their bonuses.  Finchum Hard work. Easier than picking cotton?  M. Brooks Yeah. We picked cotton.  Finchum Was the grapes easier than cotton?  M. Brooks I   d rather cut grapes as to pick the cotton. But when we got the grapes  cut, well, then we got the cotton to come on and we got that to get after  the grapes were cut. We   d cut grapes until   we   d get this fellow that  owned this big ranch and we   d have to go to another and when we  couldn   t get no grapes, we   d pick cotton.  Finchum What took you to California to begin with?  M. Brooks San Bernardino.  Finchum No, why did you go?  M. Brooks Because his family went out there. My husband   s family went out there  and they got after him to come out there, so we went.  Finchum How long did you stay?  M. Brooks About four years, I think, wasn   t it? About four years.  K. Brooks Yes.  M. Brooks About four or five years.  Finchum Long enough, huh?  Bishop How did you get there, by car, train?  M. Brooks How?  K. Brooks How did you get out there?  M. Brooks Oh, we took the car. We had a car and we took it out there. But, we  decided that we wanted to come home. (Laughs)  10  Finchum Did they call you an    Okie   ?  M. Brooks Oh yeah, I guess they did. We didn   t care.  K. Brooks Where you lived, in the area where you lived, were there a lot of Okies  out there?  M. Brooks Oh yeah.  K. Brooks A big community of you?  M. Brooks Out in San Bernardino there was lots of them.  K. Brooks Kind of banded together, I guess. That   s what I   ve always heard.  Finchum Was it hard to find work?  M. Brooks Well, no not really. Sometimes it   d get pretty tight.  Finchum Was your husband in World War II?  M. Brooks Huh?  Finchum Did he go to the war?  M. Brooks No.  Finchum He missed that.  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks Who went, your brother Collins.  M. Brooks Collins, my brother, went. He had to go, but my husband didn   t because  he had a family and had two kids.  Finchum So when you came back to Oklahoma what did you do?  M. Brooks Farm.  Finchum Your husband, too?  M. Brooks He was a carpenter. He just had a small crop, but he did carpenter work  whenever he didn   t need to be in the field.  11  Finchum What did you raise?  M. Brooks Cotton, feed, and we raised some peanuts.  Finchum Where would you take that to sell it?  M. Brooks Well, there was a fellow that contracted it and he   d come through the  field.  Finchum Well, when you were younger, did you have chores?  M. Brooks Well, yes and no. Our parents weren   t too strict on us. We knowed we  had to carry in the wood to make a fire in the wintertime and put it on  the porch. Really, we just hadn   t done much chores, except maybe  gather in the eggs and had to keep the yard clean and stuff like that.  Finchum How did your mother do laundry?  M. Brooks With a rubboard, when I was growing up.  Finchum Skin your knuckles.  M. Brooks So we finally got the machine, the washing machines. But Momma  never did, she died before we got them.  Finchum So wash them on the rubboard and the hang them on the line? Would  she kill the chickens or would your father? Who killed the chickens?  M. Brooks Killed chickens? My mother done most of it. My father was a farmer  and he worked in the fields, but now he didn   t do much around the  house. Because I had a sister and two brothers older than me, and we  helped, they helped her doing dishes and stuff like that.  K. Brooks Something that today   s generation might find very unusual and she   s  having trouble with it, with our lifestyle is that they did not eat dinner  until Papa came in from the field.  Finchum So it was dark.  K. Brooks Dark thirty.  M. Brooks Momma had a woodstove and us kids had to   me and my brother just  older than me had to carry the wood in the house for her to cook with,  to see that she had cook wood in the house. My daddy and older brother  would saw it up, chop the trees down and put the stick stove wood out  there that they used. There wasn   t much room, of course that   s about  12  how long the sticks was. And Momma had a box behind the stove  where she put the stick wood, where we put the wood in the box for her  to put in the stove.  Finchum Would it keep you warm through the night?  M. Brooks Well at night, we just had cover. We put enough quilts on our bed to  keep us warm.  Finchum So your mother quilted?  M. Brooks Mm-hmm.  Finchum And did she teach you? Where would she have to get her fabric? Where  would she get her material?  M. Brooks Mostly scraps from where she made our clothes.  Finchum Did she use feed sacks?  M. Brooks For the lining.  Finchum So when you were going to school, did she make your school clothes?  M. Brooks She made our school clothes, she made all of our clothes.  Finchum And how often would you get shoes?  M. Brooks Well, we bought shoes.  Finchum How often?  M. Brooks Just whenever we needed them. We got our high top shoes for  wintertime, slippers in the summertime. We went barefooted at home.  Finchum What were you going to say?  K. Brooks Your mother would send after muslin to make your undergarments,  didn   t she?  M. Brooks She   d buy muslin to make our underclothes.  Finchum Did she have a pattern?  13  M. Brooks No, she just used our   she might   ve had at first. She mostly used our  old clothes to make them a little bit bigger than what our   every time  we got bigger, she   d get a little bigger on the clothes.  Finchum Did she do it by hand or did she have a machine?  M. Brooks She had a machine.  Finchum The pedal, the treadle or whatever they called those.  M. Brooks Treadle. Yeah, she had a paddle machine. We drawed water out of a  well. But first I remember, we just had a cistern when I was just little  and runoff the house and caught the water in it. And then after we left  that place, we had a well.  Finchum Did you have a horse and buggy or wagon, go by a wagon?  M. Brooks Yeah, we had a wagon and a team. Papa had two teams, too, so that the  boys could help him in the fields. He had two mules and two horses.  They rode the horses.  Finchum No tractor?  M. Brooks No, no tractor. My daddy didn   t live long enough to use a tractor. He  never did have a tractor. My brother had a tractor, but my daddy never  had one.  Finchum Well, the team that he used, did they have names?  M. Brooks I forgot their names, but they had names: had two teams. First had all of  his horses and then he finally got some mules to plow.  Finchum Well, with all that work, what did you do for fun?  M. Brooks Did I what?  Finchum What did you do for fun?  M. Brooks Well, everybody seemed to be healthy and happy. We didn   t know no  better and we just     K. Brooks What did y   all play? What did the kids do for fun?  M. Brooks Well, we just played hopscotch and hide-and-seek and what all kids  played.  14  Finchum Did you have a pet?  M. Brooks Cats and dogs. Some of them was kindly bad, they didn   t want us to  play with them and some of them didn   t care.  Bishop What were holidays like in your house?  K. Brooks What were the holidays like?  M. Brooks Momma would cook us an extra dinner for holidays, a holiday dinner.  K. Brooks Fancier?  M. Brooks Yeah, she   d bake us a cake or do a little extra, just like we do now.  (Laughs)  K. Brooks Did you put up a tree?  M. Brooks On Christmas? Yeah, we had a tree.  K. Brooks How did you decorate it?  M. Brooks Well, mostly we painted paper different colors and made a chain out of  it and split it where it   d be about that wide (gestures an inch) and then  we   d paste it and make a chain out of it. And then take that and wrap it  around the tree.  K. Brooks What were your gifts? What kind of gifts did you get?  M. Brooks Well, mostly clothes. We   d get one or two toys. Collins would get   the  boys would get trains and us girls would get dolls. Most were  homemade.  Bishop Did you ever get any fruit?  M. Brooks Fruit? Yeah, we had fruit. Papa planted fruit trees, but when they   d get  bare   we   d have fruit for Christmas, yeah.  K. Brooks What was your favorite?  M. Brooks Apples and oranges, mostly.  K. Brooks She likes fruits. Good.  K. Brooks I   m sorry, Tanya, one things prompts another. How old were you the  first time you remember going to McAlester (Oklahoma)?  15  M. Brooks I was about five years old.  K. Brooks Yeah. And how did y   all go?  M. Brooks We went in the wagon.  K. Brooks Why did you go?  M. Brooks Momma and her brother was going to have their teeth fixed, their teeth  pulled. They didn   t fill them or anything back then. We just used them  until they got to hurting you and then they   d have false teeth, like me.  (Laughs)  K. Brooks So tell them about that trip and about how you went to town and where  you stayed and everything.  M. Brooks Well, we went down in a wagon, and they had a covered wagon. We  went down there in a wagon. They had a wagon yard to put the team  and that in. Then they had a kind of like a hotel, only it wasn   t very big,  where we could sleep. And we stayed down there one night and on the  way home, it started raining and Papa had a wagon sheet over the  wagon. My mother and her brother, they put them back in under this  cover because they had had their teeth pulled and they didn   t want to  get wet and put us kids up in the spring seats of the wagon. So we went  to town in a wagon from Stuart to Holdenville (Oklahoma), I mean to  McAlester.  Finchum How long would that take?  M. Brooks It would take nearly a day.  Finchum To get there?  M. Brooks Yeah.  Finchum Wow.  K. Brooks Now it   s thirty minutes.  Bishop I remember you telling us about your father owned a meat market.  K. Brooks Would you tell Tanya the story about your Papa owning the meat  market and what happened there in Stuart? Y   all were living in town at  that time.  16  M. Brooks Papa decided that he wanted to move to town. And this guy got after  him to put in a meat market at the grocery store, because he   s the only  one that had a   we called it a cooler, but where they put the meat and  put the ice in it. There wasn   t no electricity but there was ice where they  put it in there. And he always stayed open at night until everybody got  ready to   farmers all left and that was about   well he usually closed  about six o   clock.  They had two banks there at McAlester, but he just traded with this one  and put all the money in one bank. And he   d stay open until everybody  got through shopping and then he   d take his money then down, what he  got out of the store, and bank it. And the bank would stay open for I  don   t know, I was just a kid.  But anyway, he stayed open one day and a little bit later than what he  usually did, but the bank still knowed that he hadn   t closed up. And  when he went down there, they stayed open until he banked his money.  They waited on him because they knew he was coming and they stayed  open late, because he was a little late, because he was coming in and got  his money and they didn   t open up. So he lost everything we had.  K. Brooks The next day they didn   t open.  M. Brooks That bank knew when they was staying open, they wasn   t going open,  but they wanted to get his money. So he had to close the store then and  we moved back to the farm.  K. Brooks He lost his business. They knew they weren   t going to open the next  morning. They could   ve said,    Mr. Watkins, hang on to your money.     M. Brooks My daddy had a lot of trouble over that.  K. Brooks A lot of heartache over that.  M. Brooks They got everything because he   d always, he   d buy stock and then sell  it and then he   d pay for it. And they   d let him do that. He   d had the  stock sold and he couldn   t pay for it   they stayed and got the money  out of stock and then he was going to pay for it the next day but they  didn   t open up. He about lost his mind over it. He sure did worry about  it, because he always paid his debt.  K. Brooks He finally got them paid off though, didn   t he?  M. Brooks I don   t know what he done, but he done some outside work and finally  got it paid for.  17  Finchum Would that have been in the    20s, round in there?  K. Brooks When she was little, about ten, so    21, the early    20s.  Bishop Now, did you ever have any cattle?  M. Brooks Well, not very many. Well, Momma milked two or three cows and sold  the milk. Papa   d take the milk and the butter and eggs to town and go to  the grocery store, and they   d take the eggs and money and he   d buy the  groceries with the eggs and money. That   s the way we got our living,  mostly. And Momma had geese and we   d have chickens and oh yeah,  we had stock.  K. Brooks What did you use the geese for?  M. Brooks She   d pick them, made feather beds.  Bishop A feather bed.  M. Brooks I   ve still got mine. She made me mine and made my sister one. And  I   ve still got mine.  Finchum Wouldn   t it get lumpy?  M. Brooks No, if you could keep them   they would be lumpy if you didn   t smooth  the feathers out, but it wasn   t bad. You could smooth the feathers. She  made me and my sister both a feather bed for when we married, she  give us a feather bed.  Finchum How would she make the cover for it, the     M. Brooks She just got that, they had what they called bed ticking and kind of  like     K. Brooks Almost like canvas, isn   t it?  M. Brooks Canvas, a little heavier than canvas and she picked the geese until she  got enough to make the bed. I don   t know what they called it, a bed.  She made a bed, a pack to put the feathers in. I   d call it a mattress, but  it   s a bed, just put like a big sack and big as a bed.  Finchum Have to be a pretty big needle?  M. Brooks Yeah. It wasn   t very big, because she   d sew it up on the machine. It was  like a flour sack.  18  Finchum And then stuff it.  M. Brooks But it was bigger.  Finchum Did it smell different?  M. Brooks No. She dried the feathers real dry before she put them in there, of  course, and every so often she   d put the bed outside and let it sun in the  sunshine.  Finchum She knew how to do it.  M. Brooks Yeah. I don   t know what my sister done with hers but I   ve still got  mine.  Finchum You sleep on it now?  M. Brooks No. But I   ve still got my bed.  Finchum On very hot days would you sleep outside?  M. Brooks No, we slept on the porch some. Now, I had an aunt and uncle that put  their bed outside, out in the yard. (Laughs) They lived out in the country  and they put it outside of the house where it   d be in the shade in the  afternoon. But Momma and them never used to sleep out, we   d just  raise the windows and sleep. We didn   t have no electricity for no fans  or anything and sometimes it got pretty hot. (Laughs)  Finchum Did Stuart have an ice plant?  M. Brooks Yeah, it   s a bank now. I mean there was a place you could buy ice, but  we didn   t have no ways to keep ice.  Finchum So no ice cream.  M. Brooks Well, we made homemade ice cream. Papa would buy the ice and bring  it home. He   d take a big bunch of cotton sacks and wrap it up in these  cotton sacks, and bring it home, so it wouldn   t melt, and then we   d have  homemade ice cream. Not very often, but we did have it some.  K. Brooks Tell Tanya about the time your dad and the boys went to Stuart and  Collins got an ice cream.  M. Brooks Well, Papa and the boys went to town every Saturday nearly, and my  brother just older than me, he come home one day and he said he had an  ice cream cone and I thought he said comb and I said,    Well, what   d  19  you do with it?    He said he ate it. And I said,    Why didn   t you bring me  some?    He said,    It would all melt and I couldn   t. We had to eat it,    and  I said,    Why didn   t you bring me a comb?    And he said,    Oh, it wasn   t  a comb, it was a cone.    (Laughter)  K. Brooks And he ate it, too. (Laughter) Did you notice Papa and the boys went to  town?  Finchum Did you not get to go to town with them ever?  M. Brooks No, my mom took us girls to town and get her clothes because she made  all of ours. We   d get our shoes and our winter clothes. She   d take us to  town to buy our shoes because we had to fit them. And but we     K. Brooks How often did you go? How often did you and the     M. Brooks We went about twice a year. She went to get our summer clothes and  our winter clothes in, so we just went, the girls and Momma. Well,  Momma never did like to go to town. And Papa, of course, he took the  boys but he didn   t take us girls. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you ever go to a local theater?  M. Brooks We didn   t have no theaters when I was first growing up, but afterwards  we got a little older, we did some.  Bishop Well, what was the first movie you ever saw?  M. Brooks Well, I don   t remember. That   s been too long. (Laughter)  Finchum Was church a very important part of your life?  M. Brooks We didn   t have much church, only in the daytime, because everybody  had a team and most had to go in a wagon, but we went every Sunday.  Finchum Methodist, Baptist, what?  M. Brooks Church of Christ.  K. Brooks Her father-in-law was a Church of Christ preacher. Carl   s dad was a  Church of Christ preacher.  M. Brooks My husband, his daddy preached to us, was how we got acquainted.  Bishop Did he marry you?  20  K. Brooks Did Grandpa Brooks marry you and Carl or did y   all go somewhere  else?  M. Brooks No     K. Brooks Y   all went to Calvin (Oklahoma) and got married, didn   t y   all? I forgot.  Finchum They eloped?  K. Brooks You eloped, didn   t you?  M. Brooks Nope, they knowed we was going.  K. Brooks They knew you were going, okay. I wasn   t sure.  M. Brooks Tried to talk us out of it. I was just sixteen but anyway, we made it.  (Laughs)  Finchum How many years, when he passed?  K. Brooks He passed in    73. He died in    73, Carl did. That   s a lot of years, over  forty.  M. Brooks We was together a long time. The kids were grown.  Bishop What   s a typical day like for you today at a102?  K. Brooks What is your day like today? What do you do every day?  M. Brooks Sit. (Laughs)  K. Brooks Just sits, she can   t    She gets bored to death.  M. Brooks Sit and sleep.  Bishop What time do you get up and what time do you go to bed?  M. Brooks Well, I go to bed anywhere from seven to eight, usually and I get up at  about six and between six and seven mostly every morning.  Bishop Do you have a morning ritual or a bedtime ritual?  M. Brooks Huh?  K. Brooks Do you have something you do every morning when you get up?  21  M. Brooks I don   t do nothing. I don   t do nothing but put my own clothes on.  K. Brooks Well, tell him what we do when we get up.  M. Brooks Eat. No, we don   t eat when we first get up.  K. Brooks Well, I come in and put your hearing aids in.  M. Brooks She puts my hearing aids in and then we drink coffee.  K. Brooks She takes medication. And then after you eat breakfast, you go get  dressed and then sit, yeah. Most everything you say to her she can   t do.  M. Brooks I will try to walk enough to keep enough exercise to keep limbered up.  But anyway, I don   t do nothing. I can   t do nothing, I can   t even pick  up   I can   t straighten my fingers.  Bishop Do you ever get to take care of the great-grandkids or the great-great-grandchildren?  M. Brooks Well, some.  K. Brooks She enjoyed them.  M. Brooks Not very much.  K. Brooks When the little boys were still here, before the boys started to school,  what did you and them do in the living room a lot? You played  basketball a lot.  M. Brooks Well, yeah.  K. Brooks They had the Little Tykes ball goal, and they   ll run, and they call her     Matt-Matt    and they   ll run and take her ball and they   ve got one. And  they   ll say,    Shoot Matt-Matt.    She   ll shoot the basketball and she   ll  say,    It   s your turn.     Bishop Now did you ever have a favorite sport growing up?  K. Brooks Did you have a favorite sport growing up?  M. Brooks Yeah, ball, basketball. I loved to play basketball.  Bishop Did you play it in school?  22  M. Brooks I played it in school. And I didn   t care about baseball. I never could hit  that ball. (Laughs) But I did like to play basketball.  Finchum What would you wear when you played basketball?  M. Brooks We had these suits. We had pants and a shirt at the school, you know, to  play. Only time we wore them was to play ball. It was kind of a  bloomer type. They had rubber and the band and the bloomer type. And  we had our blouse.  Finchum Your mother made it?  M. Brooks Yes.  Finchum Did it have a number on it?  M. Brooks I don   t know if it had a number or not, I don   t remember but anyway,  we did have suits. (Laughs) I called them bloomers because they had  rubber in the leg.  Finchum Otherwise you   d wear a dress to school?  K. Brooks Did you ever wear pants to school?  M. Brooks No, we   d wear dresses to school. But we had our suits that we   d change  after we got to school.  Bishop What was your favorite subject?  M. Brooks Well, I don   t know whether I had a favorite or not. I didn   t care about  any of them. (Laughter) No, I liked school, I enjoyed going to school. I  was lucky enough to get my grades, to bring them up and keep them  going.  K. Brooks Tell them about when it was time for decoration for Memorial Day,  what did you kids have to do? From the White Chimney School to the  White Chimney Cemetery.  M. Brooks A week before decoration, they   d pick one day and they   d have us kids  all to march from the schoolhouse down the road over to the  churchyard. They had tools over there that we used, and we had to clean  the cemetery, us kids from the school did, White Chimney Cemetery.  K. Brooks And when you say    clean the cemetery   , what did you have to do? How  did you clean the cemetery, what all did you have to do?  23  M. Brooks We had to cut all the grass and go up there and mound up every grave,  make a mound on every grave the old fashioned way, you know.  Bishop Why did you make a mound?  M. Brooks I don   t know, because that   s the way they wanted it.  K. Brooks Used to they were mounded up there.  M. Brooks Just like an old grave. I don   t know about in town, they may not round  up. Well they don   t over there anymore.  K. Brooks It   s because they mow, they have to mow. I think you told me one time,     Not one blade of grass.     M. Brooks No sir. Every blade of grass had to be cut for Decoration Day. Us  school kids marched over there and done it.  K. Brooks Teacher took them. And when there was a funeral, the White Chimney  Cemetery had bleachers. Is that what you   d call them, or pews? And  when there was a funeral, it was usually a relative or a friend of a  relative or whatever, and they   d let school out and take them over there  to the funeral.  Brenda Tollett Back to the cemetery, didn   t they take a broom or something and brush  the tombstones.  M. Brooks The people in the country never thought about going and cleaning the  graves then, because they knew the school would.  K. Brooks And you had to take a broom and sweep off the tombstones?  M. Brooks No.  K. Brooks The headstones.  M. Brooks Well, we cleaned them off. I don   t remember if we cleaned them off  with our hands or broom or whatever, I don   t remember, but we  rounded the graves up but then most of the markers was high.  K. Brooks Upright.  Bishop Well, what were funerals like back then?  K. Brooks What were funerals like? Were they long? Were they short?  24  M. Brooks They usually had the funeral there. They   d maybe last an hour, singing  and all and everything. But most of the   well, they weren   t very long.  K. Brooks Who was the first member of your family on the White Chimney  Cemetery board? Was it Jasper?  M. Brooks Uh-huh.  K. Brooks And about what year would that have been?  M. Brooks Well I don   t know. They didn   t have no certain person that was taking  care of them. It was all volunteer work.  K. Brooks Well, when did they make the board? When did they get the cemetery  board?  M. Brooks I don   t remember just when they made it because they had a board up  there on a tree     K. Brooks No, Uncle Jasper was on the board.  M. Brooks Oh, that kind of board.  K. Brooks Yes.  M. Brooks Oh, I don   t remember just when it was. But I was grown before it  ever     K. Brooks Oh, were you? Okay.  M. Brooks     it was just a country   if anybody wanted to help with the cemetery  helped, but I don   t think there was anybody that was required to take  care of it.  K. Brooks It   s a free cemetery.  M. Brooks A community.  K. Brooks But somebody from your family has been on the board since Jasper.  She   s very proud of that fact. My husband   s on the board.  M. Brooks My uncle was. I was still in school when he     K. Brooks Okay, that   s what I thought.  M. Brooks When he was taking over to see that the cemetery was taken care of.  25  K. Brooks And then it was Collins and then it was Jerry Dale and Leroy, or Leroy  then Jerry Dale and now Les. It   s something very important to her.  She   s made generous donations to get a fence put around it. My  husband and the cousin built a fence around it. She doesn   t want those  cows walking on her. (Laughter)  Finchum Were your mother and father from here?  M. Brooks Papa I think was born in Arkansas, and I think Momma was born in  Konawa (Oklahoma). And I don   t know how they met.  K. Brooks You never heard how they met?  Tollett Her Momma was born in Arkansas and her Daddy in Georgia.  K. Brooks In Georgia. They met in Arkansas.  Tollett They met in Arkansas and married in Arkansas and then moved over  here.  M. Brooks She went and looked up the records. (Laughter)  K. Brooks Yeah, she got a cheat sheet over there, Grandma.  M. Brooks She knows more about their growing up than I do. She got their record.  K. Brooks That   s her interest, yes.  Bishop Did your grandparents live with you?  K. Brooks Did your grandma and grandpa ever live with you?  M. Brooks Oh, no. Well, Papa lived with me some, my daddy did.  K. Brooks Didn   t your mother also live with you just before she died? Or did you  go to her house?  M. Brooks I went to her house.  K. Brooks Grandma   s taken care of a lot of people and now she   s really bothers  her for us to have to take care of her. She thinks it   s a burden.  Bishop Now, what was it like being a mother?  26  K. Brooks What was it like being a mother? What was it like raising your kids,  being a mother?  M. Brooks Well, I don   t know. But I think I   ve done a pretty good job. (Laughs)  Tollett She told us about the cookies this morning.  M. Brooks I didn   t have too much trouble with them.  Bishop Do you have any fond memories?  M. Brooks They were raised on a farm.  K. Brooks Do you have any fond memories? What   s some things that you think  about when Leroy and Mildred   what y   all did together?  M. Brooks Several things, I don   t know, I always just tried to do what a mother  should do.  K. Brooks What should a mother do? I   m not sure I got it right. (Laughter)  M. Brooks Just see that they had plenty to eat and wear would be the main thing.  K. Brooks Well, I got that part right.  Finchum Would you make cookies with them?  M. Brooks Oh yeah, they thought they had to have cookies.  Finchum What kind?  M. Brooks Oh, they wanted sugar cookies. (Laughs)  Finchum Not chocolate chip.  M. Brooks No, they wanted sugar cookies. They liked the sugar cookies the best, I  guess. I did bake them some chocolate, but they wasn   t too crazy about  chocolate.  Finchum Did you have a favorite dish that your mother fixed?  M. Brooks Well, I believe what my mother fixed for me, and I liked best more than  anything, was chicken dumplings. She raised her chickens and we   d  have chicken dumplings ever once in a while.  Finchum How would she make her dumpling?  27  M. Brooks Well, she had to make her dough out of water, like a pie dough or  something, because my daddy did not want milk, only in his bread. She  could make bread with milk, but he didn   t want milk in nothing else. He  wouldn   t drink it, and he didn   t want it in anything, hardly, unless it   d  be a custard. (Laughs) As you know, Daddy got what he wanted most of  the time.  K. Brooks That   s the way it works.  M. Brooks If the kids don   t overpower. (Laughs)  Bishop I always thought it was if Momma   s not happy, nobody   s happy.  (Laughter)  M. Brooks But I don   t know that I can say that I had never heard my mother and  daddy have what I call a quarrel.  K. Brooks That   s good.  M. Brooks I never heard them say hard words to one another, either one of them.  K. Brooks That   s a good deal.  Bishop What do you think is the secret to your long life?  K. Brooks What do you think is the secret to your long life?  M. Brooks I don   t know.  K. Brooks She spends a lot of time wondering, I think.  M. Brooks I don   t know.  K. Brooks Do you think you ate extra healthy? Do you think you exercised good?  M. Brooks Well, I know I   ve had a lot of sickness, but I   ve had a lot of health, too.  But anyway, I   ve had some sickness, just different things.  Bishop Were you very sick as a child?  M. Brooks As a child I don   t ever remember being sick. One time, I remember  when I had the measles.  Bishop What about the flu epidemic, do you remember that?  28  M. Brooks Oh yeah, we had the flu.  K. Brooks Grandpa lost his family.  M. Brooks As I say, I think I   ve forgotten more than I know, more than I   ve  remembered. If I didn   t want to remember anything, I try to put it out of  my mind, something that I didn   t care about knowing or remembering.  K. Brooks Just blocked it out.  Bishop What   s your favorite decade that you have lived in? The    20s, the   30s,  the    40s?  K. Brooks What was your favorite time, the 1920s, the 1930s, the 1940s, the    50s?  M. Brooks I don   t know. I just took it as it come. (Laughs)  K. Brooks Just a pretty well satisfied person, I guess.  Finchum Anything left on your list that you want to do.  M. Brooks Not really. I just don   t want to be sick a long time. When my time  comes, I want it to be quick. I don   t know when that   s going to be, I  don   t want to know. (Laughs)  Bishop When history is written, what do you want it to say about you?  M. Brooks What it wants to.  K. Brooks    You were a good woman, who had a good life, raised a good family.     You don   t care. It   s not going to matter to you, is it?  M. Brooks Of course, I didn   t want to lose my family, but I knew that   s something  that you can   t do nothing about. It   s whatever, I don   t know. But I   m  ready, I think. When my time comes, it may be tonight, it may be a  month from now, it may be years from now, I don   t know. I don   t know  how it can be much older. (Laughs)  Bishop You had a story about her riding cattle?  K. Brooks Malaya   s not here, but she wanted you to tell the story. They were out  at the lot working calves, and you came out there, and they challenged  you to ride a calf or something. Can you tell that story? Was that when  Les and Brenda and Malaya and Wayne, were they all little?  Tollett Yeah, I remember that.  29  K. Brooks What were they doing?  M. Brooks They challenged me to ride one of the calves there, so I did. (Laughter)  K. Brooks Did it hurt you?  M. Brooks No.  Bishop How old were you?  K. Brooks How old were you then?  M. Brooks I was grown, married. That was when the kids was little.  K. Brooks You were around fifty-five, somewhere around there?  M. Brooks Yeah, something like that. Kids thought it was funny. But I did ride the  calf. They was trying to ride the calves or something, and I made some  remark about they didn   t hold right or something.    Well, let   s see you  ride it     They dared me to ride it and so I rode the calf. (Laughter)  K. Brooks I bet they fell out.  Tollett I probably wasn   t at that one.  K. Brooks I started to say, Brenda, you     Tollett That   s why I don   t remember it. .  K. Brooks Well, that   s good. You showed them, didn   t you?  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks They never questioned you again. (Laughter) Malaya said you and Aunt  Mildred really are the ones that taught her how to fish, that you took  them fishing a lot.  M. Brooks Yeah, I took them fishing out at the pond.  K. Brooks Well, they thought that was an ocean.  M. Brooks Huh?  K. Brooks They thought that was an ocean, probably, going to the pond, especially  that one on the backside. Did you like fishing?  30  M. Brooks Yeah, I did, I liked fishing. Well, we had two big ponds and then the  creek ran through the place.  K. Brooks Yes.  M. Brooks Sometimes we fished in the creek but most of the time, we   d be over at  the pond.  K. Brooks I want you to tell them what kind of meat di y   all have when you were  younger? What kind of meat did y   all have to eat?  M. Brooks Squirrel mostly.  K. Brooks Yeah. How come?  M. Brooks Because we had a dog that seemed to me like every day, when we   d sit  down to eat, he   d go out there at the edge,(we lived on the farm) and  he   d go out to the pasture, those trees come up close to the house, and  tree a squirrel. Well, my daddy would go out there and kill it and we   d  have it for supper. And I got so tired of squirrel I couldn   t hardly stand  it, and I still don   t care about the squirrel.  Bishop That   s the secret.  K. Brooks Eating squirrel.  Bishop Eating squirrel.  K. Brooks Eating squirrel has kept you young. (Laughter)  Tollett She loves watching squirrels out here now.  M. Brooks My daddy loved squirrel and that dog could have one about every other  day anyway. Momma cooked squirrel. And I still don   t like squirrel.  Bishop That wouldn   t be very much to feed a family.  M. Brooks There   s two of us girls and two boys.  K. Brooks Anything else you want to tell them? Tell her about the first time you  rode in a car?  M. Brooks I wasn   t but about nine or ten years old the first time I rode in a car.  And that   s when we lived in Stuart and before the bank went broke.  And there   s a guy that    we all run  together as  kids. I don   t know  31  what us kids was doing walking down the road, but we   d been  somewhere and there was three of us, I remember. And one of the boys  run a garage. He stopped and picked us kids up and that   s the first time  I   d ever rode in a car.  K. Brooks Yeah.  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks How old were you when you rode in the car?  M. Brooks I guess I was about eight or nine years old. There wasn   t very many cars  anyway, but this guy had a garage there in Stuart. I think I must have  been about eight or nine years old, because that   s when Papa had the  store there in Stuart. And I was about maybe nine or ten years old the  first time I ever rode in the car.  K. Brooks The first time you saw an airplane go over, did you already know what  an airplane was?  M. Brooks Yeah, I knew what it was. I   d seen the pictures of them.  K. Brooks So it didn   t scare you to death.  M. Brooks No.  K. Brooks And then what did you say, tell them about the time the one landed at  school.  M. Brooks What?  K. Brooks When you got to see your first airplane and touch it at school.  M. Brooks Yeah, the airplane and it was going to   he parked out in the schoolyard  and let us kids all go out and see it. And he   d let you touch it and     Some of the boys climbed up in it but we didn   t ride in it. First plane I  was ever around.  Bishop Have you ever been in an airplane?  M. Brooks Oh yeah, I   ve rode in an airplane. It was a bigger one than it. (Laughs)  K. Brooks Do you like flying?  M. Brooks Oh, I don   t mind a plane. I   d rather take a bus.  32  K. Brooks Did you take the bus very often? Did you ever get on the bus and ride to  McAlester?  M. Brooks Yes. I used to ride a bus every once in a while to go to McAlester, back  in those days.  Finchum How far is McAlester from here?  K. Brooks From Stuart it   s twenty miles, yeah, from the town of Stuart. Of course  it   s eight miles on out here. But of course, she lived just east of Stuart.  Finchum First television, while you   re on firsts.  K. Brooks When you were little, did y   all have a radio?  M. Brooks Oh no.  K. Brooks Well, when   s the first time you heard a radio? Where were you, do you  know? Over at town or in a store or did one of your friends have a  radio?  M. Brooks I think one of my friends had a radio the first one I ever heard.  K. Brooks Was that just amazing to you?  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks Alright, then what about television? When did you first see television?  M. Brooks I don   t remember.  K. Brooks When did you and Carl first have a television?  M. Brooks I don   t know.  K. Brooks Were Leroy and Mildred born?  M. Brooks I really don   t remember.  Tollett Mattie, it was back when we lived on the creek, what we called the  creek.  K. Brooks She said it   s when they lived on the creek y   all got a television.  Tollett Back probably about    50,    51,    52, somewhere along it there, when y   all  went to California that time. Because y   all gave us or we bought it or  33  something, your old TV. It was black and white. Our first one we got  from y   all, when we lived on the creek.  M. Brooks I told you I   d forgotten more than I remember.  Finchum Before we shut off, let   s talk a little bit about your quilts. Who taught  you how to quilt?  K. Brooks Who taught you how to quilt? Who showed how to quilt?  M. Brooks Momma. Momma taught me how to quilt. When I wasn   t very big she   d  let me help her quilt. My sister older than me, she   d let us quilt some.  She didn   t care much about us quilting in her quilts because she got the  quilts quilted (laughs), but she did teach us how.  Finchum Do you remember making your first one?  M. Brooks No. I don   t remember when I made my first one.  Finchum Did you do it by hand or on the sewing machine?  M. Brooks I done all my quilting by hand.  Finchum Did you have the rack that came from the ceiling?  M. Brooks Yep, I did for a while and then I bought me a set that you put together  to stand it up.  K. Brooks The PVC pipe.  M. Brooks And you can move it around.  Finchum Any idea how many you may have made?  M. Brooks I have no idea.  Finchum Have a favorite pattern?  M. Brooks No, not really. I just done it for pastime.  Finchum Make a Sun Bonnet Sue?  M. Brooks Yeah, I   ve made that.  Finchum Double Wedding Band?  34  M. Brooks Yeah.  Finchum Dutch Doll.  M. Brooks Star.  Finchum Made Stars.  K. Brooks You don   t have a favorite one that you like to work on, a favorite  pattern? What   s the easiest pattern to work on?  M. Brooks Well, there   s not much difference in them. You   ve just got to sew on  top of that. You put them in the frame and     K. Brooks But piecing the top together, which one   s the easiest to piece together?  That   s the one that I want to start on.  Finchum A nine patch.  M. Brooks Squares, I guess.  K. Brooks Yep. Tanya quilts.  Finchum My first one was a Cathedral Window.  K. Brooks Have you ever done the pattern Cathedral Window?  Finchum You spend more time at the ironing board than you do sewing.  M. Brooks I never made one of them.  Finchum You press and press and fold and press.  M. Brooks I try to do something easy. (Laughs)  Finchum My next one was.  M. Brooks And I pieced by hand, I didn   t piece them on the machine.  Finchum That   s cheating, isn   t it.  M. Brooks I   ve done mine for pastime, is what I really done most of them for.  Finchum Did you show any of them at the county fair?  M. Brooks Yeah, down at Stuart.  35  K. Brooks Over at Stuart, you   d display them, oh okay. Did you say how many  stitches per inch when you   re sewing a top together, do you count how  many stitches? Just get it together.  M. Brooks One may be a long one and the next may be a short one. (Laughter)  Finchum You could rock your needle?  M. Brooks Yes. I had to do something. I never could just sit still and do nothing. I  put in a lot of my time in quilting, piecing quilts and quilting. That was  my pastime.  Bishop Did you ever raffle any off at the church or community events?  K. Brooks Did you ever donate any to be raffled off for fundraiser for church or      M. Brooks I give them away.  K. Brooks All of us have got at least two a piece, and our children.  M. Brooks I tried to piece all the kids one.  K. Brooks And grandchildren and great-grandchildren have some. And she also  croqueted.  M. Brooks I quilted enough to like, when the kids would get married for the  shower I   d always give them a quilt, the grandkids. The last quilt I  started Dora Lee had to finish it, I couldn   t. My hands got to where they  wouldn   t, I just couldn   t stand it.  K. Brooks Yeah, it just hurt too bad.  Finchum Did you have a large garden and do a lot of canning?  M. Brooks Mm-hmm. I had a garden. Did you say garden? Yeah.  Finchum And canned.  M. Brooks I sure miss my garden, too. I loved to work in the garden.  K. Brooks The summers before she turned one hundred     M. Brooks I like to be outside. Mow the lawn and work in the garden.  36  K. Brooks But my husband would go over to check cattle and she   d say,    Come  start my tiller.    And so he   d pull it because she couldn   t pull it, he   d  start it and he   d take it down to see if it was working okay and come  back. She said,    This is my business, you go tend to your business.     M. Brooks And when I was growing up, Momma made us sweep the lawn. We had  a bunch of chickens and feathers and stuff. Every week we had to get us  her old broom or take a bunch of   what is it we made     K. Brooks Corn shucks.  M. Brooks It   s gray, it   s a little   anyway you could cut it. It wasn   t oak. It was  some kind of a bush that you cut.  K. Brooks Willow.  M. Brooks Yeah, maybe, something to make a broom out of. But anyway, we   d get  out and cut us some limbs and make us what we   d call a brush broom,  and that   s what we swept the yard with.  K. Brooks Clean as a whistle.  M. Brooks You had to clean up. We swept a lot of feathers.  K. Brooks You didn   t have people that did that?  Bishop No.  Finchum So it was all dirt and no grass?  M. Brooks Yeah, Momma made us. She helped us but us girls swept the lawn  every week, us and Momma. That lawn had to be swept.  K. Brooks Otherwise you   d have to let cattle or horses in to graze it and then  you   ve got to clean up after them, see?  Finchum Before lawnmowers. Did you belong to a homemaker club, a home  demonstration club?  K. Brooks Did you ever belong to a home extension club?  M. Brooks Yeah, for a while.  K. Brooks Where you all get together and trade recipes and learn, get lessons from  OSU Extension?  37  M. Brooks Yeah.  K. Brooks Well, that   s cool.  Bishop Were you a good cook?  K. Brooks Were you a good cook? Say yes.  M. Brooks They ate it. (Laughter)  Bishop Did you have a favorite recipe?  M. Brooks Yes, I used recipes.  K. Brooks What was your favorite thing to make?  M. Brooks I don   t know.  K. Brooks What was the favorite thing the family wanted you to make?  M. Brooks They wanted me to make buns.  Tollett Hot rolls.  K. Brooks Hot rolls and we have her recipe in her handwriting. All of us have a  copy and sugar cookies. When you go to her house there was a coffee  can of sugar cookies, always.  Tollett And we got to bring home what was left.  K. Brooks And her hot rolls     M. Brooks By my hands won   t work now. I can   t do nothing. I love to cook.  Finchum Did you make angel food cake?  M. Brooks Yeah, I made angel food cake.  Finchum Takes a lot of egg whites, doesn   t it?  K. Brooks I guess the next thing would definitely be fried pies.  Tollett The favorite cake is lemon.  K. Brooks Fried pies.  38  M. Brooks Yeah, I used to fry pies.  K. Brooks I wonder how many you have made.  M. Brooks Oh, I don   t know. (Laughs)  K. Brooks Thousands.  Tollett They literally hide them from each other.  K. Brooks We do, we count. Her husband and I, we like apricot and she and my  husband like the apple, and she likes them all.  M. Brooks I make about a dozen of apples and a dozen of apricot.  K. Brooks Oh, at least.  M. Brooks I dried apples and used dried apricots.  K. Brooks And she dried the apples. Now apricots we don   t have here, she has to  buy them. But she uses her dried apples and cooks them up,  reconstitutes them, and makes the pastry and yeah, fries them in the  skillet, in an iron skillet.  Bishop That   s a southern thing to do. I   d never heard of it until I moved here.  K. Brooks Fried pies?  Tollett You   re missing out.  Finchum Apple   s my favorite.  Bishop I   ve had them. But I   d never heard of them.  M. Brooks We had an apple tree and I dried my own apples. I took a piece of a  sheet, we had a cellar that had the door part that   d come straight down.  I   d go down in it and then we had a top on that. And I   d take my apples,  I   d peel them and take them out there and put them on the top of that  where the sun could dry them. And then I   d fry apple pies but I had to  buy my apricots. I always dried my apples and then made my apricot  fried pies. I didn   t have apricots, I bought them, but I dried nearly all  my apples.  K. Brooks There   s a sack still in the freezer.  39  M. Brooks Momma used to   my mom was the one who showed me how to dry  apples and all, because she dried a lot of apples. Her favorite pie was  fried apples.  K. Brooks One Sunday, the preacher got a little long winded and we were having a  family gathering, you know, so the hot rolls were on the counter ready  to go in the oven and of course, he could take a joke. So she whipped  him up one side and down the other. She said,    I guess you know my  rolls are out in the floor probably.    Sure enough, they   d rolled over,  they hadn   t hit the floor, but they had risen. She said,    If my bread   s  ruined, you   re going to be in trouble.    He said,    Does that mean I don   t  get to come eat any?       No   , anyway. (Laughter)  Finchum Sunday lunch was a big deal? Sunday dinner was a big deal?  K. Brooks Were Sunday dinners a big deal?  M. Brooks Sunday?  K. Brooks Uh-huh. When you were growing up and then     M. Brooks No, we would have dinners on the ground and I mean on the ground.  They   d take tablecloths and spread them down on the ground and put  their bread there. They didn   t have tables to put them on. (Laughs)  K. Brooks We didn   t get together as much as she would   ve liked. It wasn   t an  every Sunday thing.  M. Brooks They   d take their tablecloths and just spread them on the ground there  in the churchyard. They wouldn   t do that now.  K. Brooks Did they do that every Sunday?  M. Brooks Hmm?  K. Brooks Every Sunday?  M. Brooks No. It   d be during the big meetings. We had meetings. Usually they   d  have about a two-week meeting and then on the Sundays we   d have  dinner on the ground. Hardly ever have dinner out, because we didn   t  have tables or anything to put them on.  K. Brooks Brenda has some quilts that she   d like to show you, if y   all have time. A  couple of them are called friendship quilts. We   re going to look at your  friendship quilts. Would you tell them how you got a friendship quilt?  40  M. Brooks Well, everybody would cut out a pattern and give to all your friends to  make a block. You cut the pattern to give to them, and they   d piece you  a block     K. Brooks And they   d embroider their name on it.  M. Brooks    And they   d embroider their name on it.  K. Brooks And then did they just bring them back to you or did you guys get  together to piece it?  M. Brooks No, they   d bring them to me, usually at church where we changed. You  cut the pattern and give them the pattern that you want. And they   ll  piece it and then embroider their name on it. The center of it, you   d  have the first piece and run from one corner to the other and that   s  where they   d put their name on it. They   d piece a block and put their  name on it.  K. Brooks When you were, when other people were doing that for you, were you  fixing a block for somebody else?  M. Brooks If they gave you a block.  K. Brooks If they gave you a pattern, I mean a block. So a lot of the ladies in the  community had them.  Finchum And you get to pick the fabric that you want it to come back in. Thank  you for showing us. They   re very pretty. Thank you.  41  Bishop You quilted quite a lot.  Finchum That one   s pretty, very pretty.  M. Brooks I think everybody back then made them.  Finchum Back in the day, they would put patterns in the newspaper.  M. Brooks Well, I had an old catalog. It seemed like paper wasn   t as stiff as the  other. It, the catalog, wouldn   t tear as easy. So I had an old catalog to  cut my pattern.  K. Brooks Yeah, but how did you learn about the pattern?  M. Brooks Well, I don   t know. I might just have picked up a piece of paper     K. Brooks And drew it off yourself?  M. Brooks I think I just a piece of catalog page and cut the corners off of it.  K. Brooks Yes.  M. Brooks Didn   t have no pattern.  K. Brooks Well, that   s good if you can do that. I couldn   t do it.  Finchum Where   d you get your fabric?  M. Brooks Just most of it is scraps I could pick up and some from my remnants.  And there   s a lady one time that, well a friend of mine, she told me at  church one Sunday, she said,    I   ve got something for you.    And I said,     Well, what is it?    She said,    Well, I   m just going to give it to you and  let you do what you want to with it.    And she gave me a whole sack full  of different pieces of material. And I said,    Don   t you want them?    She  said,    No, I heard you was making quilts, and I thought I   d give it to  you.     Finchum No polyester.  M. Brooks No, it   s just all cotton.  Finchum All cotton.  M. Brooks I quilted it by hand but I put it together on the machine.  K. Brooks Now what?  42  Finchum Talking about putting the binding on.  K. Brooks Oh, the binding now, yes. Okay.  Finchum  Thank you for sharing your quilts and your story with us today. It has  been great. Thank you.  M. Brooks Well, thank you.   -------  ------- 
