 Finchum Today is December 10, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Bartlesville, Oklahoma to speak with Viola Fletcher. This is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project so thank you for meeting with us  today. Let   s start by having you tell us when and where you were born.  Fletcher Well, I   m Viola. My name is Viola Fletcher. I was born in Comanche.  Comanche County, the fifth day of May in 1914.  Finchum So you   re working on 101 then?  Fletcher One hundred and one, yes.  Finchum And what did your parents do for a living?  Fletcher Well, they worked as farmers, just raised crops. My step-father was a  sharecropper; I don   t know what that means. Anyway, they worked  with farming. You know, like cotton, corn, and vegetables, and  gardening.  Finchum Mostly in Oklahoma?  Fletcher In Oklahoma, yes.  Finchum Did they have to travel around?  Fletcher Yes. They traveled from one community to another, I think.  Finchum And did you have to help pick?  Fletcher Well, a little bit. Whatever children could help do, I guess.  5  Finchum How many brothers and sisters did you have?  Fletcher I have four brothers and three sisters.  Finchum And where are you in the line there?  Fletcher I   m about the second one from the oldest. I had an older sister.  Finchum So did you have some chores growing up?  Fletcher Well, helping at home with washing the dishes and helping my mother  with the housecleaning and laundry. That   s about all.  Finchum Would she have a large garden?  Fletcher Yes, yes.  Finchum Did some canning?  Fletcher Canned? She canned, yes.  Finchum And would she sew and make your clothes?  Fletcher Yes she did.  Finchum When you were in elementary school, where did you go?  Fletcher Now I don   t remember. It   s been so long. I didn   t go to school many  years, so it was some place in the community. We only went to school  part-time, you know, not like the school system now.  Finchum And they   d have to let you out to help with whatever was being  harvested at the time?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum What brought you to Bartlesville?  Fletcher Oh my goodness     Finchum Are we skipping too far ahead? We can go back. When did you get  married?  Fletcher In 1932 in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  6  Finchum So from Comanche County you made it to Tulsa.  Fletcher Well, yes. Well, sure. Then from there I lived in Tulsa. Then I went to  California during the World War II and worked and came back to  Oklahoma and lived. So I didn   t circle around very much.  Finchum So in 1932 you got married. How did you meet your husband?  Fletcher I met him there in Tulsa.  Finchum Were you in Tulsa in the    20s? When they had the race riot were you  living in Tulsa at that time?  Fletcher Well, my family was, but I think they left during that time.  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher Let   s see   see, I was real young then, about five to six years old. I  don   t remember anything about that.  Finchum I don   t remember things from when I was six either. (Laughter) So if  you got married in    32, did he move to California with you?  Fletcher Oh yes.  Finchum He wasn   t in the war then?  Fletcher Oh no, no. He wasn   t in the service, no.  Finchum Well what took you to California? Why did you got to California?  Fletcher To work in the shipyard during World War II.  Finchum What was your job?  Fletcher Assistant welder. I helped the welders, you know, lay the slabs of steel  to build the ships.  Finchum How did you learn how to do that?  Fletcher Well, they had a class. They   d let you be in a class about six weeks and  learn to do that.  Finchum Was it hard?  Fletcher Well, no. I didn   t think so.  7  Finchum Took a lot of courage, though, to go that far. Did you already have a  job lined up?  Fletcher Oh no. If you went there you could find work, you know. We went  there for that reason.  Finchum Well did he work in the shipyard, too, your husband?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum What was his name?  Fletcher Robert.  Finchum So Robert worked in the shipyard, too.  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum How long did you two do that?  Fletcher About two and a half years, until the war was over.  Finchum And then came back?  Fletcher I think I was there, worked out there, from    43 until    45 when the war  was over.  Finchum Do you remember much about those couple of years?  Fletcher No, you   re busy working, and sleeping, and going back and forth to  work, so you don   t get much done.  Finchum Did you have children at that time?  Fletcher No.  Finchum Made it a little easier then.  Fletcher (Laughs) Yeah.  Finchum How had you gotten from Oklahoma to California? Did you go by car  or train?  Fletcher Car, oh yes, car.  8  Finchum Took a little while didn   t it?  Fletcher Yes it did. I don   t remember how long, but we got there. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have trouble finding a place to live once you got there?  Fletcher No. People had places where the workers could live. In the  neighborhoods they   d fix up their, maybe, garage, and make an  apartment out of it for people to live in. I didn   t live in a motel or  anything, just always lived in someone   s home with rooms or  something.  Finchum Well back in those days Oklahomans were referred to as Okies. Were  you ever called Okie?  Fletcher Oh sure, sure. When the war was over they said the Okies and the  Arkies was coming home. They had pictures of people, cars, coming  back home. Most people made   like a truck with a bed on the back,  they would cover it and make a little   and that   s where they lived you  know, while they worked there. Those little cars was seen on the  highway on the way back to Oklahoma, and Arkansas, and Texas.  Finchum You didn   t have to do that, did you?  Fletcher No, no. I didn   t mind, it was fun. You enjoyed doing things like that. As  long as you was coming home you enjoyed that.  Finchum So you hadn   t planned to stay in California after?  Fletcher Oh no, too expensive to live out there.  Finchum So when you came back what did you do?  Fletcher I came back   worked at the Y, YWCA.  Finchum In Tulsa?  Fletcher When I came back I moved back to Bartlesville.  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher My family was here in Bartlesville, and I came back. Yeah, so I worked  at the Y. Then I worked in private homes for one or two families here.  Finchum And did you have children?  9  Fletcher Yeah, had three.  Finchum Boys, girls?  Fletcher Two boys and one girl.  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher Her. (Gestures to daughter)  Finchum (Laughter) Well did you ever think you   d live to 100?  Fletcher No, but I never did think of dying. (Laughter) That   s one thing you  know, you just never know, but then that   s just the way you feel about  it   the way I feel about it.  Finchum Has anyone else in your family lived     Fletcher No. Most of the family members only lived maybe in their 80   s, eighty  or eighty-five years old. My mother and grandmother, I think, lived  about that age.  Finchum What do you think the secret is?  Fletcher Well I don   t know. We just do the things that are good for you     sleeping and eating and exercising. It   s no problem with me. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you ever smoke?  Fletcher No. I tried, but I never did get the habit.  Finchum Well, when you came back from California, you came back to  Bartlesville and that would   ve been    45?  Fletcher I came back in    46.  Finchum Had the town itself changed much?  Fletcher Have things changed here?  Finchum Yes.  Fletcher No, I don   t think so. I   ve enjoyed living here and plan to live here the  rest of my life. It   s a nice place to live, really good.  Finchum Were you involved in homemaker clubs, home demonstration clubs?  10  Fletcher No.  Finchum Did you sew? If your mother sewed, did you sew and learn how to sew?  Fletcher Yes, but I didn   t like sewing so it didn   t happen   didn   t last very long.  (Laughter) I   ve sewed and did needlepoint and crocheted and things  like that.  Finchum Do you have a favorite decade? Like did you like the    20s better than  the    30s or the    40s or    50s?  Fletcher No, no. I   ve kind of enjoyed all and everything has been different you  know, and a change. I   ve just kind of enjoyed it, and looked forward to  it.  Finchum Along the way, what would you do for fun?  Fletcher Well, with the children in school, going to their games, ballgames, and  football games, and whatever the school activities were that kept me  busy.  Finchum And when you were younger, what would you do for fun, when you were  still living at home?  Fletcher Then, you know, I was with the family and helping them with whatever  the chores were and around the home. In the few years that I was in  school, busy doing that.  Finchum What would you do for fun with your brothers and sisters?  Fletcher We would play, you know. Lots of games and fish and     Finchum I always forget about fishing.  Bishop How did the Great Depression   do you remember the Great  Depression days in the early    30s?  Fletcher Well, it didn   t    bother me much. Just, I don   t really     Finchum You were in Tulsa at that time. That would   ve been     Fletcher We lived there part of the time.  Finchum In the    30s.  11  Fletcher No, we family members looks like we just kind of got by on the same  level so it wasn   t   didn   t bother me.  Finchum What did your husband do for a living?  Fletcher He was a truck driver or he worked at the filling stations, you know,  places like that for men.  Finchum Back when they were full-service.  Fletcher Yeah. (Laughs)  Finchum Would wash your windows and check the oil.  Fletcher Yes, that   s right.  Finchum I miss those days.  Fletcher Yeah, I learned to do all that too to a car. You know, change the tires  and put gas, and water, and oil in the car   I could do all of that.  Finchum Do you remember your first car?  Fletcher No, no. I guess not. I was here in Bartlesville when I bought my first  car. I learned to drive when I was young, but I didn   t own a car.  Finchum Who taught you to drive?  Fletcher My husband.  Finchum Oh, after you were married. You didn   t know how to drive one before  you got married?  Fletcher Oh no, no, no.  Finchum Just different times wasn   t it?  Fletcher Yes. Well, it   s kind of hard to learn to drive when you don   t have a car,  you know. (Laughter)  Finchum That   s true. (Laughter) So in Tulsa they had bus service?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum In those days?  12  Fletcher Yeah.  Bishop I assume you walked quite a bit.  Fletcher Oh yes, oh yes. I walked quite a bit, yeah.  Finchum Was church a very important part     Fletcher Went to church, yes.  Finchum Even as a youngster?  Fletcher Oh yes. Oh yes. That   s one thing that families did with lots of children,  you know, you went to church. They taught us to be good.  Bishop Can you talk about what Sundays were like at your home?  Fletcher What?  Bishop What was a typical Sunday like in your home?  Fletcher We went to church on Sundays, yeah, going to church. Just mostly on  Sundays you know. During the week, well we worked. Did our little  chores, go to bed early and get up. Go to school if it   s school, just the  usual things.  Finchum Well, on Sunday would you have Sunday dinner after church?  Fletcher Yes, at home. That was the day of a big dinner, on Sunday, more than  during the week.  Finchum And what would it generally be?  Fletcher Well, fried chicken of course. (Laughs)  Finchum Of course. Did you raise your chickens?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum And whose job was it to kill them?  Fletcher Well, the parents did. I didn   t.  Finchum The mother or father? Which one usually did it?  13  Fletcher The man did the killing, and the women did the cleaning and cooking or  something.  Finchum It   s not always that way, that   s why I asked.  Fletcher Oh really?  Finchum Sometimes it was the oldest child that had to do it. So I was just curious.  You didn   t have to?  Fletcher Oh no, oh no, oh no. I didn   t.  Finchum So fried chicken and what else?  Fletcher Potatoes and gravy, and beans, cornbread or biscuit, and cobbler   apple  or peach cobbler. (Laughs)  Finchum Start with that.  Fletcher Oh yeah, it was always a dinner.  Finchum And was it called dinner or was it called supper or lunch?  Fletcher It was called dinner. It was breakfast and dinner at my house. Lunch  and supper, the evening meal was called supper.  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher I guess dinner or supper. That same word could answer for both.  Finchum We always called it supper.  Fletcher Supper, yeah. That   s what I have to think of, supper.  Finchum Well the house that you grew up in, did it have electricity?  Fletcher Oh no. We had lamps that burned oil   kerosene, coal oil or whatever  you called it.  Finchum That   s how you studied?  Fletcher Yeah, yeah. We had lamps.  Finchum How was it heated at night during the winter?  Fletcher We had stoves that burned wood.  14  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher Cook stove that burned wood.  Finchum Do you remember when you first got electricity?  Fletcher Yes, after I grew up and got married and you know     Finchum So later in the    30s then.  Fletcher In the early    30s, it was.  Finchum Happy day to see a lightbulb.  Fletcher (Laughs) Yeah.  Finchum How would your mother do laundry?  Fletcher We washed in washtubs with rubboards you did your clothes on and  washed.  Finchum Hard on your knuckles?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum You had to help?  Fletcher Well, help hang up the clothes or take them down or something like  that, yes. I   d almost forgotten that. (Laughs)  Finchum It was a good day to get your first washing machine I bet then.  Fletcher Oh it was, it was, yes.  Finchum And refrigerator.  Fletcher Refrigerator, and microwaves, and all that we have now.  Finchum Microwaves, I always forget about that too.  Bishop What were holidays like growing up?  Fletcher Oh good. For the holidays we got fruits and candies for Christmas and  clothes. You know, once a year you get all of those nice things.  15  Finchum Fruit wasn   t something you had regularly?  Fletcher No. Out on the little farms in the communities we lived in, a lot of the  fruit trees grew. People had pear trees and apples, peach trees that we  got fruit off of.  Finchum You don   t see that too much anymore do you?  Fletcher I don   t know. I   m not out.  Finchum Yeah, you don   t see it too much.  Fletcher You would think people with farmland or living out should have, but I  guess they don   t.  Finchum I think the drought had something to do with it.  Fletcher Or the insects or birds would probably eat up what they had, I don   t  know. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you ever receive a favorite gift?  Fletcher Pardon?  Bishop Did you ever receive something you really cherished for Christmas or  for a birthday?  Fletcher Well, usually toys and dolls. I think I put it in some book once at the  Senior Citizens that my first doll was a ragdoll. Parents made your dolls  out of material, so my first doll was a ragdoll. I think that really was  nice. Everybody had   all the girls you know, and then the boys.  Bishop Going back to World War II when you were building ships, what part of  California was that in?  Fletcher That was in Los Angeles and Los Angeles was the shipyard. We called  it Cal Ship.  Bishop So you lived in Los Angeles for the time?  Fletcher Just lived there, yeah, while I was in Defense. I have all the pictures and  the history of all of that (I should   ve brought it) when I was out there.  Bishop How much did you make? How much did they pay you?  16  Fletcher You know, I don   t know what the salary was, but it was a little more  than what I   d been making, really. (Laughs) I don   t remember what the  salary was, but it was enough to pay your bills and live on, you know.  Finchum Paid once a week or once a month?  Fletcher Once a week.  Finchum Did you have to stand in line to get that job or just walk in and say,     I   m here, put me to work.   ?  Fletcher Well no. They needed help and I just went and applied at some jobs.  You know, they advertised for people to come and apply for the job.  Finchum Did you have a choice of what job you got to do?  Fletcher No.  Finchum They just assigned it.  Fletcher They just kind of   you know they needed people in every department  so I don   t know why I got into being a welder than something different.  Finchum Did you have to wear one of those     Fletcher Oh yes.  Finchum Metal masks or whatever?  Fletcher Yeah, I have a picture of all of that, a picture of myself when I worked  out there.  Finchum You were a true Rosie   Rosie the Riveter.  Fletcher Well, you should see the picture of me then. I look like a different  person, you know. (Laughs)  Finchum Were there a lot of other women working with you?  Fletcher Oh yes. See, I have a write-up about that. During that time when that  shipyard was building, it was 40,000 people that worked in the  shipyard. It read that most of them came there with no experience about  the work, so they were trained to do it, to do whatever was done.  Finchum You must   ve been a quick learner.  17  Fletcher Well, we studied about six weeks, takes about six weeks. No, it  wasn   t   welding is not hard. It   s just like, sort of like sewing on a  sewing machine. Sewing   I could sew on a sewing machine so that  gave me some idea. That   s the way I learned to drive a car. You learn to  sew on the sewing machine, you work your feet, and your hands, and  your eyes, and your mind. So it all works together. The same with  welding, that   s the way it went. Do you have an idea of what  welding   it   s a     Finchum I imagine it   s hot, but that   s all I know.  Fletcher Yeah, it   s hot. You melt a rod of steel into a plate of steel and that  makes it   put two plates together and then this little steel go in-between  them that makes it stay together. It was big slabs of steel, building a  ship.  Finchum Sounds a little hard.  Fletcher The little strip that we would weld, you know, it wasn   t hard for us  but     Finchum They did it in parts?  Fletcher Yes. We just put the slab together, and then a production welder would  come along and fill the seam all the way down. We would fill it, tack  little strips about three inches, enough to hold it together. I was called a  ship fitter   s helper.  Finchum Were there different levels of that? So if you did that really well, they  would bump you up and have you do something else?  Fletcher Oh yeah, oh yeah. You had the walls, you had the floor, and you had the  double deck down in the bottom of the ship. You had to crawl down in  there and sit and do   yeah, you went from the keel, that   s what they  call the keel, you went from the keel up. There   s always something  about putting the ship together.  Finchum Well, being shorter, did that help?  Fletcher No, because there were people taller than I was down doing that.  (Laughter)  Finchum Was it shift work?  Fletcher Oh yeah, three shifts. You worked day, night, and graveyard. What was  time? Well, you   re working the day, went from eight to five, and from  18  five to one or two, and then from one or two to the next day. They had  three shifts of people.  Finchum And which one did you do?  Fletcher All three. You go in, you know, they start you off at day and then they  shift you to another shift, and while you   re there you get shifted all  around. You had to work where you were told to work and the hours  and time.  Finchum Graveyard shift pay a little bit better?  Fletcher Paid a little better I think. I think so.  Finchum Would you work with your husband side-by-side or was he in a different  part?  Fletcher He was in a different part, yes.  Finchum Same shift? Or did you have to work different shifts too?  Fletcher Oh yes.  Finchum Different ones than him?  Fletcher Oh everybody did them. You hardly knew where each other was. I tell  you it was 40,000 people working at that shipyard where I was.  Finchum That   s a lot. I can   t imagine.  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum You have to clock in?  Fletcher Clock in, yes. You had your picture with your number on it. When you  received your check, you go to a window and show your  picture  and  they give you your paycheck. Everything went by pictures and  numbers.  Finchum Were you working the day the war was over?  Fletcher No. When the war was over I didn   t work anymore. Most of the people  didn   t work. I think it read the shipyards closed shortly after that. You  know, and stopped building.  Finchum When the war was announced that it was over were you still working?  19  Fletcher Yes, I was on duty when the war  ending  was announced.  Finchum I was going to say, do you remember that day?  Fletcher Oh yeah, I remember that day. Everybody was throwing their hats and  shovels and    The war is over  We can stop working now.     Finchum Kind of mixed feelings though because that would mean your job was  over.  Fletcher Well, I was glad. I had two brothers in service so that made me feel like  I was helping to win the war, because I had two brothers in.  Finchum Did they make it back safely?  Fletcher Yes they did. They both did. One is still living now and he   s ninety-four  years old.  Finchum And where is he?  Fletcher In Denver, Colorado.  Finchum Scattered around then.  Fletcher Yeah.  Bishop You had children after the war. What was it like to be a mother back in  those days?  Fletcher Oh fine, oh sure. Every lady wants to be a mother. (Laughs) Yes, that   s  right. Yes sir, had three after then.  Bishop You said you attended a lot of ballgames. Are you pretty active with the  children?  Fletcher Oh yeah. Two of them have children. Ballgames, and swimming, and  hiking, and camping, and so lots of things.  Bishop Did you ever go on vacation?  Fletcher Oh yeah.  Bishop You remember a favorite vacation? Favorite family vacation?  20  Fletcher We like going to rodeos. (Laughs) Down in Okmulgee, you know, they  have a big rodeo every year. I think last year was the first year I   ve  missed out of I don   t know how many years.  Bishop My gosh. What   s your favorite part of the rodeo?  Fletcher Oh the   all of it. No parts of it, no one part thing, just the whole show.  Bishop Just the whole thing. I like the bull riding myself.  Finchum Would you go to the Boley  Oklahoma  one? The rodeo in Boley.  Fletcher Boley   yes, yes we have.  Finchum Boley has one of the longest  running  rodeos in the state, I think.  Fletcher Yeah, we   ve been there about three times I think.  Finchum Not too far from here so   or not too far from Tulsa, I guess. Did  anyone participate in the rodeos, or you just like going to watch?  Fletcher No, just go and watch.  Fletcher  Had a relative  in Cushing  who rode  for a while, but not long enough  to talk about it. (Laughter)  Bishop Less than eight seconds?  Fletcher He soon fell off enough that he stopped going. (Laughter)  Bishop You didn   t show him how to do it. Did you ever try to ride or anything?  Fletcher Oh no.  Bishop No? Did you ever ride a horse?  Fletcher Oh yes.  Finchum That must   ve been before you were married   riding horses?  Fletcher Well I   ve rode a horse since then, the riding club or something like that.  (Laughs)  Finchum If your parents were sharecroppers, did they have their own team of  horses?  21  Fletcher Of horses? Yeah, they had their own horses, and cows, hogs and  chickens, and dogs, cats, and children. (Laughter)  Finchum So you had pets.  Fletcher Pets, yes.  Finchum Do you remember a favorite puppy or dog?  Fletcher No, no. I didn   t care for the pets.  Finchum Well, would they butcher their hogs?  Fletcher We had hogs, yeah.  Finchum Would you have to help with that?  Fletcher No, I didn   t.  Finchum Make sausage or whatever?  Fletcher The parents did, the adults did. They made sausage.  Finchum Would they make lye soap in the big black kettles?  Fletcher (Laughs) No, I don   t remember them     Finchum Some would people would back in those days.  Fletcher I   ve made lye soap since I   ve been an adult, but you can make lye soap  in anything. Now they don   t have to be the big black kettle.  Finchum Used to be in the big black kettle I thought.  Fletcher I know, but no. No (Laughs)  Bishop We always like to ask, what was bath time like as a child?  Fletcher Bath time? Well, we take the bath in the washtub.  Bishop Would you have to share the water or did you get new water?  Fletcher (Laughs) Well, I think when we were real young we probably shared  the water, but after we got old enough to do our own bath, we had our  own water.  22  Finchum Have to heat it on the stove?  Fletcher Well you heat the water in a kettle, pour it in the tub with the colder  water. I remember that.  Finchum We   re spoiled today, aren   t    we?  Fletcher Yes. You step in the shower now and walk out. (Laughs)  Finchum What do you think is the biggest invention during your lifetime?  Fletcher Let   s see   like what?  Finchum Well I mean, electricity some people say, but     Bishop What   s been the greatest invention, do you think, in your lifetime?  Finchum Not the cellphone.  Fletcher (Laughs)  Finchum Running water?  Fletcher Running water, it   s good. All the appliances, water, electricity     Finchum And an indoor bathroom?  Fletcher Indoor bathrooms, yes. Cars and airplanes and things     Bishop Do you remember the first time you saw an airplane?  Fletcher No. Don   t remember, but airplanes have been around all my life haven   t  they?  Finchum They   ve just gotten bigger and bigger and bigger.  Fletcher Bigger and bigger, yeah.  Bishop What   s a typical day like for you at 100? What time do you usually get  up, what do you do during the day, and what time do you go to bed?  What   s a day like for a 100-year-old?  Fletcher Well now I go to the nutrition   they have a luncheon for senior citizens  every day, and I go there three days a week. I   m usually up at six  o   clock every morning. I   m picked up about nine o   clock and taken  there. I had to cancel this morning and not go because I came here.  23  Finchum We owe her lunch sounds like. (Laughter)  Fletcher Yeah, so we have that. I have church to do and I   ve been every day. I  have several shows on TV in the morning I look at when I   m at home. I  do my own laundry and fix my own meals, and I don   t depend on the  girls to wait on me. I do everything for myself.  Finchum And then what time do you go to bed?  Fletcher About ten o   clock. I hear the ten o   clock news, and I turn off TV. I like  it quiet, you know. My daughter   they play their TV in their bedroom  all night, but I turn the TV off. I like it quiet.  Finchum Do you read much?  Fletcher Yes, I have a little bible daily reading; I do that every morning. Then I  read newspapers and books and different things. Enjoy that   and sleep.  I spend most of my time sleeping.  Finchum You take catnaps during the day?  Fletcher During the day, that   s right. (Laughs)  Bishop But you like to have that quiet time before bed.  Fletcher That quiet time, that   s right.  Bishop What do you do during that quiet time before bed?  Fletcher Just sleep and   the TV, you know, keeps you awake. So to have that  quiet time you turn the TV off, and usually I don   t get telephone calls  after ten o   clock. I don   t like to get telephone calls after ten, so it   s  quiet. So I just enjoy.  Finchum What type of book do you like to read?  Fletcher Well no, I read the bible a lot and then magazines and different things.  You know, it   s not too much reading. Thumbing through and looking  through Good Housekeeping or something like that, yes.  Bishop Now you said you go to church, are you still active in your church?  Fletcher No, you just go and sit and listen. (Laughs) I   m not very active, I   m old.  (Laughter) Yes, sir.  24  Bishop I would assume that you   re the oldest member of your church.  Fletcher Usually, yes.  Finchum Everyone comes to you for advice?  Fletcher Well, they think I have a lot of advice. You know, they think the older  people do, but I don   t usually try to tell them (laughs) because they  think it   s an old idea, you know, that I have.  Bishop If you could give a young person advice about growing old, what would  you say?  Fletcher Well, just take care of your health is one of the best things about getting  old. Most people don   t.  Bishop And what have you done to take care of your health all these years?  Fletcher Eat and sleep, and I wouldn   t say exercise, but I   ve been active, and all  of that. So it   s no problem and I   ve been blessed. I   ve been in good  health most of my life. Not any sick spells and I haven   t been in a  hospital in sixty years. Haven   t been admitted in a hospital for any  complaint for better than sixty years.  Finchum Six, zero? Sixty years?  Fletcher That   s right.  Finchum Wow, that   s pretty good. Do you take medicine today?  Fletcher Like aspirins and pain pills.  Finchum No high blood pressure?  Fletcher Pressure   yeah, pressure pills.  Finchum But that   s it?  Fletcher And the baby aspirin the doctor said to take, pressure pills and the baby  aspirins, pain pills.  Finchum That   s pretty amazing in itself, yes. And you hear pretty well and your  vision   s pretty good.  25  Fletcher Yeah, yeah   well, I   m only seeing out of one eye. The one eye   s kind  of bad on me. I had cataracts removed some time ago, so one of the  eyes are not doing very well  Finchum Your biggest challenge today is what?  Fletcher With what? No.  Finchum Nothing really?  Fletcher I don   t think so.  Finchum When did you stop driving?  Fletcher Oh, a couple years ago.  Finchum A couple of years? In your late nineties? Wow.  Fletcher Sure, I could drive now if they didn   t drive for me. (Laughter)  Bishop It   s too convenient, right?  Finchum Well did you choose to stop or did they tell you to stop?  Fletcher Well after I had cataracts, the doctor said it   s best I don   t drive. Yeah,  the doctor said stop, I didn   t. Wasn   t my idea. (Laughter)  Finchum And you listened, though.  Fletcher I listened. Well, it   s different. Now that I   m only seeing out of one eye  it   s different you know.  Finchum Well is there anything left on your bucket list that you want to do?  Fletcher No.  Finchum You   ve done everything you   ve wanted to do.  Fletcher Oh yeah.  Finchum Absolutely?  Fletcher Oh yes. I   ve traveled, I   ve been on a cruise, and I   ve just done a lot of  things the last thirty or forty years.  26  Bishop In terms of traveling, what   s your most favorite place you   ve ever  traveled to or visited?  Fletcher Well, the cruise, the first cruise I went on. Saint Thomas is a beautiful  island. Oh you know I had to go on a ship after helping to build ships.  (Laughs)  Bishop But you weren   t building cruise ships were you? (Laughs)  Fletcher No, no, I wasn   t building a cruise ship. (Laughter) Yes sir, certainly.  That was one desire and I had a chance to do it. In fact, I   ve been on a  cruise twice, but the first one was really wonderful. With my family,  you know I have the brother in Denver, with the family. I always get  with them when they go. I   m not alone, I   m with family.  Bishop Was that cruise ship   was that the first time you   d been actually on a  ship?  Fletcher Oh yes.  Bishop Just to ride it, not to build it?  Fletcher Oh no, those ships we were building   it wasn   t a cruise ship. It was a     what is it? Carried the fuel     Bishop Tanker.  Fletcher Yeah, the little ships that we built.  Bishop But the cruise was your first time actually out on a ship out in the  ocean?  Fletcher Yeah, yeah.  Finchum Knowing how they were made, you didn   t feel like you were in danger  at all I bet.  Fletcher (Laughs) Yeah.  Finchum So you built tankers. Well, besides the cruise, where else have you  been?  Fletcher Oh, I have a grandson in San Diego. I   ve been out there a couple of  times to visit him, yeah. Here in Oklahoma I   ve been all around. Years  ago I went to Kansas City, what other state have I been in? I have a son  27  in Arizona. In the last ten or fifteen years, you know, I   ve visited quite a  bit of the family. I plan to go to San Diego again next year.  Finchum See, that   s on your bucket list, plan to get there then. Have you been  back to LA since you left?  Fletcher No, I haven   t been there in, oh my goodness, fifty or sixty years.  (Laughs) I would like to go back there, but I haven   t been.  Finchum And wonder where you lived, if it   s still there.  Fletcher I doubt it.  Finchum I doubt it, too.  Fletcher Yeah.  Bishop Do you have a motto or a philosophy that you live by?  Fletcher No, I guess not. Just being kind to everybody and being friends  whenever I can. You can   t be a friend to everybody, but you can try.  (Laughs) I learned that.  Bishop You said you learned that, what   s an important lesson in life that you   ve  learned that you would share with others?  Fletcher Well, on myself, just try to be true and honest and dependable.  Bishop If history were written today, what would you want it to say about you?  How would you want to be remembered?  Fletcher Oh, the good things. (Laughs) All the good things you could think to  say. So that   s like what now?  Finchum You tell me.  Fletcher He said,    What things would you want you to say?    Anything good.  Everything.  Finchum You were a shipbuilder and contributed to the war effort and raised  three good children, and a good Okie.  Fletcher Yes.  Bishop That   s something I was going to ask. You came back to Oklahoma, you  said this was home. What makes Oklahoma    home    for you?  28  Fletcher I don   t know. I just loved the state. I was born and raised here, and I   m  comfortable here with the living condition. It   s not as expensive to live  as it is in other states for me, because I have a grandson in San Diego,  and a son in Phoenix, and a brother in Denver and they all complain  about the living conditions, you know, and how much it costs. They like  coming home too. (Laughter)  Bishop And the weather hasn   t bothered you?  Fletcher Oh no, I love the weather in Oklahoma. Love the weather, yes sir.  Finchum And your husband was from Oklahoma too, so that probably helped the  pull to come back.  Fletcher Oh yeah. Yeah.  Finchum In 1918, 1919 they had the flu epidemic. Did that impact your family  any? You would   ve been about five so you  may not  remember.  Fletcher No.  Finchum So what   s your kids    favorite thing that you cook? What do they ask you  to fix for them? Do you still do fried chicken?  Fletcher Well, I   m not cooking anymore, not very much.  Finchum Okay.  Fletcher She wants to know what are you kids    favorite things were. You ate  everything on Christmas. (Laughter)  Bishop As a child, did you have a favorite food that your mother cooked?  Fletcher Well ,the peach cobbler was always   the desserts, you know, were  always the favorites in the family.  Bishop You had a little bit of a sweet tooth.  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum Had she canned her own peaches?  Fletcher She canned her own vegetables.  Finchum But for your peach cobbler?  29  Fletcher Yeah, you canned your own peaches when you lived in the country.  Any of the fruits, you know, that you could make the fillings out of.  Finchum Did she do biscuits on top of her cobbler or something else?  Fletcher Well, you made a crust   I guess it was biscuit dough. Yes.  Finchum She made a crust     Fletcher Crust, and put it on top.  Finchum Some people put biscuits.  Fletcher Yeah, no. I think they lined the bottom of the pan with crust and then  put the fruit in the middle, and then crust on top.  Finchum That sounds better.  Fletcher Desserts.  Finchum Did you drink much pop? Soda pop?  Fletcher I don   t now. I drink water now, water and tea     Finchum Sweet tea?  Fletcher Orange juice, yes. The dieticians   going to this nutrition program, it   s  really nice. They try to tell us and they come in and talk about how we  can accidently fall and do a lot of things, so I enjoy that program.  Finchum At 100 I think you could eat whatever you want.  Fletcher Thank you. She said I could do whatever I want. (Laughter)  Finchum Don   t tell (the dietician) I said that though. (Laughter) What were your  sisters    names?  Fletcher Jewel. Jewel and Sarah.  Finchum And then your brothers?  Fletcher John, Cleon, Hughes, and Albert.  Finchum The second one was Cleon?  30  Fletcher Cleon.  Finchum Hadn   t heard that one.  Fletcher That   s an odd name for a boy.  Finchum It is, spell it for me.  Fletcher C-L-E-O-N. They say Cleon is an odd name.  Finchum I haven   t heard it before.  Bishop Did you have a closer relationship to some of the siblings and not the  others? Did you have a favorite sibling that you were closest to?  Fletcher Yeah, my oldest sister.  Bishop And what made that bond so special?  Fletcher Well, I learned a lot from her, and she and I were close as girls. It made  it nice.  Finchum Share a room or share a bed?  Fletcher Oh yeah. Room and clothes and everything we had. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you get to go with her on dates?  Fletcher No, no. Now back in our days we didn   t go on dates. (Laughs) Didn   t  do much of that.  Finchum I still can   t get over you going to rodeos.  Fletcher Oh.  Finchum Yeah, and that   s an Oklahoma thing I guess, isn   t it?  Fletcher Oh yes, it is.  Finchum I haven   t been to one.  Fletcher The styles of the people there and you just go and watch the parades  and the actions of horses and people   you know, it   s just   I enjoy it.  Finchum I think I   d probably like the rodeo clown.  31  Fletcher The rodeo clown, yeah. Everything they do there I enjoy.  Finchum Well, growing up did you go to rodeos?  Fletcher Oh no, no, no.  Finchum Do you remember a circus coming through town when you were  younger?  Fletcher Well I   ve been to circuses. I don   t remember   after the kids grew up I  think, carrying my children to the circus, but I don   t remember going  when I was young.  Bishop And the rodeo, I was thinking back too, did you ever go to the  McAlester prison rodeo?  Fletcher I   ve never been to that one.  Bishop Because it   s a big deal.  Fletcher I   ve been to the one in Drumright, Boley, and Okmulgee. Those are the  only ones I went to. I   ve heard about the one in McAlester, but I  haven   t been.  Bishop It   s a big deal.  Fletcher That   s really the rough one. (Laughter)  Bishop Well   but it   s a pretty big deal.  Fletcher Yes sir.  Bishop Down in that part of Oklahoma, yeah. It   s a big rodeo.  Fletcher At this rodeo you know, they have a big parade. That you enjoy. People  with bands and all of the late model cars, and old model cars, and  motorcycles, and horses, and people. We get there early to see that. We  enjoy that.  Finchum That   s pretty much an all-day affair?  Fletcher About   yes.  Finchum By the time you get there and watch it and come back.  32  Fletcher Then you go to McDonald   s and eat or carry your own food, and then  they sell   they have little stands that they sell food. I don   t care to buy  food at places like that and eat, but I guess it   s alright.  Finchum Let   s back up a minute, after you came back to Bartlesville, you said  you worked in private homes?  Fletcher Yes.  Finchum What would you do?  Fletcher Just go and clean, sweep, and dust, run the sweeper.  Finchum And you did that for how long?  Fletcher I worked until I was eighty-five years old.  Finchum Wow. That   s a long time.  Fletcher A long time. (Laughs)  Finchum Why did you decide to quit then?  Fletcher I got tired. (Laughter)  Finchum Social security would   ve kicked in by then wouldn   t it?  Fletcher Well, I was drawing social security before I quit. So that was the only  reason I could afford to quit, you know. I had a little income of my  own, so I didn   t have to come and clean houses anymore. (Laughs)  Bishop Was work always an important part of your life?  Fletcher Oh sure, sure.  Bishop What made work important for you?  Fletcher It made it possible (Laughs)   Made life possible for me to pay bills and  live.  Finchum And go on cruises.  Bishop And cruises.  Fletcher I own my own home, bought my own cars and   by working you can do  all of that.  33  Finchum Was being black ever an issue?  Fletcher No. Oh no.  Finchum I figured it wasn   t in California, but I didn   t know about here.  Fletcher No, no. It hasn   t bothered me at all. Just accept who you are and be that,  so that   s right. I   ll say that I   m black and I   m proud and just who     nothing you can do about who you are, regardless of what you look like.  And you see, that is just mostly people going on looks. It   s just so   we  think we   re just as important as anybody else. It   s the color that, I don   t  know, makes a difference. I don   t know why. We have the same red  blood as other people. Same faith in life and yes sir, I just don   t know  why. I   ve always been treated nice and respectful.  Finchum Sometimes it   s more of a gender issue too, being a female. Sometimes  it   s harder.  Fletcher Oh yeah.  Bishop I want to know, in terms of Bartlesville, how have you seen, over the  years, what have you seen change about the community here? If  anything, how has Bartlesville changed since you   ve lived here?  Fletcher Well it hasn   t changed any with me.  Finchum The town itself hasn   t? Phillips 66? No, it   s Conoco. Conoco.  Fletcher Conoco is in with Phillips now. It   s called Conoco Phillips, the two  companies went together.  Finchum Having them here has helped Bartlesville.  Fletcher No, because I couldn   t tell any different with them coming here.  Finchum Well, what did you do on your 100th birthday?  Fletcher Have a big birthday party.  Finchum Here?  Fletcher In the building over here, the larger building.  Finchum Took a bigger one?  34  Fletcher Well, the west side, you know, because there was better than 100 people  at the birthday party. All the family members came. They came in from  Arizona, and California, Richmond, Virginia, and Denver, Colorado,  and so many little towns here in Oklahoma. Oh it was just real nice, it  really was.  Finchum Did they have 100 candles on your cake?  Fletcher Oh yes, and then 100 balloons and how many pieces of chicken? Two  hundred and some pieces of chicken? (Laughter)  Bishop I want to know, did you make a wish?  Fletcher KFC  Kentucky Fried Chicken  furnished the dinner, so we had chicken  and macaroni and cheese and everything that KFC furnished.  Finchum Well when you blew out your candles did you make a wish?  Fletcher No I didn   t get to blow out the candles. It was just so confusing, so  many people, oh it was wild. It was a tiresome day, I   ll tell you.  Bishop Special day.  Fletcher It was nice. I don   t want another birthday party though, no.  Finchum One and done huh?  Fletcher Yeah, hat one was enough.  Finchum Well for 110 maybe.  Fletcher No, I told them   I invited all of them for in five more years. That  would be what? Well, five years from now I   ll have another birthday  and that   s what I told them, you know. They don   t think I   ll live that  long.  Bishop I think you   re going to make it.  Fletcher But I do   Finchum I think you will too.  Fletcher Oh sure   Finchum I   ll come over for it.  35  Fletcher Well, we have a friend in the nursing home, she   s 108.  Finchum Well, there you go.  Fletcher One hundred and eight.  Finchum There   s no reason why you won   t be.  Fletcher I don   t know how well she is. She don   t walk anymore as much. She   s  in bed now quite a bit. Yeah, she   s 108. So I hope I get that far anyway.  Finchum I do too.  Fletcher I feel like I can.  Finchum Well is there anything else you want to say before we shut it off?  Fletcher No, just appreciate you folks coming and I   ve enjoyed you. I hope my   answers  have been what you wanted to hear.  Finchum They   ve been fine. You   ve been great. Thank you so much.  ------  ------- 
