 Finchum  Today is August 14, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex  Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. Today we   re in  Enid, Oklahoma to speak with Ottis Cornelsen, and this is regarding our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project, so thank you for meeting with us  today. Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  I was born January 10, 1913 in Beaver County, Oklahoma.  And what did your parents do for a living?  We were farmers.  Did you grow up on a farm?  Yes ma   am.  Did you have a few chores?  (Laughs) We had chores to do before   when we first got up, then we   d  have our breakfast, and then we had more chores to do when we got up  big enough to do  them , and we had certain things that we had to do  before we went to school.  What were a few that you had to do?  See that the chickens had plenty of water and feed, and help my brother  with taking care of the cattle, seeing that they were fed, and take care of  my pony. (Laughs)  And what was the pony   s name?  5  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Sweetheart.  Sweetheart. Did you ride it to school?  No.  No.  We walked to school, three miles.  One way?  One way.  My gosh, that   s a long  walk . You had to start early. In rain or snow, it  didn   t matter?  No.  Was it a one-room school?  Yes.  And how many other kids were in your grade?  Oh, there were about five or seven. It varied, but we were from the  kindergarten to the eighth grade all in one room. One teacher.  So you learned quickly. After the eighth grade what did you do?  In eighth grade I was in Enid, Oklahoma.  Okay, and you mentioned brothers and sisters. How many did you have?  Siblings?  There were nine of we kiddos.  And where were you in the order?  The last one.  You were the baby?  Yeah. (laughter)  Were you a little spoiled?  6  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Finchum  Bishop  No.  Still had to do chores.  I wasn   t because they were so far apart that I only had three brothers at  home that I can remember, because my sisters and my two older brothers  were already gone. At that time I had a nephew that was about two years  between our ages. So I was definitely the small one of the family.  Describe the house that you grew up in.  It was very small, a country home. We had a kitchen and a living room,  and a bedroom with a   we had stairs to go up to get to our bedroom.  Then we had a building that was away from the house that had an attic.  That   s where we also went to sleep.  How were they heated?  Coal and wood.  No electricity at that time?  (Laughs)  No? I have to     What was electricity back in 1913? (Laughs)  I have to ask.  And you surely had an outhouse.  That was the only thing we had. (Laughter)  Was it a one-seater or a two-seater?  One, and used a Montgomery Ward catalogue. (Laughter)  You ordered it?  No, no, no. That   s not what she means. (Laughter)  Oh, you put that one over my head for a second  I had to think.  (Laughter)  7  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Finchum  Bishop  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Well, you   re young enough that you   I hope this isn   t being recorded.  (Laughs)  It   s fine, it   s fine.  That things like that, you don   t know about.  Well, I   ve seen a Montgomery Ward. I   ve heard of them.  But not used for     Not used for the outhouse, no. (Laughter)  Well, were you living in Beaver County when the Dust Bowl was an  issue?  Well, from Beaver County we went to Texas County, which is on  farther     West.     west.  So do you have any memories from the Dust Bowl days?  (Laughs) Yes, quite a few.  Well, share a few.  We hung things over the windows to try to keep the dust out of the  house, but it wasn   t easy because houses were not so concealed at that  time. They were open, but no, I will say this, my mother and father  taught us to accept things as they happened and make the best of it.  That   s what I was raised to do. To, whatever happened, why, do the best  you could. If you couldn   t do anything about it, why, let it go.  I just wondered how the kitchen was during dust storms.  Well, we tried to cover it, everything, with towels and stuff, but I was  taught that it was something that was to be and to make the best of it and  to not complain.  And you said after the eighth grade, you moved into Enid?  Yes, in 1928 we came to Enid and lived out by Phillips University. I  went to Longfellow Junior High, and went to Enid High School three  8  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  years and graduated.  In what year?   In  1932.  See, you know dates.  In 1933 I married the love of my life.  Alright, and how did you meet him?  (Laughs) Oh okay, you want to know? (Laughs) Well, my brother and a  friend had a garage that they repaired automobiles, and this gentleman  worked for Gold Spot Dairy and delivered milk to residents in bottles.  His truck needed some work done, and he happened to be delivering  milk to where this garage was. So he talked to them and they worked on  his car, or his truck, and my brother told him that he could deliver milk  to our residence for the pay. Of course, at that time, we didn   t know that  we had to put the bottles back out, and  there was a  knock on the door,  and this gentleman said he needed the bottles of milk, and that   s where I  met him.  And what was his name?  Abe Cornelsen.  Was he a few years older than you, or same age or     Not too much.  So when you moved into town, your father was no longer farming?  No.  He was doing something else?  He worked   he was, well, I call it the custodian, but anyway, at Phillips  University. He was hired by Phillips University as a repairman out there  and of course we lived out by Phillips University, and my brother and I  walked from Phillips University to Longfellow Junior High.  About how far was that?  Well, Phillips University was about the 3600 block, and Longfellow  Junior High is the 1000 block.  9  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  A little piece then. Well, where did your future husband take you on  dates? How did he court you?  Well, usually he came to the house and we sat and visited.  Okay. Go to any dances?  No. He was a musician and played the guitar and had a beautiful voice.  Sang bass that could roll lower than the gentlemen in Nashville,  Tennessee that they always bragged about that could roll   that could  sing low bass.  Was he in a band?  After, well, several years, why he and two other gentlemen formed a trio  and sang, entertained.  Around Enid or across the state?  Yeah, just, yes.  Just in town. How did he pop the question?  That   s been so long ago, I don   t know. (Laughter)  You said yes, it doesn   t matter I guess. So what did he continue to do as  a living after you guys were married?  He was a carpenter.  And did you work outside the home?  I didn   t   well, we   ll back up a little bit. He was taking care of his  parents, and when we married, why, we lived with them for fifteen  years, taking care of them. My mother became ill, and Dad always called  me    Sis   . He called me at the house and he said,    Sis,    he said,    I want  to talk to you,    and I said,    Okay.    So I went over and seen Dad and he  said,    Mom needs you,    and I said,    Okay.    So he  Abe  had a step-sister  and he called her and told her that my parents needed me and we  were moving in to take care of my mother, and for them to take care of  her mother. So that   s what we did, and for fifteen years I   ve taken care  of my mother. His step-sister looked after his parents for, oh I guess  three months, and they went into a nursing home. So twenty-five years  of our married life was taking care of his parents and my parents, and I  have no regrets.  10  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Did you have children?  No.  Didn   t have time.  Well, I   ll make this comment. We talked about it, and he said we are not  raising children with grandparents, so that was it. Because he said,     They   ll spoil them, and we   re not going to have spoiled kids.     (Laughter) So     So you had your hands full anyway.  We had a very   sixty-seven years of married bliss.  What was the secret to that?  What was our secret?  Yes, to married bliss for sixty-something years.  To be congenial, love each other, and trust in a higher power.  Well, was he in the military?  Yes, he served overseas in India, came home ill. I mean, had a leg hurt,  but we still had a good life.  In the Army or Navy or     He   s Army.  Army. During World War II.  Yep.  Now you went to work at one point right? For the City of Enid?  I worked for the City of Enid for twenty-five years. I worked for  Kekendall and sold refrigerators. I mean, I didn   t sell them, I was a  bookkeeper. Then worked for fifteen years for Haskins Automotive.  As a bookkeeper?  Bookkeeper.  11  Bishop  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  She   s     Good with numbers. So was math your favorite subject in school?  I can   t say that it was. (Laughter) I didn   t have a favorite subject I don   t  believe.  Did you learn to sew along the way?  Well, when I was taking care of my mom she loved to quilt, and one  year she and I cut and quilted eight quilts.  Wow.  And she made the remark, she says,    I want you to help me,    and I said,     What do you want me to do?    She says,    Well, we   re going to make  quilts,    and she said,    I want to give every one of my children a quilt  that I have made,    and that   s what we did.  Did you get to pick which one would be yours?  What?  Did you get to the pick the one that would be yours?  No. And I don   t have it today because I gave it to one of my nieces that  wanted it, and because I feel like you have to have time to down load.  What was the pattern, do you remember?  Every one of them was different. I don   t remember anything in regard to  it. The only thing I remember is that we had a regular quilting frame that  you roll up, and I thought,    Oh, I   m just going to go and sit down.    My  mother came and looked at it and she says,    You take that all out.    She  says,    That   s not small enough.    Because they were large stitches. She  says,    You know better than to put those large of stiches in the quilt.     She says,    It   s supposed to be tiny.    So I had a whole block I had to  undo and redo because I didn   t do it proper.  And after those eight did you do anymore?  No.  No? Done.  12  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  That was enough.  That was. That was her desire to give each one of the children a  quilt . I  thought the other day, I wondered, I just wondered what   s happened to a  lot of the quilts.  To the other seven.  Because they were full-size quilts.  It took a lot of time to do eight by hand.  Taken us all year to do it.  Obviously church was an important part of your growing up and your  married life. Do you have anything you want to say about that?  About what?  Church, the role of church in your life.  Well, I was baptized at the University Place Christian Church. We went  there to church, and of course when we was out in the Panhandle, church  was in the school. We just had the one building, and we went Sunday. It  was fixed to church for church services, and then it was fixed for school  when it was school time.  Did you have a minister available every Sunday?  At that time they would come in from other places, because it was a very  small community. Because you would live probably, oh, six, ten, fifteen  miles apart because each of you had a farm. You didn   t have what you  have now, of neighbors that are so close to you that you wish you didn   t  have   you had more space to be. (Laughter) Because everybody had a  farm, and you weren   t that close to     You lived in Beaver County growing up, were you near     I was born in Beaver County, and actually   well, I went to school, my  first year of school was in Beaver County, and we had five miles to walk  to school.  Did you live near Beaver, the town of Beaver?  No, it was in the country. It was Beaver County.  13  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Well, what was the closest town? I   m trying to     Well, let   s see.  There   s an old     Well, at that time, Liberal, Kansas was the closest.  So you were way up there.  That was twenty-five miles.  Did you ever get a chance to go through Slapout  Oklahoma ?  No, we didn   t do much traveling.  Because it would be down in the south part of the county.  And then folks moved to Texas County, and we went to that little school  district. Then I don   t just remember, but anyway Dad wanted to get out  of farming and my brother was going to Phillips University and they  needed a custodian. He talked Dad into moving to Enid, Oklahoma in  1928, July.  I   m just curious, being in the Panhandle as a child, did you ever attend  the county fair or have anything to do with it?  Well, we were so far out in the country that the only way we had of  going was horse and buggy, and occasionally we got to go to town but  very, very seldom. A lot of times Dad and Mom would go and they   d do  the shopping, and we  at home  taking care of the  farm  because you  didn   t leave home and get back, up there and back in  a short time ,  because it   d taken you quite a while for your horses to take you.  Now I assume the town would be Liberal. You   d go over to Liberal?  Yeah.  Have to go to Liberal, Kansas.  And the roads probably weren   t very good.  They weren   t too bad, but some of the farmers would take their  equipment and fix the road. So we had a pretty good road.  Well in 1928,   29, the Depression was coming on. Do you have any  14  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  memories from that?  No, I will say that I do not because   I   ll answer you this way,  yesterday   s gone, today is here, and tomorrow is another day. And  yesterday, whatever happened     Fair enough.  What do you think of my answer? (Laughs)  Good. I know you had a role here in Enid with the senior nutrition,  senior meals   being the treasurer. Is that correct?  For the city?  Yes, for the Meals on Wheels program.  Oh, yes.  How   d you get involved with that?  Because we enjoyed volunteering and we went to a meeting and the  gentleman that was   oh, I can   t think of his name right now, I can see  his face. He was doing the bookwork, and he made a comment,    I   ve got  to give it up.    He said,    And that gal right there is going to take over,     and I looked at him and I said,    What?    I said,    I don   t know anything  about it.    He says,    You   re going to take over, going to be in charge of  keeping the books and receiving the money.    So that   s what I did for  twenty-five years.  So was that volunteer work?  That was volunteer.  Or were you volunteered? (Laughs)  Well, we did a lot of volunteering. I should have brought my nametag,  hostess for the Sirloin Stockade, Abe and I was.  Oh my gosh. Here in town?  Yeah, it   s an  Oriental  eating place. It   s right north of the Highway  Department. We hosted there for   go in in the evening, and then on  Saturdays and Sundays.  You volunteered? It wasn   t paid?  15  Cornelsen  Finchum  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Sure. Had fun. Entertained the customers.  Entertained them how?  Yeah, how would you entertain them?  (Laughs) Serve them coffee. And of course, my husband was a clown.  Of course the same people would come a lot of times. I remember one  time we were there and this gal came in and we spoke of course. She  said,    I knew you were here,    and I said,    Well, how come that?     Because she didn   t see us when she came in. She says,    I knew the  minute I walked in that door that you kids were here.    She says,     Because the attitude is different when you   re here.    And I said,    Oh,  come on.    And so to have fun, why, Abe would go out and serve coffee  and he might pull a joke on them, pretend that he was pouring our coffee  and he wouldn   t. (Laughs)  Sounds like you had a fun time.  Yeah, we tried to.  Working for Enid, have you seen any changes in Enid? What   s changed  the most, do you think, in terms of this community?  I will answer you this way. I   m glad I   m not there now.  (Laughs) Things have changed a lot.  I haven   t been back in the office or to the City since they told me I was  too old to work. (Laughs)  And how old were you when they told you that?  Sixty-five. (Laughter) Then we belonged to the RSVP  Retired Senior  Volunteer Program , volunteered there when they had their offices over  by the high school when they first started. At one time they started  making pictures, taking photos. When they   d come in they wanted  pictures, and Abe got to take their picture and cut up with them.  Were you a member of any organizations or any clubs or anything?  Well, I served as secretary for Enid  36 Eastern Star for twenty-five  years.  That   s a long time.  16  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  And I   m a past state officer of a branch of the Independent Order of Odd  Fellows.  Sounds like you were always busy.  We tried.  What   s a typical day like today at 100? What time do you get up, what  do you do during the day, and when do you go to bed? What   s a typical  day like in the life of a 100 year-old?  Well, I do here. (Laughs) I get up and come down to breakfast at around  seven o   clock, sit and visit for a while, and go back up in my room, read  the paper, and wish that they   d have different programs on television  sometimes. Then come back down and have lunch, and talk with some  of the ones that live here, get my trash mail. (Laughter)  Do you read any of it?  Yes. I got one the other day that I think I   m going to let Mike read. I  don   t know whether they know what they   re talking about. I imagine  they do, but the article said that our president was adopted and was  raised by not his father and mother but by other people. I thought,    Well,  I   m going to keep it. Just see. I   m going to read it again,    but it was  saying that the country that he was raised in and everything   so I don   t  know.  What time do you usually go to bed at night?  (Laughs) That depends upon what time St. Louis gets through with their  ballgame.  You   re a Cardinals fan? The Royals are back in first place, though.  Huh? How was that?  I said the Royals are back in first place. (Laughs)  Yeah. Well, I sometimes watch Texas.  How   d you become a Cardinal fan?  I don   t know. I guess because it   s the Cardinals, and I love cardinals.  (Laughter) Mike, you   re learning too much about me.  17  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  So have you always been interested in baseball?  Well, I used to play softball. (Laughs)  In high school or when?  There was a group of ladies about my age and I was a second baseman.  Cool. That   s cool.  So we had a lot of fun.  Was the league here in Enid?  What?  Was this during World War II? They had women   s leagues during World  War II.  We weren   t particularly in a league. It was just a group of different ones  here in Enid that we had a certain age, and I was acquainted with some  of them and they said,    You want to play?    and I said,    Oh sure, why  not.    So     Played second base.  Second base, yes.  How were you at hitting?  I did pretty good most of the time. Sometimes not so good, but     What kind of uniforms would you wear?  We didn   t have uniforms. Each one of us had the slacks and a shirt.  T-shirt or whatever?  Yeah.  What was the team name?  I don   t know that we even had a name.  Well then colors, what were your colors?  18  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Bishop  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  We didn   t have colors. Everybody wore   it was just a group of women  that didn   t have nothing else to do and had a ballgame. (Laughs)  About how old were you when you did that?  Oh     Just about.  I would say that I was in my late thirties or early forties. I   d been  married quite a while.  Well, have you been to a Cardinals baseball game in person?  No.  No? Is that on your wish list? Your bucket list?  No, not particularly. Of course I was a football fan because my brothers  played football for Enid High. So anyway, I think I told too much about  myself.  No.  No.  You   re doing fine.  You got any more questions that you don   t need the answer? (Laughter)  Did you ever think you   d make it to 100?  I never did think about age.  Not even when you were ninety-nine and said one more year?  No.  No? Are you the first in your family to make it to 100?  I do not have any brothers or sisters living. They   ve all been gone for, oh  let   s see. My youngest brother passed away   I   ve lived here five, he   s  been gone   I would say he   s been gone probably seven years anyway.  Maybe not quite that long.  Well, did they live to be in their nineties?  19  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  No, he was eighty-seven, eighty-eight or something like that I think.  What do you contribute your longevity to? What   s your secret, do you  think?  The only thing that I can answer you is that higher power has   there   s a  reason why that I   m still here and why, I don   t know. Some of these  days I   ll be told. That   s the way I feel about it. Otherwise, there   s a  reason why, I haven   t did something that I   m supposed to do yet, but  someday, I   ll be told that I   m supposed to do so-and-so. Maybe I   m  wrong, but that   s the only reason why that I can say that I   m still here.  Because all my brothers and sisters have gone, my nieces and nephews  that I played with when I was   that was growing up, because I had one  nephew that, there were just two years difference in our ages, well he   s  gone. Well, why? Can you tell me? (Laughter)  I   m out of answers. (Laughs) Do you have a philosophy or motto in life  that you live by or that you would share with somebody? If you had to  advise them to live to 100?  No.  What kind of advice would you give to somebody if they wanted to live to  100 years?  The only advice that I would say is to try to live like God wants you to  every day that you have breath to breathe, because after all, he   s the one  that has control of our life. If we don   t listen, then we answer the  consequences.  Is there anything left on your list of things you would like to do?  Things that I would like to do?  Yes.  Yes, I would like to be able to visit every one of my nieces and nephews  that live, wherever they live. I have them in every state of the Union.  Have them come to you, or you go to them?  Well, on my 100th birthday there were fifty of my relatives here from  Arizona, Texas, Kansas, Oklahoma.  So you had a good turnout for your party.  20  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Yeah.  Yeah.  My nephew, who is the son of my youngest brother, he and I were   in  fact, we graduated from high school the same year, and we were very  close. His children had the birthday party, with the assistance of a friend,  and notified all the relatives and it was wonderful.  Very nice. What would the two of you do for fun when you were growing  up together?  What did we do?  For fun.  Argue a lot of times. (Laughter)  Well that   s   kids will do that. (Laughter)  No, we got along just real well, and     What kind of games would you play, if you did?  We didn   t do a lot of game playing. We had work to do, and of course  he was working and I was working, but anyway life goes on. If you  don   t like some of the things that happen, why, smile about it and go on.  Well, do you have a favorite childhood memory?  Well, the thing that comes to me right now is when my second brother  came home from World War I.  World War I, and how was that?  He had been shell-shocked, and he was not good. That has always stayed  with me because a lot of times he would be very, very, very, very scary.  He   s the one that   s buried out here at the cemetery.  The end of the war is about the time, right after, that the influenza  epidemic   did that impact your family any?  Sir?  The flu epidemic in 1917 and 1918. Did that impact you or others you  21  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Bishop  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Cornelsen  knew?  No, I don   t think so.  Some folks say that those times were pretty harsh with illnesses and  diphtheria.  I will say with God   s help and everything, that my life has been very  lucky, I guess, with not being ill and a lot of things. I feel very fortunate  to not have to be   of course I go to the doctor, but I don   t always enjoy.  (Laughter) But I   ve been in the hospital once, and since I   ve been here I  was in the hospital a few days. All in all, I   ve got a lot to be thankful for,  and I am.  Now if history were written today, what would you want it to say about  you?  Nothing. (Laughs) I don   t   not important. Even though I   ve had 100  years, 101 years, it   s higher power that   s important, it   s not me.  That   s fair enough.  After all, that   s the one that   s saying,    Hey, you   re still here. You   re  supposed to do so-and-so tomorrow.    But what is it going to be? Well,  you   ll find out in the morning. (Laughter)  Well, is there anything else you want to say before we shut this off?  I think I   ve said more than I should. (Laughter)  I think you   ve been great, and I appreciate you talking with us.  Wonderful.  I   ll probably think of several things that I could have said later on in  the   (Laughs) Anyway, I did have   there was a communion. I   ll say  this, a communion between our family that was very, very good.  Your family meaning you and your husband, or you and your parents?  My brothers and sisters.  Your brothers and sisters. They all got along.  Of course my two brothers was at home because I was the ornery one.  The rest of them, my brothers and sisters, were all gone and the only  22  Finchum  Cornelsen  Finchum  Bishop  way I knew them was when they   d come home to see Mom and Dad  when I was in my   had some sweetie pies.  Would they come up Christmas and Thanksgiving? Holidays?  A lot of times, a lot of times. Of course they   my sisters didn   t live too  far. They married farmers and they didn   t live too far from where we  lived in Texas County. After the folks moved to Enid, well they came to  see us down here, so not as often. In fact, one of my sister   s  granddaughters lived here and she was to see me yesterday. So anyway,  I   ve told too much. (Laughs)  We   ll stop. Thank you, seriously, thank you.  Yeah, yeah. Thank you very much.  -------  ------- 
