 Finchum  Today is March 10, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum along with Alex  Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Morrison, Oklahoma, to speak with Alice Kelley Benes.  B-E-N-E-S, Benes.  This is regarding our 100 Year Life Project, so thank you so much for  having us today.  Well, it   s nice having company.  Let   s start with having you tell us for the record when you were born  and where.  I was probably born at home. People had their families, and they   d have  the doctor come to the house, you know, and the nurses come, friends,  neighbors, relatives, and people had their babies at home.  And when   s your birthday?  My birthday is December 5, 1913.  And home was Pawnee?  Yes.  Pawnee, Oklahoma.  Yes.  I understand there were nine children. Where were you in the birth  5  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  order?  Well, let   s see. There   s Cecil, Hazel, Edna, Bill, and Floyd. There were  five of them ahead of me.  You were kind of in the middle, then.  Yes.  Grew up on a farm?  Yes.  Did you have some chores?  Oh yes, we all had to work in gardens and milk cows, sold cream, you  know, had a separator, milk house. My milk house was a milk house.  Now it   s just a bunk house. There ain   t nothing now but a storage house  out there in the back. (Laughs)  How many cows did you milk?  Oh, I don   t know if we had any more than two or three.  Made your own homemade butter?  Yes, we churned.  Did you churn?  Yes.  Did you make cottage cheese, too?  I think so, probably so, yes.  And your mother canned a lot?  Oh yes, we had to raise the garden and do a lot of canning.  Well, with that many in the home, you canned a lot.  Yes, a hundred jars easy enough, peaches and vegetables.  You had fruit trees?  6  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Some people had orchards, too, yes. We had a peach tree sometimes,  just one or something like that.  And did you share a room with your sisters?  Yes, there were nine of us kids, and we had to share the rooms, the boys  upstairs and the girls downstairs. We were a big family, and we were  interested in getting a good education, teaching school, about two or  three of us. Some of the boys tried, started, but they didn   t like teaching  school. They had other things they could do, farming and all.  Well, where did you go to elementary school?  Well, we walked. We had a country school. There were districts back  there then, country schools. They had odd names like Buena Vista. That  was so long ago when they would build country schools. You could be a  teacher in the country, have a school all to yourself to teach. I don   t  know if they have any country schools now like they did then.  They sure don   t have one-room ones anymore. Where did you go to high  school?  I went to Pawnee High School, and teacher school I went to Edmond.  Edmond was a teachers    college then.  And what year did you graduate from there?  I don   t remember the year or even if I graduated from there. I just  remember going to school to classes and teaching in the wintertime.  And how would you get there?  We would get a room in a rooming house. People would rent rooms out  for students in Edmond, so I got into one of those big buildings. We had  an upstairs with the girls. That   s the way my sister and I went together,  and we stayed at this place in Edmond and went to summer school  because we taught in the wintertime. We had summer school, and you  continue your education. There   s something different to learn all the  time, and that helped.  What grades did you teach?  Well, when you have a country school, you have just about all the  grades. Maybe one or two in each class. (Laughs) I had, well, yes, taught  in country schools.  7  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  And what did the children do for lunch back in those days?  They had little lunch buckets. They   d come, and we   d all have a noon  period to have our lunches. We   d get in society, and we taught the kids  to play ball, entered them in contests, did a lot of things with our  students back there, even when you were in the country.  And I   m assuming there wasn   t indoor plumbing?  No, outdoor. Outdoor building, out buildings. We called them out  buildings.  And what did you have for transportation?  Well, legs. (Laughter) You would buy a car, and your brothers and  sisters were still going to school. They were using the car, and you was  walking to school. It was that way for me one time, so I helped buy a  car. I never learned to drive a car.  Never?  No.  But you bought one?  Yes, I was teaching school, and I needed the kids to take me places, and  they did. We went.  Well, did you have a favorite subject?  My favorite subject, let   s see. (Singing    School Days   )    Reading,  writing, and arithmetic. Taught by the tune of a hickory stick. You were  my queen in Calico. I was your young       I don   t know how the song  goes, now, something about a beau.    You were my young friend in  calico. I was your sweet   .    Oh, what happened to all the songs I used  to sing? I had a pretty good voice, but that was quite a few years ago.  Just a few.  Yes, trying to remember all   .  Did you have cake walks and pie dinners and that sort of thing?  I think so. We had box suppers. They were called box suppers. You  would make your box just as fancy as you could. You had to buy some  paper to cover it and make flowers to adorn it. You had a nice box like  8  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  that, and you   d have your lunch in it. We   d have a box supper at night,  and people would come in, and they   d bid on your box and see if you  could get one of those boxes cheap as they can. The idea was for the  school to get the money in order maybe to buy a batch of books or  something.  That   s what I wanted when I was supervising a box supper. I wanted to  buy some books for the school. We ordered them through the state, and  they shipped up a whole box of books for you. Then you could ship  them back, and that was a good idea because I sure wanted the kids to  read, and to read others than just their regular lessons, and so we   d get  those books. Well, lots of times you didn   t have too many coming to the  country schools. You had several classes, primary class. Maybe there  was one or two or maybe three kids in that class. It was altogether  different.  And how did you discipline them?  I had a little stick that was standing up in the hallway. (Laughs) I never  was mean to them, and they never outdid themselves with me either.  How long were you teaching?  I don   t know how many years it was. Five years I guess. I   d have to sit  down and figure out that, how long, how many years did I go teaching.  Quite a few until I got married.  And when you got married you had to stop, or chose to stop?  Yes.  Well, then tell us how you met your husband.  Let   s see, how   . I haven   t given any thought on that. Where in the  world did I pick up on Ed, or he picked up on me? We used to have box  suppers, and sometimes some people would be there at that box supper,  or sometimes you had a party at home. We did different things like that,  country people.  Well, was he from Pawnee, too?  He was, let   s see. Ed was   where was he living? (Laughs) I can   t  remember, can   t recall where he was from. I   d have to think on that. We  had box suppers, and we would go to them even though they weren   t  close to you.  9  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  To meet new people?  Yes.  Did you have dances?  I never did go to any dances hardly. You had to be careful of your  reputation. (Laughter)  So Pawnee was the town that you would go to shop in?  Yes.  Did it have a movie theater back in those days?  Yes, I think so. We went to a show, and we held box suppers sometimes  at schools. Country schools had box suppers, and we   d put on a little  program, had kids come out on the stage and say a speech or sing a  batch of songs. We had some kind of a program for people when all the  girls were supposed to decorate a box and put a lunch in it. Did you ever  hear of that?  And then would you have to eat with the person that bought your box?  Yes, (Laughs) and you hoped someone didn   t get it. Those were the  days, all right, so long ago.  So your father was a farmer?  Yes, he was.  And what did he     He was a thresherman. They opened up a shop in Pawnee, a John Deere  company, and then they went to Stillwater and had a store down there, a  John Deere store. All my relatives are gone. The only ones left I think in  my family, let   s see, I don   t think I have a brother left. Cecil, Bill, Floyd,  Boots, and Kenneth, five brothers. Cecil, Bill, Floyd, Boots and  Kenneth. Boots. (Laughs)  Boots, was that his nickname or his real name?  Yes, his name was Elisha Warren, Jr. or something like that, and instead  of using that name we just started calling him Boots. I think my mother  put a nickname on a lot of kids. My older brother   s name was Cecil, and  we called him Jack. (Laughter)  10  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Well, what was yours?  Ally.  Well, once you got married, what did your husband do for a living?  Oh, Ed was a farmer.  A farmer, too.  Yes.  Raising cotton or cattle or what?  Well, yes, you have wheat fields and cotton patches. If you wanted to  pick cotton you raised cotton, but people weren   t too crazy about  wanting to raise cotton and would rather have the wheat field. My  family, my dad had a threshing machine, and he would hire him. They  would hire him. He would take my older brother with him, and they  would go farm to farm doing threshing, so that   s how we made our  living. The women at home would work, too. Some of us was teaching  school, two of us I think, two of us.  My brother tried teaching, and he didn   t like it at all. He   d rather do  something else than teach school, so one of my older sisters taught  school. She did. She finished college, even. Her name was Edna, and she  married a guy named Bybee. Oscar Bybee was her husband   s name. She  had a child, but he was hurt when he was born or something. He was  abnormal, and she couldn   t keep him, had to put him in a home. That   s  what they did. They had homes in towns for children who were crippled.  I didn   t have any problems with my family. I had a good family.  How many children did you have?  Oh, let   s see. (Laughs) I   m counting them. I have to count them, how  many children I had. That   s the way my mind   s been working nowadays.  I just can   t think of things.  Is that a picture of them?  Well, there   s six people in that one. It   s probably spouses.  I had four sons and two daughters.  There you go, four sons and two daughters.  11  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  There   s three sons there. One   s my husband and three sons there and my  daughter.  That   s a pretty big family, too.  Yes.  And did they have chores?  They had families, too.  They did?  Yes, some were teachers and some   .  Education was important?  Yes, went to college.  OSU?  Yes. I went to Edmond. Edmond was a teachers    college.  Well, do you remember some of the things that you had to deal with  during the Depression?  Oh, no, I haven   t given any thought, but we had to be careful about what  we bought. Did a lot of gardening and farming, raising chickens and  dressing them and freezing. We got a freezer so we could freeze some  vegetables and stuff. Oh yes, we worked on things like that.  It was a good thing when the electricity came to the farm, then?  Oh yes, it sure was, and running water. Of course, you had your own  well.  Do you remember seeing your first airplane?  Yes, I was just a kid, and we heard about a plane coming down and  settling somewhere in a pasture. Wasn   t here. Saw a plane do that, I  think, but I was too scared to get on one.  Did you ever take a train ride?  Did I ever take a train ride? I don   t remember one. I don   t think I did.  12  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Well, to get back and forth to Edmond, you rode in a car?  Oh, yes. I bought the car. Everybody else drove it and used it, but I paid  for one while I was teaching. They would take me to school sometimes  and come after me, but I never learned to drive.  What kind of car was it?  Ford. Ford cars and Chevrolets, if it wasn   t one, it was the other. My  brothers would be the ones   I had more brothers than I did sisters. Let   s  see, Edna, Hazel, and Thelma, I had three sisters, and Cecil, Bill, Floyd  and Kenneth, four brothers.  Did any of them go to the war?  No. I don   t know. They probably had to register. People registered, but  whether they was called up was another thing, I think. No, I don   t think  they   .  They didn   t have to. Do you remember getting your first television?  I don   t remember that either. (Laughs) See, I   ve got too far down the  path to remember too much in the past.  Well, was there a actual town named Lela?  Yes, that   s right over here.  There was a town, though?  Oh, was it a town there? I think there was a store there, country store.  They sold groceries. We had a family, though, had a serious accident, I  think, run over and got killed. The train was coming, and they were  crossing the track down there at Lela. That happened when they lost a  member of the family, just accidentally. They was crossing that time the  train was coming, but it still goes across there, I guess. You have to  watch the track.  Well, we saw the cemetery, so I was just curious if there was a town at  one point.  Yes, they had a big ol    country store there for a while.  Were there very many traveling salesmen? Do you remember if any, like  the Raleigh man or     13  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Oh yes. Oh yes. Every summer you had somebody come and try to sell  you some stuff, and sometimes you bought something. (Talking to the  dog) What do you think, Petey? That guy   s different isn   t he? He doesn   t  belong around here, does he? You   re going to watch him, huh? (Laughs)  She   s just pawing him, she sure is.  Was religion very important to your family?  Oh, I think so.  Go to church on Sundays?  I think the religious things were in the country, but we went to the  Christian Church, belonged to the Christian Church.  What were holidays like, like Christmas, for you?  We   d cut down a tree and bring it in, country. (Laughs) We   d draw  names in school and had a Christmas tree in the schoolhouse and put on  a program, so the kids had to learn to say a piece or sing a song or have a  regular program for the family when they came to the box suppers. We  had box suppers to make money to buy books for the school. That   s  what we did, so I ordered some books from Oklahoma City. They sent a  big box of books to us.  Well, at home what was Christmas like?  Well, I was making a bookcase for our school. We need some books  around here, and I really believed in having some things like that to let  the kids read books.  Did you ever do anything special for your own family during the  holidays?  Why, sure. We made pies and cakes and roasted turkey. (Laughs) Had  all the families coming in, and they would bring a dish. We had big  dinners. That was a long time ago.  Well, did you sew?  Everybody had to do some sewing. You had to make your dresses. You  didn   t buy already-made dresses, hardly. You sewed and made your  own. I was the last one learning. I   d sew for my kids every once in a  while.  14  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Where would you get your fabric?  Well,  J. C.  Penney   s. I think the store was called Penney   s. Stillwater,  sometimes I bought materials in Stillwater. Pawnee wasn   t much to have  stores, but it did. I don   t know how it is now.  Would you use flour sacks?  Oh, yes. We hemmed them up, too, and used them, flour sacks and  pillowcases, flour sacks.  In Pawnee, did you ever go take your family to the Pawnee Bill Ranch?  Yes, we sure did. Pawnee Bill. Most of us lived in the country. My  brother and, let   s see, who else, just my brothers, they opened up a John  Deere store, sold tractors in Stillwater, too. One of my sisters was a  teacher. She helped me a lot, too, so we were teaching. The two of us  were teaching school. My brother started it, and he didn   t like it at all.  He didn   t do very good at teaching, so he gave up on it.  Well, did you ever think you would live to be a hundred?  Never give it a thought. (Laughs)  It just happened, huh? Well, how did you celebrate turning one  hundred?  Well, that wasn   t too far back. How did we celebrate it? I   m forgetting  things now. That   s age where I just can   t remember everything.  You have a party?  Yes, I think so.  Lots of family and friends come?  Well, that   s that party that was in the paper.  In the paper?  Yes.  A lot of people.  Oh, it was a big one. I celebrated my highest birthday at the Morrison  church.  15  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  At the church.  Yes. The church, Christian Church, has a big room attached to it. That   s  where we had this birthday, in that big room, kitchen. They had a big  kitchen.  Like a fellowship hall?  This is my baby. That   s Clarance. He   s a twin.  He   s a twin?  Yes.  Were they born at home?  Raised six children, was active in the Morrison Christian Church. That   s  me. Born at home.  Were the twins born at home or in a hospital?  Let me see if I remember. Born December 5, 1913. That   s me. I was one  of ten children in a Pawnee farm family. (Reading)    Her dad, Elisha  Warren Kelley had the first John Deere dealership in the Pawnee area.  After graduating from Pawnee High School, she attended Central State  Teachers College.    This is all about me here. You want to read it?  Let   s see it. Your son, does your son live with you today?  Yes.  Does he help you quite a bit?  There we are.  There   s the whole family there. Let   s see if we can find the twins.  I don   t know now what else I have here.  Were they involved with 4-H and FFA in high school and stuff, your  kids?  Yes, I think so. They liked that.  Did you belong to a home demonstration club?  16  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  I did.  You did?  Yes.  Do you remember the name?  No, I   ve forgotten everything. That was so far back.  But they sewed and canned and that sort of thing, the home  demonstration.  Yes. We entered contests, different divisions of the stock shows and  whatever it was they held. We would enter some things in the contest in  the sewing, I think, division.  For the county fair?  Yes. Made something for the county fair. Canning, too, we had jars of  stuff. I   ve forgotten all that we used to hustle around and enter.  And make a quilt?  Yes, I think so. Lots of times we   d have a party. People would come in  and quilt.  You had a quilting bee.  Quilting, yes. My grandmother, I can remember my grandmother  making quilts. She taught us to sew. I remember my grandmother on the  Endicott side. There was a Kelley side and an Endicott side. Endicott  was my mother; Kelley was my dad. I knew some of my aunts in  Pawnee, so I had cousins.  Did your grandparents live with you?  Sometimes I think they did, probably when there was sickness or  something. I can   t remember all of that now. The years have gone.  What   s a typical day like for you today? What time do you usually get up  and go to bed?  Let   s see. I watch television until I go to bed, I guess, and I never notice  what time it is. They have to get up for school, and I don   t mess around  17  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  too much. I don   t ever notice what time it is, eight o   clock, probably.  Petey, would you know when we went to bed? (Laughter)  Well, do you do much reading?  Yes, I do. I have books everywhere.  Do you like fiction or nonfiction?  Well, I guess both.  Both?  Yes.  I have a question for you. What   s your secret, do you think, to living so  long?  For living so long? Well, I expect there   d be a lot of things. Staying  home and accepting some things to be the thing to do or not to do. I  never learned to drive a car, even. I only expected to pay for them while  I was teaching at schools. I helped them buy the cars, but they had to  drive them, and I walked to school. The school was the one, the last one  I taught in, I had gone to it when I was a kid. It burned down, the old  school did, and so it was a new school. I was the first one to get over  there and wash up the windows and get started teaching in that school. I  like country teaching. You had all kinds of classes, though. You had the  primary class. You had an eighth-grade class. Kids were graduating out  of that eighth grade to go to high school. The high school was in  Pawnee. You could teach up to the eighth grade, and sometimes it might  be just one kid in that class.  Do you have a motto you live by?  Oh, yes, you did.  What   s your motto for living?  Well, do your share of the work. Teach your kids to help with the  cooking and sewing. We all were learning to sew. Bought machines, and  we could sew. How about that, Petey? We liked our pets, too, didn   t we?  Have you always had a pet?  Oh, I think so. I think we always had outdoor dogs, big dogs, because  the boys liked to have them. They sometimes used the big dogs outside.  18  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  They liked to have their dog, too. Out in the country, you could have  your animals, and we lived in the country most of the time.  Did you ever own a horse?  I was scared to even get on a horse I owned once. (Laughs) Some of the  kids did. They learned to get on that horse. They had to have a saddle  and everything, but not me. My animals are cats and dogs. Oh, I milked  cows, though. I   d rather milk cows than wash dishes. (Laughs) If I could  get out of washing dishes, I   d go milk the cows.  Sounds like you might have gotten in a little bit of trouble sometimes for  not doing chores.  In a big family, you sure do. They holler,    Get up  It   s time to get up      We always had an upstairs, rooms upstairs, three I think. We rented  houses, country houses. My dad was a thresherman, and he sold  machinery, John Deere shop. He had a John Deere shop, and he sold  machinery and stuff. Before that time, he was buying them, selling  wheat, threshing. The women would have to cook dinner for the  threshers.  That could be ten or twenty people, couldn   t it?  Yes.  A lot of large crews. Your bedroom was upstairs?  Yes.  How was the house heated?  They hardly ever complete them. They   d leave the upstairs open.  It was cold in the winter.  Yes.  How would you heat, stay warm?  Well, I think we would get a bottle of hot water and wrap in a towel and  put it down in the feet. We   d start that way, anyway. That   s how we got  to sleep. That was when upstairs had no heat, and we just had to fix our  own heating pad.  And then get dressed in a hurry.  19  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Bishop  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  Yes, that was living in the country. Most times we rented those places.  Sometimes we got around and bought the farm. My dad was a  thresherman, and his older son Cecil, my oldest brother Cecil, was a  thresherman with him, and they had machinery. They were hired out to  others. Did quite a bit.  Now in terms of   if history were written about you today, what would  you want it to say about you? How would you want others to remember  you?  How would they remember. You better ask them because I belonged to a  lot of things. I belonged to clubs.  What sorts of clubs did you belong to?  Let   s see. YMCA? I don   t know what was the club called. That was so  long ago. I can   t remember, recall all that. Can   t recall all of it. I   d have  to pull some books out of the shelves. I was thinking this today. Where  in the world did I leave that box of books? Clarance put them  somewhere, and I   ll have to hunt them up because I was wanting to  really find them because I was wanting to know something about  something we did. I can look up in the books, but I can   t find the books.  So how do you spend your time during the day? What types of things do  you do?  Well, to have a family, what do you think we do? (Laughs)  I mean today. Today what do you do?  Well, just about the same, too. I sit here and make someone wait on me.  (Laughs) That   s about right, too.  Well, that   s about all of my questions today. I thank you for sharing your  stories with me.  Do you think you got enough? (Laughs)  It   s interesting to hear about the one-room school, so I appreciate you  sharing that with us.  Yes, there were a lot of   in the county there were more than one, and I  was trying to think of the names we used to pick out. Skinny Valley for  one school, Skinny Valley. I can remember that. The other names, I  can   t recall all of them. I can   t remember all those names that we used to  20  Finchum  Benes  Finchum  Benes  give the school a name. They don   t have those anymore, country  schools.  Even the buildings are gone.  Yes.  A lot of them.  Things are different.  -------  ------- 
