 Finchum Today is December 1, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University and today we are  in Edmond, Oklahoma, to speak with Ivan Martin. This is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project, so thank you for having us.  Martin You   re welcome.  Finchum Let   s begin by having you tell us when and where you were born.  Martin I was born in Logan, New Mexico, July 27, 1915.  Finchum Do you have brothers and sisters?  Martin I had two brothers and one sister.  Finchum And where are you in the mix?  Martin I   m next to the lowest one. I   m next to the youngest one.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Martin My dad was a farmer and my mother stayed at home.  Finchum What did he farm?  Martin Well, first he started out in 160 acres in New Mexico, out in the sand  hills and plum thickets. Then we moved to Wichita in 1926, and there  he went to work for the stockyards company.  Finchum Doing what type of things?  5  Martin Janitor.  Finchum Did your mother still stay at home at that point?  Martin Yes.  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school?  Martin In Wichita. That   s the reason my folks moved to Wichita, to get us kids  in school. In New Mexico eighth grade was as long as you   d go.  Finchum So for the first through the eighth you went in New Mexico or Wichita?  Martin Wichita.  Finchum Do you remember the name of your school?  Martin Skinner.  Finchum And then after the eighth grade, what did you do?  Martin Eighth grade? No. We went clear through school in Wichita.  Finchum After the eighth grade though     Martin Went to North High.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject?  Martin Woodworking.  Finchum They don   t have that anymore in schools. Did you make something of  particular interest?  Martin Not really, I made a couple   two cedar chests and a bedstead. Turned it  out on a lathe. My daughters got them.  Kay has one cedar chest and  headboard . Then there   s one in there in the closet.  Finchum You   ve got all three?  Martin Yep.  Finchum That   s unusual too and they   re still together, because you did it right.  (Laughs) After you finished high school what did you do?  Martin I went to work for the stockyards as a bookkeeper.  6  Finchum Stockyards?  Martin The stockyards there in Wichita. Then I got up to the assistant to the  secretary and treasurer. Then I quit and went to work for myself.  Finchum Doing what?  Martin Vending machines, music boxes, jukeboxes and stuff.  Finchum To restaurants or     Martin Any place I could put them. Restaurants and beer joints mainly.  Finchum And did you do that the rest of your career?  Martin Yes. I moved to Winfield in 1955. Bought out a route down there and  moved my family all down there. We thought there was better schools  down there and the kids could go do as they please more, because it was  a nice little town.  Finchum Getting a little closer to Oklahoma.  Martin Yeah.  Finchum Did the company have a   did you name the company, or did it already  have a name?  Martin I named it.  Finchum What was it?  Martin Automatic Coin Machine.  Finchum Is it still in business?  Martin Yeah, I sold it to one of the boys that was working for me. He   s still  running it.  Finchum So you spent a lot of time on the road?  Martin Quite a bit, but I was home every night.  Finchum Drove a pickup truck?  Martin Pickup truck, two vans, and a big truck.  7  Finchum How many children did you have?  Martin Three. Three girls.  Finchum No boys.  Martin No boys, and a female dog. (Laughter)  Bishop What was her name?  Martin Babe, that   s her right up there.  Bishop Wow, pointer   Finchum Hunting dog?  Bishop Yes.  Finchum She   s pretty.  Martin Pam had that picture made for me from a photograph.  Finchum Did you hunt or did you just have the dog?  Martin I hunted. I hunted and fished, played golf.  Finchum What was your handicap?  Martin Seven for a long time. I won a few tournaments.  Finchum Get any hole-in-ones?  Martin One. I played the big courses and you don   t get too many hole-in-ones  on them.  Finchum But you can claim one.  Martin Yes.  Finchum Would the girls go golf with you?  Martin No.  Finchum None of them picked up the game?  8  Martin They tried   well, Pam plays a little bit.  Burnside Not anymore.  Finchum When you were back in Wichita with your parents, when they moved off  of the farm, did you have chores?  Martin Yeah, we raised chickens. Had laying chickens, and young chickens  every year. We would dress them out and sell them as fryers.  Finchum Would you have to do the killing or did your mother or dad?  Martin I did, and my brother. I cleaned out the chicken house. (Laughs)  Finchum Has a certain smell doesn   t it?  Martin Yeah.  Finchum Milk cows?  Martin Me? Never. My dad did the milking. We lived on Twenty-first Street. I  built a new house out there in 1941, and we had milk cows. Dad did the  milking. I did the feeding and cleaning.  Finchum In 1941, that   s about the time the war was gearing up.  Martin Yes.  Finchum Did you have to go?  Martin No, I worked for the stockyards at that time and my boss was on the  board. If I   d get a 1-A he   d have me, the next two or three days, get a  letter I was 4-F. He wanted me on that job.  Finchum You helped on the home front. Did your brothers have to go?  Martin My little brother did. My oldest brother was not able to do it. My little  brother, he went to just the regular Army, but he was in South Dakota,  and out in San Diego, and out in the desert. I don   t think he ever went  overseas.  Finchum Do you remember when they declared the war over?  Martin No.  9  Finchum Was he home by then?  Martin No, he was in South Dakota, I believe, at that time.  Finchum How were holidays when you were growing up? Like Christmas and  Thanksgiving?  Martin They were alright.  Finchum Would you get presents at Christmas?  Martin We got fruit when we lived in New Mexico. You   d get an orange and  an apple maybe.  Finchum And be happy to get it.  Martin Yeah. You didn   t get much fruit out there. About all the fruit you had  out there was sand plums. We used to go pick a bunch of them every  year and make toe jam out of them.  Finchum Toe jam?  Martin Yes, we called it that. It was jam.  Finchum I   m assuming your mother had a good garden, too?  Martin No, we didn   t have a garden, much of a garden at all. Too dry. It was  sand plums and cactus about all there was out there.  Finchum What would he try and grow on his 160 acres there?  Martin We grew corn, and maize, and a few peanuts. Mostly pasture.  Finchum Did you have to do some chores there?  Martin I was too little. We moved from there when I was six years old.  Finchum Okay, pretty young. How did you get from New Mexico to Kansas?  Martin In the backend of a railroad car with our furniture in the front. They  went to Hutchinson, Kansas, and took the interurban down to Wichita  from Hutchinson. You know what an interurban was? It   s an electric  streetcar.  Finchum An electric streetcar. How long did that take?  10  Martin I don   t remember.  Finchum A day or two or not that long?  Martin Oh no, it was only about fifty, sixty miles. Then we rode a hayrack from  there out to my   where we was going to live.  Finchum And a hayrack is? Some people won   t know, what is a hayrack?  Martin It   s a regular wagon with big sides on it so you throw the hay in it and  haul it.  Finchum And is pulled by     Martin Horses. That   s all we had was horses. No tractors at that time hardly.  Finchum Did you ride horses for fun or were they for work?  Martin Yeah. When we, my wife and, lived out on Twenty-first Street we had  twenty acres, and we had three riding horses out there.  Finchum Always had something for fun.  Martin Yeah.  Finchum Did you go to dances?  Martin No   well, yes. We went to shrine dances. I couldn   t dance worth a  dern. My wife was a good dancer.  Finchum Did you like music? Did you play any instrument?  Martin No I never did, just played the jukeboxes. (Laughter)  Finchum Did she? Did your wife play?  Martin She played the piano and the organ. She was a good musician.  Finchum So she had all the rhythm?  Martin Yes, she did. That   s why she liked to dance.  Bishop How   d you meet your wife?  Martin Moved across the street from them when I was six years old. She was  the only one I ever dated.  11  Finchum From age six. What was her name?  Martin Doris.  Finchum And her maiden name?  Martin Nichols. Doris Virginia Nichols.  Finchum And when did you get married?  Martin In 1934.  Finchum During the Depression.  Martin We was nineteen years old. Yeah, right in the middle of the Depression.  I was making ten cents an hour.  Finchum Doing what?  Martin Working as a bookkeeper at the stockyards.  Finchum Just ten cents an hour?  Martin I hired a lot of university boys that graduated out of a university at ten  cents an hour to dig postholes at the stockyards. There   d be 200 men  out there in front waiting to get a job. You couldn   t get a job for  nothing.  Bishop And that was in Wichita?  Martin Yes.  Finchum In the    30s. So you were lucky to get your bookkeeping job.  Martin Yes. Well I went from a timekeeper for the neighbors out and from  there into the office, main office, as just office boy for a while. I got up  to where I was keeping books and sending messages on postal and  Western Union.  Finchum Hard to turn away people if there   s that many lined up for a job? Just  one of those things?  Martin Just one of those things. The boss I worked for was quite an old man.  He was a gentleman. I said,    Why don   t you get diggers out there to dig  that instead of these men with picks and shovels?    He said,    They need  12  the work.    But the ground was so hard and dry it   d take them a day to  dig one hole. It was pitiful.  Finchum And you were nineteen when you go married. Did you elope?  Martin No, got married in my mother-in-law   s house, by a Quaker-man,  preacher. Cost me five dollars. (Laughter)  Finchum Did you go on a honeymoon?  Martin No.  Finchum Couldn   t afford it?  Martin Couldn   t afford it.  Finchum Did you go into your own apartment at that point or did you live with  one set of parents?  Martin No, I lived with my oldest brother and his wife. We lived there a few  months and then got in a garage apartment. Then I bought a house in     35.  Burnside How much did you pay for it?  Martin Seventeen hundred and fifty dollars and then I paid on it for a couple of  years, and they dropped it to twelve-fifty then. The price of the house  was really   when I come out, it was twelve hundred and fifty dollars,  five hundred less.  Finchum And then when you sold it     Martin For  4,100. In 1941 we moved out on this twenty acres and built a new  five-room house.  Finchum Doing pretty good at the time.  Martin Yeah, and I was working hard too. When the war was over they offered  me a big increase in wages. It turned out to be a two-dollar raise. Well I  went in and told my boss, put my hand down on the table, and I said,    I  can go out and pick up pasteboard boxes and make more than this.    He  said,    Why don   t you try something. If you need some money, I   ll let  you have it.    He was president of the Stockyards National Bank. He  said,    I   ll let you have what you need to buy it. All you have to do is  give me an insurance policy.    That   s the way I got my start, business.  13  Finchum Pretty nice guy.  Martin He was a good guy. When we lived in Winfield and the kids got  through college and left, I stayed there and run the business.  Finchum When did you give it up?  Martin In  1976    what was it? I was sixty-one years old I guess. I turned it  over to the boy that worked for me and he   s still running it.  Finchum So you   ve been retired close to forty years?  Martin Yes. (Laughs)  Finchum What did you do after you retired?  Martin Played golf and go hunting. I repaired golf clubs.  Finchum Kept busy.  Martin Oh yeah.  Finchum Your daughter said you traveled.  Martin Oh yeah, did a lot of traveling.  Finchum Have a favorite place?  Martin No. Just as long as it wasn   t a big city. (Laughter) I never liked big  cities.  Finchum Travel with a mobile home or just     Martin No.  Finchum Hotel rooms?  Martin My wife said she didn   t want a mobile home. She said,    If you take a  vacation, I want to take one. If you take a mobile home I got to cook,  and wash, and do everything anyway.    (Laughs)  Finchum I understand that. (Laughs)  Martin We made three trips, I think it was, to Hawaii and one trip to Canada.  I   ve been in every state in the Union. I   ve always wanted to go to  Australia, but I never did make it. It reminded me of that picture show,  14     I   m just on my way to Australia, just passing through.    You see that?  It   s pretty good one.  Finchum Did you get overseas for something?  Martin Went through the Panama Canal.  Finchum That counts.  Martin After my wife passed away, my sister-in-law out in California had a  knee replaced and I went out and stayed with her while she recuperated.  Then we got a chance   a couple was going on this trip to Panama and  then all at once they couldn   t go so I bought their tickets for a discount,  which was Panama on up the East Coast.  Finchum That   s a pretty long trip.  Martin Seven days.  Finchum What kind of car would you travel around in?  Martin Toronado,    81 Toronado.  Finchum Ford?  Martin Toronado.  Finchum I know, but is it a   does Ford make them?  Martin No, Chrysler did I think. Wasn   t it Chrysler?  No, it was an  Oldsmobile.   Finchum I don   t know my cars.  Martin Well, they don   t make them anymore. It was a straight eight, had a hood  that ever so long. Big old long car. It was a running car.  Bishop Was that the first car you ever owned?  Martin Oh no. First car I ever owned was a 1919 Ford Coupe. Windows didn   t  roll up, you pulled the strap up and hooked to the roof.  Bishop Early air-conditioning then, probably.  Martin Yeah. (Laughter)  15  Finchum A 1919 Ford Coupe. So it was used.  Martin Yes. I gave twenty dollars for it.  Finchum Quite a steal  (Laughter) You wish you still had it, I bet?  Martin Yeah, I   d like to have it now. You ever seen the tires on them?  Finchum No.  Martin About that big around, bicycle tires now. Thirty-three and a third inches  wide and three and a third wide and thirty-three inches around. Little  bitty tire.  Finchum Would they blow   get holes in them a lot being that small?  Martin They had tubes in them. They was pretty good tires. Only trouble I had  with it was when we went to Mexico and run over cactuses and poked  holes in it. Everybody down there took corn and put it in their tires  instead of inner tubes and then drive it down in the pond, let the corn  soak up and that way they can go anywhere without getting a flat tire.  Finchum (Laughs) I   ve never heard that. And it worked?  Martin Oh sure it worked   Finchum The roads weren   t too good at that point either, I wouldn   t think.  Martin You just had trails. You didn   t have roads. Well, you had a few county  roads, but most of the people when they   d get off the main road they   d  go in just two-lane high   just two tracks.  Finchum Dirt?  Martin Dirt tracks, yeah.  Finchum Where were these cactuses? In the middle of the road or     Martin Yeah, they   d get out in the road. They   d grow everywhere. Of course a  lot of times you had to drive off the road to get to your house.  Finchum You got closer to Oklahoma when you came to Winfield. How did you  end up in Oklahoma?  Martin My daughters all lived here. I moved in with Pam when my wife passed  away.  16  Finchum When was that roughly?  Martin Let   s see, when did Mom die?  Burnside Was it    92?  Martin Ninety-three. That   s when Max retired.  Burnside Yeah, when Max retired.  Finchum So you   ve been in Oklahoma a little over twenty years?  Martin Yeah.  Burnside You didn   t move directly here then. You didn   t move directly here at  that time. You stayed there in Winfield for a while.  Martin Yeah, well I   ve been in this place     Burnside You came here in 2002.  Martin Been here eight years and I was over at the other place four years. I  spent a year or two just wandering around.  Burnside Wandering around, (laughs) between daughters.  Finchum A wanderer. Where do you consider home?  Martin Right here.  Finchum Do you? Not New Mexico or Kansas? No? Just wherever you are at the  moment...  Martin That   s home.  Finchum Did you ever think you   d make it to 100?  Martin Nope. I always thought I   d be shot when I was ninety by a jealous  husband. (Laughter)  Finchum And why is that? (Laughs)  Martin I just thought of that as a joke. (Laughter)  Finchum That   s a pretty good one  Did anyone else make it to 100?  17  Martin No.  Finchum You   re the first?  Martin My mother was eighty-six. My dad was in his seventies. My kid brother  drowned when he was in his forties. Oldest brother had a heart attack  when he was in his sixties.  Burnside Aunt Pauline was ninety-five.  Finchum Well, she got close if she was ninety-five. Have any idea why? What  your secret is?  Martin No. What my secret is? A good wife is first, good cigar, and good  scotch whiskey, and a good bunch of girls. I have three nice daughters,  but they boss me around now. (Laughter)  Finchum Only when you let them.  Martin Yeah, pretty nice family. For my birthday here, how many was here for  that birthday party?  Burnside About 120 people.  Martin And there was kids, nieces, and nephews from both coasts, and then all  in-between.  Burnside We had forty-eight immediate family. Us girls, our families. We  probably had about thirty cousins that showed up from all over.  Martin Some of them from California     Burnside New York.  Martin    Washington, New York, Buffalo.  Finchum Had a big day.  Martin Course they all lived at our house at one time. My wife was the   second  oldest of a family of  eight children .  Finchum They had an open door policy.  Martin Yes. If they couldn   t come to our house, she would go to theirs and help  take care of them.  18  Finchum Was she a good cook?  Martin Yes she was. She was a beautiful woman and a good woman. There   s  my parents there. (Gestures to photograph)  Finchum What would she cook that was your favorite?  Martin What were those     Burnside Veal birdies?  Martin Veal birdies.  Finchum I don   t know what that is.  Martin Tell her, Pam.  Pam Veal birdies is you take a piece of round steak and you pound it out and  it   s about that big and you put sausage in them and roll them up. You  brown them and then you cook them in gravy and you serve them over  noodles. You   re supposed to use veal, but veal was always too  expensive so you used round steak.  Martin And then beat it up real good.  Finchum Had you heard of that? I   ve never heard     Burnside They were real flavorful.  Finchum Was that a dish that was passed down from her family?  Burnside Did Grandma cook them? Grandma Nichols? Where did Momma learn  that?  Martin I don   t know.  Burnside I don   t either.  Martin I don   t know whether she got it from somebody there in Winfield or  not.  Burnside She cooked them for a long time.  Martin Yeah.  19  Burnside All of us girls cook them now.  Finchum I just wondered if it was German or     Martin No.  Burnside No, I don   t think so. I don   t know where she got it. One of her sisters  could have fixed it, I don   t know.  Finchum What was something your mother fixed that you liked the best?  Martin I don   t know, that   s a long time ago.  Burnside Handmade rolls.  Martin She had made really good handmade rolls.  Finchum Fried chicken?  Martin Yeah, we raised chickens so she fried a lot of chickens. We ate chicken  three times a day, seven days a week.  Burnside Daddy won   t each chicken now. (Laughter)  Martin No, no way.  Finchum What about eggs?  Martin I eat eggs.  Finchum She typically fried the chicken or baked it?  Martin You got it every way, according to whether it was a young chicken or  an old chicken. If it was a young chicken, she fried it. If it was an old  chicken, she baked.  Finchum And are you serious, you had it for breakfast sometimes?  Martin No, I was just kidding you. (Laughter)  Finchum But you had eggs, which is kind of a chicken.  Martin We ate mostly cereal for breakfast, like Post Shredded Wheat, oatmeal.  I still eat oatmeal for breakfast.  Finchum What do you call the noon meal? Lunch or dinner?  20  Martin Lunch.  Finchum And then the     Martin Dinner is the evening.  Finchum    evening meal.  Martin We used to call them breakfast, dinner, and supper.  Finchum When you were growing up.  Martin Yeah.  Finchum I still say supper.  Martin I do too.  Finchum It sounds like a sense of humor has been a part of your life too.  Martin Oh yeah, no use getting mad. Somebody   s libel to break your nose.  (Laughter)  Finchum Did you play practical jokes?  Martin No, not especially.  Finchum Just try to keep the mood light.  Martin I like to play golf. I   ve spent all my extra time playing golf.  Finchum Have a favorite course?  Martin No. Just there at Winfield we had a nice course. I liked it.  Finchum Watch the Master   s every year.  Martin Oh yeah. I don   t watch them now, because I don   t know any of them.  Finchum One   s an Oklahoma boy, Rickie Fowler.  Martin Yeah, but I still don   t follow them enough.  Finchum Ever visit Augusta?  21  Martin No.  Finchum That   s on a lot of golfer   s wish lists. Get to go to Augusta.  Burnside You played Pebble Beach once, didn   t you?  Martin No, I didn   t.  Burnside You never did get to?  Martin No. Jay     Burnside Jay and Max did.  Martin    and Max played that.  Burnside And I thought you probably had too.  Finchum I   ve driven by it. I haven   t been on it.  Martin I   ve played in Hawaii, quite a few courses over there. We spent two  weeks over there visiting our oldest daughter and her husband. He was  in the Navy and the guy next door to them, he was a teacher in the  university. He came over one day and he said,    I see you   ve got some  golf clubs. Do you play?    I said,    Yeah.    He said,    Would you like to  join us in a game? We need one more for a foursome.    I said,    Sure      The president of the university was one of them. I   ve met some high-class  boys. (Laughs) It was a lot of fun though. Ever been to Hawaii?  Finchum I have not, no.  Martin Oh I tell you, it   s something. They lived at the end of a narrow street  where it went off over a bluff. Every morning those Japanese ladies  would get out and sweep off their sidewalk and half of the street. About  halfway in the street and back to the curb, every morning. It   s  something to see. And those guys would come by to trim the bushes in  the front yard. Had one of those big old machetes about that long and  they was just going along swinging it. It was something to see.  And that   s about my life. I guess it   s been a good life. I haven   t been  too sick. I   ve had a pacemaker, I   ve got my third pacemaker. The first  one was guaranteed for ten years. In seven years they had to put a new  one in and I said,    Well, they   re going to pay for this. This one was  guaranteed.    Doctor just laughed. They went from  28,000 for the first  one I got, to thirty-some thousand for this one.  22  Finchum That   s your major health issue, is your pacemaker?  Martin Yeah. I was passing out. I   d just be sitting here talking to you and all of  a sudden just go out. My heart would stop.  Finchum Do you have to take any medicine?  Martin (Laughter) They   ve cut a lot of my medicine out here in the last year. I  was taking it seemed like pills every time I turned around. I still take  quite a few, but not too many for me     Burnside We   ve really cut it back. And I think he   s done better since we   ve taken  him off a lot of it.  Martin Every time you go to the doctor he wants to give you another pill, but  he doesn   t want to take you off any. Some of them pills get a little  expensive.  Finchum They do.  Martin We had some we were buying in Canada. Here they want  4.40 apiece.  Up there it was about half that price.  Finchum They interact and they don   t seem to check that before they give you  more either.  Martin No. There   s a girl here, Pam. We call her Pam the doctor. She   s a nurse  that comes in here. She   s the one cutting me off of a lot of pills.  Finchum How early in the morning do you get up these days?  Martin About five-thirty. They get me up, I don   t get up. They come in to give  me a bath or dress me. Then about seven thirty at night   from seven  thirty to seven forty-five they come in and help get into bed. I can   t get  up and do it myself.  Finchum Then what do you do between?  Martin Sit right here. Eat and sleep, that   s about all you do here.  Burnside Don   t forget your exercising   Finchum Exercising? What do you do for exercise?  Martin She walks me up and down the hall here, and down here and get on the  rowing machine.  23  Finchum Gives you a pretty good workout.  Burnside He has a  work out  routine that he does.  Finchum And would you do it if she wasn   t here to make you?  Martin I can   t get up and go out, somebody has to follow me in my wheelchair  in case I go down.  Finchum Do you watch television, or read, or what?  Martin I watch television. I used to read a lot. Girls would get me six, seven  books a week. Then my eyes got to where I can   t   I can   t follow the  book very good anymore.  Finchum What kind did you like when you could?  Martin Westerns.  Burnside (Laughs) That was it   Finchum Louis L   Amour?  Martin Oh yeah, I think I read every book he made.  Burnside Probably six times.  Martin I had a sister-in-law that she had every book he made. She had a big  bookcase full of those books.  Finchum He had a lot. I don   t know how many, but he had a lot.  Martin There was three shelves in that bookcase and it was full.  Finchum So you   re a big John Wayne fan on TV.  Martin I used to be. I can just about repeat words they were supposed to say in  those old movies. (Laughter)  Finchum How do you keep up with the news, current events?  Martin On the TV. I get up in the morning here, it   s about six fifteen when I get  in there in my chair and I turn the news on in the morning, listen to  news till seven-thirty.  24  Finchum When did you give up driving?  Martin When I moved here.  Finchum In your nineties?  Martin Yes.  Finchum That   s pretty good.  Martin I had no trouble giving it up.  Finchum You chose to?  Martin Yeah, I didn   t want to kill somebody. I got to where   at ninety years  old your reactions are not very fast. I was still driving     Burnside About ninety-three when you gave it up.  Finchum That   s pretty good.  Martin I just told my daughter to take it out to their place and sell it.  Bishop Do you have any hunting or fishing stories you remember?  Martin There was so many of them, I can tell you one. We went over here  when they was putting a   making   what was that river over there, the  Canadian? They was putting the water in., and one of the boys we knew  was the foreman of the deal, and he invited us to come down and go  quail hunting. They was going to flood all that land in there. We got  down there and I think we shot 147 birds that day, three of us.  Bishop Oh my gosh.  Martin We run out of shells. But they couldn   t   the birds were going to drown,  so it didn   t make any difference. They wouldn   t fly past dry land. I  guess that was the biggest hunting game that I had.  Bishop Did you dress all those?  Martin Sure we dressed them.  Bishop That was a big quail fry or something.  Martin Oh we split them up amongst all the people.  25  Bishop That   s a lot of birds.  Martin Yeah, it was a lot of birds. We didn   t walk very far though. There was  too much water. My dog was there, I had her down there and she  wouldn   t get out in the water to get a dead bird. She   d go out and just  get her feet wet and she was back off. She didn   t like water. My son-in-law  had one, she   d just run and jump in. (Laughter)  Bishop That   s where you invest in a Labrador.  Martin Yeah.  Bishop Or a water dog, yeah.  Martin Did you ever hunt over an Irish setter?  Bishop No.  Martin I did one time and I thought that was the funniest thing I ever saw.  Instead of standing and pointing, they sit down and point. Just go to the  fence where the quail is and sit down there and sit there and look at  them. I thought,    What   s that dog doing?    (Laughter)  Finchum Is that why they   re called Irish setters? I don   t know.  Martin There   s Irish setters, English setters, all kinds of them.  Finchum But they go and sit, is that why they   re called that?  Martin Yeah, a setter. They   re an English-bred dog.  Finchum So you fished too?  Martin Oh yeah. Carol and Max has got a lake house over here at Lake  Eufaula. I used to go down there every weekend I had free.  Finchum Did you noodle?  Martin No. I tried that one time up in Kansas, and if a guy hadn   t caught my  suspenders on my overalls I would   ve been a dead duck. I got one too  big. He got a hold of my hand and wouldn   t turn loose. That was  enough for me. I got out on the bank right then and wouldn   t go back in  the water. (Laughter)  Finchum I really don   t understand that sport.  26  Martin I don   t either. I don   t see where it   s any fun. You   re libel to have a  turtle in there, or a snake or anything. I never did like that.  Finchum Then those alligator gars, or something, I   ve seen pictures of.  Martin Alligator gar can   t do much to you. Their snouts are too long and too  thin.  Finchum They look like they could. (Laughs)  Martin We fished for them up in Wichita when we were down on the Little  Arkansas River and just shoot them and throw up onto the bank.  They   re no good for anything.  Finchum That was more for sport?  Martin Yeah, did a lot of fishing in Little Rock, Arkansas. My wife   s oldest  sister lived down there with her husband. We   d go down there and go  crappy fishing. They had a lot of good crappy fishing down there.  Finchum People like crappies.  Martin Yeah. They   re about as good eating as there is. I went to Hawaii one  time, and my oldest daughter and her husband was stationed there. He  said,    Now don   t bring any fishing equipment.    I thought,    Well now  that   s crazy,    but I got up there and he took me and introduced me to the  commander. I bet you he had twenty fishing poles lined up, that people  brought and give to him. He said,    Just take your pick and pick out  what you want.    I said,    I don   t know anything about it.    He picked me  out some. Then I go up to the lake there and fish, catch those humpback  salmon. The way you catch salmon is you snag them, they don   t bite.  You just snag them. You happen to snag them on the fin on top, you  had a lot of fun, because he could take you all over that lake.  Finchum Did that happen to you?  Martin Yep. I was throwing them back as I caught them because they   re not too  good to eat. But this Indian boy over there had an old pickup truck and  he was putting them all in that. He said,    You don   t want them?    I said,     No.    He said,    I   ll take them.    He got to telling me that he was taking  them up to the children   s home. That   s where they had to fish to eat. He  was taking them fish to eat, because they couldn   t buy   beef up there  was   hamburgers was five dollars apiece. That was years ago and  hamburgers down here was twenty-five cents.  Finchum They don   t have too many cattle in Hawaii?  27  Martin This was up in Kodiak, Alaska.  Finchum Alaska, okay.  Martin I said Hawaii, but it was Kodiak.  Finchum Did you go deep-sea fishing?  Martin Nope.  Burnside You did with Bea and Doug.  Martin I went down to Houston, went out there deep-sea fishing. Got blisters  on my legs sitting in the shade, fishing. About an inch high just all over  my legs here. Oh god, that was miserable.  Finchum From sitting in the shade?  Martin Sitting in the shade, reflection of the water.  Finchum That makes sense. You didn   t think about that though.  Martin I never thought about it at all, before I stood up.  Finchum I don   t feel bad then. (Laughs) Until you stood up?  Martin Yep. When we caught the kingfish down there that day, got into him  real good. We had a fish trunk. Big, you know, put the fish in. We had  that full when we went in that night.  Burnside You were in a cabin cruiser, weren   t you? Or what kind of a boat were  you in?  Martin Doug   s fishing boat.  Burnside Oh, big one?  Martin Yeah, it was a big cruiser.  Finchum Had a good fish fry that night.  Martin No, they gave them all away. They give them to the Salvation Army,  children   s homes, stuff like that. They   ve usually got a locker full of  fish at home anyway. Very seldom do you ever take any home.  28  Finchum They just didn   t go to waste that day.  Martin Oh no, no. You take   the Salvation Army serves them. Children   s  homes, they like them. There   s usually somebody at the dock that you  know that goes   donates them for you. They just take the whole bunch.  We went rabbit hunting in Wichita one time. It was five of us, cousins  mainly. We had a trailer load, just a two-wheel trailer load of rabbits  when we come in. Now what do you do with a trailer load of rabbits?  Big old jackrabbits.  Finchum I don   t know. What did you do?  Martin We took them down to the Salvation Army, and they was just tickled to  death to get them.  Burnside What   d they do with them?  Martin They dress them and feed them as people come in hungry.  Burnside Oh my gosh.  Martin Yeah. They have a big kitchen up there that they prepare three meals a  day in.  Burnside Never had rabbit.  Finchum Make rabbit soup? Or stew? Rabbit stew?  Martin Fried rabbit. Get you a cottontail, they   re a good fry. Jackrabbits was  too tough.  Finchum I don   t think there   s very many jackrabbits left.  Martin Oh there   s more than you think.  Finchum Are they?  Martin Yep.  Burnside When we went on a trip to New Mexico   what was it? Your ninetieth  birthday? We went out to the cemetery to look at  the headstone  and  there were jackrabbits out there. I think that was the first time I   d ever  saw a jackrabbit.  29  Martin They   re thick in New Mexico. We used to hunt them down there. We   d  take these red snow fences and make a big circle and wide them out at  one end and everybody   d string out, way out, drive rabbits in there.  Then you   d get in there and shoot them all. Feed them to the hogs.  Finchum And the hogs ate them?  Martin Oh yeah, hogs will eat anything. Chickens, guineas, turkeys, whatever  they can get a hold of.  Finchum So your parents raised hogs?  Martin We raised just one hog. They   d get a pig and then raise it to butcher.  No, Dad would raise mostly mules.  Finchum Mules?  Martin Yes, small mules is what they call cotton mules. Weigh about six,  seven-hundred pounds.  Finchum He   d sell them to     Martin Buyers would come to him and buy them.  Finchum For farming or for other things?  Martin Yeah, take to cotton country to help with the cotton fields. They didn   t  want them big Missouri mules. Missouri mule was a big animal. It   ll  weight twelve or fourteen-hundred pounds, tall. They   d use them in  Missouri to plow with.  Finchum Cotton mules are used to pull cotton wagons?  Martin To cultivate. They were cheap and easy and it got to where mules down  there   what   s that race track? Rio   anyway the race track down there  in New Mexico. Rio Grande? No.  Burnside No. What is it called?  Martin Anyway, it got to where mules was   the ideal thing was to buy a team  of bay mules, light-colored mules, and hitch them to a buggy and go to  the fair. That was a big deal was when those mules were colored like  that, light-colored. They brought a hell of a price.  Finchum Who knew? He did the mules in New Mexico and when he went to  Winfield and Wichita he didn   t?  30  Martin No. They sold them all. I think most of them was killed in a hailstorm.  Had a big old hailstorm     Burnside Ruidoso Downs.  Martin Yeah, Ruidoso.  Bishop Is there anything on your bucket list? Anything you wish you could do  that you   ve never done before?  Martin Go to Australia.  Burnside There you go. First time I   ve heard that.  Bishop What   s in Australia you want to see?  Martin I want to see the outback. That bush country down there.  Finchum And a kangaroo.  Martin I don   t care about the big town.  Finchum Pictures look pretty.  Martin Yeah.  Bishop I notice you have a pack of Levi Garrett there. Do you chew? The bag  of tobacco, chewing tobacco, are you a chewer?  Martin Yeah.  Bishop When   d you start that?  Martin When I was about fourteen. Snuff fan. Used to take   my grandmother  and grandfather both chewed snuff. I   d swipe a little bit. The boys down  there did it so I had to try it, of course. I   ve chewed cigars most of the  time.  Bishop Do you have a favorite cigar?  Martin El Verso. They   re full of flavor. There   s no sweeteners in it.  Finchum You don   t smoke them, you chew them?  Martin Yes.  31  Finchum Snuff you put up in your   oh, down there. (Gestures lower lip)  Bishop When you have a cigar, you have to have a fine bottle of scotch. What   s  your favorite scotch?  Martin Johnnie Walker Red Label.  Bishop Johnnie Walker Red Label.  Finchum He said that too quick  (Laughter)  Martin I   ve bought enough of it I ought to know. Hello Carol   Casey Hey there.  Finchum I guess we should back up and say what were your girls    names? You  said Pam     Martin And Carol, and Kay is the oldest. She   s in Kansas City. Pam, Kay, and  Carol. Pamela Sue, Barbara Carol, Judith Kay.  Finchum And the dog was?  Martin Babe.  Bishop What was it like being the only man in the house?  Martin I was boss, if I was ever alone. (Laughter) It wasn   t bad. I had no  problems with my family. I   ve got a good family.  Finchum When you did have to discipline them who would do it? You or your  wife?  Martin My wife. I wasn   t home long enough. There wasn   t too much of that.  She had a back of a chair, kitchen chair, the back like that on it. She  called it the board of education.  Burnside That   s when you could paddle your kids.  Casey I don   t remember her paddling much or hard or anything.  Martin No.  Burnside I remember her using a ping-pong paddle once. I still have the paddle.  32  Casey Momma   s paddle? You just laid it on the refrigerator like a threat. We  were grounded. That was the main punishment we got when we were  growing up and that hurt.  Finchum Was church an important part of growing up?  Martin Not for me. I had to work, but the family, they went to church.  Finchum When you were   in your youth. Your parents, did they take you to  church? Your mom and dad?  Martin I don   t remember. Where we lived in New Mexico there wasn   t any  church. They had church at somebody   s house. Get up there to Wichita  and I don   t remember going to church. We went to Asbury Church, I  guess, when I was a kid. I   d start out riding in the car with Mom in a  Model T Ford. By the time we   d get to church I   d be walking for half a  mile. She   d stop and pick up people along the road and let me walk  because I was a young kid. (Laughter)  Finchum What kind of church was it?  Martin Methodist.  Bishop You said in your career you supplied juke boxes and machines and you  didn   t like to dance, but you liked music. What was your favorite type of  music?  Martin Western.  Bishop Who was your favorite artist?  Martin Eddie Arnold.  Finchum Not Bob Wells and the Texas Playboys?  Martin They was alright, but Eddie Arnold could sing.  Bishop I assume in the fifties with jukeboxes it all turned to rock and roll. Do  you remember those days?  Martin Screaming, yelling, that   s all they did. They didn   t sing.  Finchum Elvis was during that time too.  Martin Yeah.  33  Bishop Jukeboxes became kind of popular then.  Martin Yep. One time I bought ten jukeboxes at one time and they gave me a  piano. My wife had one in the living room and an organ in the living  room. We put this one in the basement. Had no more use for it than a  man on the moon. (Laughter)  Finchum You could have had the dueling pianos, a daughter on each one.  Bishop Those are hard to move too, pianos. They   re heavy.  Martin This was a small one. We had a big one upstairs. My wife had such  trouble playing. She had arthritis in her hands so bad, got to where she  couldn   t play at all.  Finchum That   s when you get a player piano.  Martin My mother-in-law had a player piano. I used to go up there. She had  twins, little ones, they was about two years and they   d put them on each  knee and sit there and play the piano.  Finchum Where you were living, did you experience the Dust Bowl?  Martin Yes ma   am. Hang sheets up over the windows, even if the window was  closed. Out in Western Kansas the dust bowls would blow up over the  house and be clear up on one side, just clear up to the eaves. It was  terrible.  Finchum How would you get to the barn to take care of the animals?  Martin They didn   t have any cattle in Western Kansas, only in the grasslands of  eastern Colorado. Western Kansas is all farmland.  Finchum What about the chickens?  Martin I don   t know. I wasn   t out there. (Laughs) An old man had ten thousand  acres out at Syracuse and he tried to get me to take it and farm it. He  said,    You can have half of what you make.       What am I going to do  with it?    He says,    You   ll get a crop every seven years.    I said,    What  am I going to live on those six years waiting for that seventh year  crop?    He said,    That   s your problem.    (Laughter) He was quite an old  man, he had gold teeth. He had a plantation down in Cuba and was  down there one time when you could get gold pretty cheap, and he just  had a set of dentures made out of gold. I   ve often wondered who got  those when he died. (Laughter)  34  Finchum That   s a good question. (Laughs) They may have gone with him.  Probably not though, but     Martin No, I doubt it. They strip everything off of you before you die.  Bishop When history   s written, what would you like it to say about you? How  do you want to be remembered?  Martin Just as a plain old country boy. I don   t care about any fusses. They had  this birthday party for me and it was just outlandish money they spent  on that. They fed all of our relations, there was forty-some, breakfast  before they left Sunday morning.  Finchum You only turn 100 once.  Martin Yeah, that   s what they said.  Bishop But I like your t-shirt though.  Ivan Martin, quality without  compromise, 1915, aged to perfection, original parts (mostly)   Finchum You told Alex earlier that you would change something if you could.  What would you change?  Martin I don   t know. Change my wife dying. I   d give ten years off my life to  give her ten years, but she had cancer. Bad cancer. She was helpless for  years, just pitiful. Burned up with radiation.  Finchum That   s a hard way to go.  Martin Oh man, I tell you, she suffered. She was a wonderful woman.  Finchum What would you do for dates? Where would you take her on a date?  Martin We   d go to the picture show, go canoeing.  Finchum Canoeing?  Martin Yeah we had a canoe up there. Went on the Little Arkansas River. My  wife   s sister, just younger than her, and I had a good friend, they had a  date, and we   d take the canoe and paddle up the river and back.  Finchum All four knew how to swim?  Martin Yeah. I can paddle like a duck or swim like a dog, I don   t know what  you   d call it. The rest of them were good swimmers.  35  Finchum You could save yourself if you had to.  Martin Yeah. I went to Canada one time with the Boy Scout troop and they  took us out in the lake when we first got up there and was seeing how  you could paddle and stuff like that. All at once they turned the boat  over. They wanted to see whether we could swim or not. That   s when I  wore a swimming vest from there on out. They said,    You can   t do  that.     Finchum So you were in scouts. Did you make Eagle?  Martin No, but I   ve got a grandson that   s made Eagle Scout and then right  behind him, his brother, is going to make Eagle Scout. I was assistant  scoutmaster. We went to Canada as a troop. Took that tour of the  islands up there. I didn   t know Canada had swampland in it.  Finchum So with three girls you wouldn   t be involved with     Martin Was involved in Girl Scouts too.  Finchum Helped sell a lot of Girl Scout cookies?  Martin No, they didn   t have Girl Scout cookies back then.  Bishop Did you help them with their camps?  Martin Yep. Took them out to   had teachers there that they lived on a farm  and they had a lot of watermelon. So she said,    Bring your troop out  and they can have all the watermelon they want because we   re going to  turn the hogs in on it tomorrow.    I took them out there and while I was  out there one of the cows had a calf. The girls got to watch it. They  thought that was the craziest thing, but I sure got chewed out about that  from some of their mothers. But you know, the kids, it taught them  something  It wasn   t hurting anything. That was nature. But they loved  to go out there and break those watermelons and just eat the heart out of  them.  Finchum That   s the best part.  Martin Yeah, no seeds.  Finchum And sweeter.  Bishop Pay the price for it later though. Upset stomach maybe? (Laughs) Was  that up in Kansas?  36  Martin Yeah, in Winfield. The girls grew up there in Winfield.  Finchum Friends University   s there?  Martin No, that   s in Wichita. Southwestern University   s in   used to be another  college there. Some other church college, but they pulled out.  Finchum The interurban, I haven   t heard too much about that too. Did you ride it  any other time?  Martin No.  Finchum Just that once?  Martin It just goes between Hutchinson and Wichita. Goes down, comes back,  goes up. Hutchinson   s the big railroad deal there.  Finchum I   ve heard people talk about a doodlebug. Is that the same thing?  Martin Doodlebug?  Finchum It   s a train, kind of     Martin Yes, kind of like a handcar. It was small and you pump it.  Finchum Oh, okay. You have to do the work.  Martin On some of them, some of them had a gasoline motor on them. They  got a place out here in New Mexico that there   s a town up above a bluff  and the doodlebug runs down on a narrow gauge railroad. It   s only  about that wide. Goes clear down to a town down below, then they have  to pull it back up.  Finchum Is there anything you   d like to ask him while we   ve got it rolling? Put  him on the hot seat?  Burnside Did you tell them about your trip to Canada with the Boy Scouts?  Martin Yeah.  Burnside Did you tell them how you met Mom and then long you   d been going  together? You walked her to school the first day. When did you know  you wanted to marry her?  Martin When I was in sixth grade.  37  Finchum What was that deciding factor?  Martin Just we was going to school together.  Burnside They raised each other.  Finchum Were you in the same grade?  Martin Oh yeah. Same age.  Burnside Mother was six months older. She was the boss for the first half of the  year and Daddy was the boss the second half. That   s how we  determined who we went to. That was what they always said.  (Laughter) They went together all through high school except for one  year, wasn   t it? One year, is that when she went to  East High ?  Martin She went to East High. I went to North.  Burnside And you went to North. But that   s the only time you weren   t together,  wasn   t it?  Martin Yeah.  Burnside But you still didn   t date anybody else.  Martin No, neither did she.  Finchum How did you pop the question?  Martin I just called her on   my mother, when I was working and staying at  home, my mother come in one morning or one evening and said,    Ivan,  you   re working now and making money. I   m going to start charging  you ten dollars a month for rent.    So I called Doris up and I said,     Momma   s going to charge me ten dollars a month for rent. How about  us just getting married?    (Laughs) She said,    Okay.    Ten dollars a  month.  Finchum Wouldn   t go far today, would it?  Martin Nope. I was making twelve dollars and a half a week. One of her  (Burnside   s) boys come up one Christmas. He was going to school  down at Austin working at     Burnside IBM.  38  Martin    IBM. I had my payroll card there for the year. Six hundred and seven  dollars I made. He said,    Grandpa, I lost more than that just coming  here to see you.    I said,    What do you mean?    He said,    I get twenty  dollars an hour for Sundays and holidays, twenty dollars an hour for  overtime, and double time for holidays.     Finchum Things also cost more now than they did.  Martin Yeah, you   d buy a loaf of bread for a nickel. I remember when I first  quit work and Doris sent me to the store to get a loaf of bread. I come  back and I said,    You know a loaf of bread cost fifteen cents?     (Laughter)  Burnside We were just talking about the price of eggs and how eggs have gone  up. How much a dozen they are now. When he was shopping and  buying his own groceries, what? Eight years ago? Haven   t you been  here eight years?  Martin Yeah.  Burnside And eight years you was over at the other place doing your own grocery  shopping.  Martin They were eighty-nine cents a dozen, something like that.  Finchum Not now.  Martin I remember when I was a kid, though, we used to raise a lot of chickens  and Mom would take a case of eggs in to town on Saturdays, sell them,  and she would give each one of us an egg. We could take it in the  grocery store and trade that one egg for an ice cream cone.  Finchum Pretty good deal.  Martin Yeah, but eggs was high then. Sixty-six, sixty-five cents a dozen.  Finchum But you had to walk gingerly with that one egg.  Martin No.  Finchum Stick it in your pocket and run?  Martin No, you couldn   t do that. Just hold it in your hand.  Finchum An egg for an ice cream cone. What was your flavor?  39  Martin Vanilla.  Finchum Was that all they had?  Martin They had vanilla, and chocolate, and strawberry.  Finchum Three choices. One scoop or two?  Martin One. It was a big scoop though, it was pretty good sized.  Finchum Would she give you some money to go to the movies?  Martin We never went to the movies. We had free movies at the park on  Saturday night and once in a while we   d go over there. Spread your  quilt out, sit down, and watch a movie, but they were silent.  Finchum Black and white of course.  Martin The dialogue went across the screen. You had to read that to see what  they were saying, no sound.  Finchum Make up your own story sometimes.  Burnside When did you get your first telephone?  Martin Who?  Burnside You. When do you remember the first telephone?  Martin We had one there in New Mexico.  Burnside Did you?  Martin Yeah. They run the wire out on the fencepost and they   d come to a gate  and it   d have a tall post there and they   d run the wire up and over and  down on the other side. If a cow got out and went through a fence,  broke the wire, then you didn   t have a telephone. But everybody had  their long-short ring or short and long ring, or two longs. There   d be  about seven people on one line. Boy, when one phone rang then  everybody   d listen. (Laughs)  Finchum No secrets.  Martin No secrets.  Finchum What about electricity. Do you remember getting it?  40  Martin When we moved to Wichita is the first house we ever seen electricity.  The one we moved into had gas lights. Every time a bug would fly  through the mantle, why, it   d go out.  Burnside Now the house you moved into, was it two-story, but you had put a  ladder on the outside?  Martin No. Two-story, but you had a stairway inside.  Burnside You did?  Martin We had a ladder on the front porch to go up and down to swing on a  sack so we wouldn   t have to slide down the rope.  Burnside Oh. (Laughs)  Finchum Entertainment. On hot, hot days, how would you stay cool at night?  Sleep outside on the porch?  Martin On the porch roof. We usually go out in the yard.  Finchum On the roof?  Martin Yes, it was a pretty flat roof. But Momma wouldn   t know it when we  was sleeping out there. (Laughs)  Finchum Have to get back in before she got up?  Martin No, before she come upstairs. I remember one time they shot a buffalo  right there in the front yard. They had a flood, it was 1921, and they  washed the gates off of the buffalo  range  down south of town. This  one big old bull was wandering up all through the town, clear out to our  place northeast of town. They sent some men out to try and round him  up, from the stockyards, on horseback. They couldn   t chase him down,  so they finally shot him.  Finchum Did you see them do it?  Martin Yeah. They came by and told us to get in the house and stay in the  house until they got that buffalo. He would just go right through a  fence.  Finchum Pretty big, yeah. You remember a lot.  Martin I   ve got a lot of fond memories.  41  Finchum Did your mother make your clothes?  Martin Shirts out of sacks she bought chicken feed in.  Finchum She made your shirts out of     Martin Yeah. They come out and were selling shirts with designs in them, in  the chicken feed. That   s the way they   d sell more chicken feed. Mom  made our shirts. We wore bib overalls. You know what they are?  Finchum I do. How often would you get a new pair of shoes?  Martin Once a year for Christmas.  Finchum You had to make it do. If they got to be too small?  Martin You handed them down. Most of my shoes I got to wear my older  brother   s shoes.  Finchum So you hoped he took care of them.  Martin If he didn   t I got a new pair. We were pretty poor, but we never went  hungry or without clothes.  Finchum Most other people were in the same boat?  Martin Oh yeah, everybody was.  Finchum How would she do laundry?  Martin She had a washing machine. Did it in a tub with a scrub board for a long  time. Then Dad bought her a washing machine.  Burnside Didn   t she have a wringer out on a tub out in the yard? I can remember  that.  Martin That   s where she   she had that in the house too. That was the way you  dried them. Take them out of the washing machine, put them   wring     Burnside Through the wringer.  Martin    wring them through that, on the board.  Burnside And then hang them out on a line.  42  Martin Yeah.  Finchum Then good old Maytag came along.  Martin Yep. I think that was the second washing machine Momma got was a  Maytag.  Finchum Over the course of your life what do you think   s been the best  invention? Greatest invention?  Martin Electronics.  Finchum That covers a lot, doesn   t it? Television, radio, cell phones?  Martin No, we had telephones, but was the old cranking type. Short and two  longs.  Finchum Did you learn how to use a computer?  Martin I never have yet.  Finchum How about a cell phone these days?  Martin No.  Burnside You used a tablet just a tiny little bit for reading. Grandkids got him one  of those.  Martin Did Carol go home?  Burnside Yeah, she was tired.  Martin First of the month.  Finchum December 1. It   ll be 2016 before we know it. Then we   ll be planning a  101 birthday party.  Burnside Golly, we   ll have to take you to Australia, Dad   Martin No, I couldn   t go there. I got too many pills I   d have to take. (Laughter)  Finchum Hey, they can travel with you   Martin Couldn   t buy that many.  Finchum Ship them ahead. (Laughter)  43  Martin Buy them over there.  Finchum Where there   s a will there   s a way.  Martin I went through the Panama Canal and this boat was from Australia.  They had peanut butter in regular jars just like it is here, but it was  made in Australia. I thought that was odd. No milk on board.  Finchum Been a pretty good life?  Martin Been a good life.  Finchum I think we   ll say thank you for sharing your stories with us and close up.  Martin Thank you for coming.  Finchum Thank you.  Martin I hope you got some good out of it.  Finchum We did. Got some good jokes and humor to try on other people. You  were great.  -------  ------- 
