 Finchum Today is December 8, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Shawnee, Oklahoma, to speak with Emma Shelton. This is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life project. Thank you for talking with us today.  Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Shelton I was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma. What else?  Finchum When.  Shelton When? I   m a 101 now     Finchum So 1914?  Shelton Yes, I   m sorry.  Finchum You   re fine. What month?  Shelton Eleventh.  Finchum Of   ?  Shelton October the 11th.  Finchum Of 1914.  Shelton Of 1914.  Finchum Alright, we got it  (Laughter) Were you born at home?  Shelton Yes.  5  Finchum On a farm?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum And what did your parents raise?  Shelton They raised cotton and feed for the cows, and stuff like that. I was in the  big middle of it. When I got older, I had to help do that.  Finchum Meaning you had to milk cows?  Shelton Uh-hmm.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Shelton Yes, I had brothers. Five brothers I guess. Five sisters and one sister   I  mean, one sister and five brothers.  Finchum So seven of you? So the boys had to help too I bet.  Shelton When they got old enough to get out and work, they helped work for  themselves and I had to help my dad.  Finchum Where were you in the birth order? Were you the baby or the oldest  or     Shelton I had a brother, baby brother.  Finchum So four boys, then you     Shelton My brother.  Finchum Right, and a sister somewhere in the mix.  Shelton Yeah, she was last I guess.  Finchum You had to help your dad. Did you raise chickens?  Shelton Yes, my mother did. She raised a bunch of chickens for the Parkin  Hatchery. They would take the eggs.  Finchum She helped supplement the farming?  Shelton Yes.  6  Finchum Can you describe the house that you grew up in?  Shelton I think we had   I   ll just tell you the rooms. Four rooms I guess, four  rooms.  Finchum Was it two stories or one?  Shelton One.  Finchum Did it have running water?  Shelton (Laughs) Not for a long time.  Finchum Had a well?  Shelton Yeah.  Finchum So you had to pump?  Shelton Yes, had to pump.  Finchum How would she do her laundry? Your mother?  Shelton The washboard.  Finchum Rough on the knuckles. Did you have to help her do that?  Shelton Not too much. I was always out with my dad working.  Finchum She would do the cooking?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum What was something that she fixed that you really liked?  Shelton Oh me, German food. Dumplings, chicken and dumplings, yeah, and  she made light bread. She had light bread every day.  Finchum Made the house smell good, didn   t it?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum Did they speak German?  Shelton Yes, they did. I did too.  7  Finchum Can you still say a few things?  Shelton Not too many, because when the boys married we had to kind of hold  that down because we couldn   t talk German in front of them, because  they couldn   t talk   the girls that they married. We kind of forgot a lot  of words.  Bishop Your parents, did they come to Oklahoma from Germany?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum What brought them to Oklahoma?  Shelton Well my dad, he was a shoe cobbler and he had a cousin here. He  wanted him to come and help him make shoes. He came and then he  sent for Momma. After he got settled he sent for Momma then, and she  came. A whole bunch of them came on the ship.  Finchum Where did they come into? New York? Or Galveston?  Shelton My dad, he came to Shawnee and then I guess they   Earlsboro and  around you know.  Finchum When they landed in America, what was the port that they came  through? Do you know?  Shelton No, I don   t know where they exactly reported to. I don   t know where  they did.  Finchum But once they got here they stayed.  Bishop What was their name?  Shelton Their name? My mother was Dulijah, and my daddy was Mikish. Is that  what you wanted to know?  Bishop Mikish?  Shelton Mikish.  Finchum How do you spell that?  Shelton M-I-K-I-S-H.  Finchum That was his last name? So your maiden name?  8  Shelton Yeah. I can   t spell my mother   s name. It   s German. (Laughs)  Finchum It sounds pretty.  Mahaffey Tell them about your sister that was the reason why   what happened to  your mom, when she got pregnant.  Shelton My mom, she came across because her husband was here. She had a  baby over there. She got pregnant and her parents wouldn   t let her stay  over there. So they sent her where he was, where  Daddy was. I don   t know what else about her.  Finchum What was her name? Oh, your mother   s name. You   ve already said  that.  Shelton I used to take a stab at it, but I can   t anymore.  Finchum So that was the sister that came over.  Mahaffey She was two. Aunt Annie was older than you.  Shelton Yeah.  Finchum So she was the first. A female, then four boys, then you, and then  another boy?  Mahaffey Three, right? You know what? I get them all confused. You have Annie,  and then was it Adolf?  Shelton Frank and Adolf.  Mahaffey Yeah, Adolf was older. Then you, then Ernie, who is younger.  Shelton Ernie was the baby.  Mahaffey There were some that were stillborn. How many were stillborn? One or  two?  Shelton Two. After she got here she got pregnant again and had a little boy. He  was dead. She had a rough life.  Finchum Sounds like it.  Shelton She couldn   t stay with her mother, so they sent her off.  9  Finchum How long were your parents married before one of them passed away?  Fifty-something years or longer?  Shelton About   well what they did when they came across and Momma had  that baby you know, and then they went out in the woods and sawed  wood. I   ve forgotten what you asked me.  Finchum How long they were married before one of them passed away?  Shelton Oh, now in the later years? My mother passed   no, my daddy passed  away first and then my mother.  Finchum How old were they?  Shelton I think my daddy was eighty-nine, and my mother was ninety-eight I  think.  Finchum There   s some longevity there. Are you the first one to make it to 100?  Shelton In our family.  Finchum Did you every think you would?  Shelton No. (Laughs)  Finchum When you got to be ninety-nine, you thought, oh, one more year?  Shelton Yeah. They all had   when I got ninety they started my birthdays and  it   s from there on.  Finchum Each one got a little bit bigger I bet.  Shelton Yeah. (Laughs)  Bishop What about your education? Where did you go to school as a child?  Shelton I went to school at Rock Creek, South Rock Creek. I was at eight   I  mean, eight   what am I trying to say?  Mahaffey Eighth grade.  Shelton They went to eight over there. No high school, that   s as far as I went,  until the eighth grade.  Finchum How would you get there from your house?  10  Shelton Walked. There was a bunch of us. We   d have to walk two and a half  miles     Finchum One way?  Shelton One way.  Finchum Wow, you were in pretty good shape then?  Shelton And I had to keep up with the boys, my brothers. They   d walk so fast  you know. I   d have to holler at one of them,    Well stop and tie my  shoes,    or something like that. My brother would stop and tie my shoes  and then they   d take off again.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject?  Shelton No. I know math was hard for me, because we had to stay at home and  work in the field two weeks at a time.  Finchum What would you take for your lunch?  Shelton Biscuits, and jelly, and butter, you know. I had a little round tin bucket,  the folks would buy Karo  syrup  in it, you know. We   d pack our lunch  in them little buckets.  Finchum That   s what I was going to ask, so you beat me to it. (Laughter) How  often would you get a new pair of shoes?  Shelton Oh, not very often because my dad would patch them. He   d patch them,  put new soles on them.  Finchum Would your mother make your clothes?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum She sewed.  Shelton I wore overalls more than anything.  Finchum Helping your dad. Did you have to plow?  Shelton I plowed with a tractor or the horses. Whichever Dad didn   t want to do,  I would do it. He   d have to plow with four horses to pull a big disc or  whatever they are, and I would drive the tractor. We had a team.  Finchum You   re a petite lady. I can   t imagine you working the four horses   11  Shelton Yeah, we cut hay you know, and my dad would rake it up where we  could haul it in. Him and Momma would haul the hay in on a hayrack, a  big wagon. Momma was up on top of it, stacking the hay, and my dad  would throw the hay up on the wagon. When they went back to the  house Momma was sitting up there. My dad said,    Giddy up    to the  horses, so they started up. Momma, she toppled off on the ground and  broke both arms. We had a time, I tell you.  Finchum Did the doctor make a house call to fix them?  Shelton Yes, and the house call doctor was Dr. Marshall. He lived about a mile  and a half from us. He   d taken care of her, but took her a long time to  get well.  Finchum She wouldn   t be able to cook with     Shelton No.  Finchum    or wash clothes or anything.  Bishop Who took up that responsibility?  Shelton It was me and my sister-in-law. We did the work. Then I had to go to  the field and work until dark, come in and take care of Momma, so I can  say that we had a rough life. (Laughs)  Finchum You worked from sun up to sunset. After the eighth grade, what did you  do?  Shelton I just went home and helped my daddy.  Finchum Until you got married or what?  Shelton Yeah, I got married when I was twenty-one, I think.  Finchum And how did you meet your husband?  Shelton I met him at church. I didn   t go too much, but that   s where I met him.  He was from Asher.  Finchum What was his name?  Shelton Grestol Shelton.  Finchum That   s an interesting first name.  12  Shelton G-R-E-S-T-O-L.  Finchum I don   t know that I   ve ever heard that. What would you do for dates?  Shelton My dad had an old car and we   d drive it around a little bit. It wasn   t too  good. Then he had a little car, sports car. That   s what   we didn   t get to  go much because we worked.  Finchum Did Shawnee have a movie theater?  Shelton Yeah. We never did get to go. (Laughs)  Finchum What did he do for a living?  Shelton When he got old enough to work in the oilfield, he was a pumper for  wells when they come in. We had three of them that came in on our  place, but they didn   t last long.  Finchum Would you have to move around a lot for that type of work?  Shelton No, he just had those three wells to pump the oil out. He   d just stay  there and do that.  Finchum How many children did the two of you have?  Shelton The two: Judy and Roy.  Finchum Boy and a girl.  Shelton Yes, boy and a girl.  Finchum If you were working all this time with your father, what would you do  for fun?  Shelton We didn   t have much fun.  Finchum Not even a little bit?  Shelton Well, I don   t know. I don   t even remember any fun that we had.  Bishop What types of games would you play as a child?  Shelton We sat and listened to the radio. That   s what we did. We   d always wait  for the Grand Ole Opry to come on. Really, we didn   t have much fun  you know, that way.  13  Finchum Go swimming? The farm didn   t have a pond?  Shelton No, and if it did it had slush in it. It was a slush pit. We couldn   t do that.  (Laughs)  Bishop If you listened to music, did you play an instrument?  Shelton No. None of us, I don   t guess, did.  Finchum Sing?  Shelton We didn   t have any   we couldn   t play music.  Mahaffey Didn   t Paul play the guitar?  Shelton No.  Mahaffey No? Oh, okay.  Bishop If you listened to the Grand Ole Opry, who was your favorite  performer?  Shelton Yeah   oh  Who was the   who was it? I can   t think of any.  Finchum I can   t think that far back either. Only one I can   was Lester Flatt and  that was later. Earl Scruggs and Lester Flatt, Roy Clark, they were  later. Did you have dances?  Shelton Oh I got   that was one thing that we did do. When I got old   was  older, when I met my husband we went to dances. They   d have them in  their homes you know, people would. We   d go every Saturday night to  a dance.  Finchum Square dancing or folk dancing?  Shelton Just square dance.  Finchum Cutting a rug as they say. Did any of your brothers go to the war?  Shelton No.  Finchum None of them were in World War II?  Shelton No.  14  Bishop Do you have any memories of the Great Depression? The Depression  days?  Shelton I don   t guess so. When would they start?  Bishop About 1930.  Finchum You would   ve been fifteen or sixteen about that time period. Rationing  and     Shelton Oh yeah, that   s one thing. When we had to ration food stamps, that was  heartbreaking. We lived about half a mile from our post   mailbox.  We   d walk to the mailbox to get our paper. There   d be   and I went  with my mother and she   d read a letter from her mother and daddy,  from the old country, and she would read it to me going home from the  mailbox. Bless her heart, she just cried. Makes me that way yet. She  was   she missed her and there   s a lot of things I guess that     Finchum It was good that they still communicated, even though she shipped her  across the ocean.  Shelton I know. They regretted it later, really.  Finchum Did they ever come to visit?  Shelton No, they never did come. My mom and them never did go back either.  Finchum So it was just by letter. Did they talk on the phone?  Shelton No. There was no phone. (Laughs)  Finchum Oh, that   s true. So thank goodness for letters and the postal service.  Shelton They wrote letters, and they had the prettiest handwriting in German. I  still have some somewhere. I don   t know where they   re at.  Bishop How important was church? Did you go to church as a child?  Shelton No, I didn   t get to go to church until I was a little older. Then we  walked a lot to church. There was about twenty of us that   d walk from  church to where I lived.  Finchum Would the service be in German?  Shelton No.  15  Bishop When you   d walk to church did you ever meet any one on the road, or  pass anybody, or stop, or     Shelton No, we just   it was just a narrow road then. We   d just all get together  and a lot of them we left off at the corner. They went the next route and  we went on ours. I don   t know, we were just a bunch of crazy kids.  Bishop You said the last time I was here that that happened one time and you  met Pretty Boy Floyd. Is that right? Can you talk about that?  Shelton Yeah, I had a girlfriend, two girlfriends, across the road from where I  lived. We all walked to church. When we got to church, well we went in  and then pretty soon somebody knocked on the window where we were  sitting. It was Pretty Boy Floyd. I said,    Jack, they   re knocking on the  window for you.    I think she gave him the eye that she   d like to see  him.  When church was over we went out, and that guy had a beautiful car. I  don   t know what kind it was, but anyway, he was parked alongside the  road. Whenever Jack came out she said,    Where   d he go?    I said,     There he is, right over there.    She went over and talked to him. Her  brother told her not to do that.    Don   t do that. You   re not going  anywhere with him.    He wanted to go get a Coke. I had a hold of her  hand and I said,    Jack, don   t you go     So she didn   t go.  He finally left and he went over on Highway 8   what is that? Highway  3, there   s a store over there. He got away from them and he got up on  top of the store. They don   t know what he did with the car, or we didn   t  know. They called somebody   church called the law and told them  who he was and where he went. So they had quite a hunt that night. I  still don   t know where they caught him, but they caught him. That was  a scary night. He was going to make her go with him.  Bishop How did you know it was him?  Shelton We just knew, by his picture. We seen him in person, and that   s how we  saw him.  Finchum Where had you seen his picture?  Shelton Whenever he got away, before we come out here. They had pictures all  over everywhere, and then when he looked in the window, she  recognized him right away.  Finchum Her name was Jack? Short for Jacqueline?  16  Shelton Jacqueline.  Bishop Was he as pretty as his name describes?  Shelton He was pretty nice looking. (Laughter) They say he was really a good  guy. He helped his parents and his brother with money and stuff   that  he stole.  Finchum When you got married, did you get married in the church or at the  house?  Shelton We got married at a house. My husband, he said,    I couldn   t get a  preacher.    Our preacher was gone, so he said,    I chased a preacher  down on the highway.    (Laughs) Fairview preacher, and asked him if  he   d marry us. So we went to his house and got married, Dr. Fisher.  Finchum Did you have a special dress?  Shelton Yeah. I had a blue dress.  Finchum And did you have a honeymoon?  Shelton No. (Laughs) We didn   t know what honeymoons were.  Finchum Did you work after you got married?  Shelton Yes. When I got married I went to town and kept babies for a lady. She  had four babies. I kept house for her until I got so lonesome to be home.  I told my dad,    Come get me, I   m through.    Then   course I came home  and started working again in the field   forgot what I was trying to say.  Finchum After you got married you came back and worked for your dad for a  while?  Shelton Yeah, and then me and my husband, we started a dairy. We bought  cows and we had a big dairy. That   s where I spent the rest of my time.  Finchum Did you have to milk by hand?  Shelton No. We had milkers. We milked about sixty cows. Oh my gosh  That  was awful.  Bishop How many times a day would you have to milk?  Shelton Once   I mean twice. Sorry, morning and night. When night came,  everybody was so exhausted and my husband said,    You know I   m kind  17  of getting tired of this.    He didn   t feel good and I lost him, cancer. We  had to sell the cows. That was kind of sad.  Bishop What would you do with all that milk?  Shelton The tanks would pick them up   the trucks. They   d come to the house.  We had a big tank and it was   it   d stay cold. Keep the milk cold for  two days, then the truck would come and get the milk. That just went on  and on.  Finchum Would you make homemade ice cream?  Shelton (Laughs) No.  Finchum No? Cottage cheese?  Shelton No. To this day I don   t like milk. I like to eat it on cereal and stuff, but I  can   t drink one   one glass of milk.  Bishop Too many cows.  Shelton Too many cows. (Laughter)  Finchum After you milked all those cows you had to go in and fix dinner?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum Your day wasn   t over for a long time.  Shelton No.  Finchum Do you remember your first washing machine?  Shelton Yes, I remember my husband bought a little ole Maytag and we kept it  outside in the   we had a little washhouse you know. We kept it in  there, and I did my washing there.  Finchum Hang it on the line? Or did you have a dryer? Well, probably not a  dryer. Hang it on the line?  Shelton Hang it on the line. (Laughs) One day I was out washing and something  went wrong with the Maytag. I got under it to try and see what was the  matter with it. It wasn   t getting any gas. My husband came home from  the field and he come a running out,    Momma, Momma, where you at?     He couldn   t find me anywhere and I was laying under the washer. He  thought I was dead, because he hadn   t seen me  (Laughter) I laughed  18  about that, but it did scare him. He thought I was sprawled out there  dead.  Finchum Did you figure out how to fix it?  Shelton No. (Laughs) He made me get up.  Finchum Did you have a big garden?  Shelton We did have, when we was able to work it. We had a garden and the  cows. Kept us busy.  Finchum Do some canning?  Shelton Yes, some.  Finchum Did the extension workers, county agents, come out to the farm?  Shelton When we had   when we was milking, we had people come out and  check us.  Finchum Did you have time to be a member of a homemaker club?  Shelton No.  Finchum Didn   t think so, but thought I   d ask. Did you sew? Did you learn how to  sew?  Shelton Yeah, I sewed. I sewed more before I got married than I did then.  Finchum Make clothes for your daughter?  Shelton Yes, and shirts for my boy.  Finchum Would you make quilts?  Shelton I had seven quilts when I got married, that I made by just sitting around  at night you know and making patches.  Finchum Do you still have them?  Shelton No, they   re wore out.  Finchum When you had your children did you have them at home or in the  hospital?  19  Shelton At home. No, I had Judy in the hospital, my daughter.  Finchum A lot of things have changed in 100 years haven   t they?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum What do you think   s been the biggest change?  Shelton Me. (Laughs) They think so. (Laughter)  Finchum You can laugh about it, that   s a good thing  Have you kept up with  technology a little bit? Use a computer?  Shelton No. (Laughs) When the TV goes haywire, I might as well just turn it  off. (Laughs)  Finchum I   m kind of right there with you.  Shelton But I   ve got a daughter-in-law that she   s got certain things that she can  do on the TV and she can get it to working, but I couldn   t.  Bishop How about grandchildren? Did you ever take care of your  grandchildren?  Shelton Yes, I have. I   ve taken care of them. I don   t know how many I   ve got.  I   d hate to start in. How many grandkids have I got?  Mahaffey We counted this up and now I forgot. But you have a great-great-grandchild,  don   t you? You have a   think you have a great-great     yeah, you have at least one great-great.  Shelton I don   t hear you.  Mahaffey You have at least one great-great-grandchild.  Shelton Yeah, Emmy Kay.  Mahaffey No, she   s your great-grandchild. I   ll figure it out.  Finchum Just a lot.  Bishop Did you ever have to take care of them when they were babies?  Shelton No, not anymore. I did when the kids were little.  Mahaffey Roy   s kids.  20  Shelton Yeah.  Bishop After you sold the dairy farm, more or less, got rid of the cattle, what  did you do? Did you work anywhere? Do any type of work?  Shelton Just stayed home.  Mahaffey You worked at Kmart. You worked at the pre-school.  Shelton Oh yeah, I worked at Kmart.  Bishop What   d you do at Kmart?  Shelton Brought the carts in. (Laughter)  Mahaffey You were the door greeter   Shelton Yeah.  Bishop Greet people?  Shelton Yes, oh they were interesting. People were interesting. They were so  nice. You just wouldn   t know, when you   re right in the middle of it,  how nice some people are. Talk to you.  Bishop Get to see all walks of life come through the door.  Finchum Did you work until you turned sixty-five?  Shelton No. I was     I don   t know how old I was.  Mahaffey When you quit the pre-school you were eighty-eight or eighty-nine.  Finchum Eighty-eight or eighty-nine. Taking care of little ones at pre-school.  That   s pretty impressive.  Bishop Was that in Shawnee? The pre-school?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum Sounds like    work    was your middle name.  Shelton And I didn   t have one. (Laughs) They didn   t give me a middle name.  Finchum It   s just Emma?  21  Shelton Yeah, and now I   ve got a little great-granddaughter calls me Emma  Kay.    Emma Kay      Mahaffey That   s her name. And you have another one too, I think, that   s named   Emma . Someone     Shelton Yeah, in California.  Bishop Did you ever, you and your husband, ever travel?  Shelton Yes, we   d travel with the Milk Association. We went to Chicago, whole  trailer   a whole plane full  (Laughs) There was a bunch of us.  Finchum Milk, milk, milk everywhere, huh?  Bishop Did you ever take a vacation?  Shelton No. We went to somewhere     Mahaffey Chicago.  Shelton I said we went to Chicago.  Mahaffey Sorry.  Finchum I understand when you turned ninety-nine you did something special?  Shelton What   s that?  Finchum Went to see someone in concert?  Shelton (Laughs) Do you like him? (Laughter)  Finchum A little bit  (Laughter) We should say who    him    is.  Shelton Yeah, he   s   that was really nice.  Finchum Blake Shelton. Any relation since your last name   s Shelton?  Shelton Yes, they say that he is, but he lived in Ada too. Was born in Ada, and  all of my husband   s people live out in Ada. So he   s out of one of them.  (Laughs)  Bishop Did you get to meet him?  22  Shelton No. They wouldn   t let me down to   I got about a section up from  where he was singing.  Finchum Put on a good show?  Shelton Uh-hmmm.  Finchum Does he? Which one of his songs do you like the best?  Shelton Oh gosh, I don   t know.  Finchum All of them?  Shelton Because they   re kind of not like we sing anymore.  Finchum He has a nice voice.  Shelton Yeah.  Bishop Did you go on that trip with family? To that concert.  Shelton Judy and Melissa     Mahaffey Melanie.  Shelton Yeah, Melanie.  Bishop It was girls    night out.  Finchum Girls    night out, yeah.  Shelton They first told me we couldn   t see him. I don   t know what they told  me   big fib. They told me,    Well, we   ll just go to another show up  here.     Mahaffey Aquarium.  Shelton They turned into where he was,    See there? See there? I told you      (Laughs) Oh gosh.  Bishop That was for your ninety-ninth. How did they celebrate your hundredth?  Shelton My hundredth? At church.  Mahaffey All your kids were there and your grandkids.  23  Bishop But Blake wasn   t there. (Laughs)  Mahaffey Nope.  Shelton No, Blake wasn   t there, but you know he got a divorce. He got a  divorce. (Laughs) Maybe we better take care of that  (Laughter) I think  she likes him   Mahaffey Grandma, you have five grandchildren, eleven great-grandchildren, and  at least seven great-greats.  Shelton You got it all counted up.  Bishop That   s a long list.  Finchum Pretty good legacy.  Bishop What do you do at your age, 101, what do you do during the day? Tell  us a little bit about what time you get up, some of the things you do  during the day, and when you go to bed.  Shelton I go to bed at six o   clock. (Laughs) Really, I go to bed early. Now what  did you want     Bishop Do you get up early?  Shelton Seven o   clock. Seven or eight sometimes. You asked me something  else?  Bishop What do you do during the day? What   s a typical day like for you?  Shelton When I can get outside I just walk around the farm there, and sit and  watch TV. It gets kind of monotonous you know, but I get it worked  out.  Bishop You still live on your own?  Shelton Yes, I cook, do everything. I bank, I still do that.  Finchum Do you drive?  Shelton If I had a car. (Laughs) He took the car away from me, the doctor did  because I had a mini-stroke in   what year was that?  Mahaffey Well you were ninety-seven.  24  Shelton So he thought I better not drive anymore.  Finchum The farm that you have, was it your parents    farm?  Shelton Yes, some of it. Not all of it.  Finchum It   s been in the family a long time then.  Bishop You still live there?  Shelton Uh-hmmm. By myself.  Finchum It has water and electricity now, doesn   t it?  Shelton Yes, I do. (Laughter)  Finchum Do you read much?  Shelton No, since my eyes got bad I can   t read hardly anything. I may read a  little while, then my eyes hurt and I have to quit.  Finchum When that wasn   t the case, did you read much?  Shelton Yeah, I did. Not too much, but I   d read some. This eye is already gone.  It   s hard.  Finchum Is there a dish that your children and grandchildren beg you to make?  Shelton A dish?  Finchum A specialty of yours?  Shelton I think they like anything.  Mahaffey I think what she means is what type of pie  (Laughs)  Shelton They like pies that I make at Christmas time. A coconut and a  chocolate. They want that again now.  Bishop Are you going to make it?  Shelton I hope I hold out. (Laughter)  Finchum You make your own crust?  Shelton No, no, no. I quit that a few years back.  25  Bishop What   s the secret to a good crust?  Shelton This one now? I buy them.  Bishop But when you made it, you used to make them, what   s the secret to a  good crust?  Shelton (Laughs) Lard  Lard, and flour, and water.  Mahaffey Tell them what you call the meringue. Tell them what you call the white  stuff. The white stuff on the pie.  Shelton Meringue?  Mahaffey What do you call it?  Shelton Meringue.  Mahaffey No. What do you call it? You used to have a name for it.  Shelton Calf slobber. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s what my mother called it too.  Shelton Did she?  Finchum She didn   t like it. (Laughs)  Bishop Cat slobber. (Laughs)  Mahaffey Calf.  Finchum Calf.  Bishop Calf slobber.  Finchum Having milked a lot of cows, you   d be able to know that wouldn   t you?  Shelton Yeah.  Bishop Do you have any advice for someone that wants to live 100 years or  longer?  Shelton Just live, be happy, love your people, and there   s a lot of things you  could do to make people happy. I   ve forgot them. (Laughter)  26  Finchum How old were you when you lost your husband?  Shelton He was   I think he was   what   d I say? Nineteen years ago, I think.  Finchum And when you got rid of the dairy farm?  Shelton I think when we were sixty, but we sold the cows. Then I had to sell  most of them.  Mahaffey You were seventy-five when you sold the cows. And you were eighty-four  when you lost him.  Shelton And he was eighty-four?  Mahaffey You were, you were eighty-four.  Finchum So you had a dairy up until you were seventy-five. You didn   t know  when to quit   Shelton But he got sick and we had to. And two, whenever we was milking the  ice would get all over the ground, and I   d have to go out and get the  cows and bring them down to the barn where he could turn them in, and  I   d fall. I broke my leg, broke my ankle, at different times. Boy, I had it.  (Laughs)  Mahaffey You broke your arm, I   m going to say, when you were seventy.  Shelton Broke an arm     Mahaffey Because a cow kicked you.  Shelton All because of them cows.  Bishop It   s tough work. Dairy farming   s very hard.  Shelton It is.  Mahaffey Grandma, do you remember the time Paul was in the hospital and you  were   it was me and Judy, and you had had a cow or calf in the pasture  and you and me hoisted that calf into the truck? You remember that?  Just me and you. You were eighty-three probably.  Finchum Amazing.  27  Shelton A lot of times we   d find them calves up in the field. I remember one  time, it   s a wonder it didn   t get me, but me and my husband went up in  the field and there was that little baby calf. They get crazy when they  see their baby. I went in the back and I said,    You stay on the tractor.  I   ll take care of this one.    I tried to lift that calf up on the wagon and  that cow jumped up and she started to get me. Oh boy, that scared me  (laughs), because they are so mean when they are that way. We had a  lot of   I think it   s a wonder we didn   t get killed.  Finchum A lot of close calls. Did the dairy have a name?  Shelton Just Shelton Dairy.  Finchum Have its own bottles and stuff?  Shelton No, we didn   t bottle it, we sold it.  Finchum Did you have chickens at that time, too?  Shelton No, not at that time because Momma, she did that. She couldn   t take  care of all of them and we had to do the cows.  Mahaffey You had chickens when you were older.  Finchum When you had your children, did you have chickens too?  Shelton Yes.  Finchum Would you kill them or would your husband?  Shelton No, I killed them.  Finchum You did? You have a method?  Shelton I had a big round stump and I   d take   he   d catch the chicken for me  and I had a hatchet. I   d lay that chicken down there   head. And I   d kill  it. That   s how. I did   I could wring their necks and kill them that way.  Finchum Just had to do what you had to do, didn   t you?  Shelton Yeah.  Finchum Would you fry your chicken, or would you bake it?  Shelton Fry.  28  Finchum Would you sell the eggs?  Shelton Parkin   s Hatchery in Shawnee.  Bishop Did you get your overalls from Shawnee? There   s a company     Shelton Yes, Round House.  Finchum That   s it. I couldn   t think of the name, Round House. It   s still in  business I think, isn   t it? I think it is     Shelton I don   t know, is it?  Mahaffey I think so.  Bishop They   re quite popular through here and all of Oklahoma.  Finchum Round House overalls.  Bishop I figured you   d have to have worn a pair of those.  Shelton Oh yeah, my dad kept me in overalls. (Laughter)  Finchum Did he have a nickname for you?  Shelton Tomboy. I didn   t tell you about him getting sick. He had appendicitis  and me and my husband   I was out in the field and I had to go get my  husband to take him to the doctor. Momma, she didn   t drive. He took  him to the hospital and they said,    He won   t come home because he   s  going to have surgery.    We went on home and whenever it got time  to   I think we had to pick cotton or something like that. I don   t know.  He said,    Now Momma, you take care of yourself out there. Don   t get  hurt.    He was worried about me. I said,    Well, I   ll be okay.    Whenever  he   d meet somebody, after he got home   after he   d meet somebody  they   d say,    Well Frank, how   d you get along? What   d you do about  your cotton?       Oh, my tomboy took care of it.    (Laughs) So that made  me feel good.  Finchum So you had to pick some cotton. Where would you take it?  Shelton We put it on a wagon and there   d be a gin there in town somewhere, but  I think it burned later.  Finchum In Shawnee? Did it have an ice plant? Shawnee.  Shelton Yes.  29  Bishop When history is written, what would you like it to say about you? How  do you want to be remembered?  Shelton Well, you know how I want to be remembered: good. I don   t know if  I   m faithful or not. I don   t know.  Finchum As your daddy   s tomboy.  Shelton (Laughs) Yeah.  Finchum Hard worker.  Shelton That   s for sure. I guess that could be a lot of it. Hard work.  Bishop Does it pay off in the end?  Shelton Yeah, it pays off  See? (Laughter)  Bishop One question we haven   t asked you is what   s your secret to longevity?  What   s your secret to living so long?  Shelton I guess it   s because I wanted to live, I guess.  Bishop That   s kind of interesting, what makes you want to live?  Shelton All my people, my family. Do all I can do for my family. Is that what  you want to know? I have good family, they   re all   they all know one  another.  Finchum And you   re still hoping to meet that one person, right?  Shelton If you don   t beat me to it  (Laughter)  Finchum I   ll let you win, how   s that? (Laughs) Anything else you want to add  before we close off?  Shelton No, I think I   ve mumbled on enough.  Finchum I think you   ve been great. You   re a good role model for a lot of us, so  thank you for sharing your stories with us today.  Shelton Thank you.  -------  ------- 
