 Finchum Today is December 17, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with  Alex Bishop. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Nowata, Oklahoma to speak with Ida Bell Reed. This is part of our  Oklahoma 100 Year Life, so thank you for having us today.  Reed Thank you.  Finchum Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Reed I was born a mile west of Old Alluwe in a two-story log house across  the Verdigris River. Not been very exciting, but (laughs)     Finchum And when? When   s your birthday?  Reed July 16, 1911.  Finchum And can you spell the place that you were born? I have not heard of  that before.  Reed A-L-L-U-W-E.  Finchum Does it still exist?  Reed The dam took care of Alluwe, that part of it. They moved  the town   two miles east on Highway  28 . It   s out there, but it   s just a small  place.  Finchum So where you were born is underwater now?  Reed Yes.  5  Finchum How did that make you feel?  Reed Didn   t really think anything about it.  I was too young so I don   t really  remember.   Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Reed My daddy was a pumper in the oilfield.  Finchum Okay.  Reed My mother was just a housewife.  Finchum Did you have to move around a lot then?  Reed No. No.  Finchum So he was a pumper around in this area?  Reed Well, out around Alluwe.  Finchum Okay. Did you have brothers and sisters?  Reed I had two brothers, no sisters.  Finchum And where were you in the line?  Reed In the middle.  Finchum In the middle. (Laughter)  Bishop Surrounded on both sides. (Laughter)  Finchum I guess that was good and bad, huh?  Reed Yeah. They   re both gone. I have no   my parents are gone and my  brothers are gone, so I   m the only one left.  Finchum Did anyone else make it to 100     Reed No.  Finchum    in your family?  Reed No. Nobody else made it to ninety.  6  Finchum So what do you think your secret is?  Reed I have no idea. I   ve lived a good clean life. Been very active all my life,  so I don   t know. The Lord just took care of me.  Finchum Well, where did you go to school?  Reed At Alluwe.  Finchum How many grades?  Reed All of them, through twelfth grade.  Finchum Was it a one-room school, initially?  Reed Yes. It was a one-room. Well, let   s see it was   I can   t hardly get it in  my mind. It was long. We had a stage up front. Then, of course, all  eight grades was in this area.  Finchum How would you get there?  Reed Walked. (Laughs) We didn   t have school buses. I walked about a mile  and a half.  Finchum One way?  Reed Yes.  Finchum Even through the snow?  Reed Even in the snow.  Finchum What would you pack for lunch?  Reed Don   t remember.  Finchum Would you have cake suppers and things like that at the school? Pie  dinners?  Reed No. We used to have   well, we auctioned off pies to raise money and  things.  Finchum Would they have dances?  Reed Yes. I can remember my parents going to dances at peoples    houses.  They put us kids to bed. We were just little.  7  Finchum Did they get there by horse and buggy?  Reed Yes.  Finchum I can   t imagine traveling that way, do you have any memories about  traveling in a horse and buggy   horse and wagon?  Reed No, not really.  Finchum Not really.  Reed There wasn   t   you know, when I was growing up, there wasn   t a lot of  activity out where I was raised. You just had to make your own  entertainment.  Bishop What type of entertainment did you make?  Reed What?  Bishop What type of entertainment did you make?  Reed We played basketball. We lived basketball. (Laughs)  Bishop Did you play on a team?  Reed Yes.  Finchum What were your uniforms like?  Reed Long pants down to that, but then we would pull them up. (Laughs)  First tournament I ever went to was down at Tahlequah and we won it.  Finchum You won?  Reed Yes.  Finchum What position did you play?  Reed Side center. (Laughs) See, we had a three divisioned court. I played in  the middle. Then we had guards down here and centers down here   I  mean, well, the one that shoots the goals.  Finchum So you didn   t get any baskets     Reed No. (Laughs)  8  Finchum    being in the center.  Reed (Laughs) No, I just had to take care of the middle and the girl that  played with me was really tall. There were six of us. There was two  guards, two forwards, and two centers.  Finchum And you won the tournament, that   s great   Reed Yes.  Finchum How did you get to the tournament?  Reed In individual cars. My dad was good in that division because we had a  Model A Ford with side curtains. He would load us girls in that car and  take us to different places. We went to Talala and what did we have? It  was inside, but it was a dirt floor that we played on.  Finchum Wow.  Reed I don   t remember if we won that or whether we didn   t.  Finchum Were most places dirt floors?  Reed Yes. But we didn   t have very many places, you know, schools around  that had places for ball teams.  Finchum Having two brothers helped with basketball?  Reed Well, I don   t think so. My brother, oldest brother, was six years older  than I was. My youngest brother was five or six years younger than I  was, so my parents strung us out. (Laughter) Course we played  basketball outside. They put the cinders from out of the furnace out on  the basketball court. That   s where we played basketball, so you can  imagine what our knees looked like. But we survived it, had just as  much fun as anybody who   s having today, probably more. Because     you know, we didn   t have all the advantages that kids have today. They  don   t appreciate it.  Finchum Well did you live on a farm?  Reed No, we lived in a   well, a man my dad worked for furnished us the  house.  Finchum Did you raise a garden and have chickens and things?  9  Reed Yes, we always raised a big garden. I can remember sitting on the front  porch with the number three washtub full of green beans a stemming  them. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s a lot of green beans.  Reed That   s a lot of green beans. We didn   t have pressure cookers in those  days, but we did have gas. It was raw gas coming from the lease that we  lived on. My dad fixed a fire out in the yard with a number three tub,  number three washtub, sitting on top of it with water to heat. That   s  where we put the green beans in half a gallon fruit jars, put them in that  water, and boiled them for three hours. Nowadays we put them in a  pressure cooker. Times have changed.  Finchum Just a little bit. (Laughter) Did you have a cellar to store the canned  goods in?  Reed No.  Finchum No.  Reed We had a pantry and that   s where they were stored.  Bishop How did you keep food cool?  Reed It was in fruit jars.  Bishop Even your meat?  Reed We didn   t have meat. We had hogs and salted them down with brining.  That   s the way we kept the meat. I don   t remember much about beef,  but we always had pork.  Finchum Raise your own hogs?  Reed Yes.  Finchum What about chickens?  Reed Yes, we had chickens.  Finchum Whose job was it to kill the chicken?  Reed Well sometimes I wrung their heads off. (Laughter)  Finchum You had to do what you had to do, didn   t you?  10  Reed Yeah. Or you didn   t know any better, you know, you never seen  anything else.  Finchum Well what would you do for refrigeration?  Reed Had an icebox. We drove from Alluwe to Nowata, picked up a 100  pound cake of ice, took it home, put it in the refrigerator. That   s the way  we kept stuff cool.  Finchum How long would that ice last?  Reed Now that I can   t answer, I don   t know.  Finchum How often would you have to do that, once a week?  Reed Probably once a week.  Finchum Was Nowata a very big town?  Reed No.  Finchum Have a movie theater?  Reed Not then I don   t think. Later we had. One time we had theaters in  Nowata. Now we don   t have any. (Laughs)  Finchum How far of a trip was it from your house into Nowata?  Reed Well let   s see. I think it   s about fifteen miles, maybe.  Finchum Took a little while then.  Reed Yeah.  Finchum How often would you get to go?  Reed About once a month.  Finchum Well did your mother make your clothes?  Reed Yes.  Finchum She sewed?  11  Reed Yes, I can remember. See, I   ve gone through two depressions and my  mother made me two   well, I don   t know what   they weren   t wool,  but they were some kind of heavy stuff and I had two. I   d wear one to  school one day and the next day I   d wear the other one while she  washed that one. Times back then were hard.  Finchum The Depression in the    30s. Do you have any memories from that time  period other than that? Did your parents have a rough time?  Reed What was I doing in my 30   s     Finchum In the 1930s, you would   ve been in your teens.  Bishop Early 20   s. Late teens, early 20   s. The Great Depression.  Reed Well, we had a basketball team in the school. I guess at that time we  had a brick building for where we went to school with individual rooms,  different grades. Before that we just had a big old building with all the  grades in there.  Bishop Do you remember the Great Depression?  Reed Yes.  Bishop What do you recall about the Great Depression?  Reed Well you know I wasn   t bothered too much with it because we had a  big garden, we had cows, we had chickens, and we had hogs. Never  went hungry. There was others in the community that had a hard time,  but we always had plenty to eat.  Finchum So you finished the eighth grade, and then what did you do?  Reed Went to high school.  Finchum And was that at the same place?  Reed Yes.  Finchum So you graduated high school in what year?  Reed Twenty-nine.  Finchum Right at the beginning of the Depression.  Reed Yeah.  12  Finchum Yeah, and then what did do?  Reed Well, I got married two years after that, after I graduated from high  school. Had nothing. I mean nothing. You know how silly kids can be,  but we were married almost four years and we got a call from  Michigan, from an uncle of my husband   s. He said,    If you can be up  here in three days I   ve got a job for you.    So we went, rode the bus to  Michigan, stayed up there a year. That   s where my daughter was born.  Then we came back to Alluwe.  Bishop How   d you meet your husband?  Reed Oh we grew up together. He went to the same school I did.  Finchum What was his name?  Reed James Larkin Reed.  Finchum So what was your maiden name?  Reed Stanart.  Finchum S-T     Reed ...A-N-A-R-T.  Finchum    A-R-T. Okay.  Bishop Was it love at first sight?  Reed I   d say it was. Of course we grew up together, grew up   all went to  school together.  Finchum How did he propose?  Reed I don   t remember. (Laughter)  Bishop Did he ever take you out on a date?  Reed Oh yeah.  Bishop Do you have any memories from a favorite time   favorite date?  Reed No. Don   t remember. Dates back then weren   t like they are today. We  didn   t have theaters to go to. Maybe on Saturday night there   d be, I  13  don   t know who did it, but they   d fix up a screen on a side of a  building, on the outside of the grocery store and that   s where we got the  movie, on that.  Finchum Take your own chair?  Reed Yeah, or sit on the ground. Well you know   we went two depressions  after I was married. Back in those days we didn   t have what we got  today. We had to   the way we entertained ourselves we had to make     we   d jump rope. There wasn   t any theaters or anything back then, see?  We just had the screen on the side of the building. On Saturday night  that was the entertainment we had.  Bishop What was a typical movie?  Reed Oh, don   t ask me that. (Laughter)  Finchum Probably not talking ones, wasn   t sound at that point.  Reed No, no sound at that time.  Finchum Well did you live with your parents when you first got married?  Reed No.  Finchum You moved out of the     Reed Yeah, we had a house, a little three-room house.  Bishop I know you said he had a job in Michigan. What was that job?  Reed Oilfield.  Bishop Not the auto industry? Your husband didn   t go up to go work in the  Ford Motor Company or the auto industry?  Reed No, no.  Finchum And you decided to come back for what particular reason?  Reed It was home. (Laughs) There was a man here that was single that traded  jobs with my husband so that   s why we comeback, so we could be back.  Of course we had a job with   at that time it was Wiser oil Company.  Later years, it was the Forest Oil Company.  Finchum Did he stay with them?  14  Reed Yeah, he did for a long time. Then, oh, he worked for the Shell Oil.  You   re racking my brain. (Laughter)  Finchum You   re doing great   Reed Of course we didn   t have a job. His folks put in a mill of some kind. Set  up where they ground corn and stuff you know, through this thing. My  husband worked in that. Girls, boys, it was hard back then, those days. I  mean hard.  Bishop You remember World War II? Did your husband go to war?  Reed No. He and his brother went to sign up, but neither one passed   had  eye problems.  Finchum Did your younger brother have to go?  Reed Seems to me like he was in the Army, but it was after the war.  Finchum And your parents were still living in the log cabin?  Reed Oh no. They moved up on where my dad had the lease, public lease. We  had rod lines down here. That   s something you don   t know anything  about.  Bishop What was that?  Reed Rod lines.  Bishop Rod lines, tell me about it.  Reed Well, best I remember they were hooked up to   well, there was a  building with some kind of motor. Huge thing, went around, around.  These rod lines were hooked from these wells to this motor and then  you wouldn   t say pump but it pulled the oil out of the wells. Of course  when I was a kid I didn   t pay much attention to things like that.  (Laughs)  Finchum Would you have chores?  Reed I used to milk a cow. It was either do that or do the supper dishes, and I  didn   t want to do the supper dishes so I milked the cow. (Laughs)  Bishop You preferred the cow, huh?  15  Reed Yeah. I wasn   t a very good cow milker either. (Laughter)  Bishop So you   re saying you might   ve been better at the dishes?  Reed Yeah. (Laughs) Oh dear.  Finchum So you had a daughter.  Reed Yeah.  Finchum And then you moved back here. Did you have other children?  Reed Had Jim.  Finchum Here in Oklahoma?  Reed Yeah.  Finchum Okay.  Reed He was born, from Alluwe two maybe three miles south of what   my  husband was working with Shell Oil Company at that time. We had  moved down there, and we moved in a house. No nothing, but, you  know, no bathrooms, all that kind of stuff. Had to run outside to the  toilet. You two never probably ever seen anything like it. (Laughs)  Finchum My grandmother was like that so     Reed Was it?  Finchum Yes.  Bishop Now when you gave birth, was that at home or in the hospital? Did you  give birth at home or in the hospital?  Reed What do you mean? (Laughs)  Bishop Home birth?  Reed My daughter was born in Michigan, and Jim was born out at Alluwe.  Bishop But at home?  Reed Yeah.  Bishop Did you have a physician or a doctor that attended?  16  Reed Yeah. We had a doctor that lived in Alluwe, drove a horse and buggy to  call on patients. Now doctors don   t call on patients.  Bishop You call them.  Reed Yeah, you call them up and you go to the hospital or to their office.  Bishop What were holidays like growing up as a child?  Reed Well, we didn   t celebrate because see, people had no way of  transportation so maybe some of the families would gather together.  Bishop In your own family, did you have any traditions or a favorite day, or  favorite holiday, or do you have any type of traditions that you engaged  in?  Reed It was more another day. Maybe if you had a lot of family they could  gather, but I didn   t have a lot of family and my husband didn   t either.  Finchum Were your parents from Oklahoma?  Reed No, they were from Missouri. I think my dad came from Nebraska to  Fort Scott, Kansas. That   s where my mother and, I think, he met and  married.  Finchum And then the oil business brought him to Oklahoma?  Reed Well, I don   t know. I think he come to Oklahoma and went to work for  a man on a ranch. I don   t remember too much about that.  Finchum Did he have horses? Your parents?  Reed Yes.  Finchum Your dad had horses.  Reed Yeah. We had a horse and buggy until we got a Model A Ford.  (Laughs)  Finchum Roads good or bad?  Reed Well, you know back then we thought we was flying high.  Finchum Was church an important part of your life?  17  Reed Well, yes, when I got to be a teenager. We had a Methodist church in  Alluwe, and of course I walked.  Finchum Didn   t take the horse?  Reed No, I never did have anything to do with the horses. I just     Bishop You said you liked to milk the cow, did you ever     Reed I didn   t say I liked to milk. (Laughs)  Bishop You chose it, but you milked cows. Did you ever run a dairy farm or  anything?  Reed No. My folks had what they called a separator.  Bishop Ah, okay.  Reed You know anything about that?  Bishop No, no.  Reed Do you?  Finchum No.  Reed Okay, it was a tall thing and I don   t remember a whole lot about it  because I didn   t fool with it much. I was just a smart-alecky teenager.  Finchum It would separate the      Reed Well we had the separator and we run that milk through this separator  and it took the cream out of that milk and then you took that cream and  you made butter. I   m educating you people. (Laughs)  Finchum That was good butter then, real butter.  Bishop Did you sell any of it? Did you ever sell any of it?  Reed No, I don   t think so. Everybody back in that time, you know, living in  the country, they had all kinds of animals to   men used to gather  together and go house-to-house and butcher maybe three or four hogs at  a time, salt it down. But you know back then our weather was so much  different than it is now. When it got cold, it got cold, and it stayed cold.  Now, what do we have? We have summertime in the wintertime, so it  wouldn   t be cold enough to keep meat and stuff.  18  I can remember my mother-in-law, they   d butcher a cow, and she   d  hang the hindquarters up in the smokehouse we called it. It would  freeze solid and then she   d go out there with a knife and slab off a slab  of that beef, take it in the house, bake biscuits, and cook that beef. We  had biscuits and gravy and meat, potatoes, they always raised big  gardens.  Bishop What were summers like? Were they hot?  Reed Yes, but we didn   t pay much attention to it. I can remember, after I had  my kids, wringing out sheets in water and putting over those kids when  I put them to bed to keep them cool.  Bishop At night?  Reed Yes.  Bishop No air-conditioning.  Reed We finally got a window fan. You don   t know anything about them, do  you?  Bishop I   ve seen them.  Reed Do you? We got one of them so we could   we had some air. I don   t  ever want anybody to have to live back through what we lived through  at that time, but we didn   t know any better. We never had anything else  so we just accepted it and went on.  Finchum Do you like air-conditioning today?  Reed Yes  (Laughs)  Bishop Well how would you heat, when you were growing up, how would you  heat the house?  Reed Oh, we had a King heater. You don   t know anything about. (Laughs)  Bishop I don   t know what a   I   ve never heard of that.  Reed Well it was a big round thing and it had a stovepipe that went up  through the roof so the smoke could go out. That   s how we heated the  house.  Bishop Kind of like a potbelly stove type     19  Reed Yeah, with wood.  Bishop A kink heater.  Reed A King heater.  Bishop Kink   kink?  Finchum King. K-I-N-G.  Reed It was called a King heater. K-I-N-G-H-E-A-T-E-R.  Bishop King heater, okay. I   ll have to look that one up.  Reed Just think of all the things you   ve missed. (Laughter)  Finchum How would you do the laundry?  Reed On a washboard. You know what a washboard is? (Laughs)  Finchum I know that one. Hard on your knuckles.  Reed Yes.  Bishop What do you think   s been the greatest invention in your lifetime?  Reed There   s been a lot of them.  Bishop What   s made life easier for you?  Reed A washing machine, maybe. The first washing machine my folks had  was a half a moon type, and you stood like that. (Gestures) Didn   t have  any electricity at that time, so we just had to   you had to   well, it went  like this. (Gestures) Then we finally got the Maytag. You know what  that   s like?  Finchum Maytag, that   s a good name.  Reed That was great. You didn   t have to do much manpower for that because  they had gasoline motors that worked them.  Bishop So you do your laundry outside?  Reed Yeah, winter or summer.  20  Finchum Well then, how about bath time?  Reed We got the number three washtub. That   s the way we took a bath. We  all took a bath out of the same water. Of course it was just my two  brothers and I.  Finchum In the kitchen, or would that be outside on the porch or what?  Reed No, we had a   well, we called it a pantry, I guess, outside the kitchen. I  mean the kitchen was here and this room was here. That   s where we  took a bath. There was a door on the west and a door on the south. You  could close yourself in there for privacy. (Laughs)  Finchum And heat the water on the stove?  Reed Heat the water on the stove.  Finchum What about ironing?  Reed Well, we had the old fashioned iron. Do you remember them?  Finchum I   ve seen some of them in antique stores.  Reed You got the iron you put on the stove and it got hot. Then it had a thing  that fastened down on that iron and then you could iron with it.  Bishop Now bath time, going back to bath time, you said a number three tub?  Reed Yeah.  Bishop Was that the same tub you cooked those green beans in?  Reed Probably. (Laughs)  Bishop Pretty resourceful back then.  Reed Yeah, you watched every penny you had in your hand. Didn   t have all  the luxuries we have today.  Bishop Did you have a favorite decade like the    20s, the    30s, the    40s, the     50s? Did you have a favorite decade in life?  Reed No.  Finchum Did you work outside of the home once you got married and had kids?  21  Reed Well, I went to work at a caf   after I got out of high school, and I don   t  know, I worked at that for maybe two years. I was married at that time  and after that two years that   s when we got a job in Michigan and went  to Michigan. Well we   re in an oilfield, and there was no housing, but  the man that ran the grocery store had a three-room house. (Laughs) We  rented that for nine dollars a month and in the inside of it was just, you  know, what you fasten the boards to was nothing. Not like we   ve got  sheetrock on this, no, no sheetrock on that. After we moved in there, the  man that owned up, he did seal the house. Man it got cold out there. We  were young, foolish, didn   t think anything about it, glad we had a job,  probably had a paycheck.  Finchum Did it pay pretty well?  Reed I don   t remember that, but we bought a Ford Coupe. You remember  them?  Finchum I   ve seen pictures, yes.  Reed So we did have transportation.  Bishop Now when you came back to Nowata did you work anywhere? Back to  Oklahoma?  Reed Well let   s see, what did I do when we came back to Oklahoma? I guess  my husband must have got a job with the Shell Oil Company. We had  done other things and we built a house in Alluwe. I remember that, but  with the help of Bud   s brother and his parents. Bud worked for his  brother in a filling station in Alluwe. I don   t remember how long he did,  but     Finchum Did you work after that?  Reed What did I do? I know I cooked. I was the first cook that the school  system had when they furnished school kids. I worked at that a couple  of years, fifteen dollars a week. (Laughs)  Finchum And you had to cook everything yourself?  Reed You had to cook everything. We cleaned beans in a number two  washtub, you know, washed them. I don   t quite remember what we  cooked them in. Maybe we cooked them in that same washtub.  Probably did.  Finchum Homemade rolls? Biscuits     22  Reed No. Didn   t make them. I   ve done that in my later years, but not back  then. I was in a little one-room caf   in Alluwe for three times. That was  part of our income.  Finchum Would you cook or would you wait tables?  Reed Honey, it wasn   t much bigger than this room. (Laughs) I cooked, and I  waited tables, and I washed the dishes.  Finchum You did it all then, huh?  Reed Did it all. (Laughs)  Bishop I wanted to ask if you milked the cow because you said you washed the  dishes. I didn   t know    (Laughs)  Reed I   d rather milk a cow than wash the dishes.  Bishop Well, obviously you must   ve been a good cook.  Reed Well, my mother and my mother-in-law were good cooks and they  taught me. I consider myself a pretty good cook.  Bishop You have a favorite recipe, or a favorite meal, that you like to make?  Reed No, I like to make pies.  Bishop What   s the best pie you ever made?  Reed Well, I make a custard pie, a lemon pie, a coconut pie, an apple pie   is  there any more? (Laughter)  Finchum Chocolate   Reed Yeah, chocolate pie. Until I broke my leg, I was still making pies. I   m  going to get back to making pies.  Finchum Make your own crust?  Reed Yes ma   am   Finchum I   ve never done that, I need to come and let you give me a lesson.  Reed Well, I   ll tell you what. You take two cups of flour, a cup of shortening,  and a little bit of salt. Put it all in a bowl, and take you something and  stir it up good. That makes your crust. You take it, put it out   oh, I put  23  an egg in it, too. Roll it out, put it in your pie shell, crimp the edges  around it so it     Finchum For moisture   any milk or water or   I guess the egg does that.  Reed I think so.  Finchum I don   t have any idea.  Reed A lot of the things that I used to cook are not there anymore.  Finchum Then would you make your own filling?  Reed Oh yes. Take two cups of milk, a third a cup of flour and whatever. If  you   re making chocolate you take powdered chocolate up in that. Work  it altogether, put it on board, roll it out.  Finchum Sounds good  Would you do any icebox pies?  Reed No, I didn   t.  Finchum I don   t know what the difference is, you bake one and you put one in the  refrigerator. That   s all I know.  Bishop What about a rhubarb or a gooseberry pie?  Reed Well, I   ve made a gooseberry pie. I   m not too fond of gooseberry pie.  Course I   m not really too fond of pie, I   m not a sweet eater.  Bishop But you like to make them.  Reed I love to make them. I love to make them. I like to give them to people  after I make them. I went up to the church, where I go to church, and  taught a class on how to make pies. They were young kids; they didn   t  know anything about it. Used to do a lot of cooking at the church. We  had church dinners and things, and I was still doing that when I broke  this darn leg.  Finchum Fry a lot of chicken?  Reed Yes, fried a lot of chicken. Now we go to the grocery store and buy it.  Finchum I guess back in the day you   d cut up your own.  Reed Yeah. Yeah, I can remember a time when I was living out on the farm. I  would go out and catch me a chicken, wring its head off, take it in the  24  house, dip it down in some hot water, and pull its feathers off. Then  take it back to the house, cut it up, take it   s entrails out    (Snap)  Finchum You   d fry it up.  Reed I   d fry it up or left it whole and baked it. Of course you take the entrails  out. (Laughs)  Finchum Were you a member of a homemaker club?  Reed Oh yes. I belonged to the homemakers    club.  Finchum What was the name? Do you remember?  Reed Oh, I suppose it was Alluwe. I don   t remember, but I   d presume it was.  Finchum Did that for a long time?  Reed Yeah.  Finchum Did you quilt?  Reed I made some quilts, yes, but I never did    quilt   ,    quilt    it.  Finchum You pieced it   made the top?  Reed Yeah, put everything together and then put the   oh, what you call it     Finchum The batting.  Reed The body of the quilt. The body of it, I guess.  Finchum The batting in the back?  Reed Yeah, batting. You   re picking my brain  (Laughter)  Finchum You   re doing great. Was music an important part of your life?  Reed Now my mother could sing like a bird; I can   t carry a tune. (Laughs)  Finchum I just noticed your violin, so I was wondering if you played piano or     Reed Do what?  Finchum Did you play the piano?  25  Reed No. I took piano lessons, but I was a crazy kid and didn   t go on with it.  Finchum Do you remember voting for the first time?  Reed No.  Finchum Your first car? Oh, you said it was a Model A. Model A was your first  car. How about an airplane?  Reed I   ve been up one time. My daughter   well, I don   t remember now  where we were going. Oh, I guess we were going to see Jim when he  lived in El Paso  Texas . I remember we rode an airplane down there. I  put my feet on the ground. (Laughs)  Finchum I hear the train, did you do train rides?  Reed Oh, I think I rode a train one time and that was   my husband got a job  in Illinois and he rode the bus up there. Then later when he found us a  house, which there weren   t very many in   that   s what I was telling you  about, living in that. All that stuff I   ve forgot. I won   t remember  everything.  Bishop Well how did you celebrate your 100th birthday?  Reed Oh my daughter had a thing at the church. We had 150 people.  Bishop Wow, 150.  Reed I celebrated my 103rd birthday the sixteenth of July.  Finchum That   s just amazing.  Bishop What do you think your secret is to a long life?  Reed Good, clean life. I   ve never abused my body.  Bishop Do you have a philosophy or a motto that you live by?  Reed No. I just live every day to its fullest.  Bishop Did you ever think you   d live to 100?  Reed No. And you know not long ago, before I broke this leg, I   ll be talking  about somebody and I   ll stop and laugh because I   ll be saying  something about how old they were or something and here I am older  than they are. I can   t believe I   ve lived this long.  26  Bishop Do you have anything on your bucket list?  Reed No.  Bishop Anything you want to do you haven   t done before?  Reed No. I   ve lived a very contented life.  Finchum Well, take us through a typical day for you today. Like what time would  you get up?  Reed (Laughs) All the way from four o   clock to eight o    clock.  Bishop Four hour span. (Laughter)  Reed Whenever I wake up, I get up. (Laughs)  Finchum And then what would you do throughout the day.  Reed Well, until I got this (gestures to cane), I was very active in the church  and nursing homes.  Finchum When did you give up driving, or have you?  Reed I have. Last birthday I quit.  Bishop When did you break your hip or your leg?  Reed Sixth day of July, 1913.  Bishop Do you mean 2013?  Reed Yeah, 2013.  Finchum Remembers that date. How did you break it?  Reed Well, I had been out to a party, come home, was with a friend, and I got  out of the car, walked through the garage, go through the garage into the  utility   And I walked up to that and turned just a little bit to wave at  her   down I went. It just broke.  Bishop You seem to have recovered pretty well.  Reed Yeah.  27  Finchum So if you get up at four o    clock in the morning, what time do you go to  bed?  Reed Oh maybe eight o   clock, nine o   clock. I have no certain times.  Finchum Do you do much reading during the day?  Reed Oh, I do a lot of reading, read a lot of books.  Finchum Do you have a favorite type?  Reed Oh no, not really.  Finchum Mysteries or novels or     Reed I read them all.  Finchum You read them all.  Bishop What keeps you going? What keeps you determined to keep living?  Reed Well, I don   t know as I have any reason. I just enjoy life.  Bishop Now you say you get up at between four and eight a.m., do you have  any morning rituals that you do?  Reed No. Get me a cup of coffee and read the paper. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s it.  Bishop See what   s going on in the world, huh?  Reed See what   s going on, yeah.  Bishop What   s your take on the current state of affairs?  Reed What?  Bishop How do you think the world   s doing today?  Reed It   s in a terrible mess. I just don   t know what   s going to happen. I think  the devil   s got the world by the hand. It don   t look good. What do you  think about it? (Laughs)  Bishop I haven   t lived 103 years, I don   t know.  28  Reed Well you   re living now. You can see what   s going on.  Bishop If history were written about you today, what would you want it to say?  Reed If what honey?  Bishop If history were written about you today, what would you want it to say?  How would you want to be remembered?  Reed Well, I   ve been a good person all my life and I hope to meet the Lord  someday.  Finchum I think that   s a good way to end then. It was quite a pleasure meeting  you.  Reed And I don   t want to linger, I want to go like that. (Gestures)  Bishop (Laughs)  Reed I just want to go to sleep, but now I don   t know what the Lord   s got for  me. I never expected to have this.  Finchum Well, it   s been great. Thank you for talking with us.  -------  ------- 
