 Finchum  Culvern  Today is September 20, 2013. My name is Tanya Finchum along with  Alex Bishop, and we   re with Oklahoma State University. We   re in Tulsa,  Oklahoma today to speak with Vida Culver?  Culvern      Culvern   regarding our Oklahoma 100 Year Life project. Let   s begin  with having you tell us when and where you were born.  I was born in the small town of Ramah, Colorado   April 10, 1913.  Was it on a farm?  No, in a little town.  What did your parents do for a living?  My father was a banker. Cashier at the bank, small town bank.  And your mother?  Housewife.  Brothers or sisters?  One sister (Lillian).  Younger or older?  She was younger   three years younger than I.  5  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  And where did you go to school?  Went to school there in the little town of Ramah. After I graduated from  high school, I went to Colorado College for a couple of years. Then the  Depression came along and that sort of made a change in my life, for a  while. (Laughs)  What were you studying to be in college?  I was just taking   English teacher, I guess. I was taking more  English  classes . That was the line I was headed for, I guess.  Either teaching or nursing at that time, wasn   t it? For women     Yeah, I guess so. I never considered nursing, but English teacher. Then I  was out of school for a while and went to business college in Denver. I   d  say that   s where I got an education that you can make a living with.  (Laughs)  Well, during the Depression, it impacted what you did? How so?  We lost everything. My father and mother both had stock in the bank so  we lost even our home. So we went to live with an aunt for a while. My  sister graduated from the town of Monument high school. Lillian was   I  just was out of school and I worked for a little while for a family in  Colorado Springs. Then, after my sister got out of high school, my dad  was able to get each of us a loan of a hundred dollars. We went to school  on that in Denver. I marvel, now, when I think back. How in the world?  But when I was in Colorado College   Mrs. Barnes, who was running  the Barnes Business College, knew me because her daughter was going  there, too. I think that helped a lot. She got jobs for Lillian and me as a  waitress in a home in Denver that served   the most would have been  about forty people, but usually about twenty-five or so. So through that  job of being a waitress, we got our food. It was a five-minute walk, I  guess, from where we lived.  So as soon as we were able to get out of school   I, of course, did before  Lillian because it was harder for her than it seemed to be for me. I  graded papers for my tuition. I was just fortunate, I think, in knowing  Mrs. Barnes through my Colorado College experience. So then I  worked. Well, I had several different jobs when I first got out of school.  I ended up being a secretary to lawyers in a law firm. That   s where I was  when I met my husband.  That was going to be my next question   how you met your husband.  6  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  What year was that?  Nineteen thirty-seven.  And did you get married soon after?  Got married in 1940. He worked for the Bureau of Reclamation. He  saved up his time so he had a month he could take off. I lost my job  because Mr. Wampler said,    Oh, we just can   t keep that open for you for  a whole month,    because I said I was going to be gone a month. We had  a marvelous honeymoon. We were married in Colorado Springs. Came  to Tulsa as one of our first stops because my husband had an aunt who  had taught school here for years. Then we went   let   s see   Shreveport,  New Orleans, down around the coast, all the way to Miami. I had a  cousin who had moved there. Had two cute little girls so I have pictures  of us at the beach and that sort of thing. Then we went up the East Coast  to   he was from Camden, South Carolina. Of course, he wanted me to  go there to meet his family and various members of his family.  Went on over to   where? I   m trying to think of the name in Carolina  that is so    (Laughs) Lovely place. Asheville. There is a street there  named for his family. His grandmother, I met. His father was gone. I  mean, his grandfather. I met his grandmother. Now, there is a catholic  school on that property. The street is still named Culvern Street. We  went on to Apex, South Carolina where his brother lived. Had a little  six-month-old baby. Back across, oh, Arkansas. The roads were awful.  (Laughs) Had an uncle who lived at Sparta, Arkansas so we stopped  there. Got back to Denver, I guess, about a day earlier than time for him  to go back to work. It was quite an experience and a lovely honeymoon.  Nineteen forty, that was pretty good, too.  Yeah, came home, I think, with about twenty dollars. (Laughs) Found a  little apartment and we just stayed there a month or so and said,    Surely  we can do a little better than this.    (Laughter) I don   t remember whether  it even had a bedroom. I don   t know, I can   t remember that one because  we soon found a better place.  What had you done for dates before that? What was a typical date?  Well, I had a friend I grew up with. When we were kids, we used to take  the train from Ramah to the little town of Simla where we had a music  teacher. So I   d kind of gone with him through the years, but left him  behind. When I met my husband, I don   t know, we seemed to appreciate  each other pretty quickly.  7  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Would you go to the movies?  We went to the movies a lot. I think back, that was our entertainment  was going to the movies. In June of    38, his mother and an aunt came to  Denver and we made a trip   my husband by that time   he wasn   t my  husband. (Laughs) My friend, at that time, had a new Ford. So we took a  trip to Yellowstone Park and all the parks, Zion and Bryce and Grand  Canyon. Two week trip. Very nice trip. So that was a way of getting  better acquainted with him, too. I always kid him that he wanted his  mother to meet me to approve. (Laughter) Anyway, that was a nice  occurrence, too.  A three-year courtship is a pretty long time.  It was. Well, for one thing, he was working on his master   s at University  of Colorado. I helped him type up a lot of stuff that I   m sure wouldn   t  even be used, now. You just go to the computer for it, probably. It was  quite a long thesis and I helped him with it. That was probably one of  the reasons. We were waiting for him to get that finished.  And once he graduated, what did you do then? You got married and     Well, three years later, I guess, he got a new job with Panhandle Eastern  Pipeline in Kansas City, so we moved to Kansas City. Lived there for  fifteen years before we came here, when he changed jobs to be with the  Williams Company.  And what year was that?  Forty-three   no. When we came here was   what? About    58, I believe.  I think that   s about right. When we first came here, instead of staying  here, we just put everything in storage and lived in Pittsburgh for about  sixteen months, I think. He had a really interesting job there, trying to  find room to put a pipeline from U.S. Steel to McKeesport   I don   t  know. Someplace. But I   m sure it was a very interesting job for him. It  was very challenging, I   m sure. I think he liked that. Then we came back  here and we were here until   do you want all of this? (Laughs)  We do   Let   s see. I   ve been trying to write my memoirs, but I haven   t gotten this  far yet. He retired two or three times (Laughs) and then he   d go back as  a consultant and that sort of thing. I   m trying to think of the year      73, I  guess, we went to  Calgary . He and another fellow started a new  company and it was called Butler, Culvern and Associates. We went to  Calgary for almost two years, on a job there, with his new company.  8  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Then later, he had a job in Tehran. I visited there two months one time,  and then the last trip I took to Tehran was the day that the Shah  proclaimed military law. That poor little driver   we were always met by  a driver. He was so frightened, I know, because they   d stopped him  about six times between the airport and our hotel. We stayed at the  Intercontinental Hotel. That time, I didn   t walk. When I was there those  two months, I would walk from my hotel over to another hotel and visit.  A friend and I would shop and so forth. But that time, after that trouble  in Iran, I just stayed in my hotel for the couple of weeks I was there. So  that was quite an experience that is different, I think, than most people  have had.  Well, he finally retired. (Laughs) He retired and Mr. Butler, I guess, sort  of took over and then he sold to Willbros. So it is now a Willbros  company. So then we moved here  University Village  in 2000. Had a  nice cottage. We liked the cottage very well, but his health wasn   t so  good and we finally decided to move over here. It is more convenient to  get to meals and pick up your mail and so forth. He died in December of  2007. I   ve just been here ever since.  Do you have children?  No, we didn   t have children. I guess that is just kind of it. We had done  an awful lot of travelling. We loved taking cruises. I think we took about  thirteen of them. (Laughs) I just had a good life, I would say.  Do you remember your first airplane ride?  Oh    (Laughs) Yeah. My first airplane ride   one of the lawyers in my  office had a little plane. He took me up in the plane. So that was my first  airplane ride. I don   t know what the next   let   s see. I just don   t  remember. (Laughs) I took so many. I think we flew to New York for  the   it was a convention we were going to, partly, but it was the time of  the New York  World   s  Fair. I don   t know when that was.  I know there was one in    64, but there was one before that, too. A  World   s Fair.  I think maybe it was the one in    64, is what I   m thinking about. Yeah,  that   s when it would have been. Very good fair, it seemed. Many  interesting things to go see. Particularly   let   s see, General Motors had  a very good display. I don   t particularly remember too much about it, I  guess.  So your husband did not have to serve in World War II?  9  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Oh, he wanted to be in the Navy. His brother was in the Navy, his older  brother. I mean his next brother, not his older brother. He had two  brothers. One of them was in the Army and the other was in the Navy.  My goodness, he tried so hard to get in the Navy. I ran across, the other  day, the letter from the Navy saying they couldn   t accept him because,  well, for one thing, he didn   t have good eyes. His eyes weren   t very  good. That cut him out, I guess. He just couldn   t get in. So he never was  in the service, even though he would have loved being in the Navy. We  had a sailboat out here at Fort Gibson. He loved that sailboat. He just  liked that kind of thing.  So these days, can you describe what you might do in a typical day?  Let   s take Monday, for instance. We have a little knitting group here that  meets at ten so I try to go to that. I read the morning paper, of course. I  also read the Wall Street Journal. You can   t read it very well in two  hours, but then I go to knitting at ten. In the afternoon, I   ve sort of been  responsible for our bridge games. We have usually about three tables. So  Monday afternoon is playing bridge. Monday night, they might have a  program here of some sort. They do have quite a number of very good  programs here. So I would say that is part of the routine that you go  through. Otherwise, I read. I love to read. I read novels as well as   as I  say, that Wall Street Journal can take an awful lot of your time, as well  as the regular morning paper. So I just read.  How do you get your novels? Do they have a library here?  Two or three places. One, there is a little room around here they call 265   that  anyone can go to. They have quite a few books in there. We do  have a library, which is off downstairs on the main  floor , near that  lounge. I don   t know how you came in, whether you came in the front  door, or what. Anyway, it is next to the lounge, there. I also get books  from my hairdresser. She has a lot of pretty good books. So no trouble  finding something to read.  Who is your favorite author? Do you have a favorite book or favorite  author?  This is another one of my problems. I am very poor about remembering  the authors    names. Doris   oh, gosh, I   ve got one in there. I can look at  it   Mc-Something. She writes quite a series of novels. You sort of get  interested. She follows a family maybe from one book to the next. I like  her books. I think they   re good. I enjoyed Brokaw   s book, the one about  the Great Generation. So I read a variety of things.  10  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  What about religion in your life? Was that a central part?  Very much important in my life. I didn   t even mention that. I was very  active in the First Presbyterian Church here. I always went to the  women   s meetings and was secretary for a while. Went regularly to First  Presbyterian Church downtown. I don   t go anymore. On Saturday  nights, every week, I watch our church. They have it on TV. It is on the  regular morning, Sunday morning, too. I like our Chaplain here. I think  he   s great. So Saturday nights, I look to my First Presbyterian Church,  which had been  recorded from  the previous Sunday. Then I go here to  church Sunday mornings. So I get good from both. Dr. Miller down at  First Presbyterian Church is so good. We just now are getting another  young man that had been here before, and then he went to Scotland  working on his PhD there. So he   s going to be back with us, now, so we  have six ministers, I think.  Was religion an important thing in your childhood, in your family?  Yes, always. In that little town, of course, we didn   t have a very big  church, but a minister from Colorado Springs would come out Sundays  for our church. My grandmother was a charter member of the little  church they had in Elbert. We   d always go there if we were there for the  weekend or something. I guess you just grow up this way. I was very  active in the Denver Presbyterian Church. I was president of their  little   we called it Diakonia Sunday School. I guess church has just  always been a part of my life. I remember as a fifteen or sixteen year  old, I guess, I went to a Christian endeavor meeting in Denver, which I  always remember to this day, particularly the man who directed the  music. Oh, he was so good. As you say, church has just been a part of  your life.  That event at age fifteen, what do you remember?  I particularly remember this man who was the music   I guess you   d call  him the director of music. I don   t know that I particularly remember. It  was just a nice meeting, you know. (Laughs) I stayed with somebody, I  don   t even remember who. They just let us stay there while we went to  that meeting. That   s too long ago. (Laughs) Somewhere or other, that   s  just not in my memory right now, except that I do remember going to  Montclair Presbyterian Church in Denver. I think that   s what it was  called.  Did you sing in the choir?  Yes, my sister and I both were in a little special choir group. We   d go to  nursing homes and various places and sing. I have a picture of us when  11  Finchum  Culver  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  we were   we each had nice formals, long dresses that we would wear  when we   d go to those concert things that we would do. My sister was  very good on the saxophone. So as we were growing up, we enjoyed   playing together . I would play the piano, she would play the  saxophone. So that was a nice memory, too. When I was trying to get  her located in a nursing home,    Oh, you   re not going to give away my  saxophone     I said,    No, I wouldn   t give away your saxophone.    It   s up  on the closet shelf, now. She doesn   t seem to be able to play it anymore.  Did you have a favorite song?  No, not particularly. For a little while, just while she was still in high  school, we had a little band that played for dances every Saturday night.  I played the piano, she played the sax and a friend in her class, too,  played saxophone. We had a little fellow come out from Colorado  Springs   this is when I was in Monument, Colorado   he would come  out. He was the drummer. So we   d play for the Saturday night dances.  Did you have a band name?  No, I don   t think so. I don   t know. (Laughter) I doubt it.  But it wasn   t an all-girl band. I was thinking you were going to say that.  No, we had two boys, plus Lillian and me. I don   t know how well we  played, but they seemed to think it was alright. (Laughs) That was just  playing, you know, whatever was popular at that time. That would have  been in 1936, I guess.  So you were playing   you didn   t get to dance too much, then.  Well, I danced when we used to have the dances in Ramah where we  were. We had a wonderful dance building in Ramah. We had about a  five-piece band that would come out every Saturday night. Of course, I  danced, then. (Laughs) But no, I couldn   t dance when we had our little  band. We played for them to dance.  What were holidays like in your childhood?  Always had family gatherings for Thanksgiving, for Christmas, at my  grandmothers. We would go to my father   s mother   s. I lost her when I  was ten, but her older daughter still kept the ranch and ran the ranch. I  guess it belonged to all of the kids. There were nine in my father   s  family. So we would go there in the evening. We   re talking about  Christmas, for instance. They put the children to bed and along about  midnight, you   d hear a noise where she   d throw a walnut and it   d roll  12  Finchum  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  down the steps and wake us up. We   d go into the parlor and, oh, they   d  have such a beautiful tree. We couldn   t get  until then . The parlor door  was closed in the evening until then. (Laughs) They   d get us up and we  would have our gifts and then we would go nine miles farther   it   d be  about eleven miles, I guess   and go to my mother   s  family  home.  We   d have Christmas day with my grandmother, my mother   s family.  All my cousins   big family gathering.  What would be the food?  Turkey. Turkey and dressing, the usual, cranberry sauce. I don   t  remember what vegetables they had.  What did you do for entertainment? Some people sit and watch the  football game, today.  Didn   t have that kind of stuff, that   s for sure. We played games.  What kinds of games?  We had a little top sort of thing. I don   t remember too much about that  game, but you   d twirl that top and I guess it would tell you how many  spaces you   d go. I don   t know     I   d assume in Colorado that it would be cold during that time and you   d  have to do a lot indoors.  After dinner, we   d clear the table and the kids could be around the table  playing games. After we had our gifts   that was another thing of my  grandmother   s. Oh, that killed us. We had to wait until after we had  dinner before we   d have our gift exchange. (Laughs) We   d always have  a little sack of stuff in the morning when we first got up. But we   d have  to wait until afternoon for our gifts.  Did you have a particular favorite gift as a child that you remember?  The thing I remember right now   my grandmother gave me a lovely  spoon. I   ve got it around someplace here. Anyway, it had my name on it.  I thought that was a very nice gift. I don   t particularly remember,  otherwise. I suppose the usual pajamas and socks. (Laughs) I don   t  know. That didn   t impress me, I guess. (Laughter)  And they rolled a walnut down the steps   ?  Yeah, that was a German thing. My grandmother was born in Bonn,  Germany. I think that must have been some sort of tradition or  13  Finchum  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  something. You wouldn   t think that would do that, but it would make a  noise enough to get us up, I guess. Then, when we got there, they   d say,     Oh, you just missed Santa Claus. He just went over the hill.    (Laughter)  What I want to know   kind of fast forwarding and thinking about your  life   what is your secret to longevity, do you think?  Good genes, I presume, because my mother lived to be 100. My father  was eighty-four, that   s still a pretty good age, I guess. My grandfather, I  believe, was ninety-five when he died. So I guess good genes.  Is that your mother   s   ?  Mother   s father, yes. Now, the other grandfather died before I was born.  I think he was fifty-five.  Do you have a particular motto or philosophy of life you live by?  I don   t believe so, particularly. Just enjoy as things come along, I guess.  Take them in stride. (Laughter) I did have one period there during the  Depression area that was a pretty sad time, but you get over those things  and go on. Do the best you can.  Don   t stress over too much.  No. There was a time, I guess, that was stressful. But as I say, you just  like   just the fact that my dad was able to get money for those loans.  We both, as soon as we had jobs, we started paying off those loans. It  wasn   t very long before they were all paid back. (Laughs) We just had a  very loving family. My mother and dad were wonderful.  Did she sew and make your clothes?  She did when we were little girls. I have a picture in there in the  bedroom that shows little dresses she had made for each of us. We didn   t  like it very well when she was sewing because it seemed like she   d  get   (Laughs) She wouldn   t have time for us. She was just sewing when  we   d come home from school.  What was a favorite thing she fixed for you to eat? Your favorite dish?  Well, when we could, I   ve always been very fond of ice cream. Mother  made an ice cream I thought was so delicious. Someway or other, she  would brown the sugar   you know how they caramelize it? Then of  course, they had the cream   it was sort of a caramely tasting ice cream  that was so good. We fixed ice cream a lot, particularly in the wintertime  14  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  when it was easy to get the ice, you know? We had ice available in the  summer. Fourth of July for instance, you always had ice cream.  Hopefully, you would have chickens that would be big enough, you   d  have fried chicken.  So you used your own chickens?  Yes, usually, I think. I think that was kind of a goal was to have  chickens ready by July 4th.  And would you have to butcher them or would someone else?  Oh, my dad always did that. That   s something I don   t know anything  about doing. (Laughter)  And that   s okay. Did your mother quilt?  No, she didn   t. That   s kind of surprising that she didn   t, I guess, because  I   m sure a lot of people were quilting. No, I guess the sewing she did  was just for Lillian and me. I don   t remember that she did any quilting. I  don   t know that she did a lot of knitting. My grandmother did. I don   t  know. I don   t remember.  Your sister   is your sister still living?  Yes, I   m going to visit her next week.  And where is that?  She   s in a nursing home in Colorado Springs, has to have full care. Very  expensive, and fortunately, she had a pretty good trust that has been  taking care of her. Thank goodness.  Have you two remained close throughout the years?  Oh, very. Yes.  What do you think has been a secret to that sibling bond, that kind of  sisterhood bond that you   ve had?  Well, of course, we grew up together. But I think we became more  bonded when we were going to school in Denver. She kind of struggled  some of the time, and didn   t seem to be taking to shorthand   she  remembers her shorthand, I noticed. One time, she was doing something  and she was still using her shorthand, it seemed like. (Laughs) Her  husband was a Denver University graduate. At the time he died, they  15  Bishop  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  lived in Maryland for twenty-five years, and they were just looking  forward to the time they could get back to Colorado. Unfortunately, he  had had polio as a child and he didn   t live to be   I think he was fifty-five,  I guess. She stayed there a few months, and then I went back and  helped her move back to Colorado, after he was gone.  He was with the Bureau of the Interior, I guess he was. I say, wouldn   t  he be interested, now, in this shale oil stuff? Because they lived in Rifle  for a little while. Starting to develop that shale oil   I know he would  just be thrilled with the way they   re doing all this shale oil exploration, I  guess you   d call it. They had a good life, too. She was a widow for  seventeen years and then married a friend we   d known forever, lived in  our little town. They had just six years, I believe, of marriage when he  died. Then she had a little stroke that really made her become so she  can   t stand on her feet. She just has to have full care and is in a  wheelchair. So I   m looking forward to going out next week and having a  visit with her. She does have dementia, somewhat, but she always seems  to know me, so that   s good. (Laughs)  That   s real good. One question I have for you, again, when history is  written, what do you want it to say about you?  I   ve been trying to write up my memoirs. (Laughs) It   s difficult. I   d say  just want to know that I had an interesting life, I guess. Many interesting  experiences and still fortunate that I can still travel. That is pretty  important. In December, I   m going to fly to San Antonio. My niece has  arranged for a bus to take us up to what they call Mo-Ranch, which is  north of Midland, I guess. Anyway, it is a ninety-minute drive from San  Antonio. I   m going to my niece   s daughter   s wedding. It   s oh such a  pretty setting it seems, from the pictures we   ve seen of it. My friend  looked it up, I think, on the internet. So I shall go to that.  Rather than coming back home, I   m going to just fly to Atlanta where  my nephew is going to meet me. He has built a new home up in South  Carolina that he wants me to see. He always calls his spare bedroom  Vida   s room, so he wants me to come see my room. (Laughter) So I   ll  stay with him for a little bit, and he   s going to take me on over to my  brother and sister-in-law   s in Morristown, Tennessee where I   ve spent  Christmases now for several years. Even Fred and I spent Christmas  there a lot. So that   s in the offing for December. December 14 is the  wedding.  So you   ve got plans.  Plans. (Laughter)  16  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Do you still drive yourself?  I drove myself to the dentist on Monday. A little interesting story, I  think, if you want to hear something else. After my birthday, I went over  here to this tag agency and I said,    I need a new license.    I handed her, I  guess, my  license . Pretty soon, she came back and said,    You have  been approved,    but she says,    Let me tell you       I think she said,    I   ve  worked here for thirty years. You are the only person I   ve ever had 100  years old ask for a license,    and they gave me mine. You ought to see it.  Would you like to see it? (Laughter) I think it is really something to be  proud of. Good until 2017   do you reckon I   ll be here? (Laughs) No,  I   m just about ready to quit. I   m not going to drive much longer. I don   t  mind driving. I don   t seem to have any problem about it. My biggest  problem is walking from here down to the street down there where my  car is. (Laughs) Once I get in the car, everything is fine. Then on  Wednesday, when I went to the dentist, a friend took me because I  thought,    Well, I might not be so good to drive home if I   ve had a lot of   work done .    I had a root canal and that takes a lot of time and you  don   t feel so extra good afterwards.  Do you have any other health concerns right now?  My left knee is usually kind of sore. It hurts a lot of times, but it just  does. I   m just old. It   s had a lot of wear. (Laughs)  Any medicines you have to take daily?  Yes, I take   not much. I take a blood pressure pill. I do have a little  problem with my blood pressure getting a little high, but the pill seems  to take care of it. I take one vitamin. It   s that that you take for your eyes,  that has lutein in it.  That   s pretty good.  I   ve been taking some Tylenol, too, this week with this  tooth . Of  course, right now, I   m taking an antibiotic and I   ll be glad when I  am  finished . I hope it does the job it is supposed to do because I sure had a  sore jaw down here.  How late do you stay up?  I try to get to bed by   I   d like to about 11, but most always it is  midnight by the time I get myself around and quit reading.  And then get up at   ?  17  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  Bishop  Culvern  Finchum  Seven.  Seven o   clock. Pretty good.  Yeah, of course. Sometimes I have to admit, when I   m reading the  morning paper, I can drop off to sleep for a little bit. (Laughs)  Can you offer some advice for anyone who wants to live to be one  hundred?  I don   t know what it would be. How do you know whether you  are  going to live that long ? You don   t know whether you   ll live one day to  the next, I guess. (Laughs) Should I say, maybe, having a happy life  probably helps. Having a happy marriage would be one thing, probably,  that   and just as I say, good genes. I don   t know what else.  Was there a point where you thought,    I   m going to make it to 100?     Oh, I always figured I am going to make it to 100, for quite a little while  I have. I just said,    My mother lived to be a hundred so I   m going to see  if I can   t live to be a hundred.     What did you do for your hundredth birthday?  Oh, my. We had a big celebration. See those two books right there? Full  of cards and things for my birthday. We didn   t do it right on my birthday  because that was the middle of the week, but I have four nieces and five  nephews. All of them came except one nephew who has had illness. On  Saturday afternoon, we had sort of open house in our theater here. Big  room   I don   t know if you   ve been there and know how it is, but it is a  nice big area. I had ninety-three people sign the guest book. The cake  was gorgeous. I don   t know what I   ve done with my pictures. But  anyway. It was a very lovely affair. We went out for dinner in the  evening. There were twenty-four of us that went to dinner.  Did you get to pick the restaurant?  We went out to the Oaks. I   ve belonged to the Oaks Country Club for  years so I just keep on but we don   t go much. We went out last evening,  for dinner. When we first got it, my goodness, I don   t know what year it  was, my husband was playing some golf. We finally gave up the golf  membership and just had social membership. But I like it so might as  well keep it. (Laughs)  Might as well. Sounds like you   ve had a very good life.  18  Culvern  Finchum  Culvern  I think I have. That probably has something to do with the fact that I  could live this long, I guess.  We appreciate you sharing your story with us, today. It   s been a  pleasure.  (Laughs) I hope it was. Not rambling around, too much.  -------  ------- 
