 Neurohr  McMurtrey  Welcome back to campus for the Women of Willard, the WOW group,  Reunion. (Laughter) My name is Karen Neurohr and I   m a librarian for  Oklahoma State University Library.  Today is October 15, 2009, and we  are in Stillwater, Oklahoma.  We   re very happy that you   re  participating in the Women of Willard Oral History Research Project  for the library today. Thank you.  You   re welcome.  And your name is?  Marguerite McMurtrey.  Can you tell me a little bit about where you grew up?  Well, I was born in Tulsa. I moved from Tulsa when I was in the third  grade to Norman. I lived there, went to third grade through ninth grade  in Norman. And then my family moved to Helena, Oklahoma to a farm.  So I went from Norman when I was a sophomore in high school, from a  big class to a class of twelve in Helena. (Laughs) But I graduated from  Helena High School  as Valedictorian  and then I went to OSU   no, it  was Oklahoma A M.  What year did you start at Oklahoma A M?  In 1955.  Did your parents go to school?  Yes, they are both graduates of Oklahoma A M.  Glen Gower and  Adeline LeCrone  met  while students at A M . And quite a few of  5  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  their brothers and sisters   my mother had two brothers that graduated  from Oklahoma A M and my dad had  one brother and one sister . One  of my mother   s brothers was on the faculty here a long time.  What was his name?  His name was Fred LeCrone. He was a horticulture instructor and then  he was Assistant Dean of Agriculture for a good many years.  He was  also as Advisor at Farmhouse fraternity many years ago.   So with your family ties, is that what influenced you to attend OSU?  Yes, it is. As I said, we had lived in Norman for a good many years and I  had a sister that graduated from high school the same year as I did. She  decided she wanted to go to Norman to OU. And I said,    No way, I   m  going to Oklahoma A M.    And I did.  Do you remember the first time that you visited the Oklahoma A M  campus? Were you a child the first time you ever visited the campus?  I really don   t remember. Don   t remember at all.  Was it when you first went to school there or before that?  I think I was there some   well, I know I was because we used to go visit  my uncle in Stillwater. But I don   t really recall when I first visited the  campus. I think every time we visited.  What were your impressions of the campus?  I always thought it was great.  What did you major in?  I majored in Business Education through the College of Business.  When did you graduate?  In 1959.  So this is your 50th year reunion this year.  Yes, it is.  Was Willard Hall the first place that you lived on campus?  6  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  Yes.  Did you live there all four years?  No. I lived there three years. The first year I lived in the center hall and  then the second and third year I lived around on the west wing with this  group of girls. And then I got married and my last year I lived in an  apartment.  Was Willard considered to be a popular or prestigious hall at the time  that you were there?  I don   t know that it was prestigious, but it was popular, yeah.  What other places were there for women to live?  Murray Hall and Stout Hall and then the sorority houses.  Did you feel like Willard was set apart from the other places in any  way?  Well I thought it was much better. I had a cousin that lived in Murray  and it just didn   t seem the same. It was nice. And Stout they always said  was nice and I   d visit friends there, but Willard was home. I was always  partial to Willard.  How was Murray different from Willard?  I don   t know that it was different, it just seemed different. I didn   t know  the people except my cousin. I just didn   t know very many people there.  When you were signing up to go to school here, were you able to choose  which hall you wanted to live in or did they choose for you?  I think they chose for us. I don   t remember.  What was your room like?  It was larger than Drummond is now. And it had a sink in the room,  which Drummond doesn   t. We stayed in Drummond last year during  Homecoming and my daughter lived in Drummond so that   s how I know  about Drummond. But it had a bed and two closets and the sink, two  desks, two chests, it was fine.  Were they bunk beds?  7  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  No, they were twin beds.  Was there a window?  Yes.  What did it look out on?  We looked out on Monroe Street. We were on the west wing and we  looked right out of   I was in room 213 and we had a good view, second  floor.  Tell me a little bit about the telephone situation.  (Laughs) There was one telephone on each wing and the one on Willard  Two west wing was right outside my door. (Laughter) So I answered it a  lot. But we got along fine sharing it. It didn   t pose too many problems.  Sometimes it did.  How did that work if you wanted to make a long-distance phone call?  You had to go to a pay phone to do that. And they were downstairs, I  think. We didn   t do a lot of long-distance calls.  Was there a common shower and restroom area on each floor?  There were two I think on each floor, one on each wing. Ours was a lot  of showers and a lot of stools and only one bathtub. Sometimes we had  to wait when we were ready to shower, but most of the time there was  one free. Not too many problems.  Was there a cleaning person who kept the bathroom facilities and that  kind of thing clean?  There must have been.  The students didn   t have to do any of that.  The students didn   t do that. (Laughter)  Was there diversity in Willard ethnically or any international students  that you remember?  I   m sure there were. On our wing I don   t remember any but there  could   ve been. I know we had one friend that was black, but I think she  lived at Stout. But not a lot of them.  8  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Was there much diversity on campus at that time? Were there  international students?  Yes.  Do you remember anything about that?  I remember one of the girls in this group had a lot of Brazilian friends.  And I know there were some from South America and there were  Japanese here then. But I really don   t remember them living in Willard.  Now I   d like to ask you about the dorm mom and the rules that you had  at Willard. Who was your dorm mom? Was that what you called her, the  dorm mom or the house mom?  House mother. I   m not sure, I don   t remember her name. She just had a  little apartment down where you checked in and the mailboxes were  around the corner, I believe. I don   t remember much about her.  Was there a Dean of Women for the campus?  Yes.  Do you remember anything about her? What her name was or anything?  Wasn   t she Zelma Patchin? I think it was.  I   ve heard of her.  Yeah, there   s a dorm now named after her. My nephew lived there last  year.  Do you remember anything about Dean Patchin?  Not really except I thought she was, well, her pictures looked stern and  professional, but I really didn   t have any contact with her.  Did Willard have certain hours when you were on campus that     Yes. Freshman had to be in by eight o   clock every night, or weeknights.  After that, we may have been able to stay out till ten, except weekends,  and then we could stay out maybe till twelve. But yeah, they were strict.  What would happen if you came back late?  You had to ring the doorbell and then they would come to the door and  9  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  fuss at you.  The house mother would?  Yeah, because the door was locked. But I don   t know what the  punishment was. I think if you had too many violations then you had  punishment. But I followed the rules most of the time. (Laughter)  Was there a dress code?  Yes.  What was it?  Well, we wore skirts all the time and we did not go to the cafeteria,  which was in the basement of Willard (and I think it also served some  other dorms as well as Willard) unless we were fully dressed, our hair  not in curlers or anything.  Was there any kind of etiquette instruction for the women that you  remember at meal-time or anything?  No, I don   t remember. There could have been.  Okay. Sometimes I think the sororities do that.  The sororities did, yes. At Willard at the time we purchased meal tickets;  you had to purchase, it was a cafeteria and you had a choice. I think it  was the first dorm to do that. But I don   t remember ever having  instructions. We could have, that   s been a long time ago. (Laughter)  Was your meal ticket a card that was punched or something like that?  No, what I remember was a little blue book and they tore off     What about when the boys were around and any kind of public displays  of affection with the girlfriends? Was that allowed at all?  Usually it was at the front steps when they said goodnight, was about it.  The boys could only come into the dorm on the first floor and the living  area. And when you had a date, they would come in there and go to the  little office deal close to the house mother   s quarters and they would  buzz you in and then you would come down and they could be in the  living area. People didn   t show affection in there, you know, that was  public. But there were goodnight kisses. (Laughter)  10  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  How did buzzing the room work?  Just fine.  So each room had a     Had a buzzer.  So how did they know   was there a button for each room?  There must have been. And they would buzz your room if you had  somebody there to see you or a date or if you had a long-distance call, I  think. Anyway, or something, anything. That   s how they communicated  with us.  And was it an intercom type situation where they could tell you,    You  have a phone call,    or    There   s someone here to see you,    or   ?  I don   t remember them talking to us. It seems like they buzzed and you  just went down. But I could be mistaken on that.  So you started in 1955. I   ve heard that there was a 1955 panty raid on  campus.  That was before I got there. I started in the fall and that happened in the  spring.  Did you hear stories about it?  Oh, yes.  Well tell me what you heard about it.  Well one of the girls that is a good friend of mine that lived on Willard  Two was there and she has told me about it. But she graduated a year  ahead of me and it sounded like a wild time. (Laughter)  Oh did it? What did she tell you?  Well they got some of her panties. (Laughter) I think she   s your next  interviewee.  Oh, okay. I   ll have to ask her about that.  You ask her. Her name   s Joni.  11  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  Okay. (Laughter) Ask Joni. I   m going to write that down.  Yeah, ask Joni about the panty raid because she was there. I just heard  her stories. Probably I read some in the paper about it because I think it  made the newspapers.  Oh, my.  You know, it was quite a deal.  Was there a residence hall association, kind of a government association  for the women? Were you active in that at all?  No,  I wasn   t active in it .  You did work in the library though, is that correct?  Right. That   s why I wasn   t active in a lot of things. I arranged it so my  classes were always eight to twelve in the morning then I worked one to  five everyday in the library. And then studied   well, we went to the  Wesley Foundation in the evening for vespers and then I studied. So I  did not have a lot of free time for other things.  Did the students stay on campus on the weekends? Or were you able to  go home occasionally?  Most of the time we stayed on campus, but we went home occasionally.  I would like to know more about working in the library. Can you tell me  what you did and some stories about that?  I worked in the Special Services Department. And this is the department  that has the rare books and they also check books out to other libraries  when they would write in and call in and request certain copies. And  they also sent periodicals for USDA to different libraries and branches.  My job was to go around the library and check out the volumes and the  books that were requested. That   s what I did most of the time. I did work  there full-time two summers and then I did secretarial things. But it was  a neat job.  How much were you paid?  You know, I was trying to remember that. Not very much, but at the  time nobody was and I don   t recall what my  salary was .  Who was the library Director then? Was it Edmon Low?  12  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  Yes. And my boss was Alton P. Juhlin. He was very nice. I remember     my job, I got to go all around  the library  and the Howlands,  Marguerite, her name was Marguerite, was up in Education I think or  somewhere and I remember her. Edmon Low was the Director.  Did you see him out much in the library?  No, not too much. Anyway, I don   t remember.  You mentioned when we were talking previously about the cage.  Yes. (Laughter)  So tell me about that.  I always wondered why they did that, I assume it was to protect the rare  books, but they had this cage. And it was only open during certain times  and locked other times.  What did it look like?  It looked like a cage or a fence, a wire-fence across there and it was on  the third floor.  Do you remember what was considered really noteworthy about the  special collections at that time? Certain materials that the library was  especially proud of or papers of someone or anything in particular like  that?  Well I remember Angie Debo was an author that lived around Marshall  and Kremlin and that area and she used to come up there a lot and bring  things. And my boss just really enjoyed her and I remember her and her  collection. Other than that, I really didn   t have much contact with those  things because I was going around checking out current things to send to  other libraries.  What do you remember about Angie Debo?  She was a cute little old lady. (Laughter) And she liked to talk.  Did she?  Yeah. She was cute.  Did she take an interest in students when she came around?  13  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  I don   t remember that. She could have. (Laughs)  That   s wonderful that you were able to meet her.  Yes, it was. She was very interesting.  Did you know how special she was at that time as a writer and as far as  her place in history?  I had some idea because my boss pointed it out.  Do you have any other memories about the library?  Oh, I loved the library. It was before computers and of course we had to  look up all the things in the card file. And with my job, I got to go all  over the library and I sometimes had friends studying and I would see  them but I just liked it. Sometimes it was kind of spooky going in the  basement or up on the fifth floor where the graduate students  were , but  sometimes I   d have to go up there and it was kind of spooky.  What do you remember was in the basement?  It seems like it was just little cubicles with a student desk, a lot of  graduate students had reserved. And it was that way on fifth, too, I think.  I just remember I didn   t like to particularly go to those places.  Do you remember anything about the first floor?  The first floor was beautiful. But it has been remodeled now and it   s  even more beautiful. But I used to go to the library in the evening and  study, too. Study instead of working.  What about the second floor? Any memories about the second floor?  Went up the big steps to the card file. Is that considered second floor?  Yes.  I think so. I spent a lot of time there.  And then your office was on the third floor, where you worked.  And it wasn   t accessible except by one elevator, I think. I think that all  the elevators did not go to the third floor if I remember right. It may  have. Is it now?  14  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  They do. And then the fourth floor? Do you remember anything in  particular about the fourth floor?  It was nice. I liked it. That was where Education was. I think Marguerite  Howland was up there.  And then the fifth floor?  Was mostly study nooks for graduate students and older periodicals and  reference volumes may have been up there.  Were there any ghost stories or anything about the library that you ever  heard?  No. (Laughter)  No? Okay.  Good thing. (Laughter) Are there some now?  I have heard that there are some stories around. But in Old Central, too.  I   ve actually heard a ghost story about Old Central.  Well I have there, too.  Oh have you? About Old Central?  The ghost stories. I had an English class in Old Central but it was not a  very good place to be then. (Laughs)  Do you remember when the WOW term started?  I didn   t know it had started until I got the email from Virginia setting up  these interviews.  Oh, okay.  I didn   t know we had been called that. I think Jerry just started that.  Was there something called the Willard Beach when you were a student?  I don   t recall anything like that. What was that by, Theta Pond?  It was a sunbathing area, but it may have started later on.  Well we used to sunbathe on the roof above the front porch.  15  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  You did?  The first year that I was in the center hall just right across the hall from  me you could go out there and we   d sunbathe. Maybe that   s what they   re  referring to.  Maybe so.  I didn   t hear it called that. (Laughs)  Was the front porch facing Theta Pond or was that on the other side?  No, it faces Theta Pond.  Is it that area that   s still a bricked out area that the living room doors  open out to it?  Yes.  So that was considered the front porch out there.  Yes. Most of the time we used the north entrance because that   s where  our classes were and the parking lot was there.  What were some of the special hall events and activities that you  remember?  I remember we had dances   it was probably all the resident halls had a  big dance. And they had a Howdy Dance at the beginning of the year  where everybody came. I   m sure there were others.  What about at Christmas time? Were there some special traditions?  They always had a big tree. And I think we all went caroling or caroled  around the tree or something. And the girls on our wing always had a  party.  When you had parties on your wing, what was that like?  Oh, usually it was after everybody got in. You know, most of the time  we were dressed in our pajamas. (Laughter) Had popcorn or played  cards or just had a good time.  Did you have microwave popcorn?  No, no microwaves. (Laughter)  16  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  So how did you cook the popcorn? I think some young people today  probably wouldn   t know how you would cook popcorn without a  microwave.  I   m not sure how we did. (Laughter) Hadn   t thought of that.  What about Homecoming on campus?  That was always exciting.  Did the women at Willard participate in Homecoming in some ways?  Well I didn   t. I was at work. But I just went to the parades and we  probably did some house decorations but I don   t remember helping.  Were you allowed to decorate your windows with things at all?  I don   t recall.  What would happen when a woman became engaged?  Well, when I got engaged   well when I got pinned first, my husband  was a fraternity member and so they came and serenaded me on the front  porch. And it seems like the girls on the wing threw the engaged person  in the shower. That was the way they celebrated. (Laughter) But as far as  the hall, there was nothing special. But your friends saw to it. And then  the fraternity guys did serenade me, both when I got engaged and  pinned.  When the serenading would occur, would all the girls come out of their  rooms to come and watch when that would happen?  Some of them did. Not all. Yeah, if they knew.  What happened to the boys? Did they get thrown into Theta Pond?  I think so. (Laughter) I think that did happen some. I don   t remember.  Do you remember if Willard had scrapbooks when you were there? Or  pictures on the wall of history or previous classes or anything like that?  I don   t remember.  Do you have any other personal or special memories of Willard?  My sophomore year, my roommate won Miss Varsity Revue and that  17  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  was exciting because most of the time it was not independents that won  that. She really did shine and won. We all were really excited about that.  Is she going to be here today?  She did not set up for an interview. She will be here tonight   well she   ll  be here around 5 but she   s not staying out here. But she   ll be here for the  dinner.  We   re doing interviews tomorrow, too, over at the Alumni Center.  She won   t be here tomorrow. She just had surgery a week ago today.  Oh, dear. Okay.  But her name   s Mary Sue if you get the chance. I told you I got married  after my junior year. My husband graduated that year and he went back  home and started farming. And I tried to talk him into taking graduate  courses and he wouldn   t do it, he didn   t want to. So I went back my  senior year and lived in an apartment the first semester by myself and  then just went home on weekends or he came down there on weekends.  The second semester I had two different roommates.  Your life really changed then, didn   t it?  Yes, it did.  From living at Willard for three years.  Yeah. (Laughs) I missed the girls. One time I had them all over for  dinner in my little apartment. They probably weren   t very impressed.  (Laughter) I missed them, but I was determined to   I lived 12 miles  from another university but I did not want my degree from there. But I  was determined I wanted it from OSU and that was what we agreed on  before I got married, I knew this. (Laughs)  Do you remember hearing about when they changed Willard from being  a dormitory to what it is now with the classrooms and offices?  Yes. When they dedicated that our girls all had a reunion there, or we  got together, and we put a plaque up on the second floor west wing  honoring two of the bunch that had passed away. We had a good time.  Were you upset at all that they were changing it and it wasn   t going to  be a dorm anymore since you had so many great memories about it?  18  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Yes, it kind of bothered me. But they really made it look nice and we felt  better after we visited there. I had a daughter and a son that both went to  OSU. And my daughter, as I   ve told you, lived in Drummond and my  son lived in Kerr. But they moved into apartments after   my son lived  there one year and he said,    Too many people.    My daughter lived there  two years and then she went to an apartment. And their experience was  just entirely different than mine. I don   t know.  What decade were they there? Was it in the 1970s?  No. My daughter started in    79 and graduated in    83 and my son started  in    83 and graduated in    87. But they were both from the farm and they  were used to a small town. But that   s one of the things about this group  of women from Willard, we were all from small towns and a lot of them  majored in Home Ec and a lot of them had been active in 4-H and none  of us had much money, or if they did they didn   t tell us or show it. We  just had a lot in common. We just got together and like I told you, we  went to vespers at the Wesley Foundation. At that time they had them  every night and they would just be an hour, but we   d go over there  together, walk over there together and then maybe stop and get a Coke  on the way home.  Was it a bible study, vespers?  It was more of a devotional type thing. No, it wasn   t a bible study. Just a  short devotional and sing a little bit. Just an interlude before you started  studying.  You mentioned that most of the women were from small towns. Is that  why you all have stayed so close all through these years?  I think so. I think so. They spread out. Most of them have located in lots  of different places whereas I didn   t. I went thirty miles from home. And  I haven   t moved in fifty years. (Laughs)  How many reunions have you participated in?  I think I   ve been to all we   ve had but one. And I think I counted eight,  maybe nine.  Did you all bring your children when they were young?  We did when they were young. The first one we had was at Quartz  Mountain, that I remember, and we took our children. And I think mine  were like two, four, and six at that time. And everybody else had kids  the same age. And we just had a ball and the kids enjoyed it, too. And  19  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  then we went to Western Hills and we   ve been to Lake Eufala,  Arrowhead, and Roman Nose, South Fork, Colorado. One of the girls  retired there and she hosted us. That   s been the last big one. We   ve had a  couple in Oklahoma City since then. And then last year at Homecoming  several of us were together; not the whole group.  How many are in the whole group?  Well this year there   s 20 that are coming and that is most of them.  There   s maybe a couple that won   t be here.  How many went to Colorado? You said that was a big group.  I don   t remember. Ask Virginia. (Laughter) She was the one that hosted  it.  Did you have a career after you were married and had children?  Yes. I taught Business Education at Cherokee for two years and then  when my first child was born I resigned. But I kept on substituting for 50  years and was there a lot. And I also work at the OSU Extension Office  in Cherokee as a substitute secretary and I   m still doing that. I am not  substituting anymore. I let the younger ones get the experience.  Were there any professors or classes that you particularly remember  that you had?  Good or bad?  Either. (Laughter) Those are the ones that stand out, aren   t they?  Yeah. I remember shorthand because I did not have shorthand in high  school and it was hard for me in college. My professor was Labron  Harris and he was also the golf coach. I really struggled with that class.  Normally I made A   s and B   s but I really had a hard time with  shorthand. (Laughs) So I took it over. I passed, but I didn   t feel like I  learned it, so I took it over in the summertime and made it okay. But I  remember him.  After I graduated and taught at Cherokee, I loved  teaching shorthand.  Then I had another. I had a business law class that I  can   t remember who taught it but Eddie Sutton and the basketball team  was in that class. (Laughs)  Oh, really?  That was a good memory. Only they weren   t there very often because  they were on the road playing ball. I can say Eddie Sutton was in my  20  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  class. And then I had a real good business education professor, Dr.  Culver, and he was extremely good; very understanding. He invited me  back to the campus to serve on a panel after I was teaching a year and  the panel answered questions from the current students.  I bet that was fun.  He was really nice and good, a very good teacher.  Were there more men than women in the business classes?  Not in business education. Maybe it was about equal,  or more women  than men .  Do you remember anything about the President of OSU when you were  a student there?  I should. (Laughs)  Dr. Oliver S. Willham.  They changed the name of  the university while I was there. I went two years to A M and then two  years to OSU.  How did you feel about the name changing?  Oh, I don   t know. It didn   t upset me, but I wasn   t real favorable either. It  was okay.  Was Frank Eaton a figure that students knew about?  Yeah, I think so. Pistol Pete. You asked me about Homecoming. I think  it was Homecoming when I met my husband. A bunch of people came  from home and went to the ballgame together. And his sister was dating  a friend of mine. They were there and he was with her and probably  another girl and I think I was with another boy but that   s where I met  him. (Laughs)  Did you all start dating shortly after that?  No. That was my freshman year and we didn   t start dating until I was a  sophomore. And I started riding home with him. That   s how it started.  Did he propose to you on campus?  Yes, out by Boomer Lake, I think. Not too far from here.  Was that a popular student hangout, at Boomer Lake?  21  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  Neurohr  McMurtrey  I guess.  Well do you have any other memories about life in Willard Hall or at  OSU that you would like to share?  It was just great. And I appreciate all that the Alumni Association is  doing for the grads. We came last year to my husband   s fiftieth reunion  and they just plan so many nice things for us and I really appreciate all  that.  That   s great. That   s wonderful. Have you been back to the library?  We went back, the last time was when they dedicated Willard Hall as the  Educational building. What year was that?   1995.   That was the last time that we really walked around campus and we went  in the library.  So that has been  fifteen  years. Oh, you   ll have to come back and visit  again. We   d love to show you around.  I would love that, too.  It   s changed a lot. Well, thank you so much for the interview,  Marguerite. I really appreciate it.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
