 Gill. Today is September 22, 2009. I   m visiting with  Edward Jones on the Oklahoma State University campus in Stillwater,  Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project in the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Ed, thank you for taking the  time to visit with us today.  Okay.  I thought we might start with the beginning. Could you share a little bit  about where you grew up, about your family and a little bit about your  early life?  Okay. I   m from New York, Brooklyn to be precise. Like many in the  early    50s, my family moved out to Long Island after suburbia  developed. I pretty much grew up out there near the ocean. I combined  my private school education along with my interest in sports, so I did a  little bit of surfing and     Now, you were interested in sports, but which sports were you interested  in?  Track. Mostly track.  Distance?  Distance, right. We had access to surfboards, believe it or not, on Long  Island. (Laughter)  Big waves, huh?  Yes, it was pretty rough. The water was really cold. That   s primarily my  background in terms of where I grew up. My father met my mother  5  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  during the war, World War II, and she   s from the Brooklyn area. He was  stationed at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn and met her on a soldier   s  weekend apparently. At least that   s the detail I had. (Laughs)  Where did your dad grow up?  He grew up in Virginia. He   s from Martinsville, Virginia. We would  always spend part of our summer vacations going to see some of his  family there. His family was fighting for the Confederates in the Civil  War, I know that. (Laughter) My Mother was pretty much on the  northern side.  What did your dad do for a living?  He actually started driving trolley cars in Brooklyn and then essentially  moved through transportation to, really, riding and to charter buses, and  then he moved into administration. By the time he finished his career, he  was kind of in charge of running this enormous transportation service  where he was scheduling and was hiring. He moved from being on the  road quite a bit to being not on the road at all. He essentially did that and  then kind of salted the earth to provide for the family through tough  times, and that   s what he did.  Did you have any brothers or sisters?  I have two brothers and one sister. I am the third child. I have a brother  who lives in San Francisco. He   s a humanities grant writer, and I have  another brother who works in business in New York, and my sister is a  grief counselor in New York. She does death and dying services for  people who either have sudden departures or others who for whatever  reason need to be consoled after the loss of a loved one. She   s been  doing that for quite awhile. We all do different things. I   m the only one  who went into higher   well, my oldest brother went into higher  education for a while. He did attend the University of Texas at Austin,  so he has a local connection, but he then decided to go into business for  himself. He does actually have a house now in Austin as well as San  Francisco, (Laughs) so he   s done fine.  Are there any lessons or values you learned from your family growing  up that have impacted you and influenced you?  I think pretty definitively my father and mother both had an amazing  work ethic. I   ve come from a background where I had to more or less  just decide what I wanted to do. I mean, we had very limited resources,  so I just worked early and continued to work. I   ve always had multiple  jobs, and my mother still thinks I work too much. I   ve always found  6  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  work to be a very kind of calming occupation. It allows you to kind of  step back and decide after a certain point what you really want to do, and  it allowed me to do that. I feel fortunate. At the university I like coming  to work, and I always tell my students that there are opportunities for  that. You may not always get the financial reward you wanted, but  there   s a point where you say   if you make a good enough living and if  you   re doing something you really want to do as opposed to something  you   re really miserable at and you   re getting overcompensated for,  there   s a trade-off. And, so, that   s what I   ve taken away.  You mentioned earlier that you attended private schools.  I did, and they were Catholic schools. My family raised me Catholic,  and until I went to the university I didn   t go to a public school. I think  that was a formative enough experience for me. They knew they  couldn   t afford to send me to the university, but they said,    Well, your  grades are obviously good enough, we   ll get you into a private high  school and then you   ll get trained properly.    I think my high school had  a 99 percent placement rate in universities at a time when most, not  everybody went, not like today. It worked out to be a good plan, and I  was extremely appreciative because I knew my mother was working two  jobs in order for this to happen, so it   s taught me something. I   ve just  become a new grandfather, so I understand now a little better.  Can you share a little bit about what your undergraduate and graduate  experiences were? What year did you graduate from high school?  I graduated in    68.  And then you went to college?  I went to college in Connecticut at Central Connecticut State University.  It   s a teacher   s college, and I went there primarily because it offered me  the chance to have a track scholarship at the same time I could have an  affordable education. I mean, as a seventeen-year-old you have people  calling you up and saying,    We want you to come.    It   s not bad.  (Laughs) So, that   s what I did, and I enjoyed it. I got a decent education  out of the school, and so when I went to Ohio University for my  graduate work, I was shocked to find that I was ahead of the curve in  terms of training, so it all worked out.  And you got your master   s and PhD at Ohio.  My PhD at Ohio University in Athens. Yes, that   s the non-football Ohio  school. (Laughter) Well, they have a football team, but I don   t think  that   s something they really tout. They   re trying. They   re merging out.  7  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  It   s not Ohio State, by any means.  You were an English major?  English major, history minor all the way. I   ve always combined those  two interests quite a bit, and now the research I do is probably tinged  more with historical materials than literary materials. Most of it is  focused on seventeenth century poet John Milton. I edit the national  journal on Milton  Milton Quarterly  and we have the Milton Journal  here on campus. Much of my research requires me to go to England  every summer to work in the National Archives or to work in public  record offices and throughout the country. Primarily materials   script  materials and so on.  I   ve got to ask you, why Milton? Most people wouldn   t pick Milton.  (Laughs)  I know, I know. I was fortunate that the journal, the Milton Quarterly,  was at Ohio University. I was asked to be the assistant editor because  they always assigned one graduate student to do that. I remember telling  the editor at the time, I said,    I don   t feel comfortable. I don   t know  enough about him.    I said,    Why don   t you give me a year, study a little  bit more, and I   ll be getting my doctorate, and check back with me in a  year.    And he did and I said,    I think I   m okay with this.    What I  discovered in that year was that, to my surprise, Milton wrote on such  things as divorce on the grounds of incompatibility in the seventeenth  century. Obviously, something that has been more or less embraced in  the modern world, but he also wrote on the notions of liberty and  tyranny and monarchy. So, he was a great, great favorite among the  founding fathers in our country.  As a result, I started seeing these connections in ways. I really like his  emphasis upon independence and free will and private faith. Many of the  concepts, I think, are pretty critical to me. I just think the notion of  independence and the ability to frame, having a certain amount of  responsibility and control over your own life, is paramount to Milton.  So, it turns out that he does a whole lot more. It   s not all in Paradise  Lost; it   s in these other works as well. So, there   s a lot to study with  Milton. I   ve been at it for over twenty years and I   m just starting to feel  comfortable. I mean, there   s a lot to study and he   s demanding. So,  that   s how it   s happened.  Tell me a little bit about your professional career before you came to  Oklahoma State.  Yes, while I was a graduate student I had a couple of opportunities to  8  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  make a little more money, and we already talked about how I always  work more than I probably needed to. One of them was to teach  humanities in a maximum security prison. I was asked by my  department head if I would like to do this because they were looking for  someone to do this, (Laughter) and they said,    Well, the wage isn   t  great,    and I said,    But I   m a grad student. The wage is great for me.     Little did I know that for the next eight years I would be teaching  regularly down there and got to the point where it became almost a  special skill. What happened was, I started working there, but then other  opportunities came up to teach in minimum security prisons and medium  security prisons in the Ohio system, and I kind of worked it up into a  job. So, my first appointment after I finished my doctorate was as an  assistant professor at a branch campus of Ohio University, and most of  my assignment was to teach in prison. Then I parlayed that position   I  mean, that   s the position I was holding. I had a three-year appointment  and I started my first year, and in the mean time I applied for the job  here and I received it. Once my daughter was born, I went out and made  sure that I got a full time job at a technical college because I felt like I  had to have more income, and so I was working full time at a technical  college while I was finishing my dissertation. I   ve had a variety of  teaching experiences.  I   d say    variety    would be a good word, (Laughs) yes.  Many, many things before I came here. Once I got here it was kind of  nice to just have one job.  Is there a story about how you got to Oklahoma State University? What  influenced you? Because this is a pretty big stretch from where you  were, this being the heartland.  It is. It is. In English, I think, like in history even, you have to just play  the entire market. I actually was in graduate school when the economy  was really bad, which is usually a good place to be. The year I came out,  there was a huge set of openings for jobs because the first wave of early  retirements were being paid off, so I think I must have applied for fifty-odd  jobs just in Renaissance, the year I came out. I remember my wife  saying,    I don   t know about Oklahoma.    I said,    I   m not going to get a  job in Oklahoma. Don   t worry about it.    (Laughter) And then when it all  came out, I mean, I remember going to my interview. I go into the  interview room, and my department head was from Brooklyn and went  to Oklahoma State, and two of the other people that were on the faculty  that were interviewing me were from New York. And we were in the  Hilton, I think, in New York, and it just seemed to click really well.  Was Peter Robinson one of those?  9  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  No. Carol Moder was one, and then John Crane was the department  head. Tom Warren was there, and so it worked out really well. I had a  couple of options, and they were so friendly and I felt like it just seemed  like a good fit, and I think it   s worked out pretty well. I mean, I   ve been  certainly pleased.  How long had Dr. Berkeley     He   s the person I replaced, I was told.  I was going to ask you that. Tough shoes to fill.  Yes, I was told that from day one, and I was shown a video (Laughter)  of the person I was replacing. I was like,    Oh my gosh. I had no idea.     You know, I knew him because of the journal. He subscribed to the  journal. I couldn   t figure out why they were advertising in Renaissance.  Because I said, he   s there and a person who turned out to be one of my  best friends, still is, was also here named Paul Klemp. I couldn   t figure  out why there would be an opening in Stillwater for yet another person  in Renaissance, and it turns out that when I got here Dr. Berkeley was  retiring. He was always very gracious, and I think he was very  supportive of my application.  A great gentleman.  Yes, he was.  Ed, when did you first become engaged here at Oklahoma State  University with the Scholar Development Recognition Program?  I   ve always run with Bob Graalman on Sundays or Saturdays. I mean,  once a week we usually run and we had been doing it for a while, and I  remember he was still working in the scholarship office, if I   m not  mistaken. And he would say to me,    I really think we have enough  students here that could qualify for some of these. I   d like to try  competitions. Would you be interested in helping out?    I think we  hatched a plan way back when   the details have become vague at this  point, so long ago. I was getting, at that point, really good students in my  English classes that were highly motivated, and they were just good  thinkers, and I thought,    These are just as good as anyone I   ve met. I   d  like to see how they fare in competitions.     Bob said,    We can have people apply for Rhodes.    I came to understand  the process, and we went through maybe four or five rounds whereby a  four-point student in English who would go on to Harvard Law School  10  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  would get an interview, but never get anywhere and would never get out  of the state round. The way they had it set up then, they had a state  round and they had a national round, and then we had been doing this     Bryan Begley and Jennifer Liles. There were a number of really good  applicants   Steve Wayland. Many of them have gone on to very, very  distinguished careers, several lawyers.  Bryan, of course, has done really well in business and he got really  close. He was the one they actually brought back for a second interview,  and they never do that, but they thought that he was so good the first  time. He was student body president here. He just would not back down,  and so apparently the Rhodes committee actually re-interviewed him,  which they never do, and they decided against him. I mean, I think the  line might have been his grade point average which was like 3.89. It  wasn   t high enough, in engineering.  Engineering and student association president.  (Laughs) So, they decided,    We   re going to pick somebody else,    but  that was close. And then I think right after that, I remember having this  young man come to my office saying,    I just dropped out of the  engineering school. My parents were furious with me. I   m going to be  an English major.    It was Blaine Greteman. I think having him as a  freshman gave me a long time to work with him over two or three years,  and what I discovered with Bob was that we needed to mentor these  students individually. Get them ready. He was the first one that got  through that process. Obviously, he was the only one that we   ve been  able to get to win the Rhodes Scholarship.  I   m going to visit with you about that specifically a little bit, but first of  all, in what ways as a faculty member did you participate in the program  as it was developing, and the point of reference would be the late    90s?  Yes, late    90s, since. We started probably in the early    90s, unofficially,  with Bob. Bob   s program didn   t start until the late    90s. He switched  over to an individual office, and I kept in contact with Bob. I would have  students come into my office, and I would talk to them about this  process. Bob would talk to me about it as well, and then I would just  work with them regarding their writing, what kind of classes they   re  taking. I   d have discussions with them to get a feel for what kind of  thinker they were and whether they were interested. It was never one of  these things where we just pushed it on people. There   s a sense that you  have to understand what a student is comfortable with. If a student isn   t  comfortable with the position that he   s going to be put in or she   s going  to be put in, then the chances for success are pretty marginal. I tried  through the writing, either in my own classes or looking at papers  11  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  they   ve written or statements they write up, I would get to know them.  The components of the program, it   s a little bit different for each  student. It   s not exactly some of the components that help you identify  students, and, so, is the faculty member the component that helps  identify prospective students to Bob Graalman and to the program?  Right.  You visit with them and help them with their applications.  Right. Bob would do more of that. I would do more of the oral  discussions about,    What are you really interested in? Do you really  want to put down that you like to hike and you think this is a physical  activity?    (Laughter) That can make a difference. We   d go through some  of the things, and then we   d do those mock interviews, which really  helped out because they would then be able to recognize that,    Oh no, I  can   t believe what I said on camera.    We would do it pretty consciously.  But again, it was a small number of students. I mean, we would be  talking, maybe, nothing like we have today. We   d be talking maybe a  half dozen. There wasn   t, at that time, the kind of faculty support. I think  whatever it is, most people just thought we were too crazy to be  thinking      Oklahoma is never going to be able to do that. Oklahoma  State can   t do this.    We privately felt that we were going to show them  otherwise, and we just stuck with it, and Bob   s program kept getting  those Truman Scholars. I had some exposure to them, but because that   s  a public policy issue program, I would talk to those students, but I never  had them in individual sessions with me. Chris Stephens, I would, and  there were a few of them, Bryan even, but that was because he would  take the class with me.  We had this situation with the Truman Scholarships. Every year we  would be getting one of those, and then once in a while we   d get an  opportunity for a Rhodes. We always got Rhodes interviews. Now,  what   s troubling for me is that we   re not getting interviews. We were  getting interviews, I mean, pretty regularly, but we could never get out  of the state interview. So, but anyhow, I think that to bring it back where  you wanted, now with the Scholar Development Program in place, along  with the cooperation of the Honors College, the students have a lot of  resources. We have a lot more students that take these   like I was  teaching a course in Cambridge this summer. Those courses are usually  made up of really good students at the university, and many of them go  on and then apply for these prestigious scholarships. It   s sponsored by  that program and the students are very carefully selected for it, you  know, just to cut down on the trouble (Laughs) that you could have if  you don   t have the right students.  12  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  You alluded to earlier  that it was  maybe half a dozen kids. How many  is it now?  Oh, I   d say that Bob deals with maybe forty-five or fifty. He   s got all  kinds of students that are with Udall  Scholarship  and all the various  programs. Yes, I mean the Gates  Scholarship  because he has done the  Gates.  Turn to the other side of it. How about faculty? You talked about the first  year. There was a handful of crazy faculty (Laughs) involved with it.  Three or four.  How important are faculty to the program?  Oh, they   re absolutely essential. I mean, the problem is that   let   s give  the students their due, but if they don   t know what they   re up against   I  mean, we   re up against, let   s take Harvard. I think Harvard is allowed  fifty applications for Rhodes Scholarship. We   re allowed one.  Wow.  I mean, they   re going to have people on campus devoted to helping  those students. They know that you have to understand the network, first  of all. Now, one of the advantages that I   ve been fortunate to have  because of my research, I have, actually, contacts over in Oxford. I work  in Oxford fairly regularly and in Cambridge. So, as a result, I always  find this out afterwards, but I   ll get a message from someone who   ll say,     Oh, Edward, I   m really pleased to know that your student applied. Of  course, he got it.    They can   t say that until it   s all over, but these things  happen, and so I discovered now, Oklahoma State is identified by certain  people I know primarily through me. If they   re in English, there   s a  good connection there, at least to know someone there. That makes a  huge difference, but the faculty are absolutely critical.  I think Ed Miller is a great example. Doren Recker has done a lot. There  are several people that have been very, very helpful and they   ve  participated both as instructors, referees, writing letters of  recommendation. I think, without being idealistic, the best thing about it  is that these faculty members simply believe in what they   re doing. It   s  not what they can get out of it. To me it   s gratifying to go over to  England, which I   ve done for the last twelve years. I   ve always had an  OSU student over there that I can say,    Hey, will you look this up for  me?    (Laughter) I just got notice from Joel Halcomb yesterday that he  finished his degree. Those kind of things are gratifying because you  13  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  think of guys that start out here as undergraduates. Kelsey Williams is  now working with a couple of people that I think really well of at  Oxford on a research program. They both told me,    He was trained  marvelously at Oklahoma State, and that   s what we want.     Picking up on your comments, Ed, in what ways are faculty enriched by  their participation in the program? You think of the students being  enriched, but in what ways are faculty enriched?  I think that, in my case, it validates what you do. I   ll admit I like  teaching in the Honors College. I don   t apologize for it. I like students  that are willing to work hard and accomplish, and if they accomplish  at   what we   re showing is that it doesn   t matter where they come from.  Most people would not think of Oklahoma State as a school that   s going  to have people studying at Oxford or Cambridge, but it just shows that  that can happen if they have the proper training and they   re given a little  bit of help. You can   t write anything for them. They just have to do the  work themselves, but the nice thing about the student body here, and  I   ve talked about this with my east coast friends, there   s no entitlement  here, which is a huge advantage for faculty. The students are willing.  They may not be trained as well as perhaps other students in other parts  of the country when they come in, but they   re really open to being  trained and they   re willing to work hard. There   s something about a  simple work ethic here which I really like. If you can connect with them,  then they   ll work and they   ll do what you tell them, I mean, if you just  kind of give them advice and they   re young kids. So, as a result, they   re  going to make decisions and you   re going to say,    Oh, that wasn   t a  good one,    but it   s okay.  You mentioned Ed Miller a little bit earlier, and I had the opportunity to  visit with Ed. Ed talked about faculty that enjoyed teaching and that  there was that reward of being able to communicate with students and  see them grow and get excited about their era and their field and to  stretch themselves. Is that a part of the reward that you get?  I think that in my case it has been really special for me because I now go  on my own research trips, and I   ll have one of my former students join  me and do his own research in the same archive I   m doing, and we   ll  trade off. Like I   ve done this with Blaine. I   ve done this with Joel  Halcomb, where they know how to do all the technology. I   m just like  books and manuscripts. (Laughter) We take the pictures. They   ll take  out their digital camera, and they   ll have everything labeled and put it on  my computer, and I   m just really grateful. But it   s really gratifying to  see them come and do the kind of work, and not very many go into the  profession. Let   s face it. They   ll go into other things.  14  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  I   m on a panel in Venice this spring with Blaine. We both independently  applied for this conference and both got put on the same panel, and  that   s kind of a nice thing. I got to introduce a student in Oxford last  spring. I was a featured speaker, and I was able to chair the session  which Kelsey Williams, a former student of mine, was one of the  panelists. Those kinds of things are really neat, I think. You feel like  you   ve really done something concrete for somebody.  You talked a little bit earlier about being active in teaching honors  courses in the Honors College program. How does college honors  programs in the Honors College influence and support the Scholar  Development Program?  I think the combination of the two Bobs  Graalman and Spurrier  who  seem to have different visions, but they recognize talent, there   s a direct  correlation. I mean, that college doesn   t have   and it   s not universal.  We should never assume that if you   re not in the Honors College, you   re  not doing good work, but the numbers seem to suggest that the highest  motivated group of students on campus tends to be out of that college.  And that college is university wide. It   s not discipline-specific which  simply means, okay   and there are other ways that you can get an  honors certificate. It   s not like you have to do all honors courses, but I  think they like the fact that they get a couple of extra little perks by  being in the Honors College, and it   s a reward for their willingness to  work.  They all seem to understand the scholarship games. They apply for  scholarships, but it   s also because I think they feel comfortable in what  they   re doing as a program. I get freshman students; I like them because  they   re really open. I mean, they   re usually conflicted about,    Well,  Mom wants me to do this, but I really want to do that.    I tell them,    Give  it a year, then tell Mom that you are on a different direction.    (Laughter)  If you   re doing well, then they don   t have a problem with that.  What percentage would you say of the students that are in the scholars  program are also started in the honors program? How much of an  overlap is there?  I   d say 75 percent. I would assume it is at least that high. I can   t think of  too many of the applicants that I   ve dealt with that haven   t been in that  college. Again, they come from engineering, they come from ag, they  come from humanities, business, so there   s a high correlation. I mean,  there may be a few that just are kind of off the radar, but what happens is  they come in and they get scholarship offers.  I think the system that Bob Graalman uses, and Bob Spurrier, they ask  15  Gill  Jones  Gill  faculty to identify students    ability. Faculty will send notes to the  Scholar Development Office and say,    This is a guy you should be  looking at,    or,    This is a woman who is really highly motivated and  doing really well.    Then both agencies, both programs, if they haven   t  already contacted this person, will and talk about,    What do you think?  These are some of the advantages of being in the program.    It   s not  required. We   ve had students go through that have not been in it, but for  the most part, I   d have to say, in my experience alone, and I   ve been  with Bob more or less from the beginning of the Scholar Development  Program, they   ve been almost always from the Honors College.  Another common denominator is research. How important is the  Freshman Research Program and the Wentz Research Program to the  Scholar Program?  I don   t deal with the Freshman Program. What I do do is I tell my  students in honors about the projects that are available through the  Wentz Program. I tell them, you don   t realize what an advantage you  have here. I said, as a scholar myself, to get a  5,000 grant is considered  a big grant. I mean, (Laughter) you have a chance to get one for  4,500  and you   re an undergraduate student and you get it for the whole year. I  said,    You really should think about that.    I said,    Maybe not the first  time around. Go for the Wentz Scholarship to kind of get a feel for the  program.     I   ve had some. Kelsey Williams did his with me, and it turned out to be  the project that he ended up writing his MA thesis at Oxford on. He  switched it a little bit and it became, in some respects, related to his  research at Oxford. There are lots of advantages to that. I really try to  tell them that that   s going to tell you many things. It   ll tell you whether  you   re really cut out to do research. It   ll also peak your interest in a  project. I remember having a student years ago who wanted to do a  Wentz Project on the Pioneer Woman statue in Ponca City and she did.  She just went up and did historical research in the Oklahoma Historical  Society Library and went to Ponca City and found out about the statue.  Didn   t do it for me, but I read it. It was a paper on the status of women  in Ponca City, why that statue is up there. It was pretty interesting stuff,  and she went on to do an MA at the University College London. I   ve had  students that have done two of them. If they start early on one their  junior year, they   re actually eligible. They can get one their sophomore  year going into junior and junior going into senior. I mean, there aren   t  too many schools around the country that give  9,000 to undergraduate  students to do research projects.  I kind of picked up in the conversation, and maybe you can validate  this, in addition to expanding them as researchers and getting them into  16  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  their field, another obvious benefit of that has been competition for one  of these prestigious national  awards , to have done that kind of  undergraduate research is pretty impressive.  Absolutely. The committees will ask about that and I, again, tell them  that there   s really no substitute for that. I mean, if you   re looking to stay  in the academy, this is going to be a very obvious thing for an arts and  science student. If you   re going to go into business or agriculture or  something, it   s also going to be considered field work. It   s a practical  application, and I get letters back when I write for students to go to  medical school and law school. I   ve been telling my current students this  just recently. They   re not worried. What they keep writing to me is  they   re not worried about the specific training of a doctor or a lawyer.  They say,    We can take care of that. What we need are students that  know how to write, know how to think, express themselves.    That   s  what they really want. They said,    We   ll take care of the other stuff.  That   s where we   re falling down. That   s where you guys are coming in  and giving us the kind of training we need.     So, the research program going through helps them in practical  evaluations in terms of application for jobs after you graduate or for  graduate school, for finding about their interest and honing their skills  in research and also preparing for competition for prestigious  scholarships. A whole lot of things engage in that.  Yes, it   s kind of like a crowning project. I can   t remember the name. It   s  a capstone experience in some respects where everything kind of comes  together. A lot of them, of course, adjust that for their Honors College  thesis because that becomes their major project. And you leaving a  university at twenty-one or twenty-two, that is your major  accomplishment. I mean, you can look back and say,    That   s the project  that put my stamp on my undergraduate career.    A lot of undergraduates  don   t have that kind of experience.  I was going to ask you about that. Isn   t that an unusual promotion for  undergraduates across the country to have that kind of research and  work with the professors side by side?  It   s unusual.  It occurs at the graduate level and beyond.  Yes. When I found out that they had this opportunity, I was just  astonished. I mean, it   s the Wentz Program that affords it, and I   m just  glad to take advantage of it. And what I   ve seen over the years, they   re  really good projects. It   s not just window dressing.    Oh, I   ll take the  17  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  money and run.    The projects get done. The supervisors have been very  conscientious, and the students, I think, come out of it feeling very  gratified. I mean, it   s painful (Laughter). Those things are really  difficult, but I still think in the end they   re really happy about it.  Ed, are there any components that we haven   t talked about that have  been important to the Scholar Development Recognition Program? We  talked about identifying students in the Honors Program with the Wentz  Research part of it. We talked about preparation coaching, preparation  for applications and how to write those properly, giving mock  interviews. Are there any other components we   ve missed?  I don   t think so. The only thing perhaps that we   and this is just a  cultural thing at the university level. It would be nice to convince other  disciplines of the need for flexibility. I think that   s the handicap, and  certain disciplines, there   s so little room to go off of your program grid.  For electives?  Yes. I think we fall down in that area, and I hold back, but I can see it  pretty quickly, the student coming out with no humanities background.  That   s just because I   m in humanities, but it   s just a fact of life that these  kinds of competitions, if you do not talk about breadth and range of  interests, they   re not necessarily going to look at that favorably. It can be  as simple as,    What is your favorite book?    and if you come up with an  answer that is just really lame, I mean, it   s just not going to work. We   ve  had students in the mock interviews where that   s happened and you have  to remain positive. I   m just sitting there saying,    No chance,    because  there   s just not enough exposure to the world at large. I mean, the  academy is narrow enough. We can get into our little cubby holes and  study Milton or study our Shakespeare, and the rest of the world can go  on nice and narrowly, thank you very much, but I think when you   re  coming to something like a scholar program and preparing students, they  have to have a wider perspective.  The science students will be the first to admit   I mean they tell me  privately. They don   t necessarily tell their science professors or  engineering professors, but they know they   re under some limitations, so  they have to go and try to do something on their own because they know  that their program doesn   t really allow that latitude. So, I   d love to see a  little bit more leeway there where there was a little more built-in room  for saying,    Maybe our students in engineering sciences need to have a  little bit more exposure to the other colleges, just in terms of the  diversity curriculum.    It doesn   t mean have them staying forever. I don   t  mean that. I think they have like six hours, and that   s just, you know, if  one of them is writing and one of them is reading. Well, that   s not going  18  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  to be enough, not for four years. You come out of a university in four  years and training, and you   ve had like one writing class.  Are international education opportunities important also?  I think since most of these awards are either located or foster  international travel to get there, yes, and I think we   ve been good at that.  I think Oklahoma State has really, I think, under the   well, our current  provost  Marlene Strathe  will no longer be, shortly, but she really  fostered that, and I   ve been really happy about the fact that they   re  aware of it. They need to get out and get exposed. That   s always going  to be helpful. The Rhodes people always look for some idiosyncrasies  like,    I climbed Everest    or something (Laughter) or,    I teach some  very, very specific group some bizarre language,    or something. They  love stuff like that because it   s just kind of different. But you can try to  also scheme that, and it   s just so transparent. You have to be that kind of  person or you can   t, and I try to tell them that. You can   t be someone  you   re not. The committee sees through that. Like they don   t even have  to keep their eyes open. They just have to listen to you, and they can tell  you   re a fake. So, you never want to go in and not be yourself. You  should go in with a high expectation. You should go in with the highest  expectation for the experience because so many little things can happen.  The end game is not always the winning.  Let me ask you about that. You   ve probably known some students that  are unsuccessful for their quest for prestigious scholarships.  More than not.  What do you tell the students who don   t compete successfully? Were they  failures, or did they benefit in other ways?  Well, no. Well, usually, they   ll say,    I didn   t win but I   m going on to  Brown University on a scholarship,    and I say,    That   s really not so  bad.    (Laughter) They have fall-back moves. Most of them are going to  succeed anyhow. The question is   and I think Bob does a good job of  that, and I try to second it. I tell them,    We think you have a shot. Now,  we   re not saying you   re going to win. I think it   d be a good experience  for you to go through this process and I think you need to approach it  that way.    If you get through the first stage and you get through the  second stage, that   s a really major accomplishment because what   s  happened is when you get into this mix of students and these are the top  students in the country, just to be invited puts you at a very, very  different level. And you   ll sense that when you go to these places. I  mean, when the Gates committee finishes their work and they interview  eighty people and they pick fifty, I mean, the first thing they always say  19  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  is,    They   re all obviously really good.    Because if you can   t get the  scholarship, then you can   t be accepted into Cambridge. They won   t  give it to you. If nothing else you can say,    I was accepted as a graduate  student at Cambridge University,    and that   s not a small  accomplishment. You   re right. I   ve talked to many, many more who  have failed than succeeded. Most of them take it really well. One is in  Paris. He   s been living in Paris now for seven or eight years, and he just  thought it was a really, really good experience and it rolled off him a  little better. Some don   t   I mean, some, it really devastates them  because they   ve never lost, and I   m just saying,    Oh, welcome to the  real world. (Laughter) You finally lost something.     Expanding on that just a little bit, specifically and generally, in what  ways are students, winners and non-winners, enriched by their  participation in the program?  I think the best of it I can cite is when we have the end of the year  ceremony and Bob usually does this really nice thing.    We   re going to  give a little recognition to some of the people who didn   t win, but they  were finalists or semifinalists.    And then he usually hands them a little  envelope with something in it, you know,  50 or something to go with. I  don   t know, do something during the summer, and so I think that for the  most part when they go through this experience, we don   t have to say  anything to them because they recognize that this has shaped them to see  the academic community and their careers in a different light. They have  been exposed to competition at a high level. They no longer have this  idealist notion of what it means to succeed in a particular area. They   ve  actually experienced it. It serves them well. They move right on and go  to law school. Half of them usually go to law school or go to medical  school or go into MBA programs or for study for another degree.  We   ve had two people that I know   well, you probably know one of  them. Josh   I   m trying to remember his last name, but he   s the young  man that was in charge   he was one of the founding students of that  alumni program that students give back to the university, and he   s  connected with the Foundation, I think, or the Alumni Center, one of  them. He   s now out at Cambridge for another program. He found this  program after he went to take a course at Cambridge, and he   s really  been enjoying it quite a bit.  I guess just as a person they   re stretched in ways and broadened their  perspective and understanding of themselves and of their mind.  I think of where they come from, and I   m just always astonished when  I   I had a student in my office right before I came up here and he says,     I   m from Davis and everybody in town is related to me.    (Laughter)  20  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Seven brothers and four sisters and,    It   s really nice to come to campus  where no one knows me because everybody knows me. If I get pulled  over for speeding the police officer says,    I   m not going to write you up,  but I   m going to tell your father anyhow.       (Laughter) It   s one of those  things that they kind of find the next step in their identity, and the  program just becomes exciting for them.  I got to thinking. I believe Shannon Ferrell and Blaine Greteman, both  of their high school senior classes had about thirty people in their class.  Blaine   s was fifteen, I think. Yes, Shannon   s was a little bigger, but not  much. (Laughter) Yes, this woman told me today that hers was forty-one.  Big school.  Yes, big school. She said she transferred to Blanchard or something.  Ed, we talked a little bit earlier about Blaine Greteman being our first  Rhodes Scholarship winner. Can you talk about the process for  preparing Blaine for his Rhodes Scholarship and development, using  him as an example, walking Blaine through?  I think I had Blaine in an honors humanities class when he was a  freshman. He became an English major, and then I had him again in a  Shakespeare class. By the time I had him in my senior Milton seminar,  we were pretty far along, and he was a junior, but it was a senior-level  class. That   s when I had an opportunity to kind of help him. He was  doing all of the student newspaper and getting himself into controversial  situations. I mean, that   s just Blaine. He was always writing editorials  for the paper, and he was involved in other political activities. I always  dealt with him in the context of his areas of study and how these  experiences all kind of made up who he was. We would talk, and in  conversations I would ask him what range of experiences he had,  coming from a small town, and he had a wide range of experiences,  believe it or not. Always a curious, curious individual, and I think his  intellectual curiosity turned out to be his outstanding talent because he  has it still today.  I can see him walk into a room with people I know and he just knows to  get engaged with them. It   s just some people are like that. He   s got an  infectious personality in that way, and Blaine just needed to be  smoothed out a little bit around the edges. He was a really personable,  likeable guy, but he was a little rough in terms of decorum for a Rhodes  interview. We worked on that with him quite a bit, and we would have  different sessions in which I would ask him a whole bunch of really off  21  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  the wall remarks and questions and ask him to respond to them, and he  would. I mean he just had this ability to range over popular culture,  politics, religion. There wasn   t a subject that he didn   t have a comment  on, and I try to tell students no one   s going to have that kind of  personality, but there   s no reason why you can   t have that kind of range  of knowledge. That   s something that maybe set him apart, and the  committee   he probably told you this story. He had the committee  singing Merle Haggard songs. I mean, you just can   t do that (Laughs)  for the most part in a Rhodes committee. He was talking about the  people who look at themselves as serious scholars.  Classical musicians.  We had one conversation I remember. He was writing a paper on  Steinbeck. He had been reading Steinbeck, and he was going to do his  Wentz Project on Oklahoma   s reception to The Grapes of Wrath. That   s  what he was doing. I remember one day I had just been listening just by  accident to a Bruce Springsteen album that had come out that year called  The Ballad of Tom Joad, and it was maybe thirteen or fourteen songs,  and they were all dealing with this notion of the Tom Joad figure or  pilgrimage and pilgrims like him. It just dawned on me when I saw  Blaine. I said,    You   ve been working on this thing with Tom Joad, and  when you come around to doing your Rhodes essay, you might think  about linking it to Bruce Springsteen who is also doing something that   s  popular culture.    That   s what he did, and I think the essay worked  marvelously, his application essay for the Rhodes. It was easy. He   s just  bold. He told me that the applicants that year for the Rhodes in  Oklahoma said they all knew he was going to get a spot. It was just a  question of who was going to get the other one. He (Laughs) got to the  finals and they said the same thing.    We know he   s going to get one, but  it   s just who is going to get the other three.    So, that was pretty amazing  to me because I thought,    This guy is pretty rough,    and you wouldn   t  think of him as being an Oxford alumni. Kelsey Williams is an  automatic Oxford type, but Blaine is not. (Laughs) He   s Oklahoma in his  own little way.  Intellectual Okie. What were your feelings when you first learned of  Blaine being selected?  I remember Bob got the call, and we went out and, of course, celebrated  and had a drink, a glass of wine, and said,    Ah, we finally did it.    It was  a sweet moment for us because we had more or less been told implicitly  by others,    You guys are just silly. (Laughs) You   re never going to get  this to happen.    And then when we got the call   it was in Salt Lake.  That   s where he was interviewed, and so we went up to the airport to get  him the next day. We were there with a welcoming committee. OSU put  22  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  a welcoming committee together, and it was so much fun to see him.  Spiky hair, whatever. (Laughs) He just came up with this bizarre  approach. It was really fun, and to this day he has continued on. I mean,  I really thought he would get out of the academy because he was  working for Time magazine in London for quite a while after his first  degree and I thought,    He   s just going to do that. His academic life is  too narrow.    We had a very nice media blitz the next week or so at OSU,  and I think it worked out pretty well for him.  You related the fact that we had a lot of success with our Truman  Scholar recipients and in fact we   re recognized as a     Truman Institution.  How important was that to Oklahoma State University?  I think it was very, very important. It actually, because of Louis Blair,  who was the director of that program, it put us in a select category and  therefore, with Bob doing his recruiting, we were able to maintain that  as consistent winner year after year. It was one of the reasons why this  national organization now of faculty advisors has been created that Bob  Graalman was part of the founding figures in that, and it was born out of  the fact, among other things, that we won the Rhodes Scholarship,  because I remember the Chronicle of Higher Education pointed at that.     What   s going on here?    The new kids on the block, so to speak. We   re  getting people from Oklahoma State winning the Rhodes Scholarship?  What happened? The Ivy   s just always dominated. There was a two- or  three-year window in there where, in fact, that changed. A lot of the  schools saw the success that we had and decided to organize an office.  Kansas State has a very good office; they always have. Bob, I think,  used them as a prototype. They were always getting awards, and then we  ended up, I think   I remember going to a couple of those conferences  with Bob, and people were very excited from all around the country.  They were setting up these programs with different kinds of resources,  different kinds of plans, and in some ways Bob has said that we   ve  created a monster that has been our own undoing (Laughs) because these  schools   we   ve just increased our competition unwittingly. They have a  lot of those in place, and schools that have a lot of resources are really  serious. A lot of the state universities are getting into that.  Changing direction for just a minute, and I want to get back to that  comment a little bit before we conclude, but in your opinion, how does  the scholar program mesh with other academic and scholarship  programs across the campus?  I think I   m repeating myself a little bit. I think the joining point is the  23  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Honors College. This is a perfect example. I taught a course this summer  in which five students in that class all lived in the same dorm. They  knew each other. They would travel together. They   re from different  disciplines, but they   re all in the Honors College so they all know one  another. They live in the Honors dorm, and the chemistry in the class  was spectacular. It was open. I think what happens is that these become  the student leaders in different programs and if there   s a Spanish club, or  if there   s a physics club, these people are probably in it. Now, I can   t say  how each department fosters its students. I know in the A S college a  lot of the departments have honors directors. We have one in English. I  couldn   t estimate how the interfacing at that level goes. But I don   t think  there   s any doubt that when you go to the A S banquet event of the  year or you go to the top ten ceremonies that you see departments  willingly promoting their top students, because this is kind of an  achievement for them as an identity, and they become featured on their  website as well.  Ed, a little bit of the flip side of that, are there individuals who have  concerns that too many resources are invested in a small number of  students in our Scholars Program and that maybe the money could be  more broadly spread across the campus?  I have heard that and I certainly understand that.  What do you say to these people?  Part of what I say is that it   s not like you   re not eligible for the Honors  program. I said,    What higher institution of learning does not want to  promote its best products?    I mean, this is counterproductive (Laughs) to  submerge the students that are achieving and saying,    Well, no, we want  to bring them back into the fold.    I think there   s a reason why leading  institutions in the country   and you can go to websites of any state  university and you will find, if they have a Rhodes Scholar, that   s like  right at the front. It   s just common sense that you would say,    We want  to promote these students.    Now, the argument is,    Do I take away  general student resources to bestow them on others?    No. I don   t think  you should necessarily do that. I think the Wentz Program has actually  mitigated that a little bit, and I think in the Wentz Trust, the way that  Trish Houston has run that, I mean, she   s abided by the guidelines and  she   s fostered the kinds of things that I think Mr. Wentz wanted. So, I  don   t have any objection to that. I   m not sure if those resources are  supposed to be just given to anybody that goes to the university.  I think that it   s a legitimate concern, no question about it, but it is a  public land-grant  institution  and I think if we can showcase our  accomplishments through a set of students, that helps the image of the  24  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  entire university. In the end, if we look at what happened with the  endowed chair thing and the Foundation, the gift giving, I think people  want to give scholarships for learning activities, and I think that that   s  helped. In my mind, it wasn   t an accident that Courtney Timmons was  on the program with Boone Pickens when President Hargis made the  announcement about the endowment chairs and that whole big gift to the  program for the university, because she was a direct recipient. She  benefited from all the different activities. She also contributed to the  campus. She did a university-wide recycling program. It wasn   t like she  just took her money and went off and did her own little thing. She  actually came back and did something for the university at large. So,  these students participate in the whole university. Many of them, they   re  not just sitting in their little library cubicle and doing private research. In  some ways it   s not just the Scholar Development Program because the  Wentz Scholarship Program gives scholarships out to huge numbers of  students on campus. So, that would be one way of answering that.  In your mind, what should be the goals, desired outcomes of the  Scholars Program?  I think we   ve accomplished several of them. I believe in a pay-it-back  mechanism. It   s an implied payback that you, at some point in your life,  reflect on the educational opportunities or what life experiences you  were able to have from the university, and then as resources permit, you  come back and foster that. What I   ve been really happy about, and I see  it in the Cambridge program particularly, we teach a course every  summer at Magdalene  College , Cambridge. The students who were in  that program before are now   like Brian McLaughlin. He was finishing  a PhD. Those students came over and joined in. They   re no longer OSU  students, but they came and they fostered the environment for the  current students. They came back and they did it because   and Joel is a  perfect example. He says,    The university did all this stuff for me. I  would not have a Gates Scholarship if it was not for OSU and its faculty  and its administration. I want to give something back. I want to come  back and make those students have a good time while they   re in  Cambridge. I want this program   because it fostered my interest. It was  a gateway for me.    And so they   ve all done that. Brian McLaughlin has  done it. Joel Halcomb, Blaine, Chris Stephens   they   ve all come back  and done really good things for current students. They   re not invisible.  They didn   t make their mark and leave. They still come back and do  things for students. They come back on campus.  Shannon Ferrell.  Shannon Ferrell is another example. He   s come back as a faculty  member, yes. So, he   s a great example. Shannon Ferrell was in that  25  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  really early wave. He just makes me realize how old I am. (Laughter) I  mean, he was way back there. Blaine, too, but he was before Blaine  even.  Chris Stephens and Shannon Ferrell and Blaine, they were all together,  about a year difference between them?  I think Shannon might have been    96 and Blaine was    98, and Chris  might have been    97. We were on a roll there, but those guys were real  trail blazers because they actually achieved the success that legitimated  the proposal to make a special office because without that, I mean, that   s  why Bob has a special office. He was just in scholarships, but I think the  success with the Truman, the success with the Marshall, that   s what he  did. I mean, you   re not going to get a program based on one Rhodes  Scholarship. It was all the other scholarships that did it, really.  Ed, tell me about the recent successes you   ve had with the program. Has  any of that translated to recruitment of academically gifted students?  Have you noticed? Is there a buzz out there that excites students about  OSU?  I think there has been. I know Bob has taken several of these individuals  we   ve mentioned on speaking trips and to other high schools, and it has  made a difference. I think I   ve had students who naively have said,    If  Blaine Greteman can get a Rhodes Scholarship, I can.    And I said,     Fine. We   ll help you.    (Laughs) It   s not that easy. And they were really  determined that they would get it, but they didn   t. But we   ve had  students who were inspired by that. I know in the first few years after he  won that made a big difference. Now, the word gets out like anything  else in the academy. I think, like, Renee Hale is a perfect example. She   s  in electrical engineering, I think, or chemical engineering, and she   s  going to go over on a special scholarship to Cambridge this year. But I  talked to her as a freshman, and four years later she   s in the program.  She   s all ready to go and she   s following in the footsteps of her sister.  The students pass the word on, actually. I   ve gone down to the  Oklahoma School of Science and Math and talked, and they   re not big-on-  humanities people down there, but they do come up and talk to you.  (Laughs) I   m surprised they let you in   Yes, I know. But they were really, really cordial and they said,    Some of  us are coming up to OSU.    So, I   d like to think that the national pool  could be a little bit better, but that   s any university. We   re regional, but  we   re doing better regionally. We can compete now. Really our biggest  competitor is Arkansas because they have all that Wal-Mart money.  (Laughs) It   s pretty tough.  26  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Kansas and Arkansas are both pretty stiff competition for us as far as  scholarships go.  Yes, they are. They are.  Talking about creating our own monster by helping foster other similar  scholar development offices, and, of course, the competition had already  been fierce for these kinds of scholarships, and now it   s even tougher.  Yes, it is. It is.  Having said that, what changes do you think OSU is going to need to  make it in the future, down the road, and what are some things that  might need to be enhanced to remain competitive?  We made a few decisions recently that I think really help. One of the  things that Bob did was he hired an assistant to run the Freshman  Research Program who was a former student of the program. He   s on a  Javits Scholarship here as an English graduate student. He was the  overseer of the program in Cambridge this summer and he   s worked  really well with the students, and so there will need to be a few people in  place that understand the culture. I think the difference with scholar  programs is it   s not just winning an award. It   s understanding what are  the ingredients that go into it. What does the student have to have, and  what ethical assistance can the university administration, official and  faculty members give? I mean, there   s this issue. You can   t have faculty  members too involved because the work has to be the students. When it  comes to looking at those letters, you have to be really careful about  how much help you can give. I think that   s something that Bob has  understood well. The question is, obviously, there needs to be people in  place in the future that need to understand that, as well. He   s taken the  first step in terms of getting a person in a position that is becoming  familiar now with this. He   s in his late twenties maybe.  The competition I don   t think is going to go away. Competition is  simply going to remain what it is. The success rate will depend upon  getting the better students who have the right perspective on the process.  I   ve already been able to identify students who are going about this for  the wrong reason, and luckily we   ve not had too much of that. But there  are a few students who have come into this process because they wanted  to make a name for themselves. I said,    That   s not why we   re doing this.  It   s not about the attention you   re going to get. It   s about the program.     There are certain people and that   s just how they think. Their mentality  is personal reward and fame or recognition and so on. In a scholar  program like this, that   s not the goal. I mean, that   s kind of the aftermath  27  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  of it. You get that as part of the process, but if you go into it with that as  your goal, then you   re probably not going to succeed.  Will the university have to think about different resources? I remember  my conversation with Shannon Ferrell, and he talked about getting more  faculty involved in the correct ways, more members involved in  identifying working students. We had a conversation around maybe we  need to give a little bit of leave time, maybe quarter time for people to  work with more students to guide them and counsel them.  I would certainly never object to that, but I think it   s probably idealistic  because the current climate is the professors aren   t on campus enough as  it is. (Laughs) People don   t understand how different professors and  different professions work different ways. I don   t write on campus. I  write at home in my study. That   s where all my resources are, and other  professors, if they   re at home, they can   t stay there because they   re just  going to watch TV. (Laughs) They know they   re going to have to come  to their office to work. Mine is just the opposite because if I   m on  campus, then I   m assuming that my students are going to want to talk to  me. I   m not going to get anything done. Then if you close your office  door and someone knocks on it and you act like you   re not in there,  that   s pretty bad. It   s a different perspective. But I think that maybe not  leave time but maybe some recognition at the service area for a person   s  career. I always have it as an item, and it   s always mentioned at my  A D that I do this work.  Consideration for tenure and promotion.  Yes, I mean, stuff like that. I think it can help. It   s just another item that  I don   t worry about because it   s just something I do. But there   s a  difference between multi-taskers and like a-couple-of-taskers. (Laughs)  You can do one or two things. So, for me this is just something that fits  in my schedule. I don   t need to have two weeks devoted to it, but stuff  like that. I spend more than that with students. I like to keep it kind of  informal. I like to meet them at a coffee shop and say,    Bring your  essay. We   ll talk about it over a cup of coffee.     You have devoted a lot of hours, Ed, to this program. Your name has  come up with different people about your passion from the time you put  into it. What keeps you motivated? What excites you about the program  that keeps you involved and giving your time?  I think it   s always the fact that it   s hard to do. Part of it is, it   s something  that I would have loved to have done as a student and no one ever  alerted to me about the possibilities. So, what I discovered in my own  training was that I didn   t want to be one of those professors who didn   t  28  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  Gill  Jones  tell their students what was available to them. I think I   m partly  motivated by the fact that I just want others to have the opportunities  that I didn   t have. I can share vicariously and successfully. Like I said,  there   s nothing sweeter for me than to see my students at Oxford,  Cambridge, NYU, whatever, doing work. I mean, it   s kind of what do  we have besides our research in terms of our job, our books and articles.  Our students are our legacy, and so that   s why I do what I do.  This is probably just an overlap of my previous question. Just to nail it,  what has given you, more than anything else, the most personal and  professional satisfaction of being engaged in this program?  I think that my students turning into friends. In other words, they   ve  been my students, but now they   re colleagues. I think that   s been a really  nice development. Some of them don   t know what to call me. Blaine is a  perfect example. He still calls me,    Hey.    I mean he just doesn   t know.  He   s just uncomfortable, but he   ll get over that eventually. I told him,     It   s Edward. That   s what I go by. Just call me that. Don   t worry about  it.    And he just,    Okay, I   ll try.    Then it   s funny. If there are three  people in the room and he has to refer to me, he   ll do it, but (Laughs) he  just can   t do it yet. Joel has made the transition a little bit better. It   s  driving Elizabeth crazy. She just can   t handle it.    Why are they calling  you this? (Laughs) We had them in our house. We spent all this time  with them, and they can   t figure out what to call you.    (Laughs) So, it   s  like   I don   t know. So, that has been, by far   to see someone who you  had as an eighteen-year-old now becoming a recognizable professional  at thirty, thirty-one, you can talk to that person and exchange ideas, and  you learn from that. That   s been really great to me because what I   ve  been gratified by is that my students don   t turn out to be like me. I don   t  turn out carbon copies. (Laughs) They do something really different.  That   s great for me because then I actually learn from them as well,  which is part of what I   ve always felt is possible, though it doesn   t  happen as often I   d like. It still happens, so that   s been good.   Is there  anything that we   ve left out?  Gee, I don   t think so. This has been about the longest interview I   ve ever  had. (Laughs)   If you have  any closing comments, they are welcome at this time.  (Laughs) No, it really made me think a lot about the program, and  maybe I haven   t fully grasped the historical line until I start talking  about how long this has been going on. I think back, fondly, to the real  path makers in this process. Some of these men and women who had  very little chance to succeed, but they did a spectacular job of applying,  29  Gill  Jones  and just the excitement I remember when they would come back and  say,    I didn   t win, but I really had a good interview. I forgot who wrote  The Catcher in the Rye.    (Laughs) I was like,    What?       I just couldn   t  remember.       An English major and you can   t remember?     (Laughter)  But those are the kinds of fond memories I have of it.  I actually was walking down the hallway about three weeks ago, and one  of those students came in the building and she said,    I   ve been looking  for you. I come up here every couple of years.    She had her four  homeschooled kids with her, and they were all like from ages eight  through five and they were all surrounding her. She said,    I just wanted  to come and see how you were doing. I just wanted to let you know that  I   m still hanging in there. I   m homeschooling my children.    She was one  who I thought had a really good shot, and she did well. I tried to  convince her that she wasn   t ready to go to graduate school the year  after, and she did. She went to the University of Illinois and she went a  year and she did fine, but she just wasn   t ready to stay. So, I think  eventually she   ll go back and get her degree, but that   s a key item for a  lot of students.  I tell them, four years of university study   it   s not bad to take a break. I  mean, given longevity as we know it today, you have enough time to  take a year and maybe travel a little bit and get a little bit out of the     you   ve been going to school since you were five years old, and maybe it  might give you a little bit of a revival by taking a year off and then  coming back. I said,    That   s what I did, and I was really ready to come  back.    But I wasn   t ready to start graduate school right after  undergraduate. It just seemed like,    I need to take a break for a little bit.     Some of them would have done that, and some of them, of course not.  (Laughs) They go and do what they want to do.  But those early ones, even before Shannon   and Shannon was a  success. We weren   t having very many successes early. We   d get a  Truman, and that Truman would then apply for the Rhodes and wouldn   t  get it. We had a bunch of people in English that did those applications,  and  in  history, and I think they did okay. They came out of it with a  really good attitude and they never forgot it. That   s all you can ask for.  We wanted to change the student culture. We didn   t worry too much  about the faculty culture because that   s what   s more entrenched. The  faculty are going to change a little more slowly than the students, but we  wanted the students to know that they could compete, and I think we   ve  succeeded with that.  Perhaps you   ve also done a little bit of the other too.  I think we   ve made inroads. We   ve made inroads, and I think that our  30  Gill  Jones  application for Phi Beta Kappa is certainly predicated at least in part on  this program. If we get that at the university   I think that   s something  we really need to have, and we   ve had enough academic excellence and  success to warrant that. The question is, there are certain key areas in  any application like that that have to be at a certain level. That   s  probably where for whatever reason   and I think there hasn   t been  universal support for that even with the faculty here. I think that   s  changing. I know the students feel a whole lot more confident about  their ability to succeed. When I first moved here, I thought,    I have  never lived around such an insecure set of individuals.    They say,    Well,  I   m from here.    And I say,    Why are you apologizing for being  Oklahoman?    I said,    You have a lot of unique characteristics that you  need to embrace.    So what if I   m from New York? Do I need to think  New York is automatically better than    No. It   s what is individual to  the place, and I don   t hear that as much. I mean, I still hear it a little bit,  but that   s like any place. I mean, I   m from Texas   they   re going to have  that, too, but I think that the student culture has changed in regard to this  issue. They do feel they can compete. They do apply, and they   ve  demonstrated that they deserve to be in that pool of applicants. That   s  probably been a really nice thought for Bob and I to have, and it   s  motivated me to keep working on the project.  Ed, thank you very much.  (Laughs) All right.  -------  -------   
