 Gill. Today is February 19, 2009. I   m visiting with  Nancy Randolph Davis here in the Conoco Philips OSU Alumni Center  on the Oklahoma State University Campus. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Nancy, thank you very much for being with us today for this  interview. I know you   ve had a busy day today; you were recognized  earlier at Langston University.  That   s right.  Starting off, can you tell me a little bit about your early life, about your  family, where you grew up?  Yes, I would like for you to know that I grew up in Sapulpa, Oklahoma,  that   s where I was born. My parents were Mr. Ed Napoleon and  Ernestine Randolph. My dad was a railroad man. He worked with the  Frisco Railroad Company. I had four brothers and one sister. We stayed  in our six room house. At that time we lived across the street from the  Booker T. Washington School, and my parents were always there at  home. My mother did not work. She was a homemaker, and my daddy  had to go to Tulsa to work for the Frisco Railroad Company. They were  located in west Tulsa, Oklahoma. They taught us to be sure to be clean,  neat, respectful, honest, and to always tell the truth.  Can you tell me about your family roots, a little bit about your family  history? I understand that your great-grandparents were actually  slaves?  Well my great-grandparents were slaves but my grandparents were not  slaves.  Did they live in Texas?  6  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  They lived in Marlin, Texas. My dad   s people lived in Marlin, Texas.  My mother   s people lived in a little town called Yakum, Texas. When  my mother came to Oklahoma, they settled in Colbert, Oklahoma and  they came in a long wagon train. And you   ve heard of Carl Graves?  I   ve heard that.  Mm-hmm. They all stayed at different places and they helped each other  build little houses; at that time, coming into Oklahoma, they built houses  along the way and they would help each other.  Nancy was that in 1903?  It was about 1900 or 1903, I don   t remember the date exactly.  Let   s see, Claude grew up in Poteau.  Poteau, Oklahoma.  And then you grew up in Sapulpa. You all came up as a group of about  30 families, as I understand. Did you get a little scattered out after that?  Well I don   t know how many families there were but I know there were  at least seven or eight families. My mother   s people stayed there in  Colbert, Oklahoma. She has some sisters near there. And my daddy  worked for the railroad company so he was always on the road going.  But his mother and father lived in Marlin, Texas and they had a big farm  there in Marlin, Texas. They had farmed   the highway ran through. My  dad   s people usually had about eight or ten kids in the family. My daddy  had fewer children than any of them with my mother and father, my  oldest brother, one sister, and four brothers. We all lived in Sapulpa and  my dad went to Sapulpa after he had worked for the Frisco Railroad  House and that was in west Tulsa. That was as close as he could get at  that particular time to our home. So they lived in Sapulpa, Oklahoma.  He would commute and use the bus for transportation back and forth to  work. He would go to work at one o   clock and come back by 12 at night.  You mentioned some things earlier about principles your family instilled  in you. Was the importance of education one of those?  Education was the main thing. Get an education; whatever you do you  must finish high school. If you live in this household you must get an  education. So there were three of us who attended college. My brother  Carl, my sister and I, we attended some kind of college. And I graduated  from Langston University. That was in 1944-1948.  7  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  So you graduated from Booker T. Washington High School in Sapulpa in  1944 and then you enrolled in Langston that fall in 1944.  That   s right.  Was it common at that time for African American women to attend  college? That was probably a little unusual on your part.  Well it was in my class of 1944 because our principal, and his wife,  D.A. Williams and Zemula Williams, they told us kids that they wanted  to see us go to college. There   s not enough kids from Sapulpa going to  college. So we had some who had gone to college, but they wanted our  class to and they thought our class was smart and we should go to  college.  Did you get any financial assistance to go to college?  No. There wasn   t any kind of financial assistance. My dad had to work  hard on the Frisco Railroad Company. He worked day and night making  sure that he saved enough money for us to go to college if we wanted to.  Did you work part time at school as a student?  No. I did not. But I did have a Saturday job where I would babysit. I  made a dollar and a half a day. (Laughs)  Great wages. What influenced you to seek a college degree? I know your  parents certainly encouraged you in high school. But did you know you  wanted to go to college? Did you know what you wanted to be when you  were in high school?  Well when I was in high school I really knew that I wanted to be a home  economics teacher. I had a teacher at my school by the name Mittie  Jackson. She was from my hometown. We loved and admired her.  Minnie Jackson?  Mittie. M-I-T-T-I-E.  Mittie, I see.  Mittie Jackson. So she was a lady that we all had high esteem for. She  was one of those that said,    Nancy, you would do good if you go to  college and major in home economics since you like to cook so well.  And you can sew pretty good, so you can sew.    That   s the main thing  that they did in school back then was sew in home economics, sewing  8  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  and cooking and maybe making baby clothes and children   s clothing.  We did a little bit of serving food for the high school football team  because the football team could not go to a restaurant and eat so we  served the boys after the football games every Friday night that we had a  game. I was one of those who volunteered to serve.  Did you have a good football team?  We had a nice football team. We were called the Sapulpa Bulldogs. We  had our little pep club and we had on our blue skirts and white blouses  and we just really did go with the pep club.  So were you a member of the pep club?  Yes.  Did you lead the cheers and do things like that?  I did not lead the cheers, I was not a cheerleader.  You were just in the pep club.  Mm-hmm.  Well let me first of all ask you a little bit about your experience at  Langston. Was it a good experience for you? Were you involved in other  activities other than just class?  Yes. Langston University was the place where I really received lots of  outlet for experience because my home economics teacher would have  us to fix meals, fix cookies and sandwiches and they ate those  sandwiches for teas and make all kinds of tea from tea leaves and Lipton  tea and all that and fruity juice and lemons and so forth. That was an  experience that we knew we had to dress up for every Sunday evening  and go to the tea. A tea would be held in Sandford Hall, so we enjoyed  that.  Did you live on campus there in a residence hall?  I lived in the oldest building the first two years, the oldest building on  the campus which was called Phyllis Wheatley Building. Phyllis  Wheatley was a lady who wrote poems and she was a slave.  The last  two years I lived in Sandford Hall, a building which was named in honor  of President Sandford.   So your senior year, the home economics majors had to live in a certain  9  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  cottage together, is that correct?  Yes, it is.  Could you share a little bit of information about that?  We lived in a home economics cottage which was there across the street  from Phyllis Wheatley, a little brick building. We had a home economics  supervisor, Mrs. Sadie G. Washington. We had to learn how to prepare  breakfast, lunch and dinner using the four basic foods at that time. We  always had to carry out our table manners. We had to carry out our  cooking turns and know how we cooked different foods so we could  share with the class. And we would serve anybody who came through  the campus that was new or somebody who was visiting the campus. We  thought that would be the best we could learn, was with Mrs.  Washington. I remember we served M elvin . B. Tolson and I went to  the Teacher Day at the M. B. Tolson Library. That teacher is now an  important laureate and he was a great poet. He was an English teacher  but he was also a writer and a poet and he presented plays.  Were there some other activities or organizations that you were a part of  at Langston University as a student?  Yes, at that particular time I was a part of the Young Woman Christian  Association, I was a part of the Langston University Woman   s  Dormitory Association at Phyllis Wheatley where we had our devotion  and prayer. We had prayer every Sunday night, believe it or not. We had  singing and we got to experience other   s talents. I was a part of a club in  which you had to make at least a C average to join the club. And then  my Senior year I joined the Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority and that was a  big thing. You really had to learn a lot and do a lot of different activities.   We learned to be sophisticated, intelligent and mannerable.   I went to do my student teaching at Luther, Oklahoma. Luther is just a  little country town but that   s where I did my student teaching and I  learned a lot of different lessons under Miss Clara Ballard  who  was  there, too, as the supervising teacher. And Mrs. Dandy was the state  supervisor, she taught us on the campus. She also taught us how to be  good teachers, how to work well in the community and work with  people, make home visits. She taught us to remember that we had to do  something with our children. Not just let them make a garment, like  some people were having them make tea towels. We had to help them  make something that they could wear. And they also had to model the  clothing that they made. Sometimes it   s a dress, sometimes a suit,  sometimes a coat, and sometimes an evening dress. But they had to do  their own clothing. And they made clothing for their little brothers and  10  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  sisters at home.  If you don   t mind me giving you a compliment, every time that I   ve ever  seen you, you   ve really been dressed lovely and beautiful. Where did  that come from? Did that come from this experience or from your home?  That came from this experience. At least I knew how, even though I  didn   t have the clothing and I didn   t have the hats and all of that but I  knew what to wear for church and what to wear for sports occasions and  always practiced wearing clothing for home wear or school wear.  So you did your practice teaching at Luther.  Luther, Oklahoma, yes.  When you graduated from Langston, you took a position at Dunjee High  School in Choctaw.  Yes, that was an all-black school. At that time we called it an all-negro  school. When I taught at Dunjee school, I had a one room building  where I had to teach 60 kids with five sewing machines and three of  them would work. I learned how to work on the machines. I didn   t know  how to be a mechanic, but I learned how to work with them.  Five machines and only three worked, is that right?  Only three worked. And then the next year after I was there, I came in     48-   49, they built a home economics building. That is where we really  had lots of fun. We had a living room, all-purpose room, bathroom, and  a washer and dryer in a laundry room. The kids learned how to do  laundry by using the washer machine and the dryer and they learned  how to be a good hostess when somebody would come in. They were  appointed to be a hostess and they were appointed to be the chairman of  the foods committee. We had it where we really had a good home  situation in action.  So obviously you felt a need to go ahead and get your master   s degree.  After that first year you taught at Dunjee you decided to get your  master   s degree.  Well it wasn   t that next year, it was that summer. The following summer  I was going to work at Oklahoma State University. When I went to  Oklahoma State University, I remembered that the lady who was head of  the Home Economics department, I have forgotten her name.  It wasn   t O   Toole was it? Lela O   Toole?  11  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  No, her name was Miss Nora Talbot from Guthrie, Oklahoma. She was  the one who told me,    Don   t you come to this university. You negroes  are not ready.    She talked about how the negro kids would make fun of  them because they had to go to a restaurant and eat dressed up with hats  and gloves on. And they had to   well they had to remove their gloves or  go dressed up. She told me that I should attend school in Kansas, Ohio,  Colorado or go to Illinois     where negroes were accepted .  So why did you want to go to Oklahoma State University?  Because Oklahoma State University was in the state of Oklahoma, it was  inexpensive, it was a place where I could go and see my father and my  mother and my sister and brothers on weekends. So even though they  were older and I was the youngest one in the family, I had an older  brother who lived there in Sapulpa. One thing that happened that I shall  never forget is my older brother came to visit us at Christmas time. He  had moved to Tulsa. And when he came at Christmas time he brought  his wife and four babies: six years old, four years old, three years old,  and a three month old baby. His wife took sick. She took sick with three  day pneumonia and she died. And that was the most tragic thing that   s  ever happened in my whole life. I shall never forget how my brother and  I just cried to ask the Lord to help my mother with those four boys. My  mother and father raised those four boys and all four of them finished  high school, went over to Tulsa and found a job at the Country Club on  the weekends and they came back and enrolled at Langston University.  They  worked their way through college and  went to Langston each  year until they finished  with degrees in math .  Higher education institutions in Oklahoma, including OSU, had been  segregated up to that time. What legal event changed that allowed you to  enroll in Oklahoma State?   Segregation was abolished because of the work of Ada Lois and G.W.  McLaurin.  The legal event that took place was that Ada Lois Sipuel  fought a court battle for two years and also G.W. McLaurin thought he  was wanting to get a master   s degree in English and education and Ada  Lois wanted to get her law degree. At that time, Ada Lois Sipuel, who  was my dormitory mate, she lived in the same dormitory, she decided  that she was going to fight and go to school and get her law degree. She  did that with the help of the NAACP, the National Association for the  Advancement of Colored People. They had a lawyer by the name of  Amos T. Hall that fought the case for them and Thurgood Marshall, who  was on the Supreme Court, they fought the case and they won. So Ada  Lois went to OU and the state decided that they would not let her in the  school but that they would have a new law school at the State Capitol.  So they had a law school at the State Capitol but it was too expensive to  12  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  keep up because they only had one student and one professor and it was  too expensive so they decided to not have the law school. They had to let  it go.  Then they opened the doors for Mr. G.W. McLaurin to attend OU  on a segregated basis.   Well Nancy it must have taken courage to enroll at an all-white, very  large university. What gave the strength and the conviction to do that?  Well I think really, my mother and my father.    If you want something  you have to work for it, work hard, be determined. Don   t you give up.  You stay right with it. You can do it.    So my mother and my father, my  church, my sister and my brothers, they all said,    You can do it, girl.  You   re smart, you can do it     And you know with this feeling you have  self-esteem, telling you    you can do it.    Then I thought that I could do it.  I thought I was ready because of the hard work that my parents had  done. So I went on to have the faith and the courage and mostly faith in  God.  My dad was one who always had vision. He was a man that believed that  we could go places if we get an education. So he, in addition to the  radio, would read the papers and at that time we didn   t have televisions  but he   d keep up with the news.    I   m just listening to this radio and I  read it in the paper that this school in Stillwater is going to be a great  school. It   s going to grow. And I would sure like to see you get your  degree from Langston, get your degree, get out of high school and go  there, but you won   t be able to go because it   s not a school for negroes  to go to.    So he instilled in me that I could go. At that time Dr. Martin  Luther King and Rosa Parks, they had opened doors   not then. It was  later on. He was the one who really encouraged me to get my education,  go to Stillwater and get your degree because that school is going to be a  reputable school.  I was also encouraged to go to OSU by my God  parents, Mr. and Mrs. Joe Johnson. I lived in their home as a freshman in  high school. He was the principal of Booker T. Washington High School  and she was an elementary teacher. The Johnsons were my neighbors in  Sapulpa but worked in Cushing, Oklahoma.   OSU had quite a reputation growing for home economics.  It was growing. Well he said it would have the best agriculture and  home economics department in the Southwest.  I think he was right. It was getting a strong reputation at that time. So  you attended in the summers because you were still teaching. Was it  three or four summers? And you started in the summer of    49.  I started in the summer of    49. And then it was    50,    51 and    52, four  13  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  summers that I worked hard to go to school at Oklahoma State  University. At that time, we did not have any scholarship programs. My  dad and mother had sent me to Langston University where I did not have  to work. But I decided myself that I would go to school during the  summers because a lot of teachers were doing that. Go to school at a big  university and then go and teach during the fall. So that   s what I did.  Do you recall the admissions and enrollment process? Can you tell me  about that experience? You came up to Oklahoma State to enroll. What  kind of experience was that for you?  Well that was an experience. I went to the Registrar   s office, asked them  if I could enroll, and they told me that I had to go and see the head of the  department. And the head of the department was a lady that certainly  was not ready. She said we weren   t ready and she said,    You   re not  ready to go to school here.    Because negroes are not there. She talked  about how this man from Guthrie who was a janitor stole the seal from  Guthrie, Oklahoma and took it to Oklahoma City. She didn   t realize that  there were some whites helping him. But she said that he was the one  who stole the seal. She was from Guthrie and she was upset because of  that.  She told me that I should go to school in Illinois, Colorado, Kansas or  some school out of state because at that time the state was paying the  tuition for those who went out of state. She said,    Why don   t you do  that?    And I told her,    No, I want to go to school in my own state. This  is where I was born and reared.     This was  Miss Nora Talbot,  the head of the Home Economics  Education Department?  Yes. She wrote a book, Homemaking for Girls.  So had you been on the OSU campus before? What was your first  impression of OSU when you came on campus?  Oh when I came on campus it was just a very small campus. I remember  the old fire station. I remember the administration building, I remember  the home economics building, science building. OSU was doing lots of  remodeling. I had to go across the street on Knoblock to a two-story  brown and white house for my classes at the very beginning. And those  girls in the classroom were just happy to have me.  So I understand that summer of 1949, you were the first African  American student to enroll at Oklahoma State University. Is that right?  14  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  That   s right. And then you know what, they gave a test the second week  of school. When I had this test, they were surprised that I made such a  high score on the test, the second highest grade. They were surprised and  they told the professor the next Monday morning,    We disagree with the  state law. We want Nancy to sit in the classroom with us.    And the  professors became nervous, uneasy and upset. And they said,    We  can   t.    They didn   t want to lose their jobs. So they told the professor that  well emphatically,    We want Nancy to sit in the classroom with us.    So  when the professor thought about it, she decided to let me sit in the  classroom, and the other professor also.  Nancy, let   s see if I understand right. State law at that time said while  you could enroll at Oklahoma State University, you had to be separate.  So they sat you out in the hallway with the door open where you could  hear the lecture, but you were out in the hallway?  That   s right. Or in the back of the room. I had to sit in a little space  where they had a little office in one of the classrooms.  So how many classes did you take that first summer?  I took three classes.  Were these graduate level classes?  These were graduate level classes. I took a class in teaching home  economics to high school students, a class in methods of teachings, and  another class in how to get children interested in your clubs and  organizations. We had at that time the New Homemakers of America for  the black students and the Future Homemakers of America for our white  students. So I found different ways that we could get the kids interested  and really working and working hard in order to keep their organizations  together. I had one of the largest home economics classes in the state at  that time and one of the largest home economics clubs in the state. They  thought I was just a smart little teacher.  You had three classes. When you first started did you have to sit outside  in all three of those classes?  No, in one class I had to sit in the hallway. Another class I had to sit in  the back of the room, and another class I had to sit in the office space  which was really small and the teacher I couldn   t hardly see or hear  sometimes.  So as the summer semester progressed, you got to move in the back of  the class in all three of those classes?  15  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis   The students asked the professor to let me sit in the classroom with  them the third week,  so I did not have to do that for   for a time I had  to. The first year and the second year I stayed in the community of  Stillwater. I lived in the home with the principal and his wife and two  daughters; the L.E. Ward Family. And that was Versie and Ella Pearl  Ward. I called them my sisters because they treated me real nice. And  the next summer I stayed with the Jones family, they lived next door to  the Wards. Mr. Ward was going to school at Colorado State and he was  taking administration courses. So when he came home, I had to stay next  door because they didn   t have enough room for me at the Ward   s house.  Were these African American families or were these white families that  you are talking about?  They were black families. He was the principal of the Booker T.  Washington School here in Stillwater and his daughters attended the  school. One daughter was just graduating from high school and the other  daughter was about two or three years back, a sophomore in high school.  They were just really nice young ladies.  Mrs. Ward was a second mom  to me. She was a librarian at the black school.   We talked a little bit about the instructors that you had, a little about the  reception. Can you tell us a little bit about your class experience with  your fellow students? How did you relate to them, how did they relate to  you?  Well the fellow students were really wonderful. They told the  professors,    We want Nancy to sit in the classroom with us.    And they  would ask me that every day,    Nancy, will you come and sit by me  today?    They acted as if I was a special person because I would sit with  them, study with them, go to the library   we had a library there. We   d  go to the library and study, make out lesson plans that we would use for  our classes. We also had demonstrations that we had to carry out. Each  lady in the classroom gave a demonstration. I gave a demonstration on  cake baking and one on decorating cakes because I had done lots of that.  How about outside the classroom? Were you involved in any activities? I  know you were pretty much studying during the summer, but were you in  any activities and did you interact with students outside of the  classroom?  Yes, I would go with them on field trips and that was outside the  classroom. I would also go with them on our field trips where they were  looking at me real funny because I decided not to go on the next field  trip because I had to go home and see my parents over that weekend.  16  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  How often did you go home?  I would go home practically every other week. My mother was taking  care of my nephews and I would go home and help her with the laundry  and housework and things like that.  So you felt welcomed and accepted by the students.  Yes, accepted by the students better than the faculty members.  Were there any less than positive experiences that you remember?  Well the most positive experience that I had was going on a field trip  and we were there in a caf   and they were eating and I remember some  of the girls were saying,    Nancy can   t eat here. Well if she can   t eat  here, we won   t eat here.    And they would take me to Sapulpa to visit my  parents on weekends. They were just as nice to me as if they had known  me  for a long time . They would ask me about the patterns that I used  because back then we made our clothing, and they would ask me about  the different patterns that I had used and how I made different dresses  and different things.  Do you remember some of your professors? Were there some of them  that were helpful to you and do you recall some who were mentors to  you?  Yes, Ms. Rowan Elliff. She was from Ohio and she was my major  professor. Dr. Millie Pearson who was one of my professors, she was  just as nice as she could be. She didn   t care whether I was black or  white. If something needed to be done she would ask me to do it or ask  the girls to do it. And we had another lady   oh I can   t think of her  name. I can   t think of her name but she was one who really taught us a  lot about FHA and NHA, how to get the girls to meetings and how to  carry a meeting on, rules of order, parliamentary procedures. That   s  what we had to study to know how to carry on.  Did you have some favorite places on campus? Student hangouts, places  that you went on and off campus?  Well on the campus, I would leave the campus and go to some little fast  food place. They had a little Dairy Queen and they had places like Sonic,  but they weren   t called Sonic.  After they opened the Student Union in 1950, did you go to the Student  Union?  17  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  I went to the Student Union after, when so many of the black students  came out, I went with them. Had I gone before then I would have been  going by myself because most of these girls were as poor as I was. They  always said that they didn   t have money to eat in the cafeteria. So we ate  in the cafeteria occasionally but not often. We ate in the cafeteria at the  end of our classes at the end of the month when we were here.  Nancy that first summer in 1949 you were the only black student  enrolled on the campus. How did it feel out of several thousand students  to be the only black student?  Now I was not the only black student. There was a man who was  majoring in industrial arts. He was a brother to Mrs. Ruby Hall. His  name was Herbert Hibler. He was an industrial arts major. I did never  get to meet him the whole time I was here that summer. I tried to get in  touch with him but he was busy and I was busy. So I was the first  student  besides  Herbert Hibler, then the next summer we had students  coming and the third summer we had students coming and they provided  a hall for us. Hanner Hall, I   ll never forget it. All black people had to  stay in Hanner Hall. The first floor was for the married couples, the  second floor was for the ladies, and the third floor was the men. That  was Hanner Hall; it was across from the Student Union.  As you progressed through those four summers from 1949-1952, how  did attitudes by students and faculty change over that time toward you?  Well I remember the third summer we had competitions seemingly with  the white students and black students. It wasn   t any big competition, but  they tried to have   like we had posters to make, we had lesson plans to  make out, and we had different kinds of little activities going on within  the classroom and I noticed that the black students would stick together  and the white students would stick together, but so far as any major  animosity or anything like that,  there was none .  Did people seem to be more accepting after a little while than they were  when you first came? More welcoming and more accepting?  Well I don   t think they were any more welcoming because the first year  they were really welcoming to me because I was the only one. But when  lots of us came it was just about the same.  To go back to the question about when you first enrolled at Oklahoma  State University, you said that it was less than inviting then. Can you  share with us? I think you indicated earlier that you had difficulty  getting enrolled the first time you came here?  18  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Yes, I did. The head of the home economics department told me that we  were not ready and that you should wait and go to school in Kansas,  Colorado, Ohio. I decided that I was going to go to school here anyway.  I said,    Well I should go to school here. This is my home. Oklahoma is  my home and I don   t have the money to go to other schools so I   m going  to go to school here.     But they refused to enroll you that first time, is that correct?  They refused to enroll me. But I think somebody called the Black  Dispatch which is Roscoe Dunjee   s office and told them that Nancy  Davis had not been able to get in school, she   s trying. So Roscoe Dunjee  who was the president of the NAACP and Mr. Amos T. Hall  (the  NAACP state lawyer)  came to this university and talked to them and  they let me enroll in three days.  They told them legally how it had to be.  Yes.  However, the last of June the desegregation law had lifted.   I appreciate you sharing that story. That explains some things. Looking  back now, you   ve got your degree. Did it feel good to finally get that  diploma after all that hard work and four summers and getting turned  down and some of the difficulties that you had? You must have felt good  about that.  I not only went four summers, I would come on Saturdays when I was  working on my thesis. My advisor, Rowan Elliff would tell me that she  would help me with my thesis if I could come through on a Saturday, so  I would come on Saturdays. And I also took a few classes from OU at  night; methods in teaching and some other classes from OU in order to  have enough credits to finish in 1952.  How did your graduate education at Oklahoma State University help  you in your professional career? Was it important to you? Was it helpful  to you?  It was very helpful, it was knowledgeable. I was able to work with the  parents and be down to earth, not feel that I was a burden to anybody.  And it was helpful in helping me to know how to do a lot of little things  in the community with people like working with the PTA and working  with the different organizations that they had at our church.  So you learned, in addition to the professional and technical expertise  you learned, also     19  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  How to reach out in the community.  And then the certification, having a master   s degree from Oklahoma  State University.  Yes. I met certifications of the State Department of Vocational Home  Economics because I was teaching vocational home economics. And the  NHA was part of it; that   s why I took that class that first summer.  Nancy, why did you want an education so badly? You worked hard to  get this. Segregation, hard times; I mean what was your motivation,  what drove you to get this degree? You had to be truly motivated to do  this.  Well I was motivated through my professors at Langston, I was  motivated through my parents. At Langston University I had a professor  there by the name of Lenouliah Gandy  (a building at Langston is named  in her honor; she was a great inspiration to my life)  who was State  Supervisor of the negro schools always said,    The new young ladies  who are going out to teach learn to work with the families, learn to get  involved, help those children. They don   t know anything, so you   re  going to teach them everything they know. Probably everything that they  learn, they learn it in the classroom.    She was a great motivator in  encouraging me to be ready.  Oh I had a wonderful friend at that time, my husband. He was a very  polite, mannerable young man who would take me out to dinner,  because I wasn   t used to going out to dinner with guys at Langston. I  had a boyfriend there, but going to Langston or going to teach at Dunjee  school, I had this nice wonderful dear man who was very polite, very  intelligent and dignified that I really admired. So he would take me out  to dinner probably once a week. He didn   t have very much money but  we would go to inexpensive cafes and restaurants in the black part of  town. He motivated me to get my master   s because he had to go out of  state to Kansas, Kansas State Teacher   s College, to get his degree. He  was working on an Administrative Certificate. So he got his master   s in  administrations. He became the vice principal at Dunjee school.  So he was a strong encourager for you?  Very much so. And also my godparents who were teachers and lived in  Cushing, Oklahoma. I had my godparents Joe S. Johnson and his wife,  Gretchen Johnson. They encouraged me to get my master   s and told me  to stick with it, don   t give up, it   s going to be hard.  Well looking back, you have remained an advocate for the OSU College  20  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  of Human and Environmental Sciences through the years. I know they   re  proud of you over there. In your opinion, how has the college changed  over the years? And what would you tell prospective students about  going to OSU today?  Well the university   s changed so very much because they have a large  building where they   re teaching foods and nutrition, they   re teaching all  kinds of child development. And they have a nice child development  plant. I just visited there when I came over here February 2,  2009 . The  plant is there and they have all kinds of technologies that they use in  teaching kids and the children are divided into classes as if they were in  high school. They have fashion design and they have a hotel where the  kids will go and prepare food.  Hotel and Restaurant Administration.  They prepare food for banquets and for different kinds of family  reunions. It has just been a turnover of design for home economics and  for the entire college enrollment.  Increased the number of majors and the scope of studies.  Yes, the scope of studies  are important with new technology and  learning experience .  I forgot to ask you earlier, did you take classes in at that time the new  Home Economics West or were you in the older Home Economics East?  I was in the old Home Economics East. I took foods and nutrition in that  particular  building , and I took a class in home preservation of foods  where we did lots of canning, jelly making, preserve making and things  like that. In the foods and nutrition we planned and prepared food for a  family.  So the new Home Economics West wasn   t open at that time?  It wasn   t open.  Looking back at the time you spent at Oklahoma State University, were  there some OSU experiences that stand out in your mind that were  special to you?  There were so many things that were special to me because I had not  been exposed to working with people in a large area of foods and I was  not exposed to being in fashion designing. All the designing we got was  when we made clothing for ourselves. But with fashion designing you  21  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  are making clothing for the stores and department stores. There were lots  of children in the classroom and we had lots of preparation for marriage  and planning for weddings and making garments for weddings. It was a  whole new avenue with the home environmental sciences.  Nancy you experienced discrimination at OSU yet you persevered, do  you feel that your OSU experience and your path that you helped blaze  helped prepare the way for other African American students that  followed you, especially female students?  Yes, I have encouraged lots of them by telling them to come to this  particular school. Be sure to keep their grades up because if your grades  are not up you will not be accepted. And I would tell them to get  prepared for a new day because you will be working with boys as well  as girls. Life had changed for me in my school because I had a friend  and co-worker by the name of Clara Luper who was one that liked to  expose her homeroom students to home economics. So I taught those  guys how to sew and cook and how to make pants and how to make  vests, reversible vests and they had to be in the fashion show. If they  stayed in my classroom, I told them you have to show something that  you   ve done. You can   t just come in and sew and say I made this for me  in the classroom. Boys had to make vests and they had to fashion a pair  of pants.  They also planned and prepared luncheons and dinners.   Now you mentioned Clara Luper?  Yes, Clara Luper was a good friend of mine. I used to go with her  downtown with the sit-in movement. We would open doors at Katz  department store, and at the different restaurants like Anna Maude   s  Cafeteria, Skirvin Tower Hotel, and the living places where they did not  want blacks, we were there. We stopped them from going to places  where they had to go to the back door to eat, restaurants. Opened doors  to restaurants and hotels.  In your opinion, how has the student experience for African American  students here at OSU changed since you were a student?  Well it   s changed because students are now able to get financial aid.  They get help from different organizations giving them scholarships and  they   re getting help from the student organizations, they work together.  They only have a few students, and when I was here they only had one  or two students and then the next summer they had probably about 30  students who came and worked on a master   s degree. Then the next  summer they had a big grove of them who came and were interested in  getting a master   s degree and improving their teaching ability.  We have  had a large percentage of undergraduate enrollment.   22  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  I   d like to visit with you for a while about your teaching career. You  taught home economics for 20 years at Dunjee High School in Choctaw  and then for an additional 23 years at Star Spencer, is that right?  Yes, I taught 20 years in the Choctaw school system, but the school  system for Dunjee School was ended in 1972.  I transferred to Star  Spencer High School in 1968 and taught mixed classes of black and  while students.   Okay, so they merged together?  Merged in 1972.  Can you share some of your teaching experiences with me there at  Dunjee?  Well the teaching experience that I had at Dunjee School was that we  used books and sometimes the books were not new. We had our new  home economics building and we made our own curtains for the home  economics room. We made our clothing and we learned. The teaching  experience was one where the kids had more hands-on activities. When I  went to   Dunjee and Choctaw were the same thing, they were in the  same school system. However, Dunjee School was then annexed to  Oklahoma City schools and were going to Star Spencer High School.  We had plenty of things to work with, each girl with a sewing machine,  maybe sharing one or two girls. And each girl had facilities where they  could cook together as partners. But in Dunjee school I had to give a lot  of demonstrations in order for the kids to learn because we didn   t have  the time, we didn   t have the equipment to work with. We had plenty of  aid things like our overhead projectors to work with at Star Spencer, we  had films to work with in Star Spencer school. Now this is an Oklahoma  City School. It was much better with the equipment and modern  technology.  Speaking of Star Spencer, you taught home economics, but also you  were a child care instructor. Can you tell us what that entailed?  Yes, well I taught child care at Star Spencer the last 10 years of my  teaching experience. We had a nice little building across the street from  the main building. It was in front of the football field. We had a two-room  building. The first room was where I taught the eleventh graders  techniques in teaching and how to make lesson plans and how to prepare  for teaching. They had to learn different songs and nursery rhymes. They  had to learn how to make bulletin boards, they had to learn to prepare  food for the kids  the first year,  in eleventh grade. When they went in  the twelfth grade,  the second year,  it was just a student teaching  23  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  laboratory, they had to put learning into practice. We had to learn on the  job training in the child development lab. The students would become  very important teachers in the second year of teaching. First year they  would learn and then they were put on jobs and had a job opening at a  day care. The children at the home ec department and the child  development department were put on jobs to be assistant teachers or to  be teachers.  So they had some release time from school so they   d have some jobs  away from school and also in school?  Yes, a job at school and a job away from school.  Nancy, were there some students that you remember that were special to  you? Maybe some of them that went on and did something significant in  their lives or really gave back to the community that you remember you  taught and that you felt maybe you made a difference in their lives?  Listen, I meet people from day to day that I have taught   some I have  forgotten and some I remember   who are teachers in school. They tell  about how the child development class, marriage and relations class,  foods class, they talk about the different things that they learned in  sewing class and how it has helped them and their families. They have  also come and told me that they were in charge of child development in  their home child development. Where they   ve helped them; it   s quite  prominent for people who are in low income families and they don   t  have money, the welfare will pay for the children   s training. And these  kids of mine are good teachers, they are good child care teachers, good  seamstresses and they make their living like this and they are students  who can feel that they really have used their talents wisely.  Are there any names that we might know? People who have gone on and  been successful that you   ve taught that come to your mind?  Well the one that comes to my mind would be Wilma Wooten who is a  dress fashion designer and she makes money at her home and she  doesn   t have to go out. Another one is Doris Jean Mukes who is a  designer and makes evening dresses and all kinds of dresses from  evening wear to school wear and she does a nice job and she has lots of  people coming to her for sewing. And also another one by the name of  Oletha Orange. Oletha has lots of grandchildren and she   s made lots of  clothing for her grandchildren.  These parents I have taught they come back to visit me in school and  they visit me in my home, they visit me when we have our home  economics meetings. We have our group leaders who are YHO, Young  24  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Homemakers of Oklahoma. They are parents of mostly preschool  children. They work together with me in presenting fashion shows and  presenting dinners. We made money to take the kids on nice trips out or  around the state and to the zoos and new movies and see Sesame Street  and things like that.  In what ways were you involved with students outside the classroom?  For example, were you a sponsor in charge of student activities? Did  you interact with students outside the classroom as well?  Yes, we interacted with them by, some of the students that we got to  interact with would be those who had finished and they had children in  the preschool. We had a Young Homemakers group who didn   t have too  many blacks that were participating in the Young Homemakers of  Oklahoma, but we had Mrs. Zena DuBois who was the first black state  secretary of the Young Homemakers of Oklahoma. We had Mrs. Audrey  Hanley who was over the fashion show, and we had our teacher aids that  helped us with our fashion show. Joetta Beasley,  my teacher aid,  was a  person who worked with kids and she worked with me in presenting  fashion shows every Christmas. We called it the Christmas Fashion  Show. We   d draw lots of people in the community because they   d love  to see their little ones perform. And model, they could model. And they  could share their pretty clothing that their parents had made or even  bought for them.  What would you tell a young person today who is considering a career  in education? What wisdom would you share with them, and would you  encourage them?  Oh yes, I would urge them to get an education, to be sure to study hard,  work hard. To have good character so people will believe in you, work  in the community and to be a person that would help others in their  organizations like scholarships that are being prepared. Give those  scholarships to some child in the community who is in need. And give of  yourself at the church when the church is having anything. Young  people today sometimes don   t find time to work with other people but I  tell them to take time out and what you give to the world, it comes back.  It was true for you that education made a difference in your life. Do you  think that   s still important for young men and women today?  Education is the key. That   s my motto. Education is the key. If you have  an education and you know people and how to work with them, and you  can reach out and touch others, then you will be much happier and you   ll  be successful in life.  25  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  And would you encourage them to go into a teaching profession, into  education and become a public school teacher?  Well I would encourage them to go into the profession of teaching if  they have the knowledge and the will power to work to help children  because our children today are nervous and upset. We have different  kinds of homes now. Children are not getting the spiritual growth and  we don   t have our Bibles in the school anymore. We don   t have the love  for our country that we should have. And this will be necessary to teach  children as young minds to learn how to respect themselves, their  families, and to respect God first of all and to make something out of  themselves, that they can be somebody.  Nancy, religion and your personal religious faith is obviously very  important to you. Is this something you learned at home, growing up in  your family?  No, my religion is something that I learned at school, in the community,  at church, with my neighbors, and everywhere I go. Because all of the  black people I knew in that day, they always believed that if you live and  you give, it will come back to you. That you should be a person that is  ready to accept criticism if criticism will help you to be a better person  each day. Because nobody   s perfect. And this is our place where no man  is an island. He can   t stand alone.  In those times, when you were having to fight hard to get your education  in higher education, was your personal faith a strong support for you in  those tough times?  Definitely. That   s when I learned to pray every day, to trust God, as my  mother said, not just to trust God when we get in trouble, but trust God  every day. And thank God for all of the good things that you have as  well as the bad days you have because those bad days will make you  have good days if you just trust God and know that he is with you.  I know you   ve been involved on a lot of community activities,  professional organizations, advocacies causes. Can you share some of  these experiences that were especially important to you? You were  talking about some of them earlier   .  Well some of the organizations that I was involved with were the Urban  League and they raise money to give scholarships and have evening  classes for the children. Another one was PKE. We gave scholarships to  the children and gave dinners. Another organization was the NAACP,  we helped the children who were going off on trips and children who  were going downtown with Clara Luper to do their sit-in movement  26  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  where they could get a sandwich or a coke and sit down rather than  stand up, go into the bathroom and use the bathroom without having to  walk a mile to the bus station to the bathroom. These organizations were  helpful because we felt this was good for our state and our whole nation,  that people can look at you and see that you are the type of keen  individual that you are looking for and not look down on you.  Can you share some of your experiences in your early integration  activities? You talked about earlier when you were in Anna Maude   s  Cafeteria and Brown   s, Anthony   s and different places. Are there some  experiences you can share with us? Did you have some unpleasant  experiences as part of that?  Well we had unpleasant experiences because we went to John A.  Brown   s every day and sometimes the kids would just lay out on the  floor and they   d get tired. They would tell them to get up and we would  not get up and they would try to say that they would arrest them but they  wouldn   t arrest them. They arrested Clara Luper. And my husband was  one of those that would always tell me,    Please don   t be a jailbird, I  don   t want my wife being a jailbird, so you follow the rules.    So I  managed not to get arrested, but I was always there with her. And when  it came to doing something that they didn   t like for us to do, we would  sing,    I won   t let nobody turn me around, I won   t let nobody turn me  around. Just keep on walking, keep on stepping, I   m not going to turn  around.    We just sang those songs.  We would go to the Skirvin Tower Hotel. There were lots of hotels that  didn   t want any blacks there. There were people who were there and  working in the kitchen, they wanted for us to get free from having to go  to the black door. They would tell us to keep on going and they would  encourage us. Clara Luper was a person who said she didn   t care. They  said,    Girl, your house is going to get burned down.    And they did try to  burn her house down but some kind of way it didn   t burn. And they  burned the building where we had our meetings. They got all mad and  did a lot of evil things but we didn   t stop. We still built the building back  and we just prayed and asked the Lord to give us strength to build the  building back. So Clara Luper was our leader and we let her do the  talking and we would follow her and follow her advice.  And you didn   t turn around   We did not turn around.  How do you feel about racist relations and how they   ve evolved in  American, say Oklahoma specifically? Are you pleased in the direction  its going and with the changes that have been made?  27  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  I think race relation is fine in Oklahoma. We have lots of people who  will still be different and will not want to be bothered with black people  but we don   t worry about that. We just keep our heads up and keep  going.  Are there still challenges there in racial relations?  There are still challenges, yes.  Nancy, you have truly lived a life of significance. You   ve received  numerous recognitions from state and national organizations, from the  governor and legislature of the state of Oklahoma. I know the OSU  Alumni Association has recognized you with its Distinguished Alumni  Award. There are three different scholarships at OSU in your name,  Nancy Randolph Davis. Also Nancy Randolph Davis day is observed at  OSU one day every year during black awareness week. I mean, wow   Did you name the Nancy Randolph Davis building?  That   s right. And they have a building named after you, excuse me.  There   s the residential life apartment complex that   s been named after  you.  That   s right.  You   ve come a long ways from the days you had to sit out in the hallway.  That   s true.  What do you think about that?  Well I just think we have a lot of Christian people here at OSU that are  good people. I think we have lots of people around from OSU that  would like to stop the progress, but you know I feel the good Lord is  with us and that we are always going to succeed because we trust him.  And the people at OSU are good Christian people, they are people who  are reaching out and they want to help those who are wanting to help  themselves. Those who are not wanting to help themselves they have  their shades on anyway.  Looking back on your life, what accomplishments and recognitions that  you   ve received out of all the recognitions, what   s given you the most  personal satisfaction?  The personal satisfaction that I am a mother   a wife and then a mother.  And then I was a teacher, I was a Sunday school teacher, I was a leader  28  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  in my church. I was a person that began in my community, if anything  came up that I could help with I would help people. If there were homes  that burned down, I was there to help. I had personal satisfaction in  knowing that I could help the aging people   I used to go with the FHA  girls every Saturday and we would have prayer and we would read to the  aging people that were there and would have singing with the aging  people, they enjoyed having young people come in. This was gratifying  to me. And it has really helped because in my lifetime, I have been in a  very serious car accident and I stayed in the hospital for seven months  and the good Lord just saw me through that. I   ve had both of my legs  operated on for knee operations and I   ve come through that and I said  the Lord must be keeping you here for a good purpose.  Still got something in mind for you, right Nancy?  Mm-hmm.  He   s not through with you yet.  And I   m still getting honors from my church, and my church will be  honoring me on the 27th. The  Department of   Human Services, they are  honoring me on the 27th morning. So I feel this is just something that the  Lord wants me to enjoy while I   m alive. Like Langston University  honored me today at the 11 o   clock honoring ceremony.  Here about a month ago the Oklahoma Human   .  Human Service Department in Oklahoma City. It   s going to be at a  Baptist church on the 27th. And on that night my church is having an  honorary service for me at 7 o   clock and having a play depicting Nancy  Davis at OSU as the first African American.  And the Human Rights Commission just honored you here about a  month ago, is that correct?  Yes, they did also. And then the Governor of Oklahoma, he was the one  who appointed me as a lay member on the State Board of Nursing.  A first lay member as I recall, is that right?  Mm-hmm. First lay member of the nursing board.  Just accolades abound.  I have plenty of them. And the people in the Young Homemakers of  America, my Plant a Garden and Savings Club, I shouldn   t forget get  29  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  Davis  Gill  them. They have wanted me at their club which is the oldest club in  Oklahoma City. They were organized in 1944. And they   re a club that  Clara Luper was president of and Ida Coleman was president of. And  they   re honoring me. I get honors every time I turn around.  Well Nancy what values have been most important to you that you tried  to impart in students that you talked to and people you   ve come in  contact with over the years?  Well some of the values are that we should always remember to put God  first in our life. Try to help others, reach out and help others who are  sick and down and are inflicted. Help the children who are orphans   so  many times they are overlooked   and to encourage children to go to  college. The scholarships program, in working with my sorority, we  reach out and we give over  10,000 in negro scholarships. The top  ladies, I think you remember, they invited you for when they honored  me as one of the top ladies in 2002. So many organizations that I can   t  remember all of them. Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, they honored me.  And Zeta Phi Beta sorority has honored me, and my sorority has  honored me just a number of times as the most outstanding soror in my  chapter when there   s about 220 of us.  Well how do you hope people will remember Nancy Randolph Davis?  Looking back in your life, how do you hope they will remember you and  what do you want them to remember you for?  I just want them to remember me as a person who was reaching out  trying to help others and helping myself. Remember me as a person who  was an educated leader. That I was the leader but that they were just as  important as I was.  Nancy is there anything else we haven   t covered or is there anything  that you would like to share with us that we haven   t talked about?  I think we   ve covered about everything.  Well thank you     -------  -------   
