 Finchum. We   re here with James Lovell for O-STATE  Stories. It   s October 20, 2006, and we   re at the OSU Foundation   and  do you want to say your name so we   ll have your voice     My official name is James F. Lovell. I normally go by Jim.  ...and you   re the Class of     Class of    56   1956.  Okay, so you attended here 1952 through    56 nonstop?  That   s correct.     and you   re from what part of Oklahoma?  I grew up in a small town south of Marshall, Oklahoma, called Lovell,  Oklahoma. Lovell schools had to consolidate and we went to high  school then at Marshall High School.     and why did you pick OSU as your college of choice?  No member of my family had ever gone to college. In fact, a good  number of them did not go through high school. In high school, a person  who had gone to Oklahoma A M College by the name of Raymond  Brice, who is still alive at 95 or 96   and I have dedicated myself to be  as much as I could like him   and he suggested, based on his thought or  observations of myself, that I might be worthy of being a college  student. I knew there was no way in the world that I could go to college.  We just didn   t have the money or the background. Neither my Mother or  Father had graduated from high school, but they were reared during the  Depression. He asked me one day after a football game if I might like to  5  Finchum  Lovell  go and visit Oklahoma A M College, and I thought that would be fun.  So we came over here in the fall of 1951, and it was, you know, great.  He had graduated in Agriculture with honors and was well known. He  was a livestock-oriented person and was pretty well known for his cattle.  One of the stops we made was to go to the Dean of Agriculture   s office,  and he says,    I don   t think he will know me, but we knew each other  when we were in college,    and this fellow was the Dean of Agriculture,  so he said,    Let me see if we can get in.    So he went and, before he even  had a chance to introduce himself, the Dean of Agriculture comes out of  his office and says,    Hello Raymond Brice.    And so he clarified to him  that he thought he would be interested to see if there might be jobs, as  there were twenty or thirty years ago at the Ag Farms. He said well,  we   d really come a little bit late because they   re probably pretty well  now committed. But he said,    We could put your name on a waiting  list,    because usually five to ten percent of about thirty or forty boys that  you hire each year as freshmen do not show up. I knew I   d be way down  on the list so I figured my chances were nil. So one week before high  school was over, I got a telephone call that said there was a position  open. I didn   t ask where it was or what it was because I knew it was a  chance of a lifetime.  At that time, you had to sign a contract for one year to be there every  day unless they excused you. My job, being a freshman, would be to  take what was probably the poorest of the jobs because when you   re a  sophomore, you go up the line. My job was to clean ten hog  experimental feeding pens and scrape all the manure each day and feed  them each day and be sure they were healthy. And every Saturday we,  there were three of us, mixed all the feed for the entire swine barn.  During farrowing season, you cut the teeth and castrated them, and at  that time they did not have running water down to the sows pasture. So  the other two boys were responsible for watering them. And each  evening when they came back from school they got a mule, known as  Judy, and three or four big fifty-gallon tanks and filled them up and took  the buckets down and watered pigs    every day. In the summer, we had  a little bit more free time and took more water. They did that and I, at  that time, cleaned the experimental pens, and that   s how I worked my  way through school.  All four years or just that     Just that first year. Dr. Jim Hillier, who was well known, was our  advisor and came quite often. We three lived in a one-room with no  eating facilities. We had two double bunk beds and the other one we  threw our books on. So two of us lived upstairs and one lived  downstairs, and we had a small sink. It was tough going to college.  6  Finchum  Lovell  When I took English, the only thing they taught us was Shakespeare. I  didn   t even know that English meant writing. We   d never had any  writing experience, so it was extremely tough   real tough. One thing I  remember, on reflection, was on certain occasions, no matter how much  you tried to clean up, there was probably a little odor from working at  the swine barn, and every now and then people would look a little  strange. And there wasn   t much I could say or do, but you just went  ahead and     One point I want to make though about that first summer, I   m not certain  it was the first summer it could have been the second, I took classes on  campus of course. And the first summer they were building the OSU  Library     We were going to ask about that.     and I just marveled at that. I   d never seen anything like it. They had  what was the equivalent of little wheelbarrows, but instead of having  handles, they were motorized. They contained just about as much  cement as a wheelbarrow would but you   re building a big building. The  cement truck came to the north side, the road just behind the library, and  there would be lined up twenty plus little motorized units. The first floor  had already been paved without any big fanfare. They had wooden  boards, probably two inch by sixteen or eighteen inches, and two of  them, so that the motorized concrete wagon could putt-putt up this. As  you went to the second floor, it was the days before what we have today  where you have these big long cranes that will go up three and four  floors and just pump it in there, they would go up like the entire width of  the building. These planks were put up, and then they would have a  circle and they   d come back up and weave back and forth to the second  floor. Then they went to the third floor. All summer long, every day,  even the noise   you just couldn   t keep it all out. Each time you met,  three days a week, you saw the progress that they made    all summer.  And I thought,  My goodness what a modern invention we were seeing.   Nothing like it in the world. Motorized concrete wagons. (Laughs) And  we thought, boy this place is high-tech. And then they put the water  fountain in front and it bubbled and all that. And all the time we were  there, there was not much mischief about dumping water in there, but  later on I understood it got that way. So that was my first year, and it  was tough.  I grew up on a dairy farm and my Dad really wanted me to stay home  and milk cows. We milked about forty cows. But when it came my  senior year, they were to let me off for the four- or five-day senior trip.  He   d find somebody. Even with two weeks to go, he said,    I   ll find  somebody.    And it got to the day before and he still hadn   t found  7  anybody, so I didn   t get to go on the senior trip. And that day I made a  vow that if I ever had a chance to go to college, I was going to go. So  that   s what I did. My father paid me twenty-five dollars a month to go,  to help expenses here, and it was tough. And when I came home for  Thanksgiving, which would be three months, he said,    I just can   t afford  it anymore.    Well, I knew that he really could. He was just trying to get  me to come back. I said,    Well, I   ll just find another job.    And that   s  what I did. I found a job as a custodian and worked. You could work any  time from 5:00 to 8:00 in the morning, just have it cleaned, that   s the  only thing. So I did that and when I came back home for Christmas he  had decided that he could afford to buy a milk machine. So that   s where  we got off    that   s strange   but Raymond Brice had helped me get a  job on campus.  So I came and in the first year I had a chance to move up to the steer  shed feeding. All you had to do was feed steers hay and grain, and it  could be done in less than an hour. There was no manure to pick up, and  so you were really a pretty clean-cut fellow by your sophomore year,  and I liked that. In the summer of 1953, it was a year-round job, a friend  came up to me in class and said,    I need to go on a double date with a  young lady and she said that she doesn   t know me that well and so she   d  like a double date. Would you be interested?    Well, I didn   t have a car.  It rained a lot on the summer weekends it seemed like, so I said,    Sure.     So we went on this double date and when it was over, we went out to the  park, the park right down the way here, and had a nice chat and swang in  the swings and things like that. I said to myself,    This guy   s got a real  quality lady here. I mean a quality lady,    so I thought,    I   ll just play it  coy because I   m certain they   re probably dating steady.     But I never saw him with her. So after about three weeks I decided to  ask him how I could get any space with her and he said,    Oh, I just date  one girl, maybe once or maximum twice, and then just go on.    And I  said,    Well, if you   re not dating this girl, I think I   ll ask her out.    So I  call and find out that she would go out with me. I also found out that she  had come here as a freshman and was working at telephone operations  on campus and had been monitoring my telephone calls. The good thing  is I was an honest fellow, so we started dating. And we oftentimes met  in the library because I didn   t have a vehicle. It got real serious, and she  was the valedictorian of her class and I just graduated in my class. So we  went from the fall of 1953 to the spring of 1954.  At that time, I was an Ag major. A lot of Ag publicity came out from  Oklahoma A M through a person by the name of Clay Potts. He was a  strong supporter of OAMC, and he had barbeque dinners all over the  state. I would say in that time there was probably no farmer or  agriculture-oriented person that wouldn   t have known him. He passed  8  away at a football game where, I   m certain, he would have wanted.  I heard about a new job and the requirements were that you had to be a  graduate student and be married. I could hardly afford myself, let alone  two, but I heard about it and I said I had nothing to lose so I decided  we   d just keep dating. If we get this job, it gave us a one bedroom, one  living room, one kitchen, and we would work out here on Sixth Street at  what is the Vo-tech center now. In those days, it was called the  Oklahoma A M College or Course Center where they had a lot of  meetings. They had three or four large halls and needed somebody to  clean it up in the evenings. And part of the meeting might fall in the  morning, and your responsibility was to keep those three buildings     rooms cleaned. I asked for an interview and he said,    Well, you can  come, but,    he says,    I   ve never hired anybody but a graduate student. I  just don   t hire them. I have to have dependability.    So I said,    Well, I   d  like a shot at it.    So he said,    Come in.    We go in and sit down, and the  interview went well. I thought maybe he was just being courteous, and I  understand, but then as we got ready to leave he turned and he said,    I  want you to know one thing. Your fianc  e   s hair is exactly the same  color as my fianc  e   s hair was when I first met her.    So we left there  thinking there might be an outside chance. And in less than a week, he  called and said,    If you can be married by June 1st, the job   s yours. But  you have to be married.    And that   s what we were waiting for, so we got  married at our home church and came back to school.  We both graduated in 1956. I was on the Air Force Drill Team. My  sophomore year, a good friend of mine from high school was a  FarmHouse member. I knew what the FarmHouse did for him, so I  applied to work there. And I worked then at the building directly west of  the library, a wooden building called State Vo-tech Center   or the Lag  Center. It was a white, wooden building right along the street and just a  little bit to the west and north of Whitehurst Hall. Mr. Perky, a man of  great power and influence, interviewed several and he liked to say,     Alright, I   ll tell you this job is yours on the following basis. Sometime  between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. every day, you come in here, sweep the  floors, empty every wastepaper basket, and I want that water fountain  sparkling. And then one weekend a month, you come in here and wax  the floors.    And we did that. And it worked out great. And that   s what I  did for the additional job. So we get married and live out there, and he  was kind. Whenever there was a meal, if there was any food left over, he  put it in our little refrigerator, whatever it was. He was like a father to a  young boy.  I get in advanced ROTC  Reserve Officer Training Corps  and thought  that   s where I would be. I go off to summer camp and get a choice place  to go. In the trial runs they find that I am color blind to about three or  9  four colors out of a hundred, or maybe it   s seven. You couldn   t miss  over three. I remember the famous halfback here at A M at that time,  and he was quite good. When he went out on passes, he sometimes  dropped them or didn   t quite get them. He was in the Air Force ROTC.  We went to Vance Air Base for our inspection and he learns that he   s  slightly cross-eyed. That   s the reason he was missing those passes. They  never caught it. So they worked on that technique, and the next year he  became a highly successful halfback. But in my case, they said you can  only miss four. Now, the commandant   that was a tough guy   he said,     The only way not to have to take these tests is to pull a 3.5 average or  be an Engineering major.    Well, I was neither. So then he gently pulled  out of his drawer a little pad that had all of the hundred colors. He says,     It just so happens I have one of these.    And he says,    You   re a good  student.    He said,    I   ve got seven of them marked.    He said,    You  might want to study and go take the test.    We were married and we  came home and talked about it. If those colors are that important,  someday I would run into them but we decided we would and we  enjoyed it.  I   d like for the world to know there were some great teachers here. One  of them was a Mr. Johnson in Chemistry. Chemistry is a tough course,  but he made it interesting. Class would have 100-150 in it, but oh, he  was a teacher that really   you could learn. Another was a Dr. Dugger  that came from Texas, and he became a guiding light. I became an  officer in the Ag Ed Club, and he was a major influence in my life.  There was a Dr. Reed in Soils, and he was an excellent teacher. There  were others. Mr. Clay Potts was well known and you could count on  whatever he said.  In the sophomore year I pledged FarmHouse  fraternity  and it was a  great experience   honorable young men, clean cut, and we still see each  other some to this day. The following spring then I was made a member,  and for some reason I was chosen as the social chairman. I couldn   t ever  figure that out, but I did know a few ladies.  We get married. She   s majoring in Home Economics. She makes  straight As   has all kinds of awards. Our parents both tell us,    You   re  going to have to make it on your own. We will not provide you any  money.       I understood. I thought maybe they might give a little. I  knew Dad wouldn   t. I knew her Dad might, but when it came to it, he  said,    Now, Jim, there   s one thing. You   re on your own.    About six  weeks after we were married, we decided we   d drive from here back to  Weatherford. We suddenly realized that not many of the service stations  were open on Sunday, and when I got there I didn   t have enough gas to  get back so I humbly asked if I could drain some gasoline. So we go  down to the farm gas pump, and we pump in five gallons, and he turns to  10  me and he says,    That will be  1.25,    (Laughs) and so I came up with   1.25, but I never forgot to fill up when I was in Stillwater before I went  again. But he was a great man and a great teacher, and those are just  some of the funny highlights.  I enjoyed my Air Force ROTC. I really thought I   d be a jet pilot. I even  had a chance to fly some jets while I was there, but it didn   t turn out. So  we come back and decide we   ll both go out and practice teaching at the  same time. They made assignments to us at Fairview. We went there and  we taught. I taught under a Claxton Cook, who later comes to Oklahoma  A M as a professor and stays here many years. And he taught me two  or three little simple things that he says, like,    When you   re young,  you   re like a little duck. You don   t want to be in a big pond. You want  to be in a small pond and learn the ropes.    So I took that to heart. But  before our practice teaching finished, the Lag teacher took a job in  Texas, so there was an opening in the panhandle of Oklahoma. They  were desperate for people to look into it, and I knew western Oklahoma  has honorable people because she  his wife  lived there and I   d been  there. So I go out there and interview at a town called Hardesty. It   s just  about fifteen miles east of Guymon, and Panhandle State is there. So I  go out there and interview and they said anyone of these five that had  made application that this would be your second eight weeks of teaching  supervision except you do the teaching. Then we   ll come and see you,  and that   s what it was. That   s what I finished at. And so Jan went to  Panhandle State the second semester and then comes back in the  summer.  All   s going well, but at the end of the second year there we learned that  in our home county of Logan County, Oklahoma   Guthrie   that in  those days they had drafts and numbers, and there were three members  on the draft board and those three fellows had sons and the FBI came in  and charged them with falsification where their sons would not have to  go into the service. The federal judge   s report was that every person  born in the county of Logan County would have to go into the service.  My entire school board came down on my behalf trying to keep me  there, but he says,    It   s a federal ruling. I can   t.    So I had to go off to the  service. So I did that, but in some ways it   s probably a blessing.  When we finished, we had saved all of her money which was  2,400 a  year, and we decided to go back to graduate school. I have a love for the  environment, so I went back and majored in Ecology, and we went to  Kansas State  University . We took her money for a down payment and  went there, and we had one child while I was in the service, actually just  before I went into the service, and we have three other children. We  came back and I went to Kansas State  University  and I majored in  Ecology. In those days, we said Ecology   when people asked, I said,     It   s Ecology spelled with one    l    and pollution spelled with two,    and  11  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  that   s the way we sort of felt      If it   s one    l, it   s good. If it   s two    l   s,  it   s hell.    So it was a great experience. I worked under a great person.  You may not know it, but the Konza Prairie  in Kansas , which is now a  national grassland reserve in the Flint Hills  in Kansas  was under the  supervision of my graduate advisor, and he was a Quaker and he taught  me a lot about Quakers and what they do.  I   d go on and on, but we gave birth to a son, Ralph, and then later a son,  Randall, and later a daughter, Rhonda, and a daughter, Diane. I never  once tried to influence my sons, but both of them decided to come to  Oklahoma State. Both of them went through FarmHouse. Both of them  were top ten students in the yearbook. One now is a toxicologist and  works for the federal government and is in charge of   primarily for the  mad cow disease in this country. And so we   re proud of him, but we   re  proud of all   our daughter is a lawyer and our other daughter is a  history professor at Houston Baptist College University. So we feel that  we   ve been very fortunate. Just a humble beginning   I never dreamed in  my wildest dream that any of this would happen, but FarmHouse was a  big part of it.  Oh, and I worked on my master   s degree while I was at   in the  Panhandle, and Robert Price was the head of the Ag Ed Department.  He   s passed away but his record is almost untouchable, and he was my  advisor and came out and provided me words of encouragement during  those days, and I owe a lot to him. A very fine person. That   s probably  the highlights. Dr. Dugger eventually left his position here at Ag Ed and  went with Senator Kerr and was on his staff, and he made a lot of  decisions which related to the Houston Aerospace Center   and he was a  major influence. What I learned later was he had married a friend of  President Johnson   s, and Roy, having grown up in that area, was a  peanut farmer, and it helped, but he was a gentleman. So a lot of fine  people were here, but I   ll do the highlights of what I recall. FarmHouse  was a big influence for me.     During homecoming did the FarmHouse do decorations?  Yes, and I know we won one of the two years, and our song was This  Old House. This old house ain   t got no   probably before your time. It  was   it was a hit song then and so we did that. This Old House. This old  house ain   t got no windows, this old house ain   t got no doors, that   s  what I remember   but we participated every year that I was there and  before they had always been first in academics. And there were some  real sharp kids there, but   it was just an unbelievable experience to be  there.  The Student Union was being built at about the same time as the library,  12  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  too? And I understand they had dances there.  I remember that. That brings up a fine point. I   d never done anything but  square dancing in our small town, so I come over here and, you know,  you   re lonely and you hardly know anybody in summer school. You   re  just out here sort of on your own. So I go up to the student union and  they had that little third floor dance   I learned to jitterbug. (Laughs) I  was good at it for about a year, but then without practice it sort of went  away, but   oh I wrote back to my mother. My mother and father, of  course, were separated   and I told her I was jitterbugging and then I  added at the bottom of it, it says,    Mother, I did this because whenever  you   re real happy, you do the Charleston.    And my mother could do the  Charleston, and she was a fine lady.     and most of the time your life was only good for about ten years  because of the hours you spent in the water with the irrigation, but we  have been gone from there plus fifty years, or right at fifty years, and we  still have four families   at Christmas time, because you bond there.  They were fine people, and they still are.  Well, speaking of bonding, I notice here at OSU there   s always that  strong connection with OSU. What is it about OSU that inspires such  rich bonds or such passion   when you step on campus, and you can feel  it.  I never dreamed in my wildest dream that I could get a college degree at  that time. No one had ever done it. You come from a poor family. You  have no basis from which to weigh it, but Raymond Brice gave me that  chance.     life altering opportunity, a chance of a lifetime     Right. So after I retired, I identified five people that were very  inspirational in my life and I wrote each of them a letter and I visited  with each of them because I wanted them to know.  Where did you have most of your classes?  Williams  Hall , and I still have my freshman beanie.  I saw that in the yearbook and somebody said,    No they didn   t have  those,    and I said,    Yes, they did.    (Laughs)  I still have my freshman beanie.  Do you have one, too?  question asked to Mrs. Janis Lovell   13  J. Lovell  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell   Janis Lovell joins interview   I do not have one.  Jan was red-headed, and when you got out in the sun at football games,  and we always sat on the north side so you got a lot of sun. She would  freckle a little bit, so we had to get a little shade screen that we put over  it at a couple of those games, but     Were there other unit or Homecoming traditions that you remember that  we still have today? Walk Around, did you have it then?  I don   t remember the Walk Arounds. They might have, but I know the  fraternities and sororities were quite involved and the FarmHouse was  on the north side by itself, but the sororities were very supportive of  FarmHouse. We had almost no drinking at all. There were one or two,  and they would be somewhat discussed and encouraged or given  assignments. If it got real bad, we   d take them on a   what we called a  walk   take them out somewhere twenty or twenty-five miles  blindfolded and tell them to get home. And one of those guys I   ll meet  again tonight. (Laughs) But   there was a little bit, but not near what I  saw elsewhere. But Raymond provided my exposure to college, and I  wasn   t certain that I could make it, but when we ran tests, it showed that  I really had potential. I just hadn   t been encouraged, but my mother was  a very fine lady. When my dad and mother separated, she had no choice  but to look for work. World War II had broken out and so she left for a  day or two and we didn   t think anything about it. She comes back home  and says,    We   re going to a bigger town in Kansas called Wichita,    and  she goes, and she becomes one of the 300 women that were hired each  week during that time to build the B-24s, and she   d been there about     everyone had an entrance test, and two to three weeks later she gets a  notification to come to the office and she thought she probably was to be  fired, she probably hadn   t done well. She did not graduate from high  school, but in that class of 300 she was in the top thirty, and they asked  then if she would be interested in being trained as a blueprint supervisor     supervise every   wiring the electricity in each of these plants and  then your stamp of approval would go on there, and what it would mean  is you   d take six weeks of training and we   ll give you fifty cents more  an hour. She says,    I don   t care what it is. If it   s fifty cents more an  hour, I   m ready.    And I still have her shoulder badge, and we   re  building a museum at Weatherford and that will be on display.  How long did she work there?  She worked there during the entire war and then married a soldier who  had come back.  14  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  She   s a true Rosie the Riveter  A true Rosie the Riveter and she was quite proud of it.  It sounds like you came from good stock     I did come from good stock. Jan comes from tremendous stock.  And you have passed it on.  We sure hope so. We   ll kiddingly say that our second son is a  toxicologist, PhD toxicologist in veterinarian medicine, and there   s only  less than fifty of them in the country. That   s one reason he was hired to  be the   in charge of the mad cow disease. He has four children. They   re  in a high school of about 700. The two oldest girls of his were both top  of the class, and their son, their first son, is now senior class president  and will probably be number one in the class.  Do you think they   ll come to OSU?  I think they are probably not because they   ve been in West Virginia for  so long. A year ago last   this last Christmas they had that basketball  classic. OSU plays a team and OU  University of Oklahoma  plays a  team. Well, OU played West Virginia so that entire group came here to  play. In the first five or six minutes, OU was leading 13 to 7. Before the  next five minutes was over, West Virginia was slightly in the lead, and  that was OU   s first loss. And I mean   you talk about big-time victory      We cheered for two reasons. One that OU got beat (Laughs) and,  secondly, that West Virginia won. But I don   t   I don   t think we   ll get  them out of West Virginia. They   they might.  Well, maybe one out of the four     But they   at least two of the four will go on to graduate school, I   m  sure. But, you know, it   s one of those things. Our other oldest son has  two children, and the oldest girl is a freshman on the Texas Tech  University soccer team. That   s where we are. And the other   our  daughter has two daughters, and they   re both in college. And our  youngest one has two children, one boy and one girl, and she   s married  to a very successful lawyer. So, in my wildest dream I would never   I  couldn   t have written a story like this, but Raymond Brice was the  catalyst and he was from OAMC. He said,    Let   s give it a try.    I would  never have been here otherwise. It   s just   that   s just why. And so when  I saw that e-mail, Jan encouraged me to come.  15  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Finchum  Lovell  Well, we appreciate that     Well, Clay Potts was the big factor that helped us.  His name has come up several times   today already     Oh, there were two other professors in Animal Husbandry, Dr.  Todd       I tried out for the junior livestock team, never having been on  a judging team, but I knew I was fairly good. The only thing that kept  me alive the junior year was, even though I never judged horses, I  always beat everybody on the horses, but then the sheep and the cattle  and stuff   I was way, way off. (Laughs) But he was a great teacher.  And then there was a Dr. Nelson who went to New Mexico State as their  chair. And Dr. Polk who went from here to Texas A M. They were all  great teachers   very fine teachers. But Chemistry I thought would be a  problem, but that Dr. Johnson was just   he teaches like,    If you   ll study,  it   s there.    And sure enough it would be. So that   s   you know     And you still had time to go to football games     But   I mean my start is the result of having the chance to come here. In  those days, one of   that guy asked me if   maybe one out of three, four  or five students, male students, would have a car. If a woman had a car,  it meant one thing. She   s either real wild or her parents have money  because there weren   t many girls that had cars. And I mean today, if you  don   t have at least one car, you   re a nobody. If you don   t have two cell  phones, you   re a nobody. In those days, we didn   t have cell phones, but  I   ve been at a few of these college conventions that are at the student  union   they go up and down that hall, every other one is talking to  somebody, so it   s a world that   s really changed. And the computers are  great. I appreciate your time in listening. I thought we were going to just  talk about OSU, but I appreciate the honor to do this other.  We appreciate you   for your story     Well   we   we do it partly because it   s something we can pass on to the  kids, grandkids.  We   d better get you out of here. It   s time for you to get off to your next  person     I appreciate it.  -------  -------   
