 Finchum Today is August 2, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I am with Oklahoma State University, and today, I am in Harper County, the town of Laverne, to interview Wayne Sizelove. This is part of our Cowboys in Every County, so thank you for having me today. Let   s start with learning when and where you were born.  Sizelove I was born in Woodward  Oklahoma  1947, June 29. Our residence was in eastern Beaver County, west of Laverne, between Slapout and Gate.  Finchum I know where Slapout is, (laughs) stopped for a photo there. You were born in a hospital or at home?  Sizelove At a hospital.  Finchum Have brothers and sisters?  Sizelove There   s four of us, all living. Two older brothers, a younger sister, and a younger brother, so I   m the middle of five kids.  Finchum Okay, and what did your parents do for a living?  Sizelove Ranch. I was going to say something cute like    poor ranchers,    or something but my dad had cow-calves, yeah. He was with his dad. They would   ve moved here from Illinois in the   I don   t know the date, but it would   ve been in the late nineteenth century.  Finchum Part of the land runs? Around in there?  Sizelove Um-hmm and settled in the Gate-Laverne area, and went through the Depression years, and my dad was a 1919. My mother was in    23, I think, but she was raised here, so they   re both native. This is the native home for me. 5  Finchum Is the farm still in the family?  Sizelove It is. I think my grandad probably lost a farm or two, went broke (laughs) probably early there, lost part of it. The ranch is in eastern Beaver County, and that   s supported two or three families, yeah.  Finchum I wonder, is it a centennial farm then, if it can go back that far?  Sizelove I   m not aware that anybody   s made any effort to make it a centennial. It might be.  Finchum It just has to be in the same family for the hundred years.  Sizelove Well, would be three generations for   probably, yeah. I don   t think anybody   s   . (Laughter)  Finchum Well, what was his last name, your grandfather? Was it Sizelove, your father   s side?  Sizelove Frank Sizelove, then my dad they called    Billy    was Ivo, Ivo Leon, and then there was four of us boys, and the younger brother   s on the ranch.  Finchum Okay, and it probably does then, if someone has been there that long.  Sizelove Yeah, he   s   the youngest is on the ranch.  Finchum And what was your mother   s name?  Sizelove Mary, Mary Alma. She was born in North Dakota. Her dad was in meat inspection. Actually, they were Kansans, he was a K-State graduate. I guess while we talk about him, he was a genuine K-State graduate, on the football team and several things. Then came to this country, bought hogs, and shipped them to California, and elsewhere, and then he got started in farming. He was the first, probably, person in this area to irrigate.  Finchum And what was his name?  Sizelove Jacob, J.C. Holmes.  Finchum H-o-l-m-e-s?  Sizelove Yeah, and he was involved in conservation. He was on the Soil Conservation, very involved in that early years. I   d say he was a conservationist probably, but he was just a farmer. He kind of did things, to me, backwards but made money. (Laughter) Alfalfa, raised a lot of alfalfa. 6  Finchum Oh, he was the first in the family to go to college then?  Sizelove He would have been.  Finchum Probably?  Sizelove Yeah. On the Sizelove side, there wasn   t any college graduates until my generation.  Finchum Education was still important for the family?  Sizelove Yeah, my mother didn   t go to college. She married my dad when she was young. All of my family are college graduates, my siblings. Julia   s siblings are all college graduates. I was going to say two brothers are OSU graduates. Two of them are Panhandle graduates. She has a brother that   s OSU. Yeah, so we have about   sometimes, I don   t know how you would   as far as how many generations are, how distant you would go, but if you included all of Julia and I   s, I call immediate family, which would be nephews, brothers, and sisters, our kids, and our nieces, and nephews. That   s probably, and some of us have more than one degree, I bet there   s over thirty OSU degrees, if that   s important to the discussion.  Finchum Wow. Yeah, that is important. Blood runs orange for sure then in the family.  Sizelove Pretty much.  Finchum Your neighbor I noticed had OU. (Laughs) A little friendly rivalry there?  Sizelove They   re just football fans.  Finchum That   s okay. So where did you go to elementary school?  Sizelove Laverne.  Finchum Grades one through   .  Sizelove Forever. (Laughter) We all went to Laverne.  Finchum Were all twelve grades in one building?  Sizelove No. We had a grade school and then a junior high and high school. When I was in   we built a   Laverne had pretty good financial support because of, beginning with the oil activity, energy activity, beginning in the    50s, had some funding, and we had good facilities. It   s a very large district, maybe second only to Boise City   s district. Early days, most of the kids were 7  country, rode the school bus. Not so much, I don   t think, anymore but my parents were both Laverne graduates, and all of our family is Laverne graduates, if that was the question.  Finchum And what year did you graduate from high school?  Sizelove Sixty-five.  Finchum And the elementary school was just called Laverne Elementary? Didn   t have a     Sizelove No     Finchum    not another name?  Sizelove The only name that stuck to the school is the football stadium is Kilmer. He was our football coach. (Laughs) Oh, I didn   t finish. When I was in the seventh or eighth grade, we moved into this new high school, and that was a big deal.  Finchum Well, how far was the school from your home?  Sizelove Well, seventeen miles. We   ll call it sixteen-seventeen and a half.  Finchum So you rode a bus?  Sizelove We rode a school bus, and see, it picked up kids, went fairly deep in Beaver County, well past Slapout to Logan. Some of those kids got on five thirty, six in the morning. That may not be quite   but we spent time on the bus, and that was a part of our experience.  Finchum Well, did you have to do your chores before you got on the bus?  Sizelove In our   traditionally, my dad didn   t ask us to get up and chore before we went to school, but I did plenty after I got home.  Finchum What were some of the things he had you do?  Sizelove Oh, we   d milk cows, and separate the milk, and the early days, we   d bring cream to town and sell it. We had milk, and eggs, and literally we   d slop the hogs with the extra milk. Then we   d raise bucket calves, but we always had some hogs, and of course the cows. I can   now, we moved from the hand milking to   we had machine milking, I   d say from the time I was in the fifth or sixth grade up. Then the milking cows become a burden. I don   t know, maybe they got enough oil leases or something that the finances were better but   . 8  Finchum So he had mineral rights along the way?  Sizelove Yeah, there was a lot of people that got a lot of good out of early leases and damages, as much as from the actual production, a lot of our family. And that helped people. Not even to the extent that we saw this last decade, where it got so wild, but yeah. All we have here is the energy production, and ranching, and some farming. We   re just on the edge of   there   s areas that have very high, productive land, but most of the irrigation is just a little bit north and a little bit west. With response, we have irrigation.  Finchum Well, if he had his own hogs, would you butcher in the fall for the family?  Sizelove Sure. I don   t know that it   s just   well, I bet we did do it in the fall or winter. Neighbors would come. That was back in the years when your neighbors helped you do a lot of it, and then you helped them, but we did our own. We killed our own beef and hogs, yeah.  Finchum Did you have a freezer, or was it in town?  Sizelove Well, we had a freezer. What I remember is we   d butcher, and let it hang there, and then we   d haul it, the half of beef or so, to the grocery here. The butcher there at the grocery would cut it up for us. Now that would be entirely   that   s not legal today. That couldn   t happen, but we did kill it, and skin it, and gut it, and everything. I never   I was just   I watched. I never really     Finchum And it was just a way of life, too.  Sizelove It was. We had   it was always good to have fresh side meat, that would be kind of a bacon.  Finchum Have a smokehouse?  Sizelove No, didn   t do any of that. Our family, Julia   s family was big in gardens. Our family wasn   t too big in gardens. We had some garden but as far as milk, butter, cottage cheese, we even made a little soap, I remember. Beef and hogs, that   d come   we probably had our hands on most of those before they were   .  Finchum What about chickens?  Sizelove Oh yeah, chickens, sure. One of the things they did, my grandmother, my dad   s mom   see, they were there, and so you had your grandparents next door, and that would be important, that kinship relationship with your grandparents right there. She pushed the cheese, and the butter, and the 9  making lye soap, but she was there during all of those early years, and they were influential in our upbringing.  Finchum Did they get to discipline you, or was that your parents?  Sizelove Oh, I don   t remember them ever     Finchum You didn   t get in trouble? (Laughter)  Sizelove That   s where you   d run and hide. They were people, both grandparents were people that were born in the   70s, 1870s, and   . Although my mother, she was raised in town. They were in town, and they had indoor plumbing. When she married my dad, and went from their home in town to go to the ranch, where there wasn   t electricity, there wasn   t indoor plumbing, she kind of stepped back to the   and she started our family. Electricity didn   t come to, I think it would have been in the late   40s, early   50s. Telephones come in, I can remember that, in the probably late   50s, early   60s.  Finchum Party lines?  Sizelove Well, before then, we had the old   I   m talking about a real dial phone, but yeah, we had the   before that, we had the phone where our number was short, long, and two shorts.  Finchum You could listen in. (Laughs)  Sizelove Oh yeah   Finchum Were both sets of grandparents nearby?  Sizelove My mother   s parents were here in Laverne. The trip back and forth seventeen miles was a big deal. You needed a good reason to make the trip, and then even though gas was twenty-five cents or something. We had aunts and uncles, and family, and grandparents in town, so when we had school activities, we oftentimes just   I don   t know whether we invited or not, but that   s (laughs)    we    But then as my older brother says,    As you get in high school, you got to play ball.    You had to be able to get back and forth from practices, so as they got in school, they had their cars. You had all of those experiences with whatever happens with boys and cars. Before I got my license, I had to get to town to practice, and I didn   t have my license. Well, the city cop, he knew exactly how old I was, and so I was on the edge of town, just barely in town, and he got me. (Laughs)  Finchum Just one time? Is that all it took? (Laughs)  10  Sizelove Well, I don   t know what I did after that, but that was before school practice. I don   t know, I guess we worked something else out, but he knew. He probably knew my birthday, too. (Laughs)  Finchum What did you play, all of the sports?  Sizelove Well, I went out for all of the sports, and band, FFA. In small town Laverne, lot of kids did everything.  Finchum So you played baseball, basketball, football?  Sizelove Yeah, football.  Finchum Good at any of it?  Sizelove I wasn   t very big, I mean, no excuses  No, I wasn   t the star, but I played, I did my part.  Finchum Well, how many students were in your class, just in your grade, if they came from all over?  Sizelove Well, I think we graduated forty-eight, a pretty good sized class. And in the   50s with the boom, people moved in in trailer houses, and the drilling and things. It transitioned from   the boomtown was people with the drilling rigs into the pumpers, and so they were more permanent people. We got up to class sizes, when I was probably fourth, fifth grade, of seventy-some, and that wasn   t from the cattle business. That was oil and gas.  Finchum Changes the whole makeup of town, doesn   t it?  Sizelove Yeah, and that   s been a big part of what Laverne is about.  Finchum Well, were teachers pretty consistent? Did they come and stay?  Sizelove Oh, they was here forever. Yeah, I had a fifth grade teacher that taught my dad at another country school, and all of us kids, several of the teachers were our old neighbors in the country. Yeah, the teachers were here forever.  Finchum So if you did something wrong in school, your parents knew it before you got home?  Sizelove Oh yeah. I mean, it was just   I never thought about it being any different than that. You just didn   t have any turnover, here. The faculty, the superintendent was here for years. There   s been a stable   school board never changed. Seemed like, I mean, there has been periods now that it has had a lot of turnover, but see, the forty years   in our marriage, early there, 11  we were in Buffalo  Oklahoma . Buffalo and Laverne were rivals, so our kids grew up, Julia and I   s kids grew up in Buffalo, and their rivals were Laverne. They had cousins and things over here, and we just   Laverne has a way of kids being pretty   they think they   re   it   s just bred into them, they think they   re the best. (Laughs)  Finchum There you go. (Laughter)  Sizelove And not a bad deal, but they weren   t always the best, but they thought they were.  Finchum What was the cafeteria like at the schools, home-cooked or   ?  Sizelove Yes. We had the same cooks forever. I mean, it didn   t replace Mama   s cooking, but yeah. I always ate at the lunchroom. The big deal is when you got old enough that you could go across the street to the Tastee-Freez and buy you a thirty-five cent hamburger and French fries. You were really grown-up then. (Laughter)  Finchum And where would you get the money to do that with?  Sizelove Well, you could eat at the lunchroom for a quarter, I think. No, it wasn   t encouraged at our place, but sometimes you figured out a way to do it. I don   t know where they   d get the money.  Finchum Did you get an allowance, where you   d get paid for helping milk and doing your chores?  Sizelove Oh, we weren   t big on allowance, but early days, we had a cow and a calf. We   d sell those, and so we had some bank account, you know.  Finchum Early?  Sizelove Well, when you was in five, six, seven, eight, I think that would be right. You   d have   and you had your horse, and that was a big deal, when they gave you your first horse.  Finchum What was its name?  Sizelove That didn   t make you any money.  Finchum Yeah. With your horse, what was its name, your first one? Don   t remember, okay. (Laughter) It   ll come to you.  Sizelove Basically, it was just a sorrel mare. She had a registered name. I don   t know, but the horses that we rode, which wouldn   t have been mine, was White 12  Socks, and Brownie, and Duke. Yeah, they were familiar with all those names.  Finchum Seventeen miles would have been too far to ride on a horse?  Sizelove Right. Also, I rode a horse a lot when I was young. My brothers   by the time I was, let   s say, eight, or nine, ten, they   d go to the neighbor around, and they got summer jobs. They   d haul hay, or move irrigation pipe, or help farm, so they got jobs to make money to buy their gas to go to town with. I was the oldest then, so I got to do a lot of the chores in the summer   we   re talking about summertime, and nearly every day, I   d get on a horse then, and ride to some pasture that might be two or three miles away. I was thinking about that the other day. I don   t know what I did, but I   d make sure that the windmill, that they had water, and see if there was something   I don   t remember ever finding a sick one, but that   s what they sent us to do is go ride the pasture. You had to fight the flies and the mosquitos, and   .(Laughs) Did a lot of   spent a lot of time on the horse, just during those pre-teen years, and early teen years, yeah.  Finchum Would you wear a hat, typically?  Sizelove I must have wore   I don   t remember. I must have wore something, might have been just a cap.  Finchum Have any issues with snakes, incidents with snakes? No?  Sizelove No, not really.  Finchum Well, since you were ranchers, you didn   t necessarily have a tractor.  Sizelove Well we put up hay, had a tractor. We   d have this grass meadow, or might plant a little bit of feed. My dad had this round baler, not the round balers that you know today, but small round bales. They were unique, but we put up hay. That was the extent of our farming.  Finchum Do you remember how young you were when you drove the tractor for the first time?  Sizelove Well, I don   t know. About all they   d let me do is drive the rake tractor after. We didn   t have swathers, just a mower, and then you   d have to rake it, but I never did   by the time   . My dad never did let me run the baler, or even the mower, I don   t think, but he let me haul hay. (Laughs) That was a big part of our growing up time is hauling that hay in and stacking it. Sometimes there would be neighbors, young neighbors come help us, and you   d get acquainted with them that-a-way.  13  Finchum Well, if there wasn   t running water in the house   .  Sizelove Well, we had water in the house then. We would have had water in the house in the early   50s, I think. By the time I was two or three or four years old, I think our house was    modern.    Got a TV when I was   I mean, in the house. In the days when you had Rawhide, or what were some of the others   I bet by the time I was six or eight, yeah.  Finchum Dragnet   s the only other one I can think of. (Laughter) Was the house air-conditioned?  Sizelove No. We had water coolers. They   d be in the window, and they were just basically a big fan that had water blowing through the   we were dry enough where the humidity allowed to where   we   d call them water coolers, just a round thing that   d blow a lot of   but at night, you   d just open the windows. It was good to have a room that had a southwest window, where you got a breeze, but there was times where you   d get a wet rag and put on you, but you didn   t know that that was not good. In the wintertime, we didn   t have   we had these wall panel  radiators , and I bet by the time I was five or six, they had a gas well on our property, and part of the   we got free gas. There wasn   t any problem heating up the house, and the barn, and the chicken house, and everything else when we got free gas, (laughs) but that was a big deal. That was a spin-off of the oil and gas.  Finchum Nice perk.  Sizelove Yeah, it   s hard. I don   t know that you could get a lease now-a-days that lets you hook up to the well.  Finchum Well, maybe a dumb question, could you use it in your vehicles then?  Sizelove No, this would be   now, what they did   condensate, which would be liquid, is what we were burning there with the gas, volatile. The condensate would be at these tanks, and they   d run these trucks around every once in a while, pick it up, and some of it could be high quality. It was not refined or anything. We called it drip gas, and there was a lot of people that   I mean, they did it at night, it wasn   t theirs, they actually just stole it. A lot of people   I mean, that would be   when I say stole, I don   t know that people did that were criminals, but they would   a lot of the old farm tractors, and you could smell it, it was different, but drip gas. Yeah, I don   t know that we ever   certain wells really had really high quality drip gas, if they were close to you, but they   d go with their barrels in the night, and fill those up.  Finchum Was never missed, probably.  14  Sizelove When the oilfield people come to town, at first, they were the foreigners. You didn   t trust them, I mean, they were different. Then pretty soon, they were your best friends. Literally, they were a part of the town and the community and they were good people. Early, I remember my dad, and he didn   t know whether he trusted those    oilies.    I don   t know if that   s really right, but that was a little bit of my impression. Later on, they were always out there, stop by for coffee, and some of them wanted to be your buddies because they wanted to hunt or something. They   d help you build fence or do things, and then pretty soon, gradually, they become the native people. At first, these people moved in from all over the world to take these jobs, but then after a few years, those jobs were taken by people that were local.  Finchum Well, as you did chores, and worked, and went to school, what would you do for fun? Not practice for your sports, but what would you do for fun, as an individual and as a family?  Sizelove Well, I didn   t do   some of them, you could fish or hunt. I didn   t do much of that. I don   t know why, I would just follow my dad around a lot. I was interested in horses, and so we went a little bit to   not really rodeos, but to a few events with our horses. I always liked to go with him when he   d go visit with people that we thought were really good with horses, horse trainers. We were pretty busy by the time we played   particularly, my folks let me play a fair amount of summer baseball, which would have been a big deal to get in town. Then during the school year, there wasn   t   well, I went home with my friends, spent the night, but by the time I did   I mean, there wasn   t   .  Finchum Well, did Laverne have a movie theater?  Sizelove Oh, they did, yeah. Early days. I rarely went to the show.  Finchum Well, then the other option some people have done is go to a barber shop and play checkers or dominoes.  Sizelove Well, had the pool hall     Finchum Oh, a pool hall  Okay.  Sizelove    but we didn   t ever go to the pool hall either. (Laughs) When I went to the pool hall with my friends, I was always wondering who saw me go in. (Laughs)  Finchum You weren   t supposed to be there?  Sizelove Well it wasn   t   the smoking and the   not really, but it   s what the older men did when they didn   t have anything else to do. Some of them, I think, really enjoyed that. I remember going in there, there would be a pool table 15  or something like that, but I didn   t   . If you were in FFA, and you had the stock shows, that was a big part of our life. You had your show animals to take care of, and you had the fairs in the fall, and the spring shows, and a little bit of going to a few horse events.  Finchum Did you rope?  Sizelove Oh, I tried just a little bit, but not much in the arena. I mean, we broke   .  Finchum That can be fun too, I guess, since   .  Sizelove Yeah, our family wasn   t   we always had so many horses, and we raised a lot of horses, and so there   s always trading or trying to sell some horses, and that was a big part of my dad   s life.  Finchum Well, most of his business, for that sort of thing, had to go somewhere besides Laverne, for the horse business, I mean, a bigger town?  Sizelove Well, people come from hundred miles around, and they   d see the colts out there, and they   d pick one out. We always had two or three stallion studs, and we get a lot of   we bred other people   s mares for them, and that was a part of   a lot of the summer activities is taking care of those mares and those colts. That was probably, early days, my interests, and it was all quarter horses, so I become a student, early days, of bloodlines and, early day, quarter horses and things.  Finchum So your favorite subject in school would have been science?  Sizelove Well, yeah. I mean, I was a science student. I just thought about that. Early days, I thought   I don   t know why it was, but for me, with my mother particularly, if you didn   t have all As, it wasn   t acceptable. (Laughs) I says, I don   t know, and I don   t think it so much on my older brothers. Starting at about the fifth or sixth, seventh grade, there was no excuse to make a B, (laughs) so what am I saying? I   m saying     Finchum Did you find out? Did you make a B?  Sizelove I made a B in typing when I was a senior. Yeah, so when you ask me my favorite class, I   if you ask about sports, I competed in the classroom. It was, how do I want to say it   I was pretty much the one that always wanted the highest score. I don   t want that to sound, but somebody asked me about   . I played all the sports, and that was really important to me, but where I beat everybody was in the classroom. The science classes were where I really beat them. (Laughs) For a while, you   re getting me to say things I wouldn   t say. There was a time where I thought about medicine, but for whatever reason, early, by the time I was a sixth or seventh grader, I had 16  decided that I probably wanted to be a veterinarian. When I started school at OSU, I mean, I was in pre-vet, and I stuck with it.  Finchum Did you two meet before you got to OSU, or did you meet at OSU?  Sizelove No, we met at OSU.  Finchum Okay, so we   re not there yet then. When it came time to graduate from high school, was OSU the only school you looked at? I know it   s the only vet school in the state.  Sizelove My older brothers went to Panhandle, and that would have been the option, and I could have. I don   t know, I just   that   s where I was going. I mean, I didn   t really ask. (Laughs) I don   t know.  Finchum Had FFA taken you to campus before?  Sizelove Sure, it was a big part of the FFA, yeah. Of course, if you   re going to go to vet school, you use the   and that   s really not the truth. You might as well go there. In those days, to get accepted into vet school, you probably needed to be a resident. It   s a little different now.  Finchum When you told your parents you had decided you wanted to go to OSU, there wasn   t any issue?  Sizelove No, no. The ag teacher was probably helpful or influenced that. No, they   it was really never a   .  Finchum Well, how did you get there, when you first went? Did they take you and drop you off, or did you have a car?  Sizelove No, I had my car.  Finchum Took yourself.  Sizelove Had an old    62 Falcon. Yeah, I had my car, and   .  Finchum They didn   t go with you?  Sizelove Oh no. I didn   t need them. (Laughter) We left   we had the county fair going on, Beaver County fair. I left the fair, took my animals home, and jumped in my car, and went. I lived in East Bennett, had a classmate that was my roommate that   so that   s where.  Finchum Were you there all four years, well, six or eight, I guess, but stay in the same? 17  Sizelove No, no. I only lived in Bennett for two or three months, and then as I became acquainted   well, I was already acquainted because these guys at FFA events, and stock shows, and stuff, a fraternity that was     Finchum Farmhouse or Alpha Gamma Rho?  Sizelove Alpha Gamma Rho. Yeah, that   s   emphatically Alpha Gamma Rho. (Laughs)  Finchum Had they come to your home to recruit you?  Sizelove Well, not much until I got to school. They had a little bit. I had some interaction with them at the Oklahoma City stock show, and then at the FFA convention. Then I had   my older brother encouraged me. I mean, I had high regard for them, but when my grades were going to be all right, Farmhouse began to look at me but I was already more acquainted with AGR people.  Finchum Well I don   t know about   does either one rank higher than the other? It   s not a good question to ask, I guess.  Sizelove Oh, yeah, don   t ask me. No, they   re the two. Then that really changed my college experience.  Finchum Yeah, your living arrangements completely.  Sizelove Yeah, and so that pledgeship, and then the activities in the house. That   s how, if we   re moving that way     Finchum Yeah, go ahead.  Sizelove    she was a sister of a pledge brother, but it wasn   t until   we didn   t really   until I was actually in the second or third year in vet school that we began to strike up a   .  Finchum Did it just turn out to be coincidental that she happened to be from the same area?  Sizelove She   s from Custer County.  Finchum Oh, she   s not, okay.  Sizelove She   s from Arapaho.  Finchum That   s further south, right? 18  Sizelove Yeah, but she has the background. She was on a farm, and grew up   .  Finchum How did you two meet? Put him on the spot.  Sizelove (Laughter) Well, I guess the real, the first time we met is I was Rush chairman, and we were having a Rush event in Oklahoma City, and it was important that I have a date. Her brother was the president. I just called him up, and asked him, basically, if he could fix me up with her. That was our first date. Then it wasn   t until she was up there a couple years that we actually began to   she probably had dates with half the people in the house before (laughs) we dated.  Finchum You have no comment, huh? (Laughter)  Sizelove Yeah, I would have never met her had it not been for.     Finchum Well, her brother must have thought highly of you to say yes.  Sizelove Well, at least he didn   t   he probably steered her away from a lot of the guys in the house but he didn   t try to intervene, I don   t think. That was a big part of our OSU experiences.  Finchum Were you involved in anything beyond the fraternity, like in the animal science or whatever?  Sizelove Well, I spent some time in the Library. I wasn   t that involved in a lot of leadership, which for so many people in the house that was a big deal. That   s where it   s so beneficial to be a part of those organizations is they force you, or encourage you, to be involved in some of those. I was really involved in a church group that had nothing to do with   well, they called it Chi Alpha. I worked quite a bit with that group, and then just several organizations, but I wasn   t, besides the house   .  Finchum That keeps you busy, from what I understand.  Sizelove Yeah. See, I was accepted with just sixty hours after my second year, and a lot of   that wasn   t unusual then. You just had sixty hours of requirements, what I   m saying, and I don   t know that the application pool is any different. Then it was my third year in school, and that first year in vet school, for me, it was a grind.  Finchum Kind of tough, huh?  Sizelove Yeah, you had to spend some time at it, but I enjoyed it.  19  Finchum Well, was the vet library there, or was it the big library that you spent more time?  Sizelove Well, if you   re familiar where the AGR house is located, it   s just   I lived in the house, and that was somewhat different than a lot of the vet students. I stayed in the house for two more years, so that was a little bit of a distraction. What I did is we   d have dinner, and by six thirty or seven, I could be at the Library, and I usually had to take a nap or two at the Library, but by ten thirty, I was ready to go back to the house. I   d get two or three hours studying in, but it was at the Edmon Low. I could take you to my study areas.  Finchum Which floor was it on?  Sizelove Actually, most of the time it was on first floor or second floor, those large rooms with those big tables. I just spread things out, and I didn   t go up to those little cubicles up   well, I did some, when it was cram time. Where I was, there   d be classmates or people usually come by, and they   d get me, if I was napping or if I was studying there, we   d go to the Union, and get a Coke or something. Those were our social times, yeah.  Finchum The Union, at that time, had a bowling alley I think too, didn   t it?  Sizelove Yeah, they did, down in the basement. I was rarely down there. You   d just go to the   actually, I think we went to the fourth floor. They had a place up there where   it   s so much different now, or maybe the first floor.  Finchum Fourth floor had the Starlight Terrace, does that sound familiar?  J. Sizelove It was fifth floor.  Finchum Was it fifth floor?  Sizelove I don   t know, but     Finchum They   ve remodeled it several times since then, too.  Sizelove    and, except for times when the weather was a little tough, just that walk, back and forth to the Library, was good.  Finchum Well, at that time, the Library had the big card catalogues, as you come up to the big   .  Sizelove Yeah, you   d check in, and they   d kind of go through your   but you got acquainted with whoever was at the two booths or something, by the doors, and those were good times. 20  Finchum Well, would you go to basketball games or sporting events?  Sizelove Oh yeah, I went to basketball games, first wrestling matches I ever   I was a big wrestling fan. Oh yeah, I went to most sporting events, I did. I flunked a path test one time, when I elected to go to a wrestling match. (Laughter)  Finchum Did you tell your mother?  Sizelove No. After a while, and when you get accepted, and you get through the first year, grades weren   t very important to me. Well, I mean, yeah   .  Finchum You didn   t want to retake it though, just     Sizelove No, I didn   t want to.  Finchum    a B was good enough, huh?  Sizelove Yeah. (Laughs) The    B    became good enough. (Laughs) That was   I didn   t have to   I   d let my classmates make the As. I mean, yeah, it was, I shouldn   t say it wasn   t important. Boy, for me to make A in some of those classes, I didn   t want to. (Laughs) That would take too much effort.  Finchum Well, did you do small animal, or large, or both?  Sizelove Well, they made   you did it all equally, as far as the class, but my special interest is I spent a lot of time at the post-mortem room. Are you familiar with what I   m   that   s where they   d bring the dead animals in, and they   d do their autopsies and necropsies, and that   s where I   and the teachers that were there were the people that made me want to. Now, I could go to work for them. I mean, I never wanted to not have an answer for them. There   s people still there, Panciera?  Finchum I   ve heard that name.  Sizelove Yeah, I thought he was tough, but you just would work for him. So large animals, but you had to spend   in those days, you had to wear a tie to class. You didn   t wear boots. It   s so different.  Finchum Could you get by with jeans?  Sizelove No, and then what   d you get by with in class, when you   we had these uniforms we wore, khakis that we wore in large animals, and you could wear those to your morning classes before you went to clinics. The clinics, I don   t know that I should say this on the   because somebody might see it, but the clinics were a disappointment for me. They   re better, I   m sure, a lot 21  now, but boy, the diagnostics in the post-mortem room just turned me on. That   s where   the minute I could escape the clinics, I went to   for their rounds, yeah. I don   t know whether that was the question or not.  Finchum No, it   s fine.  Sizelove Then large animals. So my interest was equine and food animal, cattle. I guess I looked for some mentoring. The people that was highly regarded, in my opinion, and those like that to spend some time with, outside of the classroom.  Finchum You graduated from when and what? From the med school when, vet school?  Sizelove Seventy-one.  Finchum Seventy-one. The other name   it starts with a Totusek, Totusek?  Sizelove Totusek was animal science, yeah. I didn   t have a lot of exposure to him, but yeah, he was highly regarded.  Finchum Well, was there a class you almost didn   t pass?  Sizelove The one that I kind of really let go would be poultry path, (laughs) and I don   t know how   I didn   t invest hardly any effort to pass that, I just went to class. Poultry path, now, it   s in the last semester of the junior year. There would have been two or three others like that.  Finchum Weren   t into chickens?  Sizelove No. (Laughs) I don   t know whether we   re moving that way or not, but when it   s time   in the fourth year of vet school, well, then I discovered girls, women, and that kind of changed my life a little bit. Then the Vietnam War was raging then, and so you needed to decide how you dealt with that, and I had a high lottery number. Then I went ahead and actually signed up, and was well along the way to being   and then I had applied to four, five, or six veterinary schools for internships. That was in early days of   and probably, I don   t know, there would have been two or three people there at the school, I suppose, would have helped me, but I got offered an internship at the University of California-Davis, UCD. I mean, that was way up there for me, so I accepted that, and got out of the commitment to go to Army. We were just married, and we spent our first year at Davis, California, and you talk about a learning experience. That was tremendous.  Finchum Just adjusting from Stillwater to there too.  22  Sizelove Yeah, the change of them accepting you as a veterinarian rather than some student who didn   t know what he was doing. I discovered that I had such a long ways to go before I had the competency that I needed, and boy, I worked hard there. It was a great experience, and that was in large animals, medicine and reproduction. After we were there a while, they   d send us out with students, for me to lead those students. I don   t think I was equipped for it, but you learn to make up for what I didn   t learn in clinics at Oklahoma State. There was a difference between UCD and OSU vet school at time. I mean, it was   but yet, I don   t know that it was   at OSU, we   d do a lot of our own   they just didn   t have the money. At UCD, they had technicians that wrapped the horses legs, that did up the surgery packs, that took the X-Rays. At OSU, the students took the X-Rays, developed the X-Rays, wrapped the horses legs, did the exercising.  When you get in the real medicine, you needed to   I think we were better equipped than some of the California students that were exposed to the giants in the world because they were just   all they did was watch and listen. They didn   t have to   .. That was good, and I always thought that maybe Oklahoma State really did a better job with training practice-ready for Oklahoma than maybe California. California would give you a different   the research exposure, and a different   yeah, but anyway then, what do we do after that? Do you move on from an internship to a residency, and the right thing didn   t really come by that I thought   and so I inquired about some feed yard practices, and then some equine practices. Then the Buffalo clinic, Buffalo Veterinary Hospital become   so it just seemed to me, that   s what we were supposed to do is move back to our home area. We come back to Buffalo and never got a way to leave. (Laughs)  Finchum That would have been mid-  70s?  Sizelove Seventy-two.  Finchum After you finished from Davis?  Sizelove Yeah, we just spent a year out there.  Finchum A year there.  Sizelove And I think Julia enjoyed the year there. She worked for some Okies that were in botany there, right? If we don   t get to it, it would have been twenty-five years later, in    86 and    87, I don   t know, just ran into it. We got the opportunity to go back and do a graduate degree, a master   s. The veterinary medicine, even though they call it a doctor   s, it   s not a research degree. The actual medicine degree, even human medicine, you don   t have to present a research project or a thesis or anything.  23  In epidemiology, and California was way up there in that, and so there was four people at the practice at Buffalo, and I guess I told them,    I   m leaving for a year.    We got a little bit of a grant money and several things, lived in some homes that were sabbatical homes, but we had four kids at the time, from two to ten, or eight or something. That was another good experience at Davis, so I got a master   s then that I never did use. I come back to the practice at Buffalo, and spent from    87 to 2008 or something at Buffalo.  Finchum You   re retired, semi-retired?  Sizelove Well, I don   t have a good answer. I mean, people ask me that, and I don   t think I   m retired, but I have made a real switch in my career. Still haven   t made an exit from over there altogether, but I just don   t show up. (Laughter)  Finchum Semi-retired.  Sizelove I always wanted to be the cowboy, you know, so we   re in the cow business. Bought a farm here, and we include family members to work. Now, they   re pretty well   they have it now.  Finchum How many acres are we talking, 160 or more? Well, out here, probably more.  Sizelove Yeah, I guess the farm south of town is 1,880 acres. The big thing about it is most of it   s irrigated, and so that makes it up. Then we have another place that we bought north here, so it   s fairly intense. It   s stocker.  Finchum You still check to see how they   re doing, health wise?  Sizelove Well, they don   t ask me too much. (Laughs) They wanted to make the calls, so I   ve got my own little project north of town.  Finchum Semi-retired then.  Sizelove Yeah, but I still go check cattle every day     Finchum Well with that type of business, are you able to go on vacation? I know with dairy cattle, they say you can   t too much, but.     Sizelove Sure, and we always had a multi-person practice before, and we were able to get away. The lifestyle is really   you share your time after hours, but so much of what we did is just long days, and that   s how you make your living is you work long. (Laughs) You made a little money because you worked a lot.  Finchum Long from like six in the morning to ten at night? That long? 24  Sizelove Well, that   s an exaggeration, but you could, yeah. I over-emphasize, but from seven thirty, eight. A lot of times if you made a trip at some distance away, to a feed yard or something, you might not get home until eight or so. There was a time that, I guess, Julia would probably say she raised the kids the most, (laughs) but she says I missed out on a lot. I would have, but I was around quite a bit too.  Finchum So you had four?  Sizelove Four.  Finchum Boys, girls?  Sizelove Three girls, and then the boy.  Finchum Did any of them attend OSU?  Sizelove All of them spent time at OSU. The two older ones have degrees from OU in health sciences. One   s a physical therapist, and one   s a PA  physician   s assistant .  Finchum OSU doesn   t offer any of those, so...  Sizelove Right, so they   re Aggies. Holly, the oldest one, she didn   t get a degree from OSU, but all the others did. Her only degree, because you weren   t required a BS to be accepted, and she did good enough to be accepted in two years, so she didn   t ever   but she wasn   t really on the Norman campus. She was in Oklahoma City.  Finchum They   re OSU fans, or they   re OU fans?  Sizelove OSU, yeah.  Finchum They could have gone wherever they wanted?  Sizelove Well, I guess. (Laughs) We never had to cross that bridge, but it was a natural. I mean OU had the schools for physical therapy, and the PA school, so they just naturally   .  Finchum Does Bedlam come into play, when they   re playing each other, OSU and OU, in your family?  Sizelove Well, I have a sister, and there   s some family members that are OU people, but not in our immediate family, no.  25  Finchum Do y   all go to Homecoming?  Sizelove Sure, that   s a big event for us.  Finchum Walk-around and all of that? Well, when you were there, did you help make floats, and house decorations, and all of that?  Sizelove I wasn   t as good of help as most of them, but I did decorate. The earliest house dec for AGR was when I was a sophomore or third-year student. We won it, so we kind of got   the AGRs kind of thought that   s what they supposed to do, but it cost them so much money and so much   I bet it cost them a grade point by the time they get through with that fall semester.  Finchum I would say it does more than that, maybe.  Sizelove I don   t know whether it   s worth it, but that   s part of the experience.  Finchum I think they spend more than they   re supposed to. All of them, not just one in particular, but all of them do.  Sizelove Yeah, it   s what makes that Homecoming, a lot of it, and I don   t know whether people that haven   t experienced it really understand that.  Finchum Pomping? I don   t understand all of that, but I know it takes a lot of time and effort.  Sizelove A lot of friendships and relationships come out of that, I   m sure, when they do it with a sorority or something like that, all the activities. It   s important to us, (laughs) but from a distance, yeah.  Finchum Well, did you go through graduation ceremony when you finished vet school?  Sizelove Sure, yeah.  Finchum Was that in Gallagher or in the football  stadium ?  Sizelove It was in Gallagher. A lot of things I forget about. No, we had our own separate   I   m trying to think. We were one of the few colleges that walked across the stage. I remember that. Were the other colleges at the same time, Julia?  J. Sizemore I don   t recall.  Finchum Did your parents come?  26  Sizelove Oh, yeah.  Finchum Well, when you were going, how often would you come back to Laverne or Buffalo when you were at OSU as a student? Every weekend, or once a month, or just at holidays, or   .  Sizelove No, we went   I really do think   I mean, we established a church home there basically. We didn   t necessarily have membership there, but it was home. Now, I   d bring my clothes home when I came home, and my mother would help wash them and everything. But we did our   I mean, for the most part, did my laundry.  Finchum You did, or you paid someone to?  Sizelove Well, both, but we   d take them down to that   the jeans   I never did iron any, but most of my underwear and things. Yeah, no, I washed them. I remember that first semester in pre-vet, the first time I went home. Oh, I was tired, I was tuckered (laughs) and went to a Friday night football game here. It would have been six or eight weeks, though, before I went home. Yeah, I think that   s   to me, you go to college, you need to move out.  Finchum Well, would you call, or write letters, or just no correspondence sometimes?  Sizelove Oh, I learned to appreciate my parents. I become better at writing cards and things, yeah. I   d write my grandmother and my folks some when I realized I had something that I needed to appreciate and tell them about. Then the first summer I was home, maybe even the first two summers, so I was back during the summer. That   s what I see   oh, I don   t need to go there either, but when you go to a small school locally, and you come home every weekend, that   s   .  Finchum You miss out.  Sizelove Oh, it   s not the same. Those people down there became closer to me, or I was closer to them than my high school classmates, and basically they still are.  Finchum Well, you mentioned pressing jeans, who would do that? The cleaners or was there someone on campus that would do it?  Sizelove No, we   when I was in the house, we went on Washington, down there two or three blocks. There would be, I don   t know whether you   d call them cleaners, but they pressed our jeans, yeah.  Finchum Had to be pressed.  27  Sizelove Yeah. I don   t know what they do now-a-days, but the shirts were mainly you just hang them up. I don   t know that I had many shirts pressed.  Finchum Well then was the pants pressed required by the house or just personal preference?  Sizelove No, that was just me.  Finchum Personal preference. Had your mother pressed them growing up?  Sizelove Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Finchum With four boys, that took a lot of time at the ironing board.  Sizelove Yeah, she did it. Not as much starch in them as they put in them at Stillwater, but no she did. Julia continues to press them, so   . (Laughs)  Finchum It   s whatever you get used to, I guess, isn   t it? Well, how would your mother do the laundry? Did she have a regular Maytag machine or whatever, and hang it on the line?  Sizelove Yeah, she hung them outside more than using the dryer, but I guess she had a dryer, maybe. No, we had a clothesline.  Finchum Making them stiff, nice and stiff. (Laughs) I remember those days too. Well, you mentioned church. Was that important growing up as well as while you were at Stillwater? What denomination?  Sizelove Yeah. Early days, the best description I could have, it would be a Pentecostal church. Then I started going, I just   that   s where I found the Lord, and that   s where I was saved. Some friends and I, we attended that, and so when I went to Stillwater, I become involved with Assembly of God. During the college days, that   s where I attended regularly, and was a part of their fellowship. Then in our married life, we   ve been in more than one fellowship, but we   re Baptists now. (Laughs) It   s still   our spiritual fellowship   s a big part of our life.  Finchum Well, growing up, when it was Christmastime, would everyone come to your house, or to your grandparents    house?  Sizelove Both. I mean, we   d pass it around, but we   d always have at least one day at my mother   s parents. Then actually, the Sizelove side was more at our house then because we had the bigger house.  Finchum Any traditional dishes?  28  Sizelove No. I don   t know. For holidays?  Finchum Yeah, like for Christmas or Thanksgiving. Turkey or ham, or both?  Sizelove Always had turkey. We had wild turkeys. We   d kill our own turkey, but we had a lot of ham. I don   t know which would be   we had plenty to eat.  Finchum And did Santa come?  Sizelove Santa came, Santa was a part of our tradition. Yeah, the holidays were a big part of our family.  Finchum Did Laverne do parades for Fourth of July, or Christmas, or anything like that?  Sizelove I don   t remember when I was growing up that they did, but Fourth of July is a big celebration here presently. It   s huge.  Finchum What does it include?  Sizelove Well, you said parade, but they have so many events. It   s about a three-day thing, all the way from golf tournaments, to volleyball tournaments, to softball tournaments, to mud, what do they call it, mud races. I mean, it   s a   we have a son-in-law from Texas, Houston, that came and experienced our Fourth of July event here, and he just couldn   t believe it. Small town America.  Finchum About how many is in Laverne? A thousand or are there that much, around about?  Sizelove I believe a few more, but not two thousand. I   m not sure. Yeah, probably.  Finchum Well, it seemed alive. You even have a grocery store. Some little, smaller towns don   t.  Sizelove Yeah, the hospital, which rural hospital   s a tough deal. It   s in Buffalo, but they have a clinic here. The bowling alley   s gone, but there is a theater at Buffalo, so we kind of back and forth there, movie theater. There   s, as far as places to eat, I guess both towns have   they have enough. You basically, to get a really good steak, you go out of town, and go to Woodward or something. There   s lots of church events and activities. Once school starts, that pretty well runs everybody   s schedule.  Finchum Well does the circus come through town?  Sizelove I don   t think anymore. I mean, it has happened, but not... 29  Finchum Did it in your childhood?  Sizelove No.  Finchum Carnivals?  Sizelove Not really. I mean, it hasn   t been that many years ago that, I guess, there had been a small circus, but no, that   s not   . As far as some of the men   there   s nine-hole golf courses at both towns. That   s not for me, but there is   at least one night a week, there   s a little small rodeo for young kids at Buffalo during the summer. It may be that the teenagers probably think there isn   t much to do here.  Finchum Well, is FFA and the county fair still popular?  Sizelove That   s in August, but like I say, once school starts, you   re.     Finchum Football, basketball, baseball.  Sizelove It   s those, and not only the sports events, but there are music events and things. There   s no philharmonics in town, you know.  Finchum You have cable TV for that, I guess, maybe?  Sizelove Well, you know, I bet there   s more people than we think that make several of the Thunder games, I mean, so people travel. When you play ball here, the high school, and you might travel eighty miles to play a game, so it   .  Finchum And that   s such a norm, it   s not a big deal for this area.  Sizelove Right. From Seiling to Hooker  Oklahoma , they travel those. I guess if you don   t have kids playing, you wouldn   t travel like that. Some people are passionately involved in stock shows. They go almost every week to some, they call them    jackpot shows,    pigs.  Finchum Longhorns?(Laughter)  Sizelove No. No longhorns, but so that   s kind of   it   s a lifestyle that   s   . If you lived in Stillwater, what I can imagine is you still would have those events that we   re talking about, the FFA and things, but there would be more to do. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, not that much more though for teenagers. Teenagers complain, too, there   s not enough to do in Stillwater.  30  Sizelove Yeah, but for us, I guess I didn   t mention that we   d make   we got season tickets, football and basketball. That   s sometimes more than we need. I mean, those night games in basketball   .  Finchum Especially Wednesdays, or Tuesdays, Wednesdays, mid-week?  Sizelove Yeah, but that   s an activity that we have that takes some time.  Finchum And it took me about three and a half hours to get here from Stillwater. Is that about what it takes you?  Sizelove Well, you went through Buffalo     Finchum Yeah, so it   s three?  Sizelove We   ll make it in a short three hours, just a long two hours, yeah.  J. Sizelove Three hours, that   s what it took us the other day.  Sizelove Yeah, three hours.  Finchum That is a long route, six hours in the car to see an hour-and-a-half, two-hour basketball game.  Sizelove Yeah, it   s silly.  Finchum Well, if they   re winning...  Sizelove It doesn   t make sense, but it does, particularly if the game is over at ten thirty or ten.  Finchum Yes, doesn   t start until eight.  Sizelove TV runs our life, when they play, and all of that kind of stuff. Yeah, but that   s important to us, and we meet family there sometimes and friends.  Finchum You have two tickets or four? Two season tickets for each   .  Sizelove Basically, we share four tickets in basketball, so sometimes we have four, and sometimes we have two. Football, I don   t know why we do, but we have eight. Well, I know why we did because there was a time when the kids were still in school, or just out of school, that we needed eight tickets.  Finchum Well, with four kids, if they   re all married, you need ten.  Sizelove That   s right. Homecoming becomes about the only time that    31  Finchum They have to draw, (laughs) or they can all go and tailgate, and a few go to the game.  Sizelove Yeah, we have a   the oldest is in Louisville, Kentucky, and then the next one is in North Dallas, Richardson. Then we have two families here, so not everybody shows up at the same time.  Finchum Well, it seems that once you graduate from OSU, people are pretty loyal to the school. Do you have any explanation for that?  Sizelove Well, I really do think that the school means something to them. We have the joke that if you wear an OSU cap or an OSU shirt, you probably went to school there. If you wear an OU cap or shirt, you probably just come from Walmart. I mean, that   s not a new joke, but   and that   s becoming less as they   we have more fans that aren   t graduates there, but without the football tradition that OU has had, it   s   you have to   my passion for OSU is more than about the football team. I don   t know whether that was going the direction that you asked the question about.  Finchum And maybe it   s because you met someone special there? (Laughs) That   s part of it.  Sizelove Well, the people in my profession, that   s essentially where I might have gotten acquainted with them, or know them from, and all of that adds up.  Finchum Well, you got married before you graduated, or right after you graduated?  Sizelove The last semester.  Finchum Last semester. You were in Bennett, and then you were in the house. Were you anywhere else?  Sizelove I lived outside of the house for two years, the last two years. Then we were married the last semester, so I lived on, what was it, Sunny Brook or Sunnyside     J. Sizelove Sunset.  Sizelove    Sunset for two years.  Finchum Okay, that   s close to   within walking distance of     Sizelove Right.  Finchum    okay. 32  Sizelove It was close to the vet school.  Finchum On that end of campus. Well, and you said the Vietnam was going on during that time too. Do you remember any events on campus that were related to that?  Sizelove I don   t remember us students   I can kind of remember some students, we called them    hippies    or    liberals,    voicing things, but not much. The first time we ever really experienced that is when we moved to Davis, California. We saw a bit of it there, but the revolt against our involvement in a foreign war or whatever   we weren   t engaged in it. I don   t know that we totally disagreed with it, but we weren   t   that wasn   t   .  Finchum And were you in ROTC? R-O-T-C?  Sizelove No.  Finchum Didn   t have to do that?  Sizelove The year I started, they quit requiring it. By one year, I   d have been in ROTC. No, so I don   t have the memories, I don   t have the legacy, I don   t have the   of having served in the armed forces, and I   m not proud that I didn   t serve. At the same time, I didn   t feel the need, at that time, to rush over there and get killed in Vietnam either.  Finchum No, and you were doing something on the home front too.  Sizelove I wasn   t messing around, I was   . Most of the people that I went to school with and graduated with that didn   t go to a professional school or something, didn   t have the deferment. A lot of them went to   various ways, most of them were looking for the six month, where they just did six months of active duty and then the reserves. Then some of them   well, a lot of them served.  What was interesting, we come back from Davis, from California, after that year of that internship. We just had bought the clinic, the practice at Buffalo and had serious commitments there, and I was in Beaver County. That was where the draft board I signed up with. I got a draft notice, (laughs) and I really thought, after I bought this practice, that I was on my way, get to serve that commitment, but it worked out that I didn   t. I don   t know whether they found somebody who took my place or what, but military service I didn   t do. There was a lot in our class that served the two years, and they were in meat inspection, and I don   t know that many veterinarians   we were commissioned. I don   t know that many of the veterinarians actually went to war. 33  Finchum Well, they needed more here, I would think, for the food supply whatever. You could have gone anywhere, you just chose to come back to Buffalo, Harper County?  Sizelove Yeah, why did we come back to Harper County?  Finchum It   s home, I   m assuming, but   .  Sizelove Yeah, and I thought maybe I could be involved in the family ranch a little bit, which didn   t really happen, but the family ranch being close was important. I don   t know, I knew something about this area, and it held some things that I was really interested in, as far as horses and cattle. Then this practice become   I don   t know why. Two people had come and gone from that new clinic at that time at Buffalo, that the local development authority had helped build, had come and gone in three years. That should have been a sign, why, but we got it bought cheap.  We got started right away on our own, and back in those days, that was what so many of the classmates   we were looking to have our own business. I don   t think graduates now necessarily want to have their own. They just want   they would prefer to be an employee than an employer with the things involved in owning, particularly if they can get a decent income. You don   t find many of the new graduates, I don   t think, that rush up to you, and want to work for you for one year, and then buy you out. That   s the way it used to be.  Finchum Maybe their student debt is too much?  Sizelove Student debt is part of it.  Finchum Did you have scholarships, or did your parents help, or did you have to work your way through or what?  Sizelove Well, I was able to run some cattle at home, had some income from. And I think my folks gave me a hundred dollars a month or something. I had some small debt when I was done but not...  Finchum Not like what they have?  Sizelove    not like they   they just make it so easy for people to borrow large amounts of money. They have nice vehicles. (Laughs) On that subject, we didn   t have huge debt. Our vehicles were paid for, but some of that was help from our parents. We were   it was easy for us to borrow the money to buy the facility, and we paid almost nothing for the    practice,    the phone number, the blue sky. We moved in there, and we got a good start there. 34  Then after the first year, we were able to get an associate from Texas A M, and that worked out good.  The only way that we could keep people there, to me, was once they worked there awhile   this is kind of my   once they worked there awhile, and then they begin to build their own clientele, to me, they already had blue sky built in it. Essentially, they just bought facilities and inventory. If they could buy in reasonably, rather than have a million dollars of blue sky, then you could get the right people to come to small town Buffalo. That   s not easy anymore, to get a new graduate to come to the rural areas.  Finchum It   s the same for vets as it is for physicians?  Sizelove Yeah, or more so. They have the programs, to where they subsidize some of the student debt, and give you twenty-five thousand dollars a year or whatever it is, to move to a   what I can   t understand, I   m on the hospital board here. I know more about that than veterinary medicine, but they call Enid, Oklahoma,    rural.    (Laughs) That doesn   t help Buffalo.  Finchum No comparison.  Sizelove There   s just things like that, but I   m sure in some cases, it   s helped to get.     Finchum Someone was saying the student makeup has changed a lot too. It   s more females going into vet med than men.  Sizelove It   s altogether different, it   s   and OSU would have been   this is what I believe to be correct. I watched the graduation. I was more closely involved in the   80s and   90s, when I spent time on the selections committees and different activities that I had, and I knew more about it. I may misspeak, but looked to me like the graduating classes last year might have been 70 percent women.  Finchum I   ve heard similar numbers, so that could be correct.  Sizelove It was that way in Michigan fifteen years before it was   and then they also have students from New York and California that has schools. I   m sure that they are very qualified individuals. I don   t know why they come to Oklahoma. It   d be because maybe they   re not getting placed in their   but not many of those are going to stick around Oklahoma, are they? (Laughs)  Finchum No, I wouldn   t think.  Sizelove The women are great students, and they   re well-qualified but sometimes they   re not enabled to go out and do some of the tasks that I did. Maybe we don   t do those anymore, I don   t know. Things are different. 35  Finchum Pulling calves or that type of thing?  Sizelove Yeah. I wouldn   t necessarily want my daughters   I wouldn   t recommend to them doing what I did. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, they could do the pathology part though.  Sizelove They could do the pathology, and they may   there   s no reason why they   they   re working in nutrition, and pathology, and all of that as far as being a consultant and everything. They can be equipped to be good and excellent in that field. Basically, I was just referring to some of the physical chores that we had.  Finchum Hard on your back from what I   ve been hearing.  Sizelove Yeah, and not all of them want to be, or will be, working a companion animal, a small animal practice. There   s   it   s different.  Finchum Well, what advice would you give students going into OSU or thinking about OSU?  Sizelove Just as a student for a general education?  Finchum Yes.  Sizelove It   s just a good place. I mean, it   s a   people are friendly, I think, and looks to me like it   s   if I was visiting with somebody, a small town person, some students from small town are frightened by the big city. Although Stillwater, the traffic sometimes makes me wonder sometimes, but you can be comfortable there, and enjoy it. Just whatever you   re interested in, it   s probably there. I think there   s, again from people from rural areas, there   s   I don   t know why they would be uncomfortable there. Then it is big enough, and there   s enough of everything, but there   s also the opportunity for much larger world than maybe a smaller campus. I mean it   s   .  Finchum I would assume you would recommend that they get involved with an organization, not necessarily a fraternity, a sorority, but something.  Sizelove They need to, exactly. I   ll just use the church. They need to essentially pick a home church there that they become involved in, and know the people, and those people can support them, and not run home.  Finchum A home away from home.  36  Sizelove Yeah, and if you need to see your parents, sometimes they can come see you. There   s plenty of events there, but they just got to be happy as well as engaged as a student. There   s lots of things there at Stillwater that ought to make most people happy, I think.  Finchum And sometimes B is good enough, sometimes? (Laughter)  Sizelove Sometimes, yeah. I remember my challenge early wasn   t so much the sciences there but this English class I had. I couldn   t write for this lady, (laughs) and I made a C. It was my first semester. That   s what kept me from being, basically, four point, but I could not. It was really frustrating, and I didn   t know whether to blame my high school English teacher or what, but I didn   t   I remember getting those papers back, and it was almost like it was bled on. It had red ink all over it, (laughs) so that was   I had to get through that.  Finchum Do you remember her name?  Sizelove Samsey. Yeah, I do remember. (Laughs) Mrs. Samsey.  Finchum You just had her for one class, or did you more than that?  Sizelove Just one. I got all my English in a five-hour, one-semester course, so it was every day. You had to write papers once or twice a week. Now, when she   d get into some of the spelling, you could get a few points by   she had some type of spelling, and then grammar, where you put your periods. I could get my grades up a little bit, but when I went to write, I don   t know what she called all of that. I don   t know. Report writing in our profession is important, and I begin to realize that your ability to write is a big deal in our profession, but at least I got through it. I never did make her grade.  Finchum Where was that class? In Morrill?  Sizelove No, the old Classroom Building. The only thing I had in Morrill was I took a speed reading class. I had all my history, and speech, and English in the Classroom Building. There   s two classroom buildings now?  Finchum We have   there   s the one right there by the Union, and then they built a North Classroom Building.  Sizelove This is the one that   s next to the Union, yeah.  Finchum Did you have a favorite spot on campus?  Sizelove Well, the house was close, but I never had trouble going to the Union   I mean, the Library. I was comfortable there. 37  Finchum Passed Theta Pond on the way?  Sizelove Well, on the east side, yeah, between there and the Union. I found a lot of cubby holes in the Library and in the Union, to get off to study when I needed to.  Finchum When you were writing your papers, it was typewriters, wasn   t it, or was it cursive?  Sizelove No, it was cursive.  Finchum Not computers, (laughs) that self-correct, incorrectly at times.  Sizelove It was all hand. I   m trying to remember. I often wondered what happened to her. (Laughs) I knew two or three people else that was in that class, and they did well for her. If I had other classes with those people, I competed well with them there, but I just didn   t...I don   t know whether I could have been taught better earlier or not, but I imagine I still would make a C in that class. (Laughs)  Finchum If she was teaching it?  Sizelove If she was teaching it.  Finchum How do you spell her name? Do you remember?  Sizelove M-a, excuse me. S-a-m-s-e-y, I believe.  Finchum I have not heard that name, so I   ll have to look her up.  Sizelove I bet, I don   t know.  Finchum And she was a Mrs. or a doctor.? You said Mrs. so...  Sizelove I called her Mrs. I don   t know that she was a   .  Finchum    may have just been an instructor then.  Sizelove Yeah, I don   t know that she was a   . I bet it   s so much different now, with technology and things, the way you write and hand in your papers. I mean, you really don   t even have to go to the library anymore for your material, do you?  Finchum It   s sad to say, no, but there   s issues. There   s so much information, and plagiarism is more of a problem than it probably was in your day. 38  Sizelove Yeah. Well, learning to use the library   and actually, when we went to Davis and I did that master   s, they had one course in doing research and all your bibliographies. I learned a lot there that I didn   t pick up when I was  at OSU . It   s my impression that you could be a successful student and not even go to class. You could pick all that up online.  Finchum Well, if your class is online, maybe, but not every class is online. Some are face-to-face only.  Sizelove Well, in vet school, a lot of that   s   you can just go to your computer, and get the homework.  Finchum I think you miss out on things, don   t you?  Sizelove Oh, it can   t be the same   Finchum You need that interaction.  Sizelove Some of those big classes, maybe   I don   t know. Just like the English class I was telling you, there   s only, I bet, the twenty in there, and there was a lot of interaction. I imagine, everybody in that class knew that I was struggling with it. The math class was small, but then you get to those large   .  Finchum Well, I would assume that the vet classes were small?  Sizelove Right, you knew everybody. There   s forty-eight. It   s about double that now, I think.  Finchum Well, then you would know everybody.  Sizelove Yeah, everybody become   you know where they   re from, and they   ve become   you spend a lot of time together.  Finchum Do you have a favorite memory, and we   ll close out on a favorite memory of your time at OSU. Making a C and getting out of that class? (Laughs)  Sizelove I don   t want to beat this up. I don   t know who   ll watch this. The friends at the house, and meeting Julia there, and some of those occasions, it   s a big deal. Then in vet school, I have some really good friends that I would trust and would invest anything that I have in at the vet school. When you   re four years together with   in both of those situations, you don   t actually pick all of your family. In the house, there   s people there that aren   t like you, but you learn to live with them and tolerate them, and that   s part of it.  39  Same way in vet school. There   s some of those guys that were different than I, but I   ve learned to appreciate it and say love them, you know. They were all good guys. I said guys because there were only four women in our class, but the women I know and appreciate just as well. There was only four out of forty-eight, as opposed to say, sixty out of ninety now or something. I don   t think I could be as close to those women (laughs) as I was to some of the guys. I   m not answering your question really, but the vet school experience was good. I wouldn   t want to do it again, but I wouldn   t want to give it up for anything.  Finchum No regrets having gone to OSU to start with from the get-go?  Sizelove No. If I was to do anything, I wouldn   t try to get in in two years necessarily, and they   re not now. I would spend some time in animal science, and be on the judging team or try. And be involved in some of the leadership activities on campus, try some of those that I just didn   t think I had the time for. But that adds   if you put two more years onto your price tag of your education, so if you get in and get out as fast as you can, I just didn   t have the capacity to do everything. Those first   in pre-vet and then in the first two years of vet school, you needed to grind it out. After that, the last two years in vet school, again, I discovered women and other   .  Finchum Life after classes.  Sizelove Yeah, but I don   t know that I   d do a whole lot of   but I don   t think you have to   . See, I never did work. I had one job there for a short period of time, bleeding mice. Having a job down there would be an experience that a person probably needs to have, whether you wait tables or   I didn   t, I just   .  Finchum Part of that, too, though is time management. It sounds like you already had that skill down pat, and you   re not juggling it.  Sizelove I didn   t   the guys played cards, and dominoes, and watched TV. I didn   t do much of that, early anyway.  Finchum Well, and you didn   t have to cook in your room because the house had a cafeteria, I guess.  Sizelove Yeah, didn   t cook. Now, that first six months, that pledging was different than what it is now. I mean, that took some   .  Finchum Pretty tough?  Sizelove It was part of the experience. (Laughs)  40  Finchum You can   t say, I   m sure.  Sizelove They tried to make it build character, but I don   t know. (Laughs) It   s still part of it, that there   s memories there.  Finchum I think that   s starting now. It seems to get earlier and earlier each year. They   re already showing up for Rush, or pre-Rush, or whatever it   s called.  Sizelove Yeah, but lots of   I mean, just so many people that you read about in the paper, you see here or you see there, that you can   well, I had some acquaintance with them, or I   whether you really knew them well or not. That   s kind of important to me.  Finchum Yes, the connections. Well, do you know the words to the alma mater?  Sizelove    Proud and immortal, bright shines your fame.    (Laughs)    OSU, we herald your fame.    You got me, I     Finchum That   s further than most people get, so that   s okay.  Sizelove    well, I know it  But I   m not     J. Sizelove We sing it often at the game.  Sizelove    Proud and immortal, bright shines your fame.     Finchum I remember    We herald your name    is in there somewhere.  J. Sizelove    Loyal and true   ... (Singing)  Sizelove    Loyal and true to our alma mater, O-S-U.    (Singing)  Finchum There you go. (Laughter) Do you want to take it from the top? (Laughter) You can say no.  Sizelove Try it again, you mean?  Finchum Yes, and get it   .  Sizelove Is this a test?  Finchum Yes. (Laughter) We want it on tape.  Sizelove Proud and   you mean sing it?  Finchum Sure. 41  Sizelove You do? (Laughs)  Finchum I do.  Sizelove (Singing)    Proud and immortal, bright shines your name. Oklahoma State, we herald your fame. Ever you   ll find us, loyal and true, to our alma mater, O-S-U.    (Laughter)  Finchum You   ll be glad you did that later.  Sizelove You think so?  Finchum I do.  Sizelove People will laugh at it.  J. Sizelove It   s good.  Finchum No. I think it was great. Anything else you want to add before we close?  Sizelove If this is about OSU, and not about me or Julia particularly   I mean, it   s a part of us that we wouldn   t trade, and we don   t need OU telling us that we are one bit inferior. (Laughter) Because we are not, so that little bit of pride doesn   t mean anything.  Finchum You wear your orange proudly when you   re out and about?  Sizelove I   m not too big about   but yeah. I don   t think you have any trouble finding people not knowing where we come from.  Finchum Okay, that was my next question.  Sizelove I   d say that   s   yeah. They know who we are, concerning our allegiance to   and people in Laverne, Homecoming in Laverne for us. You   ve got to drive a hundred and eighty miles to get to where Homecoming and our home team is. That doesn   t mean that we   re not Laverne Tigers either.  Finchum Just on different levels, and Laverne is home now.  Sizelove Laverne is home.  Finchum    considered home. Well, thank you for inviting me here. It   s been a pleasure.  -------  -------  
