 Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  My name is Jacob Sherman and today is April 5, 2010. I   m here in the  OSU Library visiting with Dan and Jenice Bigbee about their  experiences with Oklahoma State University   s Ethiopia Project. Today,  we will primarily interview Dan Bigbee, with his wife Jenice chiming in  to clarify things, or just to give him some good grief. (Laughter) This  interview is part of the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. This is part one of the Bigbee interview. On  Wednesday, April 7, we will be interviewing Jenice. First off, I want to  thank both of you for your participation today.  You   re welcome. Glad to be here.  Mr. Bigbee, can you tell me where you grew up and when you were  born, and primarily about your early life?  I was born in Walters, Oklahoma down in Cotton County on April the  16, 1930.  Well, happy early birthday to you.  Yes, we   re getting close.  You   re going to be eighty then?  I   ll be eighty, yes. Well, I grew up in Walters and attended school. I had  odd jobs around the community and that sort of thing as I grew up. I  saved some of my money so I could go to college and I started out at  Cameron in Lawton, which at that time was part of the A M system. At  the conclusion of my two years there, I got married and was called up  for the Korean Conflict with the 45th  Infantry  Division and so I had  three years with the military intervening before I actually got on campus  at OSU to finish up a bachelor   s degree, and ultimately did a master   s  while I was here.  5  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  What did your parents do?  My mother was a county director of public welfare in Oklahoma and my  parents were divorced at an early age. All I know of my father is that he  was a federal bureaucrat in Washington, D.C. He did spend some time in  the Burma theater during World War II.  How big was Walters at that time?  It had a population of about 3,000.  Three thousand?  Yes.  And is Walters the county seat down there?  Yes.  So, you lived in town, and maybe for those that didn   t grow up or  haven   t seen that, can you describe what the town atmosphere was like  during that time period?  This was Depression period. It   s a small town, an agricultural  community, so a lot of the business was agriculturally oriented. We had  a lot of equipment dealerships. At that time, we had, I think it was three,  maybe four groceries stores and there were two dry goods stores, a bank,  two drugstores and a five-and-dime store. We had a theater or movie  house and it just   oh yeah, there were two movies houses. One of them  didn   t operate much though. So, just a small, agricultural community in  the 1930s. We still had horse-drawn wagons coming into town on  Saturday and the livestock sale was right up in the middle of town. Just  the typical sort of thing of the 1930s.  What kinds of things did you do for entertainment?  As a small kid, we just played the usual side yard games of football or  basketball or kick the can or whatever. As we got on into high school,  there were church activities, going to the movies, going to the high  school athletic events, things like that. Sometimes it was a big event to  go off to Lawton or up to Oklahoma City to go to the movies or some  event that was coming off at that time, but by and large, we entertained  ourselves. Of course, in the afternoons, you always had the Captain  Midnight and Superman and Little Orphan Annie and all of that sort of  thing on the radio and then at night, why you   d have Bob Hope or Bing  Crosby or Jack Benny or the Phil Spitalny and His All Girl Orchestra  6  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  and those kinds of things that entertained us. And summertime, we did a  lot of sitting on the front porch and playing in the front yard at night,  chasing lightening bugs and just being relaxed and enjoying the evening.  Did your family own a car?  Yes, we lived with my grandfather and grandmother and he was a  stonecutter, basically with tombstones and that sort of thing. So, he  traveled the countryside with his business. Then, my mother as a social  worker had to visit people in their homes and so forth around the county  and so she had an automobile.  What kind of vehicles were they?  Well, my mother had a 1936 Chevrolet sedan and my granddad, when  we first went to live with them, he had a Model T Coup and then later  traded that for a Ford Model A.  Stepping up there.  Stepping up a little bit, and then I guess when he died, he was driving a  Chevrolet Coup, would   ve been an early 1930s model.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  I had one brother, younger than I by about fifteen months.  Did you two get along or     Yes, we got along alright, although we were not buddies in the sense that  you often think of brothers. As young kids, we played together a lot  around the home, but we had a lot of chores to do. So, we didn   t play all  the time. Then as we got older, he was more of an outdoors type and he  liked to hunt and fish and he was much bigger than I and so he was  athletic and played sports that I didn   t do and so we didn   t   well, we  weren   t buddies, I   ll put it that way, but     Two different personalities?  Yes, two different personalities. He was much more introverted than I.  We were in the National Guard together and we both went off with the  45th when it was activated in 1950. Although we were in the same  company, we were in different platoons and so we didn   t see each other  all that often when we were in the Army. In a lot of ways, my brother  was my hero.  7  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Do you remember aspects of the Depression at all? Like what you had to  do, what you had to deal with to cope during that time period?  My mother was the primary cash income earner with her job. My  grandparents owned four city lots, not blocks but lots. And the house sat  on one lot, the side yard was the second lot and then the back two lots  were really farmed. And so we had a big garden. We had a chicken  house. We kept goats and rabbits. We had a little four-tree peach orchard  and a nice asparagus bed. We spent the warm seasons of the year  working the garden and canning. I remember a lot of our summers as  kids, we   d sit out there with our grandmother, particularly, peeling  peaches, snapping beans, shelling peas, canning so that we   d have food  in the wintertime. Of course, we had straight run chickens and so just as  the male chickens matured, they started being Sunday dinner and my  brother and I, that was one of our jobs was to pluck the chickens. We  didn   t have to finish dressing them, but we had to kill them and pluck  them. And then we kept care of the rabbits and that sort of thing and  when the litter got big enough, why we started eating fried rabbit instead  of fried chicken.  Then, in the wintertime, we had to take care of the animals but we also  had to see to keeping wood in the wood box because we burned wood.  We had some gas in the house and that was used on the cook stove but  the house was heated by wood and usually, we just closed up all the  house except what we called the dining room and the kitchen. You got a  bath certainly on Saturday and sometimes in the middle of the week and  then you just heated water on the stove and put it in a washtub in the  middle of the kitchen floor. You kind of took your chances as to whether  you got to use the water first or not. (Laughter) That kind of thing. But,  that was pretty much the way that we got through the Depression years.  Of course, the Dust Bowl came along and although we weren   t affected  nearly as badly as some of the folks further west and north of us, still,  those big old dust clouds would come in and dust would just be on  everything and in everything and around everything for two or three  days until it would blow through. I remember stuffing rags around the  windows and then the doors and that sort of thing to try and keep it out  of the house, but days on end all you could see was kind of a little red  ball up here through the dust cloud that was the sun. And the drought  that went along with that was very bad.  Another aspect of Walters was we had a very active WPA  Works  Progress Administration  program in the county. They built a lot of farm  to market roads and they built the dam for the local lake and a number of  other public works in the area and that went on for several years as well  as a lot of young men went off to the CCC  Civilian Conservation  8  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Corps . They worked in the camps up around the Wichita Mountains,  fixing the parks and so forth and recreation facilities that are there now.  Did the war transform life in Walters at all?  Oh, yes  That was a whole new thing. I worked in the drugstore during  part of that time and we had the telegraph office. One of my duties was  to carry telegrams out to homes, but when one of the casualty telegrams  came in, I remember my boss always took those out to the home. Then,  rationing was   that was a whole different culture. You didn   t have just  one ration book, you had ration books for this and ration books for that  and whatever and each member of the family got, depending upon their  age and so forth, various ration books for shoes or clothing. I know for  the cars, rationing for the tires and gasoline was rationed. I know in the  drugstore, tobacco was rationed and there were favored clients  particularly for the cigars because they   d be kind of scarce and so you   d  save back certain brands of cigars or what not for certain customers.  We had a bus station and so there   d be people coming through on the  bus and then a lot of bus travel at that time. We could only go thirty-five  miles an hour on the speed limit down the road. We made several trips  out to relatives in New Mexico and if you can imagine in the 1930s or     40s in this case, going out through west Texas on those old asphalt  highways in the summertime and the wind is blowing and then the world  goes on forever and at thirty-five miles an hour, it really does go on  forever  But lo and behold, even at that, we could drive from Walters  down into the southeast corner of New Mexico in one day. But, we  started awful early and it was dark when we got there. (Laughs) But yes,  it affected everything and     When you were activated it took nineteen of our young people, which  was a lot for Walters.  Yes, but of course there were draftees and so forth during World War II  and one occasion I remember, one of the family   s son was a pilot, a  bomber pilot     That   s a dangerous job.  Oh, yes. He had to fly from one location to another location and Walters  was along the way. They gave him permission and he came in and he  buzzed the town two or three times. (Laughter) But, we knew he was  coming and so people were already out kind of looking for him and so,  when he did come, why people were out in their yards and in the streets  and what not waving at him and then he gave us a good show. (Laughs)  Soldiers would return from combat on leave, recuperation and they   d  9  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  come visit the schools and relate their experiences. I remember one  Marine fellow, I can   t think of his name now, but he   d been on  Guadalcanal and that was a terribly hard fought battle in the early part of  the war. He was telling them his experiences in the jungle and how bad  it had been and the hot, moist climate and all of those things that make  life miserable in the Army, I don   t care whether it   s combat or not.  How did you hear about Pearl Harbor? Do you remember that day at  all?  Oh, I remember that day. I guess that I heard about it as we were playing  in the yard and then my parents called us into the house to listen on the  radio as things were going on at that time. I was eleven years old at the  time and even at that age, I was already listening to the news with some  interest and was aware that things with Japan were tense and so forth.  But yes, it would have been around early afternoon. I   m pretty certain  my brother and I were out in the yard somewhere or another and then we  were called into the house to listen to it. I know that we didn   t listen to it  too terribly long. We went on about our business, but I guess I look back  on it in some way   it was a terrible thing, but I think there was a little  bit of release of tension and so forth at least within my family and  neighbors and that sort of thing, that well, we   re not just waiting  anymore. We   re in it now. But, very apprehensive because the attack on  Pearl Harbor and the subsequent days with the attacks in the Philippines  and what is now Indonesia, Southeast Asia and really, the war going  very badly at that time. It was scary     Did you follow the events of the war?  Oh, yes  I think that the best geography lesson that I ever got was the  war   listening to the news reports and it involving practically all of  Europe and the Pacific Rim and that sort of thing and then the  Mediterranean area, I got to know a lot about Africa and Europe and  Asia and   I depend on that geography lesson even today.  Do you remember particular battles, do you remember hearing about  the Jimmy Doolittle raid or     That was an exciting thing  And the news reels at the movies showing  them with those B-25s taking off of those aircraft carriers. Oh man, that  was great stuff  Yes, that was one of the first really big morale builders I  think for the country. It was kind of a show thing. Then, it was really a  serious attack on the country. We realized that, but we also realized that  the Japanese have been hitting us pretty hard with their aircraft carriers  and so forth in the Pacific, but we could reach them. And that was a big  boost.  10  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  What about D-Day? Was there an apprehension about it?  Well, it was happening. It wasn   t something that we could anticipate that  it was going to happen, but we knew that it was coming and when they  announced it, there was a lifting, I think, but at the same time, there was  great dread. The news coming from Normandy was mixed. We did get  through the first day and were still on the beaches, but the casualty toll  was, well, horrible; much anticipation particularly on the part of those  families in the community that had soldiers in the invasion and waiting  to hear whether they had survived the initial attack or not was a very  anxious time for everybody. My family directly did not have anyone in  the war, other than I knew that my father was in the Burma theater, but  he was not involved in a combat situation. But there were neighbors that  had people in the Army. We had neighbors whose children had been  captured by the Japanese in the very early part of the war and it was a  very hard time for them and most of those, as I recall, did come home.  But we had casualties.  It   s interesting now   there   s a community in Virginia, Bedford. As I  recall, there were nineteen National Guard people that had been called  up before the war actually got started, but we had started activating units  and so forth. That particular company, made up of those people from  Bedford, they were the first ones on the beach at Normandy and nineteen  of those young men were killed in that assault. The National D-Day  Monument or Memorial is in Bedford, Virginia. Very nice memorial but  it depicts the landing at Omaha Beach, but that town sustained the most  casualties of any town in the United States on D-Day. And that   s an  interesting fact, and we   ve had an opportunity to visit that memorial.  Because you served, do you have a greater appreciation of what those  who served in World War II did? Or, how do you view their service to  their country?  I guess I look at it   Korea and World War II were the last good wars  that the United States has fought. I mean, there was a real purpose there  beyond just materialism. As I look at the involvement in the Korean  thing, yes, the North Koreans came down and invaded South Korea in  the same way that Germany and Japan had gone to war in World War II  with the sole purpose of occupying and subjugating those peoples. I still  feel that we were justified in doing what we did. Korea also was good  from the standpoint that it was the first time that the United Nations  really came together as united nations to try to rectify an international  wrong. We haven   t been very successful at that, although they   ve been  UN sponsored, I don   t think we   ve been nearly as successful with that as  we were with the Korean situation. At least we brought that back to the  status quo to some extent. But, World War II   I feel like I was aware  11  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  before a lot of the media indicated at this point that something was  terribly wrong with the German regime, particularly in eastern Europe as  they attacked Russia and we were aware of concentration camps. Now, I  don   t know that we were as well aware of the genocide that was going  on or the extent to which it was going on, but we were aware before the  US and allies began to liberate the concentration camps in Germany and  Eastern Europe. We were aware of the deportations and all of those  kinds of things and that something was terribly wrong. But yes, if there  is such a thing, I think that   s the last war that we   ve been involved in  that really had some moral basis.  How did Walters celebrate the end of the war? Was there a great  celebration?  No, I don   t recall parades. I think that there were probably some church  gatherings and some prayer meetings but there wasn   t any great public  display of jubilation and so forth. I think that there probably was a little  less stress in people   s voices as they greeted one another. There was  probably a lifting of the spirits of the community and that sort of thing.  But, life kind of just kept going with V-E Day, we still knew that there  was Japan to deal with, but certainly there was a quiet jubilation in the  town. We didn   t do any great big public display of any kind to celebrate  that, though.  What year did you graduate high school?  1948.  How big was your graduating class?  At that time, it was the largest class that ever graduated from Walters  High School and there were sixty-one of us. (Laughs)  What was your high school mascot?  The Blue Devils.  When were you called up? Were you drafted or     Our unit was what was called federalized. We were Oklahoma National  Guard and that was the 45th Infantry Division. And so we were  federalized and by that we were brought in under Army command now  rather than state command in     Did you volunteer for that service?  12  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  Oh, yes. The National Guard is all volunteer, but you are signed up for  certain periods of time just like you were drafted and so you were  obligated to go unless you were declared physically unfit. You went just  like any other draftee would go and then the unit was filled up with  draftees and prepared for action in Korea.  What made you decide to volunteer for the National Guard?  That   s a really good question. I look back on it     Money.     now and I guess it really was money as much as anything. It was not a  great act of patriotism, I   ll put it that way. (Laughs) Back at that time,  you had to drill once a week, I think it was, and for two hours, and you  got a full day   s pay for whatever your military grade was and so yes, it  gave me pocket money and let   s see, I guess I probably joined in 1947. I  was still in high school at the time that I joined. I just continued  participating as I went on to college because it was providing income to  support college and actually, even after my Korean experience, I  rejoined the National Guard for that reason. It supported my education.  Do you want to discuss briefly your participation in the Korean  Conflict? That   s up to you.  I was a noncombatant but I trained to go into Korea with my unit and I  was a squad leader and I decided to come back and go to OCS  Officer  Candidate School  and so I spent some time at Fort Benning,  Georgia .  I was also on the staff of the infantry school detachment at Fort Benning  until my discharge.  And, you were discharged when?  In May of 1953.  And you made the decision at that point to go to college?  Well, yes. Jenice has a farm down in Comanche County and we really  had thought that we might farm, but when we actually got home and  began to look at that arrangement, it was going to be another year before  we could actually plant a crop because the current lease man had a  contract for the land up until that time. I was casting about for what do I  do with myself in the interim and I thought, well, I   ve got the GI Bill.  Might as well use it, right?  13  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  So I just decided I   d go back to college and things just evolved from  there so that I ultimately finished with a doctorate from Michigan State  and then went to Ethiopia for a while.  Let   s back up a little bit. How did you meet your wife?  How did I meet my wife? Well, there are two stories. There   s mine and  there   s hers. (Laughter)  Can we get yours?  Yes, you can get mine today and you can get hers another time.  (Laughter) Temple and Walters were rival high schools. She attended  Temple and my brother and I attended Walters. My brother was playing  on the Walters football team and some of her cousins, who I went to  Cameron with, we   d always come home for the football games and we  had the annual Walters-Temple rivalry at Walters this particular year.  One of her cousins and I at that time kind of traditionally carried the  yard markers on the sidelines. So at halftime, he and I were just standing  there leaning on our sticks and this pretty little thing just came kind of  dancing across the field and up to us and she was coming to greet her  cousin. So that   s how I met her. I became a Comanche captive right  there. (Laughs)  You bought me a cup of coffee.  Well, yes. I could very well have done that too. (Laughter) But I still  have a vision of her dancing across that field to talk to her cousin.  And when did you marry?  In August of 1950.  So you   re working on sixty years?  Yes, it   ll be sixty years in August of this year.  Congratulations   Well, thank you. We   re rather proud of that. (Laughs)  That   s good. So you went to Cameron for two years, right?  Yes.  And you got your associate   s there?  14  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Well, I chose not to take the certificate because my intentions were at  the time that I was going right on for a bachelor   s degree and then the  Korean Conflict intervened before I got here. (Laughs)  And once you were discharged, you made the decision to come up to  Stillwater? Can you describe campus; what is was like back then at that  time? I know you were talking about earlier that the library was just  being built.  I guess at that time Low Library had not really opened when I came in  1953. But the structure was up and the internal fixtures and so forth were  being completed. We had a nice big grand opening and so forth for the  library, not too long, I guess, after I arrived on campus. The poultry farm  sat in the area were Ag Hall now sits. That old dairy building that they  tore down, I guess this last year or so and they started putting up a  research laboratory facility there, I guess it   s one of the last buildings     old ag buildings at any rate to still be around when we moved back in     95. The Union was new but had been opened for some time and back  then, the Union cafeteria was one of the best places in town to eat. A lot  of people in the community would go to the Union for Sunday dinner.  I   ve heard those stories. Very formalized dinners.  Yes.  Did you participate in any student activities?  Not really. I participated in Poultry Club and I was invited to join Alpha  Zeta, which is an ag honorary.  Did you do ROTC?  No, by that time, see, I had fulfilled all of my military obligation by the  time I came back to go to school at Stillwater, so no, I never participated  in ROTC. I enjoyed sports, so I took in the athletic events and that kind  of thing.  Go to basketball games?  Oh yes. I regret missing probably the most exciting basketball game, or  one of the most exciting basketball games ever played on this campus  and that was when Wilt Chamberlain was at Kansas and they came  down here to play and we beat them at the buzzer. I happened to know  the guy  Mel Wright  that shot the basket that won the ball game.  But, I guess our other involvement here, we were very active with our  15  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  church and then with the Wesley Foundation at OSU. But, I pretty much  guess I had my nose stuck in my books and involved with my family and  didn   t get too terribly involved in campus life, not that I was unaware of  it, but it just was not the kind of thing that entertained us much at that  time.  You were an older student.  I was an older student and had a family and so I guess the antics of  students at that time, such as panty raids and whatever were     You were way too mature for that.  Yes, that   s right. (Laughs)  Do you remember any particular professors that you worked with, or  under?  Yes. I would be remiss in not mentioning George  Watts  Newell. He  was one of the professors in the Poultry Department at the time and he  kind of took me under his wing and mentored me through my time here  at OSU and encouraged me to go on to graduate school at Michigan  State. He had some influence on my employment at the University of  Maryland where he had graduated. He certainly was the major influence  in getting me to participate in the Ethiopian Project.  You came here seeking an animal science degree?  I came in general agriculture to start with.  And did you want to go back on the farm or start the farm or     Well no, I     I was just wondering what pushed you toward higher ed     Serendipity. (Laughs) When I was at Cameron, they had a field day at  the junior colleges that were affiliated with the A M system and they  had judging contests and other kinds of activities. The ag kids from  those schools would come on campus. So, my freshman year at Cameron  Kendall Bales and James Phillips and I made up the poultry team that  came to the field day and we won the event. The next year, we couldn   t  participate in that event again so I wound up coaching the poultry team  that came up from Cameron and we won that one. Bill Webb and his  twin brother and there   s a fellow   he had flaming red hair   Richardson,  Red Richardson and those guys made up the team that came from  16  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  Cameron. And they placed, I think it was third, fourth and fifth, but there  wasn   t   yes, there was fifteen points that separated the low man in that  group with the high man. And we won the contest.  Well, when I came back to Stillwater after the Korean thing, I took a  poultry course the first semester that I was here. And lo and behold, the  professor, Cecil Roberts, remembered me and so he kind of got me off  on the side a few times and encouraged me to major in poultry. Since  poultry had been my FFA project and so forth, it was just kind of natural  to go in that direction. So that   s really how I got into poultry. I can   t say  that I started here with any specific goal in mind other than a degree in  agriculture.  When was Fred Harris in your group? That was in high school?  High school, yes. Fred Harris was a senator from Oklahoma at one time.  He went to school with you?  Yes, in Walters.  But, that   s kind of how I got started in poultry and how I got into the  academic line, I was graduating and was looking for a job and it was  Thanksgiving and George Newell called me up at my mothers and said,     Hey, there   s a job up in Kansas if you   re going to be interested and  they   d like to interview you on Saturday.    And this was like Thursday,  Thanksgiving Day. And so we got Thanksgiving out of the way and  hopped in the car and came back. On Saturday, I tootled up to Kansas  and interviewed with these people and at that time, it was kind of normal  working hours but I thought this really isn   t the kind of thing that I   m  looking for and I don   t see the future in this. I came back on Monday  morning, walked into George   s office and I said,    What are the chances  of getting an assistantship and going to graduate school?    (Laughs) And  he said,    Well, sit still for a minute.    He went in and he talked to the  department head and he said,    Come back, we   ll start you next  semester.    (Laughs) So that   s really how I got started in academics.  And what was your master   s work on?  I worked on poultry   well, really my graduate degree was in poultry  products, which would have been economics and processing, so I  studied mostly economics but aimed at the marketing side of the poultry  industry rather than the production side. But when it really got down to  where my work took me, I wound up in production of poultry.  And you got your Ph.D. from Michigan State University?  17  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Yes.  In what? A Ph.D. in poultry science?  Yes.  With a marketing component basically?  Well, food science.  And then you took a job at the university     I left Michigan State and went to Ethiopia.  Now we   re going to discuss your involvement with the Ethiopian  Project. First off, how were you contacted and who contacted you about  signing up and going?  There was a poultry processing convention/conference that always met  in Kansas City. George Newell was always pretty interested in that and  so he   d take a group of us when he went up and that   s how I really  wound up going to Michigan State. He introduced me to my major  professor up there. When I finished up at Michigan State, that  conference was going on and I was looking for a job. I knew that that  was a place to go so my major professor and I went down to the  conference. Of course, I knew I   d meet George Newell there, but I was  just anticipating talking about old times. He pulled me off to the side and  said,    Would you be interested in going to Ethiopia?    And I said,    Well,  yes. I   m looking for something.    I said,    What are you doing?    He kind  of described the activity in general and he said,    Well, if you   re  interested, why I   ll tell Bill Abbott,    who was the supervisor for the  project here in Stillwater.  And so a few weeks later, Abbott gave me a call and he said,    I   m going  to be in East Lansing,    and would I be willing to visit with him for a  while. So he came up and he spent a day with me and we left just kind of     I   ll get back to you shortly    because I told him,    Well yes, I   m  interested,    and if they decided I was the one that they wanted, why fine.  And so they called me not too long after that and I agreed to go. That   s  pretty much it. I   m glad I did. (Laughs) But, it was through my major  professors that I found out about it. It was through their support that I  got the job.  What was your wife   s reaction?  Oh  I came home and   you want to tell him this?  18  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  He came in the door, put down his suitcases. He said,    How would you  like to go to Ethiopia?    I said,    Fine, where is it?    (Laughter)  She did the same thing to me when I went to interview at Nebraska.  (Laughter) She said,    Where is it?    (Laughs) That was her reaction. I  remembered Ethiopia from World War II and the emperor   s plea before  the United Nations.  League of Nations.  League of Nations, yes. He had come to the A M campus during the  time that I was here as a student, but I really don   t remember much  about that. I can tell stories now because I   ve heard the stories, but his  actual visit, I don   t really remember much about it.  I remember his visit and they had a picture of him and when Dan said go  to Ethiopia, I thought it was in the Middle East because his features to  me looked Arab, maybe.  OSU had a presence in Ethiopia before you went in the fifties, right?  Well, the project had been started back in the early 1950s. Now, I didn   t  go until 1962 so it had already been underway for eight or ten years.  Did you have any professors that you worked with that went over there  when you were here and did they share anything?  No. Other than I knew that there was the project, it had a poultry  element in it   after I got there, my department head had been a graduate  student here at the same time I was     And who was that?  That was Leon Holland. Now some of the others had been students here  too, but I didn   t know them.  What years were you in Ethiopia?  1962 to 1966.  And who arranged for you to go over there and what was that process  like?  The only arrangements were made through Bill Abbott   s office at that  time, so they arranged for the collection of what household goods and  personal affects that we were going to take over and how they were  19  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  picked up and packed up and shipped off. They made the arrangements  for us so that we got all of the vaccinations. They gave what information  we needed for acquisition of passports and advice on how to do that  rather than having the children on our passport, why we were advised to  get passports for each one of us in the event that it was necessary for  somebody to travel with the children, they could travel. If they were on  one of our passports, why then it would kind of complicate the process.  So little things like that.  There was some orientation from Bill Abbott   s office. I know I came up  and spent a day here I think but part of that was administrative, part of it  was orientation and so forth and learning a few things about what we  need to do about our personal affairs and things that we needed to be  prepared for when we actually arrived in Ethiopia in making  arrangements with the commissary. But other than that, we were pretty  wet behind the ears when we got over there. It was Jenice   s first time out  of the country and my time out had been in the military and so that was  pretty sheltered experience.  How did you feel about this? What kind of emotions were you going  through as you were preparing? Were you apprehensive, nervous     I was excited. No, personally, I did not have any reservations about  going, or apprehensions about being in another country. Now, Jenice had  an entirely different impression on that. So really, I went with great  anticipation of having a very positive and pleasant experience.  Did you view it sort of as an adventure?  No, this is not something that I felt, or would have vocalized at the time  that we actually went to Ethiopia. But, as we got there and as I   ve had  time to reflect on it, really I think that I had some sense of being a  missionary. We had our knowledge and we had our technology and we  were going into an area where people still lived in mud huts. In my case,  the chickens just ran around the yard, in a very primitive situation. I  could see us as people from the United States going into that situation.  We had a feeling of being   well, it   s an overblown statement, but we  were going to save the world. I mean, what we were going to do while  we were there was going to change for the better, not just overnight, but  at any rate, we were going to be real agents of change. And that was  exciting to me.  I knew that I was going to encounter students of real ability. Students  who were dedicated to what they were doing there and that kind of a  challenge was exciting and it was exciting. But as time has gone on and  so forth, I think having that kind of zeal made us better at our job than if  20  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  we had been, say, more professional about this sort of thing. It did make  us excited. Not just me, but I think everybody that was there was really  excited about what we were doing. In the long run, I can   t say that that  was the best preparation, nor was it the best motivation for what we  actually did, but certainly I had a vision that the world was going to be a  better place.  When you say that, what comes to my mind is John F. Kennedy   s  inaugural speech where he said, we   ll go out, pay any price, bear any  burden, basically to change the world.  No, that   s a different thing. That   s a different thing entirely. But  certainly more accurate than the way I felt. On reflection, I consider  myself a veteran of the Cold War. I was both a military soldier and I was  a citizen soldier. I think, from the point of view of our politicians and  our government and what was going on internationally between nations  and the competition between western capitalism and Russian  imperialism, we were soldiers in that competition. Our job was to help  keep those Third World nations where we were working on the  capitalistic side of the competition and we did that. And as a result,  yes   the Russian imperialism was, I think, really doomed from the start  in the way in which they went about it as compared to the way we went  about it. We ultimately won that competition. But I consider myself a  veteran of the Cold War as a direct participant in that competition.  Where were you assigned to live and work in Ethiopia?  I was assigned to the College of Agriculture at Alemaya and we lived on  its campus. Now, when we first arrived, my counterpart, who was  leaving and we were coming in, we overlapped and so the house that we  would live in was occupied. We first lived in what we called    the white  house    downtown in Dire Dawa. Another project family had the  downstairs of that apartment building and then we maintained as part of  the project the upstairs portion for overflow and whatever, so we  overflowed into that for a couple of weeks before our house on campus  was ready. Otherwise, we lived on campus and as a part of the project,  the college started on a bare hillside and they had to build everything  from scratch. They built the physical plant for the college as well as  housing for those of us that were working there, including the  Ethiopians.  So, all four years you lived on that campus?  On the campus, yes.  And it was like basically apartment style living?  21  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  No.  An actual house?  They were individual family homes. We had a three bedroom house with  a kitchen and a dining room and a living room.  Did you have a caretaker?  We had a household staff of three. We had a cook, and a mameete and  what we called a yard boy. The cook pretty much managed the  household staff and the mameete kept the house and watched the kids.  The yard boy kept the fireplace going and kept up the yard and whatever  little garden that you might have. He tended the garden. It was an  interesting thing; I   m not much of a gardener and so he was able to do  just about anything that he wanted to. I gave him some bell pepper seeds  and he planted the bell peppers but he also planted some of his peppers  along beside them and they cross-pollinated. We were sitting there at  dinner eating salad and the peppers had a little snap to them and come to  find out he had planted chilies alongside my bell peppers. When they  cross-pollinated, well, the heat came over to our side. (Laughter) I  enjoyed it. I thought it was pretty good; it was kind of amusing at the  time.  A little surprise for you.  Yes. But, having a household staff is a mixed blessing. It certainly frees  you up with the chores of maintaining a place and getting meals on the  table and all of that sort of thing, but they   re human beings like  everybody else. I always dreaded payday because my yard boy   a nice  Muslim fellow, but he   d go out and get drunk and I   d have to go get him  out of jail and it seemed like that would happen almost every payday. If  they had illnesses or that sort of thing, why you had to see to getting  them taken care of. I know one time she kept saying that her daughter  was very ill and then she was what, ten or eleven years old? And finally  one day, I think about the third day, I told Jenice,    Well, you ought to go  down there and get that girl and take her to the doctor.    And lo and  behold, she had typhoid and the doctor said,    If you   d waited another  day, we   d have never saved her.    You have to deal with those things and  then whatever other idiosyncrasies that they might have. But, for the  most part, we had a very good staff. They were a joy to have around and  were very kind to us.  How were you paid? Were you able to save some for when you came  back to the States?  22  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  My personal arrangements, my pay check was sent to a bank in the  United States where my mother lived and she could kind of keep eyes on  things. We did have a designated amount that went into a savings  account and then we could go to the local bank and write a check to get  cash for local expenses and so forth. Now, there were other allowances  that were paid in local currency and we received those locally.  What activities were included with your job assignment? Did you teach?  If you   re familiar with the land grant philosophy with teaching, research  and extension, my duties involved all three of those areas of activity. So  I taught a basic poultry production course. I also taught a hatchery  management course. With my background in food science, I developed  and taught an animal processing course which was basically a slaughter  and dressing of livestock, and that included poultry. That was pretty  much my teaching regime.  Extension-wise, I worked with some local farmers and helped them  begin to develop some income producing poultry operations in  cooperation with an ag co-op that was being developed by one of the ag  economists there. And so the eggs that were produced from that were  sold through the co-op to basically the French and the French army in  Djibouti. We could get a better price that way than if we tried to sell  them to local markets. So, that was the extension activity.  The research activity, I did the breeding work on maintaining the college  poultry flock. I also did a little work studying the local poultry and their  production capabilities and that sort of thing. That was pretty much in a  nutshell the general areas in which I worked. Of course, I had some  other committee duties and what not, but they were rather mundane  housekeeping kinds of things.  Who were some of the colleagues that you worked with?  Well, of course, I worked with the other animal science people there     the dairy people and the beef cattle. Some with the agronomists from the  standpoint of looking at feed supplies and that sort of thing. But for the  most part, I pretty well worked independently of the other members of  the faculty.  Was Dr.  Clyde  Kindell overseeing the Ag College at that time?  Yes.  Did you have much interaction with him?  23  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  No, he was in administration and my work certainly was not  administrative in character and what administration that I had to work  with was usually through my department head. Professionally, I didn   t  have a lot of contact with Dr. Kindell. Now, as a teacher, I had more  contact with people like Leonard Miller, who was the Dean of Students,  in dealing with student activities and needs and functions and advising  and if there were issues with a student then we   d have to deal with them  that way, but by and large that hardly ever happened. We had such good  students.  How many students would take courses under you? How many would be  in your class?  The poultry production class probably would run from around thirty-five  to forty. The hatchery class would probably be in the neighborhood of  fifteen to twenty. The animal processing class was probably ten or  twelve because the facility was relatively small and the interest in that  aspect of animal science was not all that great. Being a butcher is not a  very high position in the culture. (Laughs)  What was the Ethiopian agriculture like when you were over there? Did  you go outside of Alemaya and help assist farmers? What were your  observations?  My work dealt with only about fourteen or fifteen different farmers and  they were mixed agriculture farmers. They would have poultry flocks of  somewhere in the neighborhood of two or three hundred which they kept  under closed facilities but still, they ran free. They ranged in a yard, but  they were confined. The general area around the college was mostly  grain, sorghum and corn, vegetable crops and then the real cash crop of  chat, which is kind of a tea plant, but it has a narcotic affect. A lot of that  at that time was marketed on the Arabian Peninsula.  The soil around the college was what   s called disintegrated granite and  as it lost moisture, it became pretty much stone textured and so it did not  suit itself to animal power as far as tillage was concerned. And so, most  of that was done just by hand and they just stand in a circle with this  stick and a counterweight on it and in unison, they   d drive that stick into  the ground in a circle and they   d turn out a clump of dirt about yea big     I should say    soil      about yea big and then move on and flip it. Then,  the farmer whose land it was would come back with a kind of hoe-like  instrument and break that up to make a seed bed. Then the seeds were  just broad cast and worked into the ground. That was fairly common  practice. We used some mechanization. It was not practical in the sense  of a local farmer being able to do that sort of thing, but it was mostly just  subsistence farming.  24  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  I remember in visiting on farms and so forth and then going for a first  time and then getting introductions out of the way and what not and the  farmer, instead of saying maybe who he was or what not, he might say,     Well, I belong to so and so,    because the feudal system was still pretty  prevalent in the country and people were tied to the land on which they  lived.  Was the land still ruled by clans?  Well, they had a very mixed land tenure system. In our area, the land  would have been owned by the church. It would have been owned by  noblemen and it would have been owned by the local farmers. The  church owned a lot of land in the country and it was just leased out or  sharecropped or whatever. But, still under that system, most of it was  farmed in small plots. A large field of, say, a quarter of a section in this  country would have been a huge farming operation over there. You  might look at there, a big farm might have been four or five hectares and  so farming on a hectare or less was pretty common.  What did you enjoy the most and enjoy the least about your assignment  over there?  That   s a hard question because I just really enjoyed being in Ethiopia.  The Ethiopians are very hospitable people and we got to know a number  of Ethiopian families. We would visit in their homes and attend their  weddings and other family events. The students, we had them into our  home frequently and the Ethiopian staff, we had a very active social life  with them. I guess though, the one thing that gives me the most pleasure  about having worked in Ethiopia are the professionals that we left  behind as graduates of that institution and the successes that they have  had over their professional life as well as in maintaining and sustaining  the university at Alemaya. That, I guess   if I get a warm fuzzy, that   s  what I get a warm fuzzy over, alright? (Laughs)  Now, something that I disliked about the country; that is really a hard  thing. I never really had an unpleasant   really, really unpleasant  experience professionally or traveling around the country. And we  traveled a lot of the country. We were always treated so well. Hospitality  was so good, even from strangers. People were always willing to help if  you were in trouble. I can   t really give you something to say that this  made life uncomfortable or it made it hard; no. I know some people  would complain about the bureaucracy and they would complain  about   to go to the bank, for instance and cash a check could take all  morning because all of the paperwork had to be done on the processing  of that check before they would pay it. Oftentimes, they wanted you to  sit there and wait so that they knew you were there. At any rate, some  25  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  folks would look on that as such a terrible waste of time and an  imposition and this sort of thing, and at times it would be a nuisance, but  that   s the way they did things. It   s their country, and it works for them   So why should I get really upset about the way that they do things? So,  no.  I just had such a good time in Ethiopia and I   ve got such good friends  from that experience that that   s the highlight of my experience was  being in Ethiopia. If I   m in a new setting or this sort of thing, it   s always  going to come out that I   ve been to Ethiopia and I had a good time there  and it usually stops the conversation. (Laughter) But, that   s one of the  most pleasant parts of my life and I remember it with great fondness.  Did you participate in any American traditions? Did you celebrate the  holidays while you were over there?  The is another aspect of Ethiopian hospitality and generosity and  grace   we observed all of the Ethiopian holidays and traditions. On top  of that, we had the Fourth of July, Christmas, Easter, Thanksgiving,  Halloween. We observed all of those. Not just as    the Americans    that  were there, but the whole campus observed these holidays as well. If we  would have some event on campus that would have a social activity  involved with it, so there might be a reception or something and you   d  always have to serve refreshments of some kind. The wives would  always prepare things and at least organize this sort of thing, but within  the Coptic faith, which was the national religion, there were some two  hundred and seventy fasts, feasts and other sort of days through the year.  Now, that didn   t mean that everything shut down on that many days, but  if you had a fast day, they couldn   t eat animal products. And so we made  fast cookies, which was a graham cracker with some margarine on it  with a little sugar in it and maybe some cinnamon on it or what not. And  a note would be passed around:    Could you fix this,    and so one lady  who was new to the situation at any rate, she said,    I don   t have any fast  recipes    not realizing that we were talking about not     Not quick. (Laughter)  Yes, but we socialized quite a bit in the community and amongst  ourselves. If we wanted to throw a group party, why we always invited  the Ethiopian staff to come and participate with us and so we had a  number of feasts and f  tes and dances and whatever. I know since I  handled some of the processing classes and that sort of thing, they were  very generous as long as we kept it kind of in the back and out of sight,  well they   d let us raise hogs, because pork is forbidden in their culture.  And so we decided that we would roast the whole pig. Well, no one had  ever really done that before, but I knew some idea of what was involved  26  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  with it so we got Conrad  Evans  to build us a pit and a big spit rack sort  of thing. I got my yard boy to come down and help me and we roasted a  two-hundred pound pig. We started on that thing almost at sun-up. It  finally got done enough to eat about nine o   clock that night. (Laughs)  But, they   d come and participate in that. Now, of course, when we had  the pork, why they had something else, but we   d get together for things  like that and they   d participate with us and it was a very congenial  atmosphere.  That   s good. How did you take to Ethiopian fare? Did you enjoy the  food?  I   m not a great connoisseur of wat and injera. If that   s what there is to  eat, I   m going to eat it and enjoy it, but it   s not something that I really go  out of my way for. Now we had the wat club, which was a group of  faculty that would eat supper with the students one night a week because  the evening meal was always wat and injera. Then afterwards they   d  assemble at somebody   s house and have dessert and what was it they  called the guys who just came     Sweetie pies.  Yes, sweetie pies. We had the sweetie pies, that they only came for  dessert. (Laughs) I didn   t participate in that, but my first real experience  with one of the farmers that I worked with   this was very early on after  we got there   invited us to his daughter   s wedding. A wedding is a feast  time and we arrived and my Ethiopian counterpart went with us as an  interpreter so we sat down and instead of sitting at the usual little matad  sort of thing that they sit on the floor and you reach in with your hand,  why there was a regular table and chairs and there was some other  Europeans that had been invited. So they fed us a seven-course  continental dinner. No, they started out, they served us a regular  Ethiopian dinner and there was wat and injera and aleecha and I don   t  know what all, and tej and tella, which are drinks. At any rate   I mean,  very elaborate spread. And we sat there and ate our fill and then after the  meal was done, they cleared all of that away, and just on the chance that  we didn   t really like Ethiopian food and were still hungry, they brought  out this seven-course continental dinner. (Laughter) And we had to sit  there and eat that, too  We might not like tej which is a honey wine, or  tella which is a home-brewed beer   and I have to preface this that when  they give you something to drink, they fill the glass to the point that it  overflows. So all of a sudden, here comes ice tea glasses and a bottle of  whiskey and they pour glasses of whisky to overflowing. And I tried to  say,    Well, really I don   t drink whiskey. I don   t care for it.    My  Ethiopian fellow leans over to me and very quietly says,    Drink it.     (Laughter) So we sat there for hours sipping at this tumbler full of White  27  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  Horse whiskey.  That fellow   I eventually in my relations with him over time, I finally  convinced him that I did not drink whiskey. They have a    white  lightening    that they drink and we were at the farm one day and the  workers were around and the farmer was there and they drug out a jug of  white lightening and started passing that around. He knew that I didn   t  drink or like that sort of stuff, so that I had something to drink, they had  bought a case of Fanta, that little orange drink in those little bitty bottles.  And so as the jug came around, I had to drink a Fanta. I sat there and  drank three-quarters of a case of Fanta while these guys passed that  white lightening jug. I   ll tell you, that   s no more fun than drinking white  lightening  (Laughs)  Did she ever know about your escapades there? Did you ever tell her?  Oh yes, she knows that story. When we went to the wedding and all of  those things, she always went along. So she   s familiar with all of those  kinds of things. But that was part of the cultural acculturation process  that you look back on with some humor and certainly with some  fondness and remembering the generosity and the grace of these people  toward you as a guest in their home as well as a guest in their country.  Did you still enjoy Ethiopian food or do you ever have a chance to get  it?  Oh yes, there are some restaurants around that we   ve been to, but there  are   we have Ethiopian friends in town and when their children  graduate from high school or college or what not, there   s going to be a  feast and so we   ll go and eat wat and injera with them on those  occasions. She likes it and will go out of her way to have some, which is  fine, but we haven   t been to an Ethiopian restaurant now in a long time.  I understand there is one in Oklahoma City that   s pretty good. Conrad  recommends it. (Laughs)  I   ve got a few more questions and then just an overview or snapshot of  your experience, which you did a good job detailing how you feel about  it within the last hour or so. I know this is a long interview so     That   s fine.  And I appreciate it.  We   re having fun.  Are you having fun Jenice?  28  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  I   m learning things that I never knew. (Laughter)  Is that a good thing or a bad thing?  I   m glad I know it now.  I can sit and talk about Ethiopia all day.  I wish we   d never left.  (Laughs) Yes.  But I always had that feeling, you know? This is not real.  Yes, this is a fairytale.  I   d have to remind myself or I had that feeling. Just a beautiful interlude.  How did you maintain contact with your family back in the States?  Through the mail. We had APO  Army Post Office  privileges and so we  didn   t have to depend upon the international mail necessarily, but we got  mail both ways, both through the international postal system as well as  the Army postal service.  You were over there four years, so you had two contracts. Is that  correct?  Yes.  And between the two contracts, did you come back to the States?  Yes, we came back on home leave one summer; 1964.  How long did it take for you to get back?  Seventeen hours.  Yes, the home leave year we planned our trip so that we went around the  world.  Can you share with us that?  Now, the contract was set up so that we could travel to and from by the  most direct route and go first class. Or, you could take that amount of  money and divert as long as you didn   t backtrack. For that amount of  29  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  money, we could get a ticket that would take us around the northern  hemisphere. And so we took a trip starting in Dire Dawa, and we went  across to the Arabian Peninsula and then Aden  Yemen  and from Aden  we went to India and India we went to Hong Kong and then we stopped  in Hawaii and then came to the States and spent our time at home. Then  we went back through Stockholm  Sweden  to visit some friends from  Michigan State days. Then from there, to Frankfurt  Germany  and then  on into Ethiopia on Ethiopian Airlines.  Did you have much time in any of those places? How long were you in  India?  In India, we probably spent the better part of a week and we visited New  Delhi and the Agra area and just by happenstance, we got to spend some  time in Calcutta. But I won   t go into that.  We saw the Taj Mahal.  Yes, we saw the Taj, and the Red Fort in New Delhi and got to visit the  New Delhi area in particular. And that was   well, it was a pleasant trip.  Then from there, we went to Hong Kong and we spent, what, three days  there, I suppose. Yes, better part of three days.  And Hong Kong then wasn   t     Hong Kong was then a British Crown colony.  Yes, but it wasn   t skyscrapers like it is now?  Oh yes  Oh yes   Oh my word  They   re bumper to bumper. I mean, high. Mercy   We got to see the city and the harbor and do the shops and those kinds of  things. And eat in the restaurants and you know, just the usual tourist  sort of things that one would do. From there, we went to Hawaii and we  spent about five days in Hawaii, just going to the beach and touring  around the island and so on, and resting up and having a good time. The  kids were having a good time playing on the beach and well, I guess,  mentioning the kids   we have five children. The youngest one was  actually born in Dire Dawa and so this was her first trip home to the US,  at any rate.  And I   ll even diverge a little bit on this   when we actually came back at  the end of our contract, she kept hanging on to her mama, because we   d  always talked about her as our little Ethiopian baby and it finally came  30  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  out,    Are you going to take me with you because I   m an Ethiopian  baby?    (Laughter) We took her with us  But, we were making this trip  with five children and     What were the age ranges? How old was your oldest?  The oldest would have been at that time     Ten or eleven.  Well, on home leave, she would have been twelve. The youngest one  would have been two.  You   ve got a handful there.  Yes, but     They were good travelers.  They traveled well and you go through Asia in particular   folks just  love children. We never had to worry about those kids. There was  always somebody kind of keeping an eye on them or knowing that these  children belonged to us and they would entertain them too, for that  matter. I guess that does     They discovered room service.  Oh yes, they discovered room service. (Laughs)  That   s an expensive habit to get into.  But, at any rate, that was our home leave summer.  What do you think your Ethiopian experience had on your children?  What did they learn?  They loved it  They wanted to go back.  How do you think it shaped them?  I think in later life, it gave them a greater appreciation of the world.  They   ve all traveled out of the country, which is not a common thing.  Two sons married Europeans. I think too, as a result of that, they have a  better sense of the global aspect of civilization. They certainly look back  on that as one of the happy times in their life and just the freedom of  being on that campus and also knowing that they were protected. I mean,  31  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  the whole community knew who those children were and they kept an  eye on them. We didn   t necessarily have to keep a finger on them all day  long. They have developed lifelong friendships with the other children  that were there at the same time that they were.  Did you travel within Africa at all?  Not too much. We stopped over in Cairo  Egypt  when we came home  and spent a few days in Cairo.  Did you see the pyramids?  Yes, we saw the pyramids and went out on the desert and went through  the museums, but mostly we rested.  Did you have a vehicle when you were on campus?  Yes, we bought a car after we got there.  What kind of car was that?  It was an Opel station wagon.  From Germany. It was nice.  Yes. But, I also had a Jeep that I bought from one of my colleagues that  was coming home and so I had a four-wheel drive vehicle as well as the  station wagon. That station wagon went almost everywhere my jeep  went except for a few places that I wouldn   t have   I   m not too sure I  should have gone with that Jeep, but I did. (Laughs)  She   s shaking her head.  Yes. (Laughs)  As entertainment, we went camping a lot.  Did you hunt?  Yes. My brother loaned me a rifle and I shipped it in pieces through the  APO, but I wouldn   t   I hunt to eat. I really didn   t trophy hunt. I did get  a leopard, and I skinned that thing out and brought it back and had it  tanned and preserved. My son out in New Mexico has it now. I had a  crocodile skin, but I don   t know whatever happened to that. Some of the  antelope that I killed, I kept some of the horns, but not a rack or  whatever.  32  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Not a head?  No. But, it was possible. I could come home a little early and fix some  sandwiches and get in my Jeep and head out to one of the valleys on the  other side of the city. Harar had a dry riverbed. You could drive up and  down the dry riverbed and with a spotlight, you can spot kudu, which is  the antelope which is most prevalent. So I could get my sandwiches and  go watch the sun go down   or get out there, watch the sun go down, eat  my sandwiches and wait for it to get good and dark and make a run  down the dry riverbed and get a kudu and throw it on top of the jeep and  be back at home by nine o   clock that night. Then I   d process it and we   d  put it in the freezer. My daughter always complained that she didn   t like  to eat after I   d been hunting because she didn   t know what she was  eating. (Laughter) But yes, I hunted some, but I really did not trophy  hunt.  What kinds of things did you bring back?  My wife can talk about that better than I can because she   s a collector  and she likes baskets, so we have a lot of basketry that we brought back.  She can address that much better than I can.  Okay, we   ll get that on Wednesday. Now, switching gears into the  political world, politics, that type of thing, during your time there, did  you see any remnants of the Italian invasion?  Yes. The Ethiopians welcomed the Italians after the war. There were a  lot of Italians in the country. As a matter of fact, one of the fellows,  Mario, was an employee of the college in helping run the maintenance  facilities and so forth. The other thing that you   if you had curiosity, the  roads in the rural areas weren   t too well maintained, but a lot of those  roads had been built by the Italians. Now, I   ve heard it said that while  they were there, in the four years that they were there, they built a  kilometer of road a day. There are a lot of those roads still there, and  they are primary arteries for farmers to get to market, but when the  Italians were driven out, they blew the bridges   not the Italians, the  Ethiopians blew the bridges; the philosophy being that if you blew the  bridges, the Italians couldn   t come back. Or, it would be more difficult.  And so a lot of them they never rebuilt and so travel in the rainy season  could be hit and miss, depending upon whether the water was up in the  washes and we had some experiences with that. We never really had to  wait overnight, but we did have to wait at a number of washes or get  some help to get down the road.  Well, they were the typical     33  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Yes, but they were the old typical Roman arch type of bridge and there  was a beautiful old bridge on the way up to the rainforest and it just set  out there in the middle of nowhere and instead of having a bridge to go  over, why you kind of went down the embankment and went through a  low water crossing in order to get on your way. Other remnants   a lot of  the power plants in the rural areas were remnants of the Italian  occupation, I think. I know the power plant that supplied the campus  was probably a left over from the Italian days.  There was a spaghetti factory.  Yes, and one of the local breweries was an Italian operation, but they  were very much present in the country and the Italians   because a lot of  them were technically competent people, at one time, the Italians had a  program to try to repatriate a lot of those Italian technicians, particularly,  that lived in Ethiopia, but it didn   t work well because they had lived  there a long time, they had families, their roots were down and other  than occasional trips back, they really didn   t know Italy anymore.  How did you hear about the Kennedy assassination?  My next door neighbor, Yack Moseley, had a short-wave radio and he  always listened to the BBC at around nine o   clock at night, our time. He  got the news over the radio and he ran next door and I remember him     he didn   t just knock, he pounded on our front door. I opened the door  and he just kind of blurted out,    Kennedy   s been shot     And so, we went  over and listened to the BBC for a little while, maybe Armed Forces  Radio. But that   s how we heard about it, and we were expecting a visit  from the Emperor the next day or the day after, I don   t know. At any  rate, his visit was imminent and he just cancelled that, got on his  airplane and went to Washington. Then after all of those ceremonies  were out of the way, he came and did make a visit and expressed his  sympathy and condolences to us.  We were invited to his house.  Yes, but the most impressive thing, I think was that they came to us and  asked if we wanted to fly the American flag. And so we were permitted  to put up a flagpole and fly the Stars and Stripes at half staff during the  funeral ceremonies for Kennedy, which is a very magnanimous thing, I  think, and it certainly was a comforting thing for us Americans that were  there.  Then he had a reception for all the Americans when he got back.  Yes, that   s right. But the Emperor was a very gracious host to us during  34  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  the entire time that we were in the country.  I was just getting ready to ask questions about him. How many times did  you meet with him?  We would meet with him every time that he came to visit and as I said  earlier, he   d visit anywhere from one to three times a year. He would  visit our area. The military academy was close by and he would visit  there as well as he had other government business to take care of in the  area and so he   d always make a visit to the campus. That was a formal  occasion and he wanted to tour the facility each time that he was there.  So I had the poultry area, and others had the dairy and others had  agronomy and horticulture and whatever. He wanted to visit each one of  those, so we always had to prepare some kind of presentation at the site  of the facility.  We   d always visit with him when he   d come to our portion of the  facilities and the thing that struck me at any rate, he always knew what  he   d talked to you about the last time he was there and he remembered a  lot of what you had talked about at that time plus he kind of always  asked,    What are you planning on?    and this sort of thing, and he   d ask  about,    Well, now you were planning such and so, where are you on  that?    kind of thing. And he either had somebody that kept good notes  and briefed him very thoroughly before he came to visit, or he had one  heck of a memory. But that always impressed me. That, at least in my  case, he always was familiar with what we had talked about and what we  were planning to do.  He really cared about the college.  Yes.  Was the college a source of pride for him?  Oh, yes  That was one of the things that I think he was most interested  in. Now, he was interested in the university. He took a lot of heat from  the royal dukes and earls and whatever else that there was, and many of  them were not very well-educated people anyway, and did not really  support him in his efforts to improve education in the country. But his  concept was that he would build the universities and get the people  trained and train their own people and build their own faculties with the  intent that they were the ones that were going to go out into the  hinterlands in the country and have an impact. They have done that. I  think it   s to the credit of the Ethiopians, whether it was the Emperor   s  regime or that of the Communists or of the dictator that   s in there at the  present time, they have held pretty fast to that policy and for good or ill,  35  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  they have been very successful in establishing higher education in the  country.  In the case of Alemaya, I think the quality of students has been and  remains good. Well, the philosophy that we put in there with the land  grant system and the work ethic that we introduced in the training of our  students while we were there has carried over. We had a gentleman here  on campus not too long ago from Purdue that was a graduate of Alemaya  College and in his discussions and talks to people here on campus, that  was one of the things that he emphasized. That seems to have carried  over. I know in visiting with Ethiopian students that have come from  Alemaya since we left there and been on campus and so forth, I still  sense the dedication, the seriousness with which they take their work  while they   re here   very much, I think  is  an outgrowth of what we  were able to do in those initial stages in getting the College of  Agriculture established. So, that   s all part of that warm fuzzy thing that I  talked about a little bit earlier.  How many students did you have when we were there?  Now when we were there, we only had a student body of 250 and all  males. Now, they have a student body of 20,000 and there are     Half and half; male and     Yes, it   s a co-educational institution and there are three or four other  colleges on the campus now besides agriculture, but I never really  finished my thought   that with all of those changes in government and  the adversity that grew up around that, the Ethiopians have carried  through and maintained and grown the institutions of higher learning in  the country, Alemaya being one of the fine examples of what they   ve  done. They kept them open during the revolutions and the intrigues and  whatever. But they kept the colleges and the universities open and  functioning and it will make a difference for them. So OSU can take a  lot of pride in what was accomplished at Alemaya as far as the country  of Ethiopia is concerned.  Now, I know Dr. Willham made trips over there?  Yes.  Did you ever meet with him and discuss     Well, Dr. Willham is a Cotton County boy, so yes, I know Oliver  Willham and he visited the campus several times while I was there.  36  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Could you just briefly describe his personality for us?  He was proud of being a country boy.  Yes, but Dr. Willham   I guess if you kind of look back into the  definition of a gentleman from the eighteenth and early nineteenth  century, he was a gentleman and a very gracious, very personable,  outgoing individual. The first time that I ever met him, I   d come up from  Cameron to look at the possibilities of going to school at A M and he  was Dean of Agriculture at the time. My friend and I were standing at  the receptionist   s desk as he came out of his office and he stopped and  visited with Kendall and I for several minutes and then when he learned  we were from Cotton County, why he related his growing up over  around Randlett and so forth and made us feel very good about being on  the campus. Well, it was three years later that I actually got on campus  and Oliver Willham called me by name and knew where I came from.  But he was that kind of person. He always made you feel good around  him but at the same time,  he was  a tremendous leader, a tremendous  leader. Very quiet; that sort of man, and certainly very gracious   boy, I  use that term a lot. But, he was a man that you would remember.  What kind of influence did he have on the Ethiopia Project?  As you look at the way that a president of a university has to divide their  attention in terms of the various priorities of the institution, this is  something that he took interest in and I think, too, he was proud of what  was going on over there, but he pretty much left the project to those that  were involved in it. He would come to visit, but he came to visit  basically just to see what was going on and let people know that as the  chief administration of the institution that had the responsibility for  fulfilling the contract, that he was staying aware of what was going on,  but he didn   t have anything to do with the running of the project per se.  Have you maintained relationships with those you met from your time in  Ethiopia, such as Ethiopians themselves?  Yes, not to the extent that Conrad has, but we   ve still got two very close  friends from Ethiopia in the United States. Hagos Kafil was the  procurement officer at Alemaya and we got to know him and his family  quite well. He has immigrated to the States and as a matter of fact we  talked to Hagos this week, or last week.  Said,    Happy Easter.     Yes, just exchanging Easter greetings. Then Toshoma Wonderfrash lives  in the D.C. area. As a matter of fact, we stayed with him when we went  37  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  back for the inauguration of the Native American Museum in the  Smithsonian. We have phone contact with them several times through  the year and so those are the two folks that we know the best. There are  some others that we are acquainted with and we   ll see them from time to  time, but most of our contacts with the Ethiopians have been through the  Oklahoma Ethiopian Association and its reunions and activities over  time. We   re acquainted with Tilahun Yilma out at Davis  California  and  some of those folks. When I was at Nebraska, Gatermu Highly, who was  president of the college at Hawassa  Hawassa University , we got very  well acquainted with him and his family. He has since passed away, but  yes, we   ve kept contact with people and have kept aware of things that  are going on in Ethiopia.  Dasaalam.  Oh yes, Dasaalam was here and he got very involved in the current  political aspects of the country and he was a good person to talk to from  the standpoint of opposition to the current government.  Is there a bond between those faculty members that were part of the  Ethiopian Project?  A bond? Yes, there is very much a bond between the folks that were  there. You   re probably aware that we hold a reunion every two years,  just about. Our group is getting smaller. Through the year, we maintain  contact with one another in greater or lesser degree and that   s part of the  reason why we came back to Stillwater to retire is that there are a  number of those Ethiopian families that we were with in Ethiopia   of  course there   s the Evans   , the Wagners, the Wells, and some others that  are here in the community. Others that have passed away. There are  others that live in Tulsa and so forth, so coming to Stillwater was not  coming to a strange place and partly because of the friendship that  existed between us and those that were in Ethiopia back in the mid-sixties.  Is there any other topic that we should discuss that we haven   t touched  upon about your Ethiopian experience that comes to mind, or should we  wait until Wednesday?  I guess I could think a little bit more about it, but no. There are a lot of  stories that I could relate, but I suspect that you got most of those kinds  of things from Conrad already. We could talk about trips that we took in  the country, or we could talk about camping trips or campus activities or  community activities that we got involved in. I guess I would raise that.  The student   s Village School.  38  D. Bigbee  Yes, I guess I   ll start there. Pat Murphy, who was a soil scientist here,  helped the students start what was called the Village School. There just  wasn   t any school for children in the area around the campus, and Pat  had started teaching his yard boy to read and write. The boy   s father  came to see,    What are you doing with my kid?    And he said,    Well  hey, would you teach me?    And out of that, Pat organized the students  and they actually established a school. The students were the instructors  in the school and built around their class schedules and so forth, why  you   d see the students going off campus to where we had a little school  building for them. Then one year, Crossroads Africa, I think it was,  came in with a group of folks and they built a cinder block multi-room  school just outside the gate to the campus. But now, that was something  that yes, one of our faculty members helped students. The students  picked up on it, and took it and established a neighborhood school, and  we would help them. If they needed money or whatnot, we   d have some  kind of a fundraising thing.  I remember one time we put on a variety show. We had songs and  dances and I don   t know what all. At any rate, we did it on campus and  we did invite people from around the community and we charged  admission. It was so well received that the Greek church in Dire Dawa  had an auditorium and they invited us down to perform our variety show  in the city of Dire Dawa and that was an activity. It took us quite a bit to  get rehearsed and prepared and whatnot, so over a period of maybe three  or four weeks. That was a big social and activity outlet for us and a way  in which to kind of show something of the American culture other than  what they saw in the movies, but that sort of thing.  I guess another thing that we did that was an entertainment thing for the  whole campus that was typically non-Ethiopian, it was Christmastime  and record players at home were something that we used for  entertainment. Some of us had collections of Handel   s Messiah and we  were all used to the little kids    Christmas thing at the church or at the  school. At any rate, the little tableaus and whatnot of the Christmas  events and so the suggestion was well let   s record on a separate tape the  music from the Messiah that is associated with Christmas. And then  we   ll get together and then we   ll have the Ethiopians to help us and of  course, we   ve got donkeys and camels and cattle and sheep and all of  this to do the manger and the shepherds in the field and all of that kind  of thing.  Our campus was situated on a hill and so we kind of had a natural  amphitheatre that we could put this on. And so we did. We put this all  together and Conrad helped us and we built a star to come out of the east  and rigged it up so that we could pull it on a pulley thing and it would  come out of the east and rest over the manger and all of these kinds of  39  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  things. So we had angels and Gabriel   s encounter with Mary and the  Immaculate Conception and we had the shepherds in the field by night  and the wise men and the whole smear. Then we made arrangements  with the local folks and they brought their camels in and we had donkeys  to fill in on the scenes and all this sort of thing. The veterinarian had  some tranquilizer that he could use so that we could keep the sheep in  place. But he didn   t have enough tranquilizer to do dress rehearsal and  the real thing.  On  the night of the performance, he tranquilized them  and he overdosed them and they were all out there just laying down ga-ga.  (Laughter) At the dress rehearsal, we   d mistakenly tied the donkey to  the actual manger and it got spooked and so here it goes, running off  down the road with the manger and the baby Jesus. (Laughter) But the  performance itself was really very impressive.  Ababa was the Ethiopian angel. Jean Kindell, President Kindell   s wife,  had blonde hair. That was nice.  Oh, yes. Dr. Kindell   s wife was a statuesque blonde. Perfect angel. She  was scared to death of the camels and low and behold in the manger  scene, here she is with a camel head sticking over her shoulder.  (Laughter) She managed to get through it and I have forgotten now, one  of the Ethiopian ladies played the part of Mary. All of the staff got  together and did this thing and presented it to the student body and we  invited the general public from around the college. Dire Dawa and Harar  and the Governor came over and the folks particularly out of the  Christian churches out of Dire Dawa came up. We had a nice crowd and  of course, we had good music and so on, so it was     And we turned off all the lights.  Oh yes, we were able to turn off all the lights so that our star came out of  the dark and then it stuck halfway. (Laughter) But I could tell you story  after story of those kinds of things but I don   t know that that   s really  what you   re trying to do here.  I guess this is probably a good stopping point for right now. And we   ll  see you on Wednesday?  Yes.  I do appreciate this interview. We   ve gone nearly three hours here so  thank you and see you on Wednesday.  You bet.  ------- End of April 5, 2010 interview -------  40  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  My name is Jacob Sherman with the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Today is April 7, 2010. I   m visiting with Dan and Jenice  Bigbee for the second time in the OSU Library. We   re going to discuss  the Ethiopian Project. This interview is part of the O-STATE Stories  project.  Today, we   re primarily going to interview Jenice Bigbee, but whenever  her husband feels the need to chime in, he can. I   m sure he will at some  point. I   m going to first ask you, you grew up in Temple, Oklahoma?  Yes.  Can you describe for me your childhood and I   m really interested     you   re Comanche, right?  Right.  Can you detail that lineage, too?  Well, let   s see. First of all, I was born in the Fort Sill Indian Hospital  that the United States provided for native people. I think Mom and Dad  were born there, too. I was born to Charlotte Tahawa (that   s her maiden  name) and Robert Hee-va Atchavit. He had a farm four miles west of  Temple, Oklahoma which is in Cotton County. Mom and Daddy worked  hard. Daddy had cattle and grew wheat for cash crops, and then Mama  had her poultry stock so that we   d have eggs to eat, chickens to eat and  then she could sell them for money. Whenever Daddy needed an extra  hand that was my mother. I   ve gone with him to fix fences and  whatever. And we had a great big garden. We grew everything you  could think of and most of it was canned for winter food. And we   d pick  red plums   sand plums. They make the best jelly and she   d can those  and we had potatoes. I can tell you a story about the potatoes. They had  half a basement. The other half was where we stored potatoes after they  were harvested. So I   m the youngest and I was the smallest. They pick  up two boards off the porch and hold it up and I   d slip down. I was the  potato retriever. As those boards went down, it got dark down there,  they   d say,    Look out for snakes     (Laughter)  Anyway, but I had an idyllic childhood. We ran and played and swam. I  had fifteen cousins and they   d come and spend the summer and so it was  just a big gang of us going swimming and hunting and playing games.  We did have chores though. My job was to take my little basket out and  gather firewood because our woodstove was the heat for the house. And  my brother and I had to feed the hogs, which I hated. We got, I think it  was Purina Hog Chow. It was dry and then you had to mix it with water  and haul it down to the pigs. They wouldn   t wait for us to pour it into the  41  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  trough. They   d come up and we had to pour it all over them and all over  us.  And then on Saturday evening, we   d go to town and I would sell   I  gathered eggs; that was my spend money. I   d sell my eggs and my  brother did the milking of the cows and he sold his cream so that was  our money, our allowance, I guess.  We also were members of Brown Church. It was up the hill from us and  the strange thing was, three acres were donated to build the Christian  church by our very traditional medicine man, who was not a Christian.  But, we had a very nice brick building up there. My grandmother lived  with us and she became a Christian and she would walk up that hill  maybe four miles in her old shawl and blanket thing. No matter how  cold it was, that was her penance or something to the Savior, I guess.  One day the missionary saw her coming and he stopped to give her a  ride. She said,    Oh, no.    No, she was going to walk. She lived to be a  hundred and three and her picture is hanging in that little Brown Church,  a rural church.  I was in third grade and I said,    I have three grandmothers,    and  everybody laughed. I didn   t see the joke. Well, in the Indian tradition,  you don   t have aunts and uncles and cousins. You have brothers and  sisters and when Dan married me, you have also married my four other  sisters and those kids are your kids and our kids were their kids, also. So  Dan became a father rather than an uncle, but the three grandmothers,  my father   s mother died in childbirth so he had three   she had three  sisters and they were my grandmothers, so I didn   t see any joke in when  I told them I had three grandmothers. But it   s just a closer association  and all of my cousins were either brothers or sisters so we grew up very  close.  How did your family acquire that land?  It was initially allotted to my mother. When they passed the bill in 1924,  I think it was   they were going to break up the Indian lands, break up  our reservation and give every living person at that time 160 acres.  A section of land?  Yes, and even infants   every living being at that time got 160 acres, so  that   s how we acquired the land. Traditionally, we were hunters and  gatherers, but they wanted us to settle down on our 160 acres and farm.  Mom and Dad got into it pretty well, but we had some Comanches that  just would not conform. They were not farmers. They would never be  farmers and so a lot them sold their land. We lost a lot of Comanche  42  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  land that way.  Did the dispersal of the Comanche lands occur later than the eastern  tribes in the state?  Yes. I   m trying to think of the act that did that. Was it the Dawes Act?  The Dawes Act was the act that stated that the Five Civilized Tribes   I  hate the    civilized    whatever, such a bad term. You know what I mean.  But that land was going to be dispersed and allotted for them and spread  to allotments.  Yes. Some of the tribes only got sixty acres and I don   t know how we  ended up getting 160, but I guess we were in dry western Oklahoma, so  we needed that much land. But, I   d like to stress that a Comanche child  is never alone. You have all your brothers and sisters and fathers and  uncles and whatever, so you always had somebody to take care of you.  Do you still go down that way? Ever visit?  Yes, I have a farm down there. I inherited that farm from my daddy. The  land we lived on was my mother   s allotment. So I still have a farm  southwest of Fort Sill or Lawton, Oklahoma. It   s a nice place to camp.  There   s a nice sandy beach and it   s a nice place. My father grew up on  that farm, so it means an awful lot to me, just the fact that he grew up  there.  And you primarily grew wheat down there, or cotton or     We had wheat and the cattle on Mama   s farm. On Daddy   s farm, it was  too far away to move the farm implements, so that was leased to a  farmer in the area. I also lease primarily to the same family. There   s a  family of   what   s his name? Anyway, my lease man has brothers who  also lease Indian land around there, for those Comanches who were not  going to farm.  So you grew up working on the farm. Did you ever drive a tractor or any  of that?  I drove a tractor for one day.  And what was that? Your first and only tractor?  My first and only day of driving the tractor, I went out there and went  round and round in circles in the hot sun for the day. The next day, I  couldn   t move. Daddy came in. He says,    Let   s go working     I said,  43  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee     I   m not going to get on another tractor as long as I live     But otherwise,  we kids were called upon to do some farm labor. Since we   re from  Cotton County, which says that our county grew cotton, we would start  school early in August for a couple of weeks and then we would close  all the schools in the county for three weeks and that was the time of the  harvest. We were supposed to go out and pick the cotton. I picked some  cotton, and Dan has also picked cotton. I like to say,    These are my  cotton-picking hands.    (Laughter) But that was a yearly thing. Cotton  was very important to the economy.  Now, has cotton died down there?  It   s not as profitable for us. Cotton County doesn   t grow cotton. It   s out  west   southwest Oklahoma in Hollis, and they     They tap into the Ogallala Aquifer.  There   s also a lake, Altus Lake has been dammed and they use that  water for irrigation as well and for Altus, where the Air Force base is,  that   s their supply of water.  Because cotton is a highly intensive crop to grow.  Yes, very labor intensive.  So you had chickens?  And eggs and hogs.  Cattle at all?  Cattle. We didn   t have deep freezers at that time so we   d have three or  four families would come in with us to butcher a cow. They divided it  among the families and I know there were three of us: the Wilkes   ,  Bruce Thoma and my family would butcher a hog together and share the  meat that way. When our house was built   it   s a nice bungalow with a  kitchen, bathroom, and three bedrooms and a half basement, and we had  electricity and running water when it was first built. Then a tornado hit  and took the windmill, which generated the electricity for us to have  lights and to have running water, so after that we had an outhouse and  we hauled water.  Did you participate in any 4-H activities growing up?  No, I didn   t. I don   t know why, but I don   t know that 4-H was very  active in Cotton County. Might have been, but I didn   t participate.  44  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  And I did have a horse. Daddy bought me a horse and so I would ride  the horse whenever possible and Walters would have a rodeo. I would  take my horse and ride up there because they let people who would ride  into the Grand Entry in for free. So I got to be in the parade and I got to  go into the rodeo for free. But I loved my horse. We got along real well.  When you went into town, was that Temple or Walters?  I   m going to tell you about Walters, Oklahoma. It   s racist. They had a  law that a black man or any black person had to leave town by sundown.  It was a sundown town?  Yes, and it wasn   t vocalized, but they were prejudiced against Indians as  well. Mom and Daddy didn   t want to shop in Walters. Temple was very  good to us. They appreciated everybody   s money and we   d go down to  Wichita Falls, Texas once a month and get a big load of groceries so we  didn   t really depend on the local market for that.  So you went to school in Temple?  I went to school in Temple. Went there twelve years.  So it was a K-12 school?  Well, it was first grade through high school. Dan and I married in    50  and I didn   t graduate until    52 and I went to Fort Benning with Dan and  went to school in Columbus, Georgia so I had my grades transferred  back to Temple so I could graduate with my class.  You married a young one there. (Laughter)  So was I  (Laughs)  It was a small school   small town, small school and as far as I   m  concerned, my school was like my family. When we have reunions, it   s  like a family reunion because there were only twenty of us, I think. Half  boys   fifteen boys and fifteen girls or something like that. They thought  a lot of me and I didn   t realize it until after I   d left school.  Was it primarily white students, primarily Indian students that went  there or was it mixed?  It was a public school. Mostly Caucasians, but there were, I don   t know,  a handful of Comanches that lived down there. I don   t know if you know  Ladonna Harris? She is the CEO of Americans for Indian Opportunity.  45  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  She was my sister   s best friend and she went to Temple High School.  Some of my other brothers and sisters also went to Temple.  Were you treated differently by the whites?  Not at school and not in Temple. I started driving my dad   s car when I  was thirteen and the sheriff would call my dad. He says,    Now Robert,  you know she   s not old enough to drive and you stop it.    So Daddy  came in; he said,    Jenice? Cool it.    That   s all he had to say:    Cool it.     (Laughter)  I was going to ask you about Jenice   it   s an uncommon name. How did  your parents pick that?  I don   t know and I laughed at him when he said I was the number ten  baby and they   d run out of names. I have no idea where she got Jenice,  but when I moved to Lincoln,  Nebraska , there   s a Sioux family who   had a  Jenice. I also had a college classmate who was a Jenice. And a  friend of ours had a daughter Jenice, so several Jenices after I left home.  I was curious about that. Dan? Eh, that   s common. (Laughter)  Yes, everybody   s named Dan   So you were born in    33 right?     34.  So you remember very little about the Depression?  Right. We were coming out of the Depression I think when I was born.  However, Mama and Daddy had planted a large orchard and that was all  ruined because of the drought in the thirties. The only two trees that  survived were pear trees and they had the nastiest, awful, gritty fruit. It  wasn   t fit to eat and those two guys survived and peaches and apples and  all that didn   t.  Did your farm ever have any work done by a soil conservationist at all  that you remember?  I think the BIA  Bureau of Indian Affairs  had things like that. I know  Daddy would go to the livestock meetings and I don   t know what they  learned there. They had county agents   what do you call the women  that go out?  Home extension agents?  46  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Yes, a home extension agent would come to our house and would visit  several Indian homes to help women along for food preparation and  balanced diet and all that stuff.  So you basically came of age when the Second World War was  happening, correct?  I was in first grade.  Do you remember much about that time period?  I remember when Pearl Harbor was bombed. We had an old battery-powered  radio about so high. And the battery behind it was bigger than  the radio but Daddy would listen to the news at five o   clock and I hated  it because he was always going,    Shh  Shh  Shh  Shh     We had to be  quiet while he listened to the news, and I hated the news. But anyway,  we kept up with things like that. We realized that we were at war. Daddy  went to work for the Boeing airplane plant in Wichita, Kansas. The war  created jobs for some and so we lived in Wichita, Kansas for a couple of  years while Daddy built B-17s and B-29 bombers.  Weren   t Wilbur and Melford in the Army?  Yes, my older brothers were in the Army, as well. In fact, one of them  was at Pearl Harbor and was wounded at Pearl Harbor, but he didn   t  want to talk about it. That   s all we know. He just never let us know how  he was wounded or anything.  Was he in the Navy then or was he     No, he was in the Army. He ran away from school when he was sixteen.  Went to Fort Sill, which is right there at home, and did his combat   or  they accepted him and I guess shipped him off to Hawaii at some date.  My other brother was in the Army until he retired. He was an army cook  and he loved to cook and it was good for him and he got to move around  some and ended up being at Fort Sill   like I say, it   s thirty miles  away   until he retired. Before Daddy went to Boeing, we still lived in  Cotton County and he and my older sister worked at Fort Sill; worked at  the Army base. I   m not sure what Daddy did, but my sister worked in  the warehouse and so she could get things that were rationed. We got  Hershey bars, we   d get a twenty-four case of Dr. Pepper and Coca-Cola.  So that was great; we loved that.  What did he do for Boeing? Was he on the line or     Yes, he was on the line and his group put on the back; the tail area.  47  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Do you remember much about him sharing stories about that?  No, it was just a job. One thing about remembering the Second World  War, shoes and lots of things were rationed. You couldn   t get chocolate,  you couldn   t get margarine, you couldn   t get Crisco and I guess we got  ration tickets for gasoline and sugar and flour and it was scaled to your  family. If you had a large family, you got more. Anyway, my sister was  working in Lawton at Fort Sill, and the girls that worked there would go  to lunch in town sometimes and so she came home and she said one  store had some shoes which didn   t require a ration ticket. So, Mama got  me out of school and I went up to work with my sister until lunchtime.  We went down to the store to buy me some shoes that didn   t require a  ration ticket, and they didn   t have my size. They were pretty red things; I  wanted them so badly. But anyway, they weren   t in my size so it was  kind of a lost day for me.  Your father went up to work for Boeing. Did it make more than the farm,  moneywise?  Well, you can   t make money on a 160 acre farm. You need to be bigger  than that, you need more implements, you need whatever. And so,  Daddy always supplemented the income from the farm. He and my  uncle went to New Mexico one winter; lived in tents and cut wood for  the military, so that was quite a deal.  I just find that time period fascinating. Next, when did you come back to  Oklahoma? After the war ended?  I   m trying to think. I went to fourth and fifth grade there. I think we had  moved home     That would be like    45,    46.  Yes,    45. I think we had already moved home and we have the Indian  Fair in Anadarko, Oklahoma annually. We were at Anadarko when the  war ended. I remember being in the car and Daddy driving around the  town honking the horn. It was a whole lot of cars running around  honking their horns at the end of the war.  Did you guys participate in the Indian Fair?  We camped there because it was actually like a family reunion. All of  our relatives would be there and it was a fun time for us. It was in the  summer and it was a lot of visiting and some of my relatives I wouldn   t  see except at the fair. So it was a good time.  48  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Because nowadays, that   s pretty large, isn   t it?  The fair part   s gone. It   s more just a pow-wow now. But they used to  bring produce and just like a regular state fair, but that went by the  wayside.  Was that separate from the Oklahoma State Fair?  Yes. It was totally an Indian Fair. It was administrated and organized by  a committee of Indian men from the three tribes: Kiowa, Comanche and  Apache.  And was it open to all other tribes?  Yes, it was. We had other tribes there, but very few. It wasn   t like being  surrounded by all of us Comanches. (Laughs) I   m sure they felt uneasy.  And so you went to Temple High School. What was your mascot?  Temple Tigers; red and white Temple Tigers.  And so, the big rival was Walters?  Yes.  So that   s where you met this gentlemen sitting next to me?  I was aware of Dan Bigbee when I was little girl because the drugstore  where he worked, it was also the bus station. Mama   s relatives would  come down and stay and stay and stay and when she got tired of that,  she   d take them to Walters and put them on a bus. (Laughter) Dan  Bigbee was a boxer.  Oh, he didn   t tell me this   He boxed at a hundred and twelve. He was the first one up to box. He  was in college and he came down and we had a local boxing match. He  came down to box one of the Temple boys who was like my brother, I  swear. He just was a brother to me. He got in the ring with Dan and Dan  went like that. (Gestures) Whomped him in the stomach and Doug fell  down and that was the end of that. Well, everyone was mad at Dan  Bigbee. We were going to get him  He beat up on Doug. So that   s what I  really remember first about Dan. They went into a teen hangout called  Joe Lock   s and he walked into Joe Lock   s. He came in with another  boxer, so we backed off. We didn   t go in there and get Dan for beating  up on Doug.  49  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  My daddy followed sports. He loved football and he   d follow the teams.  They   d win the county and then the district and then go up to state and  he   d follow those winners in football and boxing and he was very  interested in the boxers because they were mostly Comanche boys. My  uncle had a barn and he fixed it up as a gym. Dan and the boxers from  Walters would go up there and train. So when Dan went to Cameron  College, he was also on the boxing team. He was first up and he   d go  and beat the guy up and then go and dress and then come up and sit with  us while we watched the rest of the people. That went on for three or  four days at a time, gradually eliminating people.  And then that winter, Temple and Walters were playing and my cousin,  Kent, was helping Dan with the chain and at halftime I walked over to  have a cup of coffee. Dan bought me a cup of coffee and then we dated  every day, every night that August. He went to National Guard once a  week, every Tuesday for a couple of hours. He   d gone to his training,  and he came home real late and knocked at the door. He said,    I want to  talk to you.    So I got in the car and he asked me to marry him because  the 45th  Division  had been activated and they were being shipped off,  ultimately for Korea. And I said yes. The next day, he called me and he  said,    You know what we talked about last night?    And I said,    Yes.     He said,    Forget it     (Laughter) You did   That   s your story   Now, we did elope. His mother   I don   t know that she was against  Indians. Maybe she didn   t have a very high regard for them, but she did  not receive me well, so Dan devised this plan. He told his mother he had  to use her car. It was a    35 Chevrolet. He and his best buddy were going  to drive up to Oklahoma City to his friends    parents and they were going  to stay the weekend, so that freed up the car. Well, Dan did that. He  went to Oklahoma City, and then he came back and got me and then we  went on a journey to elope. It just didn   t make sense and he stopped  along the way. There   s Chickasha, Marlow, Duncan, and you can go  west to Cotton County. He stopped in Marlow and bought me this ring,  my wedding ring. He had to borrow the money to do that. We were  going to keep it a secret. We were married and he was going to go away  and all that. We were going to keep it a secret.  But the secret got out?  The secret lasted one day. I had a niece who was very ill at the Indian  Hospital and she was running a very high fever, like 104 or 105 and they  couldn   t get it down. They would pack that child in ice. That still didn   t  work. So anyway, my mother was staying in Lawton at a cousin   s house  because they were gone somewhere. We had the whole house. And so, I  50  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  got home and I went with my mother to Lawton. We went out to the  Indian Hospital to see about my niece and after visiting hours were over,  we drove up to Marie Red Elk   s house. There was Dan   s mother   s car,  and I thought,    Oh, no  Oh, no     Anyway, he was there and we walked  in and told Mama that we were married and then we told his mother the  next day. And she was very, very unhappy. I don   t know whether she  was more unhappy because Dan was young and ran away and got  married or that he married a Comanche girl. She would never admit it,  but I think that was part of it because she was from Walters.  Was your family accepting?  Daddy was off with my brother-in-law and my brother in South Dakota  or North Dakota with the combine. If someone had a combine and  whatever trucks and trailer houses, they   d start in Texas and follow the  wheat harvest.  Go north.  Yes, follow the wheat harvest. They were in one of the Dakotas when  we got married. We moved into a   it was actually a motel, but it was in  town and it was all run down. I don   t think anyone used it as a motel.  But anyway, Dan and I were able to rent one of the rooms for twenty  dollars a week, so we moved in there. His income was twenty dollars a  week, so we   d go to his mother   s and grandmother   s to eat. About two  weeks later after we got married and moved into the motel, I was  walking south on Main Street of Walters and Daddy was coming north.  We passed in the middle of the street and he said,    I hear you   re  married,    and I said,    Yes.    He kept walking and I kept walking. So I  really don   t know what he felt. He was very stoic and not very talkative.  Her parents were a lot more accepting of our marriage than my mother  was.  Did time heal those wounds? Over time, did     To a certain extent.  She was the typical mother-in-law. I mean, what can I say? (Laughs)  What did you do when he was overseas during the Korean conflict?  The 45th was sent to Camp Polk. It was an Army base in Louisiana that  had been closed down after the Second World War, so it was in disrepair  and overgrown. It had been closed and abandoned for years. So the 45th  went down there and they had to clean up the place. They   d get up  51  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  barracks and they   d get it all fixed up and then they   d put them in  another barracks. They   d clean that up. So anyway, it was Camp Polk  when we were there. I understand it   s Fort Polk now.  Yes, I believe it   s still in operation.  My brother-in-law who went on the wheat harvest had a teeny-weeny  little trailer house, smaller than this room and Dan had talked him into  letting us use that and we   d make the payments on it which were forty-seven  dollars a month. So Daddy hauled that thing down to DeRidder,  Louisiana and I went to school in DeRidder one year. I must have been a  sophomore   it was right after we married. We moved in down there and  I went to school down there, which was quite an experience. I would say  it was substandard from first through high school, but I was only there  for that year and in March of that year, they sent Dan to Japan. All the  45th, all the people at Fort Polk were sent to Japan to further their  training before they went into Korea. While he was at Camp Polk, he  could only come home Tuesday night until midnight, and weekends  Saturday afternoon until Sunday afternoon. So we didn   t see each other  very much.  But you didn   t go to Japan?  No, no. Daddy came down and hooked up that trailer house and took me  home and I went back to Temple High School after that.  And how long was he overseas?  Eight months.  Eight months? How often would he write you?  He wrote every day. (Laughs) I think he wrote every day saying how  much he missed us and then he came home that     Do you still have those letters?  I probably do up in the attic somewhere. Oh yes, I keep everything   (Laughter) He came back eight months later. He was flying in from  Seattle and we got news that he was coming in on an eight o   clock plane  to  the  Oklahoma City airport, and so his mother and I went up and we  slept in the car because she was afraid of maybe too much fog; we  couldn   t get up to the airport to get him. So we slept in the car that night  and eight o   clock this plane came in and we stood there waiting.  Everyone got off the plane; no Dan. So we went back and waited and  waited for the next flight from Seattle and he did come in on the next  52  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  flight. Then from there, we went to Fort Benning. He was stationed at  Fort Benning and I don   t remember what month or what year, but our  daughter was born at Fort Benning Hospital and we had a bigger trailer  to live in while we were down at Fort Benning.  You finished high school there, right?  I did. I went to school in Columbus, Georgia. I finished there and then  transferred my credits back to Temple so I could graduate with all my  classmates.  Did you spend summers at Benning?  Yes, I think when we first got there and got into that trailer, it was  summertime and it   s hot and humid and I almost died. It was miserable.  I was going to ask. I always hear stories about first summers at Benning.  Believe them  (Laughs) Dan was to be discharged and so Mom and  Daddy came and got us. We sold the trailer house. Mom and Daddy  came and got my oldest daughter, Evelyn, and I, and we drove back  from Georgia, back to Oklahoma. In a few weeks after Dan did all the  paperwork or whatever it is to get discharged from the Army   I guess  we stayed with his grandmother?  Yes.  We stayed in Walters for a little while after coming back from Benning  and Dan looked for a job but there just didn   t seem to be any and so one  day he says,    I   m going up to Stillwater.    I said,    Fine.    He said,    Well,  why don   t you go with me?    I said,    Fine.    We got up here and where  the First National Bank is on the corner, there was a hotel there. We  checked into the hotel and we looked for an apartment. All this time, I  had no idea why we were in Stillwater. I didn   t know OSU was here. I  just knew he wanted to go to Stillwater and I thought,    Okay.    So, we  came. We found a very, very nice apartment and a very beautiful  landlady who loved children. She and Evelyn got along very well so we  lucked out there. And Dan went to school here and got his B.A. and his  Master   s both here.  What were your thoughts of Stillwater? Initial response     It was a lovely little town. Very, very nice and we moved here because it  was a good little town when we were here, and we thought we   d like it  here. And it   s tripled in size since we   ve been here. It   s not the nice little  town anymore. It   s getting to be a fifty-thousand population city.  53  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  Where was your first apartment here in Stillwater?  It was on Hester. 502 Hester, just north of that traffic light there.  I know where that is. Did you work during that time period while he was  in school?  I worked a little because his mother and I decided we were going to buy  him a suit for Christmas, and so I worked that fall at TG Y, which is  about where The Hideaway is now. It was a variety store. I worked there  for two or three months and got enough to pay for half of Dan   s suit and  his mother came through with the other half.  You were four years then up in Stillwater at that time period?  We were here about five years. We left in   57 to go to Michigan State.  Did you have any more children in that time period?  We had Dan, Jr. He was born here in Stillwater.  Where was he born?  In Stillwater Medical Center   Stillwater Hospital.  What else about Stillwater can you recall from that time period?  Aside from having a wonderful landlady, we joined the First Methodist  Church. That was our home church. We got involved with the Wesley  Foundation and did a lot of things. We went to Sunday school and then  we   d have social things together. They were all young people going to  college. All starving to death together. It was great. We were all poor  together. We babysat for each other and maybe had Sunday dinner  together and one year, one of our couples got a basket that was given out  at Christmastime   ham, and I don   t know what all   so they invited all  of us over so we got to eat whatever was in that basket. It was great.  So that created a bond? The Wesley Foundation was your social     Yes, and we still have those friends that we visit. So that was a nice time  for us. I think maybe the nicest that I had because we had so many  friends. We   re all on the same level, struggling along and having babies  and all that.  Do you remember much about campus or did you spend time on campus  at all?  54  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  The poultry farm was there by where the food tech building is. An old  run-down shack, but they had classes in there. I wanted to know  something about what Dan was doing, so I did audit a poultry science  course, 101, with Cecil Roberts. So that was great, that I could sit in on  college, and Dr. Roberts was just really nice. Really nice. He liked us  and understood. Anyway, that was fun, finding out what Dan was doing.  Did you ever figure out what he was doing?  I knew he worked a lot. He made twenty-five cents an hour when he  worked on the poultry farm. And eggs were twenty-five   the cracked  eggs were twenty-five cents a dozen. So we ate a lot of eggs when we  were in Stillwater. But I liked it. We could walk up here to campus and  we have some good pictures at Theta Pond with our daughter. I just have  fond memories of Stillwater.  Where would you take your family for family outings or how would you  entertain the family?  Yes, we   d come up to campus and walk around. We   d go to church,  have lunch and then maybe walk around campus on Sunday afternoons.  But all of our social whatever, was tied in with the Poultry Department  and things that they had for socializing. We were included in all the  faculty things that they had. So they were part of our family too and of  course, our church home and our Sunday school class. We had a good  bunch of people we liked to be with and who accepted us readily.  Did you ever go out to dinners?  I think we were too poor. I don   t remember going out to dinner in  Stillwater.  I was just trying to build establishments from that era.  No, it was just graduate students going to each others    homes and that  type of thing, or the church would have something, but I don   t remember  ever going out to eat at that time.  Well, we   d go to the Union cafeteria for Sunday dinner on occasion, but  that was about it.  Really?  Yes.  The cafeteria was in the old building in the lower level and then they had  55  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  D. Bigbee  some steps or kind of like a stadium staircase up above it to the ground  level and one student ran off into that. (Laughter) The parking lot was  behind the Union, and anyway, he went bumping down those stairs.  (Laughs) We were also here for the panty raid in the    50s and we were  here when Haile Selassie came. Like I say, he looked to me like  someone from the Middle East. Had those features. But I knew he was  here and I didn   t know what his business was, but I was aware of him  visiting on campus.  Did you go to any sporting events?  Yes, to football and basketball because they had discount tickets for  students, so we could afford those.  Did you guys own a radio at your apartment?  Yes.  What were the shows that you would regularly listen to during the    50s?  I remember the morning show, Let   s Pretend and that was sponsored by  Ivory Soap or something like that. I don   t remember listening to the  radio in the evening though. I just remember while I was in the kitchen  working around, we   d listen to the radio.  But mostly what came over KSPI  KSPI?  Yes, that was the radio station in town at the time  See? I didn   t know that.  Did you ever bring home chickens or did you get discount after-processed  chickens for meat?  I don   t remember that.  Yes, every time that we slaughtered poultry in conjunction with a  research project and so forth, the products were sold and we kind of had  first dibs on it, sort of thing and yes, it would be at a discount price.  Did you purchase milk also from the     No. (Laughs)  56  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  D. Bigbee  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Alright, when we first moved into Hester Street, we were in an upstairs  apartment. And we got milk from a local company and he would come  into the house and put the milk in the refrigerator. In those days, they  could do things like that. He   d just come and holler,    Milkman     and put  the milk in the refrigerator. Well, Dan was home sick with the flu one  day and he heard    Milkman     and he sat straight up in bed and he says,     Who was that?    (Laughter)  Yes, that was my first encounter with the milkman. (Laughter)  What about butchered meat? Did the campus sell that, too?  I don   t think     Yes, they did, but we really didn   t get involved in that very much.  I don   t even remember where we used to shop. Oh, there was a Safeway  here where the AT T building is on the corner on Main and Sixth. Yes.  That building that has that kind of dome shaped top. That was a  Safeway; that   s where we shopped.  Much different that having to grow it yourself?  Well, we ate a lot better on the farm than we did in Stillwater as  students. But Mom and Dad would help us out. Well, Dan   s mother  would help us out and so would my mom and dad. In fact, Daddy bought  us a little TV before we left Stillwater.  So you had two kids in Stillwater?  Yes. We had just Dan and Evelyn. Evelyn came with us and Dan came  to us in    56, I think it was. Danny was crawling when we went to  Michigan and we stopped the first night in Eureka Springs  Arkansas . It  started raining on us here. It rained all the way to Eureka Springs and  into the night. It just didn   t stop raining. We had everything we owned in  that smallest U-Haul. The smallest one you could get, because we didn   t  have much   that TV and Evelyn   s tricycle I guess, and a baby bed.  Anyway, the next day we got up and we drove and drove and drove. We  had some friends in Ames, Iowa. He was going to school there. Gilford  Eichenberry was in school at   is it Iowa State?  Yes.  We were going to stop and we came into Iowa from the west. I don   t  know what highway that is, but I got so tired of corn. Once we got north  of Missouri and the sun came up, you couldn   t see anything because the  57  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  Sherman  J. Bigbee  corn was, as they say,    as high as an elephant   s eye.    I told Dan,    I am  so tired of corn     (Laughter) Anyway, we stopped in Ames, Iowa and  visited with our friends and then from there we went on to Michigan.  We were about halfway through Michigan and I said,    You know, I  smell corn   smells like corn cooking.    Well, I didn   t know that we were  at Battle Creek, Michigan where all the corn flakes come from.  That   s right, from Kellogg   s.  But you could just smell that as soon as you hit Michigan. Michigan was  a new experience, too. It   s different   the people were different and our  situation was different. That wasn   t bad. It wasn   t a negative, it was just  different. So Dan was working on his PhD up there.  How   d you like the winters up there?  They didn   t bother me because I didn   t have to get out. I didn   t work and  I didn   t go to school. But it was pretty rugged. We   d go to the Sears  store to buy things and you drive along and you   d see an empty parking  place and you   d pass it by and go looking around for another parking  place. Finally give up and you   d park in that place and you   d fall in the  hole. That   s why people weren   t parking there. The ice was about this  thick and then under this was about that much water, so you just kind of  fell into this hole if you wanted to go shopping. Then in the morning, we  could open our curtains and look out our window and there were all the  students and workers out there pushing each other. They had to get the  first guy out before the second guy could   so they were all out there  pushing each other out of the ice and the snow. And that was different.  Had you ever seen that much snow before?  Never. The first snow I ever saw was in sixth grade. A few little flakes  came down and we were on the south side of the building, all windows  in the sixth grade. And we all jumped up, screaming and yelling and  look 
