 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, December 4, 2014. We   re here in Stillwater,  Oklahoma, interviewing Lois Steiger as part of our O-STATE Stories Oral  History Project. Lois, thank you for joining us today.  Steiger Glad to be here.  Nykolaiszyn Lois, let   s begin by having you tell me a little bit about yourself. Could you  tell me the year you were born and where you were born?  Steiger Yes. The little, tiny place now is actually population five: Moorewood,  Oklahoma, in Custer County. I graduated from Leedey High School, which  is about ten miles from there. My maiden name is Lois Britton. My dad  homesteaded out there in 1900. I went to this little bitty elementary school,  Moorewood, and then rode the school bus fifteen miles to Leedey and  graduated in    43 from Leedey High School. I would tell you how I happened  to be at OSU, which is a wonderful thing. I think her name was Floy Flood.  We had a very tiny 4-H club, and I was just enthralled by the 4-H club.  When I was thirteen years old, I tailored a wool dress and entered it in the  district dress review and modeled it. I think I was already in high school  because I entered high school when I was thirteen. She recommended or let  me go to the 4-H Club Roundup as an independent worker. Then from that  time on, I mean, my eyes were really big, going into a dorm room compared  to the way I grew up because this was the Dust Bowl days and the  Depression Dust Bowl days. I saw a dorm room with all this wonderful  thing and availabilities. From that time on, I had an obsession to come. I did  work three years before I got here. I was twenty, and I came in 1946 and  graduated in 1950.  Nykolaiszyn Well, let me back up a little bit. I want you tell me a little bit about your  parents.  5  Steiger Oh, well, they came from Alabama. Oklahoma was a big adventure. My  dad, I think, actually lied about his age. He came out here in 1900 and  homesteaded. I don   t think he would   ve been twenty-one until the next  April, but anyway, he worked as a young man. In fact, I think the reason he  ended up in Leedey, he worked the broomcorn crop. He worked on a ranch  in Texas. I   m talking about nineteen years old. Then he went back in 1910  and married my mom, and brought her out here to the prairie to nothing.  That was three years after Oklahoma became a state, so there was nothing. I  often wondered why he picked this place to actually homestead, (Laughs)  but it was the land. They rode by train to Butler, Oklahoma, and she had her  entire possessions with her in a trunk, leaving all of her family in Alabama.  A lot of people had to live in the dugouts, but at least she had a   I have little  recording. She had a floor in a two-room house, and she was thrilled about  that. It was very, very rough. There was nothing. In fact, I guess he had been  here long enough to maybe   they were married May 4, 1910, so I guess  maybe he had put in a garden, or at least they had to immediately because  they had nothing. It was just prairie.  Nykolaiszyn Can you describe the house where you lived growing up?  Steiger Well, I actually have a picture of it, if you   d you like to see it. Do you want  to see it now?  Nykolaiszyn I   ll see it at the end, but I want you to describe it for me.  Steiger Okay, well, I understand I was the first one born out there. See, I was born  in 1926, and I   m sure that maybe the house was 1924 or    25. They put two  old houses together to make a house. Now, I am the eighth child, so that   s  how many there were of us to live in this house. We had no running water,  no modern bathroom, no electricity, nothing. We literally lived off the land.  We grew what we ate. We canned everything we could can. My mother was  a pioneer woman if there ever was one. They   re getting ready to bulldoze  down the house, and it   s sad, the memories that are there with this big  family. In fact, my cousins from Alabama, it was a big adventure for them to  come to Oklahoma, so they didn   t come for a week or two. They came for a  year or two. We had twelve in our household. I remember I shuffled the  plates around the table for twelve. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Did you see much blowing dust out in that part of the country?  Steiger Oh, my, yes. I was in the middle of the Dust Bowl days. In fact, you see, I  was ten years old in 1936. I remember walking home from school and  couldn   t even see the road. I just hoped there was a road in front of me and  kept walking. It was terrible. I mean, the dust came in under the windows  and the doors, and you couldn   t see. I remember Black Sunday. That was a  very unusual thing in history, Black Sunday. It was just, clouds of dirt came  6  in. When I was in high school, they built the shelterbelts, and that old, old  shelterbelt is still standing about two miles from where I grew up. My  daughter works for the agriculture department. She tells me they   re thinking  about restoring some of those shelterbelts. That did help, you know, the  blowing dust. I grew up in the cotton patch. We grew cotton and wheat.  Nearly everything we grew, potatoes, everything we could put in a jar to  can. My mother   s goal was to can one hundred quarts of beans. Then we  would have the flour sacks full of dried beans to get us through the winter.  Dried beans and cornbread is what we lived on.  Nykolaiszyn Would you have to help pick cotton?  Steiger Oh, did I ever  (Laughter) In fact, a lot of people are depressed when it   s  rainy days. I just danced a jig when it was raining because I didn   t have to  go to the cotton patch. All my life, I   ve loved to embroider and things like  that so I could do what I wanted to do. Yes, pulling hundred-pound sacks of  cotton and bending over is probably why I have back problems today. It was  very hard work. The cotton patch was something else. You may not know  about Johnsongrass. We would come to a patch of Johnsongrass, (it   s two,  three, four, five feet tall) and we had to chop that down to get it out of the  cotton row. We would just groan and groan. We would see a patch of  Johnsongrass, and then water   see, it   d be 110 degrees out in the field, and  the dirt was hot.  I have to, to this day, thank my mother for the way she dressed us because  we had on bonnets, long sleeves, overalls, socks, shoes, gloves. This is  something you   ll laugh at because when I first came over here, the girls in  the spring were going out to get a tan. I thought that was the strangest thing  because my mother protected my skin, and I   m thankful for that. I couldn   t  imagine. They were going out there, taking off their clothes to get a tan.  Anyway, we were exposed to the sun. We were there all day long. For  water, she would put old overalls or gunny sacks around the gallon jugs. It  didn   t really help because I remember getting to the end of the row, and it  was hot as can be. I can still almost taste that fruit jar, taste that water, but it  was wet. We did have to haul water. Water was at a real premium. We had  an old cistern, and it was the water that went off the roof into the cistern.  That was our source of water to drink and everything. I can   t imagine what  the kids nowadays would think of this kind of situation.  Nykolaiszyn All of your siblings helped?  Steiger Oh, yeah, we all had chores. We had to work. Wash day was just a  nightmare. It was just terrible. We had clothes on the bushes everywhere we  could. We had to gather the eggs. My mother, I don   t know how she could  have survived. There was so many of us to do the laundry, and laundry was  just hard, hard. She finally got an old gasoline-operated washing machine.  7  My brother said that was the greatest thing that ever happened to her,  however I   ve seen her crank on that thing two or three hours at a time trying  to get it to go. It was very, very difficult, everything. The ironing, there were  three types   sprinkle down the iron. We had to use those old irons and  heated them on the top of the stove, or they would blacken your clothes.  (Laughs) It was a nightmare doing the laundry.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me about bath time.  Steiger Oh, you don   t want to hear. (Laughter) We didn   t have any heat, see, in the  house, except the old Home Comfort cook stove. That was the big oven and  then the boiler on the side. They had to bring in   we hardly had any wood  in western Oklahoma. I remember we had some coal. Then in the  summertime, they had this little two-burner. I guess you   d call it a stove. It  was a far cry from a stove, but a two-burner thing with a little tank on the  side. We called it coal oil. My mother would leave me to watch the  cornbread pancakes while she went to milk, and then it would invariably run  out of the fuel. I   d have to run out to the big tank and fill it out of this tank  to continue the cooking.  What I started to tell you about bath time, I don   t know how she could have  cooked breakfast because we all huddled around the one stove, which was  this old   we had one little stove in our living room area that burned wood,  and then this cook stove. We would all be freezing to death, so we would  huddle around in there to try to get warm because the bedrooms were so  cold. In fact, I remember my brothers, there was some snow in the little  lean-to bedroom that the three of them slept in. I slept three in a bed. Bath  time, you asked about, well, we had one of those little heaters. I don   t know  what you call it. It just was a little free-standing heater in the middle of the  room. People wouldn   t approve of this nowadays, but we mostly all of us  took a bath in this number-three bathtub. (Laughs) That   s just the way it  was.  Nykolaiszyn Was there a pecking order? Did the oldest get to go first or     Steiger I tell you what, we would nearly fight to go first because otherwise you were  down the list, last. (Laughter) It   s hard to imagine when you think about that  many people, and the cooking that she had to do, and fixing lunches for us.  I   ll tell you another funny. See, my mother made, like, nine loaves of bread  a day, and then that was hardly enough for all of the people in our  household. I would have a sausage biscuit for my lunch, and then sometimes  I would have, mostly a sausage biscuit. Anyway, I was just so envious. One  mile over in Moorewood, they had electricity. I thought they were really,  really rich. Of course, they were poorer than we were because they didn   t  have the gardens and everything. Later I realized, but they had bologna and  bought light bread. I thought,    My goodness, that   s really living it up     I  8  should have been ashamed when you think of my mother providing  homemade bread. Every day of the world, she made nine loaves, I think. I  can remember the three loaves in a pan, and I think she had three pans of  them.  Nykolaiszyn Did they, your parents, live their entire lives in that house?  Steiger Let me see, yes. I was trying to think. No. My dad, the year that I came over  here, believe it or not, in 1946 he died very suddenly of a heart attack, and  there my mother was, widowed. I was working in Oklahoma City. I had  come up here on the bus to see if I could get up here. It was very difficult  then. He died August 7. I came up to here to the school in the fall. Then my  mother continued to live there. My brother came back from the service. He  was in the Army, and he stayed there and farmed. It was him taking care of  the cattle and the farm and my mother. Later, she moved into a little house  in Leedey, and that   s where she lived. Then she was in a nursing home in  Vici. She lived to be ninety-six. How she did that, I don   t know, with the  burdens that she had and the hard, hard work. She   d go out at two or three  o   clock in the morning to milk the cows in order to have the milk for  breakfast. I don   t know where the men were, but it was my mother that went  out there to do the milking.  Nykolaiszyn Tough woman.  Steiger She was. She had more stamina. I remember her carrying, you   re familiar  with gunnysacks, maybe, full of corn from the bottomland on her back, up  the hill for us to can and put it in the jar. Of course, I have great memories of  us sitting out there and shucking the corn and everything else, stringing  green beans, canning anything, grapes from the creek, sand plums for jelly.  She put everything in a jar. One of the things that was fun for me when I  was growing up, I couldn   t wait to get up the next morning to see if the jelly  had jelled, and it did, always. See, she had to have such quantities for so  many of us. Goodness, we could go through a jar of jelly in ten minutes.  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn You mentioned you came to Roundup, 4H Roundup, here at OSU. How did  you get to Stillwater for Roundup?  Steiger Well, this lady, Floy Flood, is the one. It seemed like there was myself and  maybe another girl or two. Anyway, she brought us up here, stayed with us,  and took us back home. I   m sure she   s not living now. You realize this was  sixty-five years ago. I   m eighty-eight now. I was here sixty-five years ago.  Then it took me three years to get here, so from the time I came over here to  that 4H Club Roundup, I just had this obsession. I never gave up the dream,  and I think it is kind of remarkable that I made it. (Laughs)  9  Nykolaiszyn After high school, you mentioned that you worked in Oklahoma City?  Steiger I worked three years before I came over here. I worked for the Department  of Public Welfare. In fact, to back up a minute, we took the merit exam. I  don   t know if you   ve ever heard of that. It   s the state merit exam, and that   s  how come me to get a job. One of the instructors (I think he might have  been the principal of Leedey High School) called me and told me they had  this opening in the Department of Public Welfare, and it was through this  merit exam that I took. I was the stenographer for the Department of Public  Welfare in Taloga. That is the county seat of Dewey County. A lady who  was the director, I typed up all of the cases for her. Then I went to Elk City,  and I worked for Elk  City  Cotton Oil Company for a while. Then I went  back to Oklahoma City for the Department of Public Welfare, and that   s  where I was when I came up here, to pursue coming up here. I was making  my plans, like I say, and then my dad died real suddenly. Anyway, I came,  and it was   I   ve often said it   s not what I learned but what I overcame  because it was a struggle.  Nykolaiszyn Well, when you came to Stillwater, what were you looking to study?  Steiger Home economics, of course, yeah. That   s been my thing all my life. I  always liked to sew and embroider and stuff like that. To tell you how I  survived when I got here, actually, I don   t know exactly what happened, but  when I came up here on the bus from Oklahoma City, I thought I had a job.  When I came up here, that was the year of the 4,000 returning World War II  veterans, so they probably gave my job to somebody else. I did not have a  job. That was a pretty low blow, but listen to this. I will forever and ever and  ever be grateful because it was the Athletic Department that put me through  college. Because of my maturity, (I was twenty years old) they  recommended me or hired me above a four-page waiting list for jobs. I  worked there summer and winter and day and night, all the time. I was at  school here, and they are the ones that put me through school.  Nykolaiszyn How did you find that job?  Steiger Well, they had some place on campus where they could tell you. I guess  they were the ones that referred me over to the Athletic Department. That   s  pretty amazing that I got that job, and really I   m serious when I worked  every hour I wasn   t in school. I ran all the way across from Murray Hall to  the field house for one hour   s work, thirty-five cents. The first year I was  here, my room and board was forty-one dollars a month, and I made forty-two  dollars a month. Then, I could sell the tickets at night for the basketball  and wrestling matches, three dollars a night. There were usually about, what,  sixteen events. Anyway, that paid my fees for the semester. Then in the  summertime, in order for me to finish in four years since I was working, I  took a course at seven in the morning and then worked full-time for a  10  hundred dollars a month. All the time I was here, that was my schedule of  work.  Nykolaiszyn Outside of selling tickets, what were some of your other duties within the  Athletic Department?  Steiger I did all the coaches    work, except Mr.  Henry  Iba. Mr. Iba was the athletic  director. I saw him daily except when he was traveling. He didn   t have a  whole lot to do with me. I was a little student working here every day. Mr.   Jim  Lookabaugh, the football coach   .  Wrestling coach  Art Griffith, he  didn   t hardly have any work, and  Ralph  Higgins was the track guy.  Anyway, I did   frankly, sometimes they didn   t really have any work much  for me to do, but they were kind enough to let me stay over there and work  until I could graduate, (Laughter) which was pretty kind of them. I was  responsible for doing all the coaches    work, except he   in fact, her name  was Geraldine Bunch   was the secretary of the athletic department. She  was his secretary.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me about Mr. Iba.  Steiger Well, he was just the greatest guy in the world. Of course, I didn   t get to  know him that well, but he was just so interested in everybody and so caring  about everybody. Of course, he was the master of all, as far as the coach,  and the players just loved him. I will tell you this, you see, I grew up to be  six foot tall, and I never met a girl taller than myself until I got to the dorm.  Here I was in the Athletic Department, and I look up, and there was Bob  Kurland. He was seven foot two. All of those guys were six foot eight or six  foot ten. I never did date any athletes, but it did me a world of good to be  over there with all those really tall guys, and the girl, especially. I never met  any girl taller than I, so I had to look up to her in the dorm. That was a good  feeling.  Nykolaiszyn Anything memorable that really stands out from your time working in the  Athletic Department?  Steiger It was, well, it was kind of interesting because as I told you, housing, (well, I  don   t guess I told you this) you can imagine with all the returning  soldiers ,  housing was just critical. The gentleman that I met my freshman year that  ended up being my husband that I was married to for forty years, he had to  live under the stadium with eighteen guys. When you say    anything  memorable,    I was walking to the field house, and he was walking from the  field house to classes. We would just speak. (Laughs) The thing that was  kind of interesting about that freshman year is that everybody, of course,  wanted to socialize and learn how to dance. Well, I never danced in my life  and neither had he, but we kind of met at that dance class. I can   t remember  her name. You   ve probably heard it a jillion times. She was a little bitty,  11  short, white-haired lady. It was over where the gym would be, Old Central  or somewhere. It was just packed. She taught the dance classes. I was  twenty, but I had to be in at six forty-five every night. Then on weekends, I  think I had to be in at ten thirty until I got to be an upperclassman.  Nykolaiszyn That was your curfew at Murray Hall?  Steiger Yes. (Laughter) That was another wide, rude awakening when I got there.  See, it was a dorm room built for two, and by the time I got there, there was  not an inch of space left. It was built for two. I got the top bunk, and because  I was six foot tall, my feet were hanging over the end about a foot. It was  quite an interesting thing. When today would you move into a dorm room  and have three other roommates, first of all? Secondly, two that had been in  the WAVES  Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service , one was  from New York, and one had come down. Her husband was missing in  action. She left school because her husband   the dean called her over. Her  husband was a complete mental and physical wreck in Seattle, so she left.  Then another girl moved down the hall, so then I was left with two of us.  Then I moved over to Willard, and I had two roommates over there. That  was a little better than four. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, you said you met your husband here on campus     Steiger At the dance classes     Nykolaiszyn    at your dance class.  Steiger    and he would walk me home. We didn   t start dating until sophomore year.  We both went to the Methodist church, and in the summertime they had a  Wesley Foundation function. Then I got to know him a little bit better, I  guess, when we went to church together. Then we dated all the way through  and finished in May of    50. We married in February of    51.  Nykolaiszyn Did he play a sport? You mentioned he lived under     Steiger No, that was the only housing available.  Nykolaiszyn Oh. (Laughs)  Steiger Eighteen guys under the stadium. That   s the only place there was. Then  later, can you believe he moved to Cordell Hall where there were four in one  room. He lived with those three other guys, four of them in a room, all the  rest of the way through college. I don   t imagine very many guys would be  too happy to do that nowadays.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me his name.  12  Steiger Charles Hickman.  Nykolaiszyn And what was he studying?  Steiger Aeronautical engineering. Actually, you will not believe this, but he ended  up being   let   s see. We lived in Tulsa. He was working for, first of all,  Spartan, and then he went over to American Airlines in their engineering.  Then after about twelve years, I believe it was, he went over to Rockwell.  They changed their name three times, so I never can remember for sure what  their name was. It was North American at one time and Rockwell at one  time. It might have been Boeing at one time. Anyway, listen to this. He  supervised sixty men and helped design the Saturn V that put the men on the  moon. We were sent to Florida for the Apollo 11 launch. He was the official  member of the Apollo 11 launch team, so that   s pretty commendable.  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Going back to your OSU days, do you recall the dean of home economics?  Steiger Oh, yeah,  Lela  O   Toole, Dean O   Toole.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about Dean O   Toole.  Steiger Well, I will say this.     I have to tell you an honor I received in order to tell  you this. I received the Danforth Award. I don   t know how in the world I  was able to get that. They picked one girl from Oklahoma and one boy from  Oklahoma to represent   the state as guests of the Ralston Purina Company  in Saint Louis for two weeks and then two weeks at the American Youth  Foundation in Michigan. Well, I could hardly miss work in the summer, but  somehow or another I did. I was gone, I guess, for a month and did that. The  other thing about Dean O   Toole   it was critical that I work. I didn   t have  any financial help of any kind. The one thing that Dean O   Toole was very  upset with me about is every girl that graduates from home economics  spends time in the   what do you call it?  Nykolaiszyn Practice house.  Steiger That   s right  I couldn   t think what it was called. She was not happy at all  with me not being available to do that, but I couldn   t do without the work. I  had to have the work in order to even survive to pay my room and board or  anything. I missed out on the experience of being   and I bet I was one of  the few that ever missed that because she didn   t let anybody miss it. She  didn   t like it that I kind of got out of that.  Nykolaiszyn Were there any teachers or classes that really made an impact on you?  13  Steiger We had classes in the Quonset huts. The one thing that I remember about  enrolling that was just unbelievable   there was pandemonium. See,  everybody wanted to be sure and get the classes they wanted at the time they  wanted them. The people that were registering (I   m assuming the staff  members were registering for the classes) were not prepared for this. They  came down out of the stands. They just   I don   t know how to   . They just  almost attacked the people to get the classes they wanted. There was no  order. It was just chaotic. That was a terrible thing that happened there.  (Laughs) Of course, it was pretty important that I get the classes that I  needed since I was working every hour I wasn   t in school. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn What did you do for fun?  Steiger Well, I didn   t start dating this gentleman until the freshman year. He was  putting himself through on the GI Bill, plus helping his folks. He was from  Sapulpa. We would walk over to the auditorium for fifteen cents to the  movie. That was our entertainment, plus going to this dance class. I think it  was maybe twice a week. I don   t know if it was every evening or not, but we  had to be in at six forty-five. Really, going to church, I was a part of the  Wesley Foundation, and I think there was a women   s/girls    group that was  called Kappa Phi. We would go down there at eight o   clock on Sunday  morning. It was a nice fellowship is what I   m telling you, that I had close  friends in the church, in the dorm, and my roommates.  It   s kind of funny because we didn   t any of us have any money, so we would  call a cab, as many of us could possibly, possibly pack in that cab to go  down there because it didn   t cost us much for a whole cab full to go to  church on Sunday morning. My two roommates sang in the First Methodist  choir. My daughter now sings in the First Methodist choir that sixty-five  years ago I looked up there and saw my roommates. They sang in the choir  all four years. There she is singing in the choir, same choir. I   ve contacted  my roommates within the last month. One of them is in a retirement center  in Shreveport. One of them is in the retirement center in Enid, and she lost  her husband in July. She married right out of college, and she   d been  married sixty-five years. I have kept track of people far back. I had a  Christmas card this week from a girl that lived next door to us, lives in  Michigan. I   ve kept track of some of my   . We   re all not very young  anymore. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn What was the climate on campus like with all the returning GIs?  Steiger Oh, gosh  You can   t believe the lines. I mean, to go to the bookstore was  impossible, even the dining room. The lines were just so long everywhere. It  just, it was just impossible. Anything you wanted to do, there were huge  lines. That was the atmosphere: crowded, lines. Then Quonset huts, you  14  know, I told you classes   . Walked everywhere. We had no transportation,  so we got lots of exercise. Oh, and the dress code was pretty strict.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me about it.  Steiger Well, in the dorm, I think it was, I mean, you didn   t go to dinner in your  jeans or slacks. We were to wear dresses. Then there would be one night a  week when we would   . We were supposed to dress nicer than just skirt and  a top. (Laughs) Dean  of Women, Julia  Stout was very strict, very, very  strict. That was the code. I don   t really know if I even wore slacks to classes.  This has been a while. I can   t remember for sure, but it seemed like the dress  code on campus, I don   t remember it being slacks. We might have been able  to. It seemed like most all of my clothes were skirts and tops and that sort of  thing.  Nykolaiszyn Do you have a place on campus that   s special to you?  Steiger Well, I   ve been yearning to go back, but after being down there today, I  don   t think I   d ever come close to campus. I would love to go back to the  Athletic Department, but I bet that it wouldn   t be anything like it was when I  was here. In fact, I doubt if I could even find the Athletic Department. Our  office was in the field house and just a very small office. It accommodated  the secretary to Mr. Iba, myself, and a calendar, and that was it.  Nykolaiszyn Times have changed.  Steiger I probably couldn   t even find anything if it was for me or in the Athletic  Department, and certainly nobody   s there that knew me then. I thought it   d  be fun to go back, but I   m sure I   ll be completely disillusioned. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Did you attend graduation?  Steiger Oh, yeah. I brought my diploma, other things, my commencement of that.  Nykolaiszyn What was graduation like?  Steiger Well, it was, again, huge, huge crowd. I never will forget my roommate   s  parents. This just happened. I didn   t even know that my roommate   s parents  were sitting next to me in graduation.    Well, there   s       I think they called  her Mary Catherine. I said,    Really?    (Laughs) We had roomed together for  three years. It was just an enormous, huge, enormous crowd, but a big thrill  to me to get that diploma.  Nykolaiszyn Were you the first in your family to go to college?  15  Steiger Actually, my two sisters, boy, they worked for theirs, but then you had to  have a teaching certificate. They taught in the one-room schools in western  Oklahoma with all eight grades in one room. They would have to go to  Weatherford in the summertime to keep their certificate up. Sometimes (I  was about thirteen years old) I would go with them because that was a big  adventure for me. I learned a lot from my   they were a huge influence on  me, my schoolteacher sisters. They were great, great teachers because they  were the cook, they were everything. They were the program director. They  were everything  They were the janitor. They were really some kind of  teachers.  You asked if they were the only ones. No, my brother actually went to, I  guess you call it, auctioneering school. He was an auctioneer, and he did  auction off cattle and that sort of thing. My brother that was in service, he  went to officer candidate school immediately when he got to Fort Sill. He  was a lieutenant in the service. He didn   t go to college, but he certainly had  the equivalent of a college degree. Then, let   s see. My younger sister went  to   she became a draftswoman for a seismograph company, which was a  pretty good thing for her to do. Another one of my sisters went to business  school for a while but married real young out of high school. In fact, I was  the only one   there were only two of us out of the class that went to college.  She married very soon after high school. Now that I look back over it, I  wouldn   t change places with them for anything because I really wouldn   t  take anything for what my experience here at Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me what happens after graduation.  Steiger Lots of things. (Laughs) I was thinking you might not be so interested in  what happened to me because you   re particularly interested in how it was  like when I was here in college.  Nykolaiszyn Sure.  Steiger Let   s see. I went to work for Oklahoma Natural Gas in Oklahoma City, and  the good thing was I was the secretary to the in-service department. Now,  the in-service department was the gals that did the test kitchen. Actually,  that was when WKY, the cooking, was brand new on TV, brand new, and I  typed the scripts for that. Of course, my background was home economics. I  worked for them. I married my husband in February, and transferred to  Tulsa, and was in the executive offices working for the head of all home  service directors in Oklahoma. See, I was a secretary out of high school,  putting myself through school, then afterwards working as a secretary. I  thought,    Is this what I worked four years for?    She was over the district  office in Tulsa, so I went down and got my official title as a home  economist. Did the cooking demonstrations in the club rooms and the school  16  demonstrations, going around to all the surrounding schools, doing the  school demonstrations.  Then for a while I was substituting on the Lookin    at Cookin    television  show in Tulsa for a while. That was quite an experience, to say the least.  (Laughter) Later on, I had my children, and then I worked for Saint Francis  Hospital, biggest hospital in Oklahoma, and I worked for the teaching staff  there. That was a real interesting job for me. I guess maybe I stayed home  for a while and raised kids for a while. Then I went to work for a  dermatologist for a while, while I did transcription for the cancer center,  nine cancer doctors. That   s when they built the Natalie Warren Bryant  Cancer Center. I did the transcription for nine cancer doctors there. Then I  went to work for Warren Petroleum Company, which was a division of Gulf  Oil. I was the secretary to nineteen oil engineers, project engineers. That  was pretty interesting. I went on up in the legal department and worked there  for a while.  Nykolaiszyn You   ve done lots of things.  Steiger I really have. I   ve really been blessed with lots of   . I was widowed when I  was sixty, living in Fort Worth. That was a very trying time. My kids were  already grown and away from home. I was down there; I didn   t know  anyone. I was very lacking in confidence driving, but I got myself out to the  Tulsa Junior College. I met a lady. They offered, I found out, it was ten  dollars (I thought) a course, but I found out later I could take everything out  there for ten dollars. I took flower arranging, and I took about eight different  kinds of calligraphy. It was through the needlecraft thing and through a lady  I met out there. She and her husband were doing crafts on the cruise ships. I  went to lunch with her one day. She gave me a name. I submitted my  projects. Now, I am not a teacher, but I taught Brazilian embroidery on the  cruise ships. I did six cruises in a little over a year, all over the world. That  was a fabulous thing for me to do. When I was at Fort Worth, I did work for  Texas Christian University. I worked in twenty-four departments on-call,  just doing that. That was a pretty different experience getting to   . I  wouldn   t do it now. I couldn   t, but that was a great opportunity.  Nykolaiszyn You   ve worked hard your entire life     Steiger Well   .  Nykolaiszyn    when you were little     Steiger    we didn   t have any choice. (Laughter) If you grew up in that family, you  had to work. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little about your children.  17  Steiger Well, I   ll back up one moment and say there   s only two of us left of the  family of nine. My sister is in memory care in Tulsa, and she   s eighty-five.  Edna and myself, we   re the only two left of the original family. My son is  living in Oklahoma City, and he was in the Navy. He   s 100 percent veteran  disabled, so he   s not in good shape physically. He got married   well, he  was married, and then his wife died. He was single all this fifteen years, and  then he married a lady   . They have each other; that   s the good thing. Then  Ducky, her goal was to become a nurse. She nearly killed herself trying to  be a nurse. She went to Ada to school for a while, and then she went to TU   University of Tulsa  for a while. The good thing is she went to work   let   s  see. She went to Tulsa Junior College. Then she ended up   let   s see. She  ended up marrying a gentleman and moving to Maryland.  She was working, well, like our Oklahoma employment, working just  everywhere. She got an opportunity into the Natural Resources Conservation  Service, USDA. She worked at another agency where she rode the whatever  you call it, the transit or whatever into Washington DC. It took her an hour  and a half a day to commute there and back. She had to have really great  clearance at that time, but then she got back to Annapolis in their office  there. She   d been up there in that office   she   s been with them now twenty-nine  years, and she   s is in the USDA here. It took us ten years to ever get  her back here. Oh, boy, how lucky we were to get that accomplished. She   s  the secretary to the soil section here. She   s been with them twenty-nine  years.  Nykolaiszyn Wonderful.  Steiger I moved here in, well, a year ago. Right now, my husband, who was ninety-one,  died a year ago in May. I didn   t tell you about my second marriage. I  was married to him seventeen years. He was a gentleman that I knew in  western Oklahoma. I knew his first wife. He was married thirty-seven years  and lost her with cancer. Then we were together seventeen years. I could no  longer live alone in Yukon because of my failing eyesight.  Nykolaiszyn It   s good to have family close by.  Steiger I don   t know what I   d do without her. I really don   t.  Nykolaiszyn Well, looking back on your connection to OSU and your growing up in  Oklahoma and your long career spanning many different places, how do you  want people to remember you?  Steiger Well, I would like them to remember me as a person that liked to give to  other people of whatever talent I had, which I did have the talent. I really     well, I   ll back up another minute and tell you that a school teacher taught me  18  the notes, and I learned to play the old pump organ. I would spend hours, if I  had any time at all, playing on that. I taught myself how to play the hymns.  Later on, I actually did play for a little church for a while because they  didn   t have anybody, couldn   t afford anybody. Played in the band in  Leedey; played a clarinet. Music has been a great part of my life. I love  music very much. I was trying to think of anything else, mostly that I   m  very much a people person. I like to be connected. In fact, the first thing I  did when I came up here was to join the church and get into a Sunday school  class because that   s always been very important to me. Wherever I am, I   m  involved, whatever. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, is there anything else you   d like to add? We kind of did a quick fast-forward  through your life.  Steiger Well, that was pretty fast-forward. (Laughter) When we get through with the  video, I   ll show you some pictures of the old home place.  Nykolaiszyn Wonderful. Well, thank you very much for coming out today. We appreciate  it.  Steiger I enjoyed it.  -------  -------   
