 Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  My name is Jerry Gill, and today is June 11, 2009. I   m visiting with Mr.  Joe McDaniel and his daughter, Mary Jo McDaniel, here in Sulphur,  Oklahoma, where Mr. McDaniel now resides. This interview is for the  O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Mr. McDaniel, I appreciate you taking time to interview with  us. You   re a legend to Oklahoma State University, and we want to be  sure we can get all of the story. Mary Jo, thanks for joining us. I should  introduce you as, of course, his daughter but also as a passionate OSU  fan, former OSU Mat Maid, and family historian.  Yes.  We appreciate you being with us and helping out today. Mr. McDaniel,  could you tell me again the story about how you got to Oklahoma State  University? You were up there working in the summer. Tell me about  how you met Coach Gallagher.  Yes. Between my junior and senior years  in high school , my dad was a  driller in the oil fields. He was doing a job up there, and I went up to  stay with him. Mr. Gallagher was having his coaching clinic, and I went  up to ask him if I could come to it, and he said,    Sure.    Of course all the  coaches were much bigger than I was, and I   d wrestle them, and if they  got rough with me, he   d go scold them on that. So when it was over, I  thanked him for letting me go and he said,    Joe, I want you to come  wrestle for me when you get out of high school.    And I said,    I   ll be  there, Coach.    And that   s how it happened.  And you showed up.  Everybody in my high school was for OU. Laurence Mantooth was my  first coach, and he was Oklahoma University   s first national champ.  6  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  Really?  Yes, Laurence Mantooth, and he was a switch artist. He invented the  switch, and all he taught us was switching. One time I said,    Coach, why  don   t you teach us something else?    He said,    You don   t need anything  else. All you need   s one good take down, one escape, and one pinning  hold.    (Laughter) He was a great coach, but in that summer when my  dad was working in Stillwater, I went up and visited with Gallagher.  Now he was working, and I don   t mean to interrupt but he was a driller  is that right?  A driller in the oil fields.  So they were working in the Stillwater area that summer?  Yes, so that   s how I got to Oklahoma State. Most everybody, they all  called me an outcast here in Sulphur because everybody else went to  OU. (Laughs) We had three guys on my first wrestling team that I  wrestled with here under Mantooth: myself, D.C. Matthews, and Ted  Anderson. All three won NCAA championships in college.  That   s amazing.  Three of us on the same team.  Davis and the other young man were at OU, is that correct?  Matthews went to OU and Ted Anderson went to Central State.  You mentioned earlier in your career that you used to get pretty hyped  up and get a little nervous before a match and tended to burn out a little  during the match. You shared a story about how Coach Gallagher   s a  pretty good psychologist. How did he handle that? Can you tell that  story?  Yes. After the match I lost to Billy Carr, he  Gallagher  told me the next  week I wasn   t going to wrestle, but he says,    I want you to weigh in, in  case this other kid can   t make weight,    so I did. Of course I wasn   t  nervous, by that time I wanted to wrestle so bad, you know. (Laughter)  And so he took us both up to the mat, and he said,    Okay, Joe, you   re  going to wrestle now.    I went out there, and I never had any problems  after that, really.  Great story. Well now if I could back up, the match before that, you had  burnt out and actually got pinned even in the match.  7  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Yes, I think it was the only match I lost. Started out, I   d get so nervous  by the time I   d get to the gym, I   d just be weak, so I kind of struggled  those first two or three matches, but I won them. But then this last one is  the one that I lost to Bill Carr of OU. I just ran out of gas, and he pinned  me. So the next Monday, Coach Gallagher says,    Joe, you   re not going  to wrestle this week. I   m going to let this other boy wrestle. I want you  to come weigh in, in case he can   t make weight though.    That was on  Monday, so by the time Friday came when we were having the matches,  I wanted to wrestle so bad I couldn   t stand it. He says,    Joe, you suit up  because we   re going to keep our opponents guessing. They won   t know  who   s going to wrestle.    When we got up there in the ring (then we  wrestled up in a ring) he said,    Okay, Joe, you   re going to wrestle.     Seemed like after that I didn   t have that nervous problem anymore. That  kind of cured that.  That   s great. How   d that match go? Did you pin the guy?  Well yes, I beat him real bad. That   s the only college match I   ve ever  lost, that one that     That one that you got pinned in was the only one that you lost. In three  years of varsity wrestling you only lost one match?  Yes.  That   s phenomenal. Of course now, Carr was a pretty good wrestler too.  Yes.  Wasn   t a shame to lose to him.  That same year we met in the finals of the nationals, and I beat him  pretty bad.  That reminds me of another story I   d like to ask you about. Again, you  mentioned briefly when we talked earlier that your father was  unfortunately involved in a serious accident.  Yes, that was just before nationals. He was involved  in an accident  and  finally died and was buried, and I was gone for about ten or twelve days.  And when I came back they were leaving the next day for the nationals,  and I wasn   t going to go. He said,    This other boy   s going to wrestle for  you, Joe.    I said,    Oh let me try out for them. Let me wrestle him down  and try out, Coach.    He said,    No, we   ll take you anyway.    So he took  me, and I didn   t know I was going to wrestle until we got to the  nationals.  8  Gill  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  Which year was it that your father died, your junior or senior year?  It was junior year, wasn   t it?  I think it was in my sophomore year. Yes, because that   s the year     Thirty-seven, wasn   t it? It was your first nationals.  Yes.  Nineteen thirty-seven. Your father in Texas was involved in a serious  automobile accident, so you went down to Texas to visit with him, and he  asked you I think   can you help with the story there, Mary Jo?  The accident was right after Dad got beat by Billy Carr, and they were  supposed to wrestle OU again.  And I   d won a national the year before.  The year before. And so Dad went to Texas to be with  his father . And  so my grandfather asked him,    Joe, did you beat Billy Carr?    because he  knew they were supposed to wrestle at OU, and my dad said,    Yes, Dad,  I beat him. I beat him.    Which he hadn   t wrestled him  yet ; he just lied  and said,    Yes, I beat him.    And he said,    Well did you win the  nationals?    And Dad said,    Oh yes, Dad, I won the nationals.     Neither one of those had ever happened yet.  Yes, it hadn   t happened yet.  But the pressure is on the line. This is your father, and he   s dying, and  when you told your dad,    Well I beat Billy Carr in that dual and then  I   m going to win the NCAA Championship.     Right, right.  Did you go ahead and do that then?  Well see, I missed a match with Billy Carr  during that time  but I met  Billy Carr in the finals at the nationals.  So he had missed like ten days of wrestling, therefore this was a ten-day  span  without wrestling . And so then when he came back and they went  to the nationals, then he wrestled the tournament and had a very good  tournament and then     9  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  I kicked his butt. (Laughter)  I remember from the last conversation, you said you took him down, let  him up, took him down again several times. Kind of wiped up the mat  with him. So you kept your promise to your dad.  Yes.  On that one mat you won the NCAA Tournament and you beat Billy Car.  Both.  That   s a great story.  It actually happened at the same time.  I want to ask you again about Coach Gallagher. From what I  understand, read about him, or heard people talk about him, he was a  real master psychologist   not with a lot of words, but like the thing he  did with you after the Carr match. Do you remember some other things  he did with wrestlers that got them ready to wrestle?  Well, he never said much. He just, if he had the greenest rookie, he   d go,     All right, go out there and feel him out a little bit, and slap a pin hold  on him, and pin him.    Maybe that guy would be startled because maybe  he was going to be wrestling a champion or something like that. But he  always made you think you were supposed to win. He had that policy,  and when you won, he   d just pat you on the shoulder, wouldn   t say  much. But in 1938, we won the NCAA and they were sending the  national AAU champions to Europe. So I think the only time   we  ordinarily as a team didn   t go to the AAUs, but we went that year. Well  Thursday night I got my elbow dislocated, and Saturday day we were  supposed to wrestle, and that thing was all swollen up. He came to me  and said,    Joe, I just don   t think you can wrestle with that elbow.    I said,     Oh let me try, Coach.    And Ray Schwartz was assistant coach, and he  kind of taped it to where I could straighten it, and I wrestled one I think  fairly easily, and that   s the only time he kind of complimented me. He  came around, slapped me on the back, he said,    You know, Joe, I just  don   t think you can be beaten.     That   s great. Obviously winning so many NCAA Championships and you  had a great, great coach. He graduated when he was at college in  engineering.  Yeah, he was a track star but     10  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  He believed in leverage and different things. Did he spend time working  with you on holds and showing you different techniques? Was that one  of his strengths in the wrestling room?  Well I really don   t remember too much. At the time I wrestled for him  he had palsy real bad and he didn   t do much.  So he couldn   t do much himself.  No. Once in a while he   d get out there and demonstrate a few holds, but  he just made you think you could lead or you could lose.  He put that belief in you that you could win and convinced you you were  good. Well in terms of working out and in terms of discipline, did you  train or run a lot? I know you probably had to run to make weight, but  did you work out quite a bit, the team members?  Yes, we wrestled quite a bit, and if we wanted to run that was on our  own. I don   t think he ever said we should run or anything. We just  conditioned. Run to lose weight or to help your condition, but mainly all  I saw was in the wrestling room.  But he expected you to be running on your own, working out?  Yes.  What did you do to make weight? Did you run so many miles a day, or  how did you go about keeping weight?  Well I never had any problems. I was always underweight, or I was  never over two pounds. Some of the guys, they   d go sit in a sweat box or  run, something like that, and I   d go with them lots of times just to be  with them. (Laughter)  You won three NCAA Championships, but now you also won either three  or four AAU National Championships?  Three I think. Two of them   my freshman year, freshman weren   t  eligible to wrestle, couldn   t wrestle on the team. But that was 1936 and  that was an Olympic year and the AAU was going to qualify us for final  Olympic tryouts, so  Coach Gallagher  took two of us, myself and  Stanley Henson, to the AAU Nationals with him. That was in Chicago I  think, and that   s where I won my first national.  First one in 1936. Then did you try out for the Olympic team after that?  Were there tryouts?  11  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  Yes, but I was a 115-pounder, and some of those guys just manhandled  you.  So the smallest weight at that time was like 126 maybe? So you were a  fairly small 115-pounder, and then you were a really, really small 126-  pounder, right?  Yes, when I came down ten or twenty. (Laughter)  How did you do in the tournament?  I went to the semi-finals and got beat in the semi-finals.  I want to pick up on something you and I talked about last time, and that  was you didn   t quite make it because you were a freshman and that  lower weight made it tough to make the Olympics. Then after you  finished your career, of course they didn   t have the Olympics in 1940, so  you kind of missed it there, but you went on the Goodwill Tour to  Stockholm and Europe.  Well, in 1938 we went to the AAUs because they said the AAU  champions would get to go to Stockholm and Europe, so we did wrestle  in that and won that. There were three of us from Oklahoma State that  made the team: myself, Stanley Henson, and Johnny Harrell.  And you wrestled in Germany and     Stockholm, Sweden. My first match was an Olympic champion from     36.  Was it Odon Zombori  from Hungary ?  Yes. He was a    36 Olympic champion. My first match was him.  Anyway, I beat him pretty good.  Now is this the guy from Sweden that was the    36 Olympic gold medal  winner?  He was from Hungary. Sweden had a tournament. It was Germany,  Hungary, Sweden, U.S.A., and I met him in that.  So you beat him, I understand, pretty handedly, didn   t you?  Yes, easy. (Laughter)  Did you feel pretty good about beating the Olympic champion?  12  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  Oh yes. Yes. John Harrell also beat a Greco-Roman Olympic champion.  We wrestled four or five matches, dual meets surrounding Sweden.  Every time we   d go... That guy   s name was Axel Cadier I think, and  every place we   d go, this Cadier would be there to wrestle Johnny.  Johnny beat him about the first three or four times, and finally he beat  Johnny the last time. We were sitting there, and he said,    Hell, if I  hadn   t let him beat me, we   d have been there forever     (Laughter)  Did you ever feel cheated a little bit that they didn   t have the 1940  Olympics? You would   ve probably been at your prime about then.  Well I was very disappointed, you know. The only Olympic chance I got  was when I was a freshman, and I wasn   t ready then. But I think that  Stanley Henson and I would   ve dominated if they   d had them when they  should   ve      40 and    44,    48 or something.  Was that a goal of yours that you thought about when you were  wrestling, that you   d want to wrestle in the Olympics someday before  you knew they weren   t going to have them in 1940?  Yes.  Then you beat the 1936 champion. You   ve got to feel kind of like,   Gee, I  might   ve done pretty good in the 1940 Olympics,    huh?  (Laughs) Yes.  I wanted to ask you also about February of 1939, the first wrestling  match ever wrestled in Gallagher Hall, now Gallagher-Iba Arena. You  have a special place in history in that: at the lowest weight you wrestled  first.  I wrestled first. When I was here we wrestled in Gallagher, and then it  was Gallagher Hall. Later they changed it to Gallagher-Iba when Mr. Iba  died.  You wrestled the first match and won the first match ever in Gallagher-  Iba Arena. That   s pretty special, isn   t it?  He   s got more fame for that than he has everything else. (Laughter)  Yes, more fame for that than all the championships I won.  Well how did you and the team feel about that first match in huge  Gallagher Hall at the time? Did you feel pretty pumped up that match?  13  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Well it was, yes. But I think I told you, all the people sat upstairs, and it  was fun wrestling at the old hall. If you fell out of the ring, they   d catch  you, you know. (Laughter) At that time at Gallagher at first there were  no seats or anything downstairs; they were upstairs. Seemed like the  crowd was so far away from you, it didn   t seem like they were there.  I think it was Gallagher Day they called it in honor of Coach Gallagher.  Do you remember a little bit of the buzz surrounding the match and it  being Gallagher Day in his honor? Was that special to you?  Well, yes. They named it Gallagher Hall but he was always special to us.  It was always just like any other match. It wasn   t as much fun as  wrestling in the old place because the people were so far away. It was  fun to me because I wrestled the first match ever wrestled there.  Did you realize that Coach Gallagher was probably pretty close to the  end of his career because of his Parkinson   s disease?  Well, that last year I was there I came back and was the assistant coach  in, I guess,    39, and actually he wasn   t at practice half the time. I  selected the team that year really and kind of did the coaching. But we  felt that he was pretty   didn   t expect him to die, but it was where he  couldn   t even move.  I heard he used to keep his hands in his pockets a lot or sometimes sit on  his hands to keep them from shaking.  Yes, he   d sit on them. In the match he   d always sit on his hands. When  you   d come off he   d congratulate you.  Something I didn   t understand, and I want to be sure I got it right. You  came back in 1940; that was his last year. That was after your senior  year, and you helped as assistant coach and you did a lot of the  coaching and showing holds because he wasn   t able to do that?  Yes.  Did he die in 1941, the year after that?  He died that summer.  That summer, after that last year.  Yes. He went up to Colorado, because the heat really bothered him and  he wanted to be in the cold weather. And I guess he got so cold and had  a stroke and died. One of the wrestlers went with him. He wanted me to  14  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  go, but I couldn   t go. I thought maybe if I had, that wouldn   t have  happened. But if it had happened, I would   ve really felt bad about it. I  think I really hurt that he died, but I think I was kind of relieved that he  was out of this, you know. He was getting so bad that life really  wouldn   t have had as much pleasure.  I think I asked you this before, but I think you did not make the funeral,  is that right? They had, I understand, a large funeral there in Gallagher  Hall, but were you able to attend his funeral?  I don   t remember why, but I wasn   t around.  I   ve seen some pictures of the wrestling teams back in the '30s that had  the cowboy boots and the cowboy hats. You traveled, you said, by car  and train occasionally. How did you dress when you were travelling?  Well, mostly just normal. Some of the guys wore cowboy boots all the  time. When we went to Europe, the three of us wore cowboy boots, but I  never even had any cowboy boots till we got to go. I just bought them     Stanley Henson and Johnny Harrell and I all wore cowboy boots, and  everybody was wanting those cowboy boots when we were over there.  When you went back East, like when you wrestled in Madison Square  Garden or some of those tours you made back east, that was pretty good  stuff for the Easterners, wasn   t it? To have the cowboy boots and hats?  Yes.  They probably thought you dressed like that all the time, didn   t they?  They thought we were pretty cocky. And we were, because we didn   t  think about losing. We knew we were going to win.  When you graduated from Oklahoma State, then you came back the next  year as assistant coach. That would   ve been in    40, and then you were  wrestling coach the next year at     Pauls Valley.  Pauls Valley High School for a year.  Yes, and I drove, took about three of my kids, I think, to New York City,  and I won the national AAU there. Boy, those kids really thought that  was crazy.  So it was in    42 that you went back to the AAU tournament with Paul,  15  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  your brother. Is that right?  Yes. Yes, I was in the Army then.  So you were going up to wrestle at the AAU tournament in    42, you   d  been drafted into the Army at that time after a year of coaching at Pauls  Valley, and then there was some question of whether you were going to  be able to wrestle?  He hitchhiked. Tell that story when you all hitchhiked all the way.  Just put your thumb up? That   s a long ways. It was in New York?  Yes, it was in New York City. (Laughter) Well in those days,  hitchhiking was very common, you know. When I went to college, we  didn   t have a car, and if I ever wanted to go home I had to hitchhike.  Do you remember how long it took you to get to New York hitchhiking?  We made it pretty good. We didn   t have much trouble.  So you and your brother Paul, is that right?  Yes. And when we got there, I was going to wrestle 115, and he was  125. I had my weight down then, and they told me,    No, you can   t  wrestle because you   re coaching. You   re a professional.     You   d been paid to be a high school wrestling coach.  So I went out that night and had a few beers and got overweight. Next  day I took Paul up there to weigh in, and they said,    Well, aren   t you  going to wrestle?    I   d already went way past that 115, so yes, I wrestled.  I said,    Yes, I   m going to wrestle.    So I wrestled 135 and got beat.  Of course, you didn   t want to weigh in against your brother Paul, so  then you jumped up another weight.  Yes, I wanted him to have a chance to win nationals, and he won it. He  won it.  How did you do then at that higher weight?  I think I got beat in the finals.  Two weights above your regular weight. Wow.  16  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  I got kind of manhandled that last match.  That   s a great story though. I   m trying to imagine hitchhiking from  Oklahoma to New York just to get the chance to wrestle. You probably  kept your condition just working your way to New York, didn   t you?  Well, I don   t remember how long it took us, but I think we made pretty  good time.  Well the question that I really wanted to ask you last time and I forgot:  You   ve been inducted into the National Wrestling Hall of Fame. Do you  remember what year that was?  Nineteen seventy-nine.  Now that is the highest award that a wrestler can get, induction into the  National Wrestling Hall of Fame. How did you feel about that?  I was very proud of it.  What do you remember about the event? I guess it was held there in  Stillwater at the Hall of Fame. And Mary Jo, you can help us out here a  little bit. You were probably there I   m sure with family.  Oh, yes. I was little.  What do you remember about it?  Well, that was just a neat time. I was pretty young, I think I was  probably in the sixth grade or something, but it was neat for Dad. Most  all of our family was still living at the time, too.  Yes, there were about eight or nine family members.  Yes, we had a lot of family there. I think Stanley  Henson  presented  your award, didn   t he?  I believe so.  Stanley was his presenter. At that time (they   ve changed it all now) you  chose your presenter, and so Stanley Henson came in from Colorado.  You want to tell us a little about Stanley that maybe people wouldn   t  know? He wrestled at OSU with you.  Yeah, he was a three time national champ. He was on that team that  17  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  went to Europe, but he got his shoulder dislocated in the first match and  didn   t wrestle any more after that year.  He was from Tulsa, and you all wrestled against each other in high  school, is that right?  Yes.  Did you meet in the finals?  We didn   t have finals. It was the state tournament  in high school . He  beat me. (Laughter)  He beat you? Oh, my gosh. And you   re still friends.  He kicked my butt. Well we became friends when we went to college     real close friends.  Now I understand Stanley   s still living in Colorado. Do you ever stay in  touch with him?  Well, about once a year. He became quite a famous surgeon, and in the  last couple of years he retired.  I want to ask you a little bit about your collegiate wrestling career. So  you went to the Army, and when you came out of the Army then you were  a wrestling coach for Syracuse. Was there one school you were at before  you went to Syracuse?  I went to Maryland the first year out when I left Pauls Valley. I was  offered and I went to Maryland, then the war came on. I came out and  went into the Army. When I got out of the Army, I didn   t coach for a  while I think, then I went to Syracuse.  And you were at Syracuse how many seasons?  Ten seasons.  You had some pretty good teams that placed fairly high in the NCAA  tournament?  Yes. I think we placed third one year or fourth.  And then you won the Eastern Collegiate Championships?  Yes. Syracuse, we won that every year. They never won it until I was  18  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  there. Of course the old man   it was kind of when I went in the Army I  was stationed at Syracuse for a while and worked out with some of those  guys, and they told the athletic director about me, and he talked to me  and said,    When you get out of the Army, let me know.    So when I got  out of the Army, Mr. Iba called him up, and he says I got the job there,  and I stayed there about ten years I think.  Well that had to be a good run there for you those ten years winning  every one of the Eastern Championships. Do you remember some of the  wrestlers that you had?  Kenny Hunte, Pascal Perri, and George Gebhardt were the stars when I  was there.  Did some of these guys place at the NCAA tournament?  Yes.  So you had some All-Americans?  Yes.  Which for Syracuse was pretty special, wasn   t it? I mean they had not  been that competitive before.  Yes. And then last year we had Rooney, I think.  James Rooney.  He was in the finals. I think he was in the finals, got beat in the finals.  What were your teams known for? You had to be pretty famous or pretty  infamous there on the East Coast with beating everybody.  (Laughs) I don   t know.  You called that one group Murderer   s Row. Gebhardt     Yes. When I went there, Lehigh would win it just about every year, and  then Penn State  would  sometimes. But when I was there, we won it  just about every year I think.  So Lehigh and Penn State were your main competition?  Oh yes. Lehigh was always good competition. Boys, my kids, used to  say,    We hate to go to Lehigh, Coach. The fans boo us.    I said,    That   s  19  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  Gill  M. McDaniel  Gill  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  Gill  good when they boo us. That means we   re winning.    (Laughter)  We didn   t talk about this last time, but as a wrestling coach, are there  any awards or recognitions that you received? Like Coach of the Year  for the conference or any special recognition you got in your coaching  career?  I don   t remember.  He got several. I don   t know how many times he got Coach of the Year  at high schools.  I   m 92 years old. I   m lucky to remember my own name. (Laughter)  Well these have been some great stories, and you wrestled at a special  time   the end of legendary Coach Gallagher   s career.  Yes.  Is there anything, Mary Jo, from your perspective that we   ve left out,  some family stories? I want to talk about the high school wrestling here  in just a minute, but anything else collegiate or in his OSU career?  I don   t think so. I think he   s done pretty good.  When you were coaching there at Syracuse, again, every year you  coached there you won the Eastern Conference Championship, which is  pretty significant as we talked about earlier. But how did you get that  talent? How did you turn the program around?  Well, we had Frank     Sprig     Gardner, out at Long Island, I guess. He  was coach out there, and we got two or three of his boys.  Was that Mepham High School?  Yes, Mepham High School. He was quite a famous old coach, and I got  three of his kids from there, and we didn   t have anybody for recruiting,  I   d just go down and try to talk them into coming. We got George  Gebhardt from Pennsylvania, who was in the finals at nationals one year.  But I think Long Island and a few from Pennsylvania. I   d just go down  and talk to them, try to get them to come.  So you developed relationships with some of the wrestling coaches, some  of the better high school programs in the New York and Pennsylvania  area?  20  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  J. McDaniel  M. McDaniel  Gill  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  I think Mepham High School had a very significant high school  program. I mean, they were probably like the New Jersey school, Blair  Academy, is probably a comparison. So Mepham High School was the  one who he pulled a lot of his kids from.  Yes, I had three kids from there.  And then when he was at Wyoming, he recruited from Oklahoma.  He  coached at Wyoming after taking a break from coaching for a number of  years.  Remember you had Jody Sloan?  Yes.  He had some Oklahoma boys.  Yes. I had some others, Dennis Alf.  Yes, Dennis Alf.  Well, we appreciate it. I just wanted to flesh that part out, and again,  thank you very much for the interview, Mr. McDaniel. In a minute we   re  going to talk about your career at Sulphur High School with the  Bulldogs. Thank you.  -------  -------  My name is Jerry Gill, and today is June 11, 2009. I   m visiting with Mr.  Joe McDaniel and Andy Swartz here in Sulphur, Oklahoma. This is the  second part of an interview we were doing earlier with Mr. McDaniel. I  appreciate your patience and hanging in there with us. I wanted to ask  you a little bit about your coaching career at the high school level.  When you finished at Wyoming, did you come directly back to Sulphur,  or was there something in between?  Yes, I came directly from Wyoming to Sulphur.   You coached  NCAA Division I wrestling at Syracuse for several years,  won conference championships, then you go to Wyoming, and then back  to Sulphur High School. What caused you to come back to Sulphur?  (Laughs) I don   t know.  Of course you had family here in Sulphur to come back to. What year  did you come back to Sulphur, do you remember?  I think it was    73. I was a freshman, and I graduated in    77 so I think it  21  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  was probably    73.  Andy, let me ask you then, you wrestled under him four years?  Four years.  What year did you start? Your freshman year was in which year?  Nineteen seventy-three.  So his first year back you started under him?  Yes.  What had you heard about Coach McDaniel?  Well, we   d had longtime coaches here, and when they quit, we didn   t  know what we were getting. I don   t think I   d ever heard of Coach  McDaniel. We didn   t have a very good history lesson, you know. But  whenever he was coming back we started hearing about him coming  back and heard more and more, and then when he got here     Were you excited to have him?  Very much so. Nobody told us he was a little guy, but he was pretty  small. We thought,    Well, we might hurt this guy.    And I remember  Dale Ledges was our heavyweight, and he was kind of a mean guy. You  know, he   s a 178 heavyweight, and the first time Coach took him and  threw him around on the mat and stuff, we had a little different  perspective on what was going on. (Laughter)  Coach, back to you. We talked about this one time earlier. Your  philosophy on coaching was that you wanted to do most of your work  and coaching in the workout room as opposed to match day   you  figured they were ready to go. What was a workout like? How did you  organize a typical workout for your team?  Well, I think we just went through holds and     You demonstrated holds.  And they wrestled a lot.  Andy, I want to ask you the same question. From your perspective, what  was a typical workout day like for you guys?  22  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  I   d say it was a typical wrestling workout. I mean, we had a normal one.  We   d warm up, and then we   d do technical stuff   learn holds, stuff like  that   then we   d do a lot of wrestling. Then a lot of times Coach would  get his assistant coach that didn   t know anything about wrestling that  would do conditioning a lot of times. We had Coach Nelson, and they  did do a lot of conditioning, but I mean we were always in shape.  What were your conditioning drills? Did you run stairs, did you run  around the   ?  No, we mostly did in-wrestling stuff. We   d always run before practice,  or we   d run after practice, but we also had conditioning stuff in the  room. You know, belly bouncer and stuff like that.  What do you remember most about Coach McDaniel? What impressed  you? As a coach, what do you think his strengths were?  Well, just any time if you had a match, then the coach very rarely said  anything during the match. If he did, you were screwing up pretty bad.  You had him upset. But the next practice   and that   s one thing that  always helped me a lot, was no matter what it was, he would have a  counter for whatever you got in trouble with. He would correct it, and if  you listened to him, you progressively got better. I think that was his  strength, was that no matter what you were doing, he would correct what  you were doing, or he would show you, if he knew a guy was coming up  that was tough and had a certain move or hold or something that he was  doing, he would show you a counter to it, or he would show you  something to do before that guy got into you.  So he   d sit down and kind of go over each match, your past match, and  first of all talk about what you did well, what you could do differently,  and kind of break it down with you?  You bet.  He was a good teaching coach.  Oh, no doubt. The best technical coach I   ve been around ever, and I  wrestled a year in college and have been around a lot of coaches and  stuff. He was technically the best.  In the four years you wrestled, how did you guys do in terms as a team?  Oh, we were always top ten in state. Sometimes sixth or fifth. We  always had several wrestlers that did pretty good on the team. We had a  state champion every year.  23  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  So you had state champions and guys that placed in the state  tournament?  Certainly.  Who was your main competition?  Well back then we were in Perry   s class. We always had good matches  with Ardmore. Ardmore had a pretty good team, but always had a big  rivalry with Ardmore.  Now they have different classes, but in those days they were all together.  Whatever class Perry   s in, they would   ve been tough wouldn   t they, even  though they were small?  And Tulsa, we were in the same.  Did your coaching style change any for high school than from college?  Did you do more teaching because the guys didn   t know as much about  wrestling, or how did you approach high school wrestling as a coach  differently than you did at college?  Oh, I don   t know. Every day I had wrestling practice in college or high  school, I found out you learned something from everybody. Somebody  could do something better than somebody else. If I didn   t learn  something in a day   s practice, I felt like it was wasted because I found  kids that could do things better even than I could. So I kind of felt that I  learned a little something every day, even at practice. They learned from  me, and I learned from them. I remember I had one kid when I was at  Syracuse named Joe Settanni, and boy, he had the best set out I   ve ever  seen, but he was bad on his feet. And one match I said,    Joe, use your  head. Don   t let him take you down. You can beat him on the mat.    He  went out there and  head  butted that kid, came back out after, and he  said,    Sure did use my head, didn   t I Coach?    (Laughter) Anyway, he  won the match.  Well Andy, from your perspective, while Coach didn   t say a lot in the  match, what about game-day preparation? Getting ready for a match,  do you remember certain rituals or things?  Not really. He had us ready by then. I always thought he had me ready,  if you paid attention to him during the week or between matches. You  know, a lot of high school kids don   t want to listen, but if you did listen  and you paid attention, you were ready to wrestle.  24  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  I see today a lot of coaches run out there on the mat and do that yelling. I  figured when the match started, they couldn   t hear me anyway. It was  too late. If they didn   t know what to do then, well it was too late to learn  anything once you get out there.  Andy, you learned a lot of wrestling, obviously, from Coach McDaniel.  What else did you learn from him about life? Are there some lessons you  learned?  Just how to compete in anything you are doing. We spent a lot of time     it seems like I always ended up riding home with him or something, and  I got to know the history of wrestling basically, too, spending time with  him. You   d get a story all the way home, you know.  What impressed you the most when you think about if someone said two  or maybe three words that come to your mind when you think about  Coach McDaniel? What would they be?  He   s always a competitor, and he made sure you were ready to compete.  How about mental toughness? He thumbed his way all the way to New  York for the AAU tournament. He must   ve been pretty mentally tough.  Did he teach mental toughness as well?  Well it was expected, you know. And he   s pretty tough physically, too. I  mean even at that time, if you were down in a referee   s position, he got  on to you, you were going to go make old man noises. (Laughter) I  remember that, still. When my kids were little, he   d come down and help  them every once in a while. And you wouldn   t want him to, but he   d  have you get down to show you something, and he   d put the oomph to  you again. (Laughter)  He was a pretty old guy at this time wasn   t he?  You bet. I wouldn   t want to get down with him now. He   d put the  oomph to me.  That   s great. Well again, coming back to Sulphur where you wrestled as  a high school student and coming back then as a coach, how did you feel  about that, Mr. McDaniel? Is that a good feeling for you to come back  and coach in your hometown?  Yes, I think so. They wanted me to come back for a long time. When I  came back they were pretty     Was it a good experience for you? Did you enjoy it?  25  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  McDaniel  Gill  Yes.  What did you enjoy most about high school wrestling, say as opposed to  college wrestling?  Well, I don   t know. They weren   t advanced. College wrestlers knew a  bit more, but maybe in high school they started with more of the smaller  details about it.  At the college level I guess it   s trying to get to the international level, get  to the Olympics. But in high school, most of the kids you   re coaching are  probably never going to wrestle again after high school. Did you try to  teach them lessons about life in addition to just wrestling a little more at  that level? Was it a different kind of instruction?  Well, I don   t know. I don   t think so.  You   re just tough on them anyway   I know one thing. I never took a kid and embarrassed him, chewed him  out or anything in front of the people like I see lots of times. If I had  things to do with him, when it was over I   d talk to him in the dressing  room, and that wasn   t too often. But I see some of these young kids that  just get hollered at and cussed every time they make a mistake. I  never   I figured once they were on the mat it was too late.  Just encourage them when they   re on the mat.  I didn   t have a very loud voice anyway so they couldn   t hear me.  (Laughter)  Andy, wrapping up a little bit your thoughts on Coach McDaniel   s  coaching career here, what do you remember most about it? How did he  impact the program here?  Well I think for me personally, I mean he made my wrestling career. He  usually didn   t say as much. You just respected his manner, his actions,  how he conducted himself, what he expected out of you.  Did you wrestle beyond high school?  Yes, I wrestled for a year at the University of Arizona.  I got him a scholarship at Arizona.  Was Leroy out there at the time?  26  Swartz  Gill  McDaniel  Swartz  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  No, that was at Arizona State.  Oh, that   s right. He was at Arizona State. Excuse me.  But he couldn   t stand to stay away from Sulphur.  That   s right, I was just     I think he was in love or something.  What lessons about life do you still take with you today that you learned  from Coach?  Well, pretty much you get out of something what you put into it. With  Coach, like I say, if you paid attention, a lot of high school kids don   t,  but I think there was a lot of people in there had an opportunity lost  because they were yay-hooing around and stuff. But if you paid  attention, if you listened to Coach McDaniel, you could do as well as  you wanted to do.  Coach McDaniel, with your wrestling career all through college and  high school, you   ve touched a lot of lives and influenced a lot of people.  Did that give you satisfaction, and as opposed to wrestling, you loved  the competition, but as a wrestling coach, did you feel like you  contributed something to the lives of people as a coach?  I made a lot of friends. I respected them, they respected me.  What   s different in your mind about wrestling? I mean those of us that  are familiar with Oklahoma State University   s program have followed it  for years, but in your opinion, what is the love that kept you in wrestling  and drove you as a wrestling coach through the years? What was  special about it?  I was very small, you know. Small for other sports. I played football in  high school. I just loved sports; I wanted to play. Even if I wasn   t  coaching, I was probably out wrestling or tumbling or doing something  out, and wrestling was one sport that my size didn   t matter. I could be  good with that.  I   ve heard it said that a good wrestler is perhaps the greatest athlete in  the world because of the combination of quickness and mental toughness  and conditioning and discipline   all of those things. How do you feel  about that?  Well, I don   t know. It takes a lot, and I think I was born with very good  27  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  McDaniel  Gill  Swartz  Gill  Swartz  balance, good speed, good strength. That   s something that you need.  Those all help. Wrestling takes a lot of work. You   ve got to want to do it  and work at it, not just go halfway. I thought if you want to wrestle, you  want to be the best. Don   t be satisfied just to be on the team; just try to  be winners.  Mr. McDaniel, this is my opinion, but after reading your stories and the  things you did, you   re one mentally tough guy. Where did that mental  toughness, that desire to win, come from? What do you attribute that to?  I don   t know. Just born with it, I guess. (Laughter)  Was there anything in life that caused you to rev your motor up to be a  wrestler? Because you had times in your life that you could have quit, as  a wrestler and as a coach    injuries, your father   s death, a lot of  issues   but you always seemed like you could reach down and get  something when you needed it. Where   d it come from?  I just liked it. I liked associating with the kids and feeling like I could do  a good job and try to do it. If they   d stay with me, well, we   d get there.  Thank you. You   re special to Oklahoma State University. In closing I  want to say that again. You   ve had just a magical career, and you   re  still a legend at Oklahoma State University. I want to thank you for the  opportunity to hear your stories and to tell us a little bit about that  special time in your life and Oklahoma State University   s life.  Well, thank you.  Is there anything you want to add to that, Andy? Your thoughts on our  conversation today?  I just always appreciated Coach. Love him to death. He   s always taken  care of me, and I appreciate everything he ever did.  Thank you gentlemen, I appreciate it.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
