 Neurohr  Cofer  Today is Friday, October 6, 2006. My name is Karen Neurohr, and I   m  with the OSU Library. I   m here interviewing Mr. C.A. Cofer, and we are  at the Best Western  Motel . Mr. Cofer and a lot of rodeo alumni are  here this weekend for the Annual Ranch Rodeo. The title of this oral  history project is O-STATE Stories, and we   re trying to capture some  stories about Oklahoma State University. Mr. Cofer, let   s start by having  you tell me what years you attended school at OSU.  I attended here from 1949 and graduated in 1953.  And what activities were you involved in when you were here at school?  I was primarily involved with rodeoing, naturally. I was real involved  with it. I was also in Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity, which was a very  good experience. I majored in Animal Husbandry and participated in a  lot of the judging contests and the Block and Bridle and a few things of  that nature, which was good. I enjoyed school very much.  Did you work at all while you were a student? It sounds like you stayed  pretty busy with your activities.  I trained horses on the side   yes, trained roping horses and barrel horses  for people.  And did you have one horse or more of your own here while you were at  school?  One to three. (Laughs)  And where did you keep your horses?  Well, let   s see. The first year, I can   t remember. I was north on  5  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Washington   I can   t remember the exact location for the first few  months I was in school. After that, I built an arena south of town. This  has been awhile back and I can   t tell you the exact location, but I had it  then for three years and I trained horses while I was there. I would get  out of class and run and do that back and forth. But it was a couple miles  south of town.  And what events did you compete in yourself in the rodeos?  Calf roping primarily   ribbon roping, bulldogging and got on a few  broncs, but that wasn   t my expertise at all. (Laughter)  Well, how was it that you ended up having to do a little bronc riding?  Were you all short a member at some of the events and you needed  another person?  As far as the NIRA  National Intercollegiate Rodeo Association , I did a  couple of times   but a lot of the other rodeos   in a few of them they  required you to be in a riding event to win the all-around, so I   d get on.  (Laughter) But no, the roping events were my main expertise.  Are there any awards that you   d like to tell us about during your times  on the rodeo team?  Oh man. We had an excellent team. I can   t remember now the particular  ones. I know that I did receive the last runner-up quite a few times in the  Block and Bridle and I did win the Block and Bridle all-around rodeo  award the last year I was in college   I know that. I won some others     won quite a few of the calf roping awards during the time that I was  roping for NIRA and stuff of that nature. Other than that, well just  normal routine I guess.  What about any memorable incidents that happened at any of the rodeos  that the team went and competed in? Do you have any stories to tell  about anything memorable? This is your chance to talk about your  teammates here. (Laughter)  Be sure and send them a copy. (Laughter)  No, I   m just kidding. (Laughter)  Oh, I can   t think of anything. I mean, I can recall one fellow telling me  like one of the horses we had get a horn in him and rip him open   the  bull did   and he was in the ring and a few things like that. There were  some terrible rain storms we rodeoed in. We had some interesting times,  but to come back and say that there was just anything really  6  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  memorable   I can   t say. We had a great rodeo club. It was big back in     52 and    53 and along through there      51   a big organization at that  time.  Did you know the founding members of the rodeo club at OSU when you  were on the rodeo club?  Most of them, yes.  So they stayed involved and active with the rodeo club then?  Yes. Of course, it primarily started I think in    46 or    47 along through  there, so most of them were seniors the first year I came in. One of the  main ones   and he has passed away now   was Buddy Reger. He was  one of the original people in it and he   s passed on now, but he was from  my hometown, so I rodeoed with him a lot even during the summertime  and a few things like that.  Well, what made you decide to go to school at OSU?  I was involved in a lot of activities when I was in high school, being  involved in FFA  Future Farmers of America . I came up here and  received a Master State Farmer degree in that   and was just kind of  around the college   and agriculture was what I was interested in. I  wasn   t interested in anything else   and that was it. The cattle  business     Okay, let   s talk a little bit about some of the traditions at OSU when you  were a student there. What was Homecoming like when you were a  student? Do you remember very much about Homecoming? I understand  they used to have a parade every year.  Yes, parade. House decorations were nothing like now though. I mean it  is just tremendous now days. Nothing of that nature, but we had  some   I can   t remember anything that would be specific that would  really     Did the rodeo team ride in the Homecoming parades? Or did you all  have a presence in the Homecoming parade at all?  Yes, we did. Yes   most generally rode in it. That was about all. It seems  like one year I remember we had fixed up a wagon, but nothing too  exceptional.  And was the parade just on Main Street in the downtown area?  7  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  The best I remember, yes. It might have gone up through the edge of the  campus, but I cannot remember that.  Okay. Today there are several gathering places on and off campus. Of  course the campus has grown quite a bit. I wonder what you might  remember about different buildings on campus or places that people  went to   and where did students hang out at?  Primarily in the early part, Swim   s. I think that was the name of it,  wasn   t it? (Laughs) And of course the latter part of it, the Student Union.  A lot of people gathered there. And the ones that got in trouble or dated  too much, Theta Pond. (Laughter) But I don   t remember anything other  than that too much   as far as gathering places     Was it difficult being in all your activities and competing in rodeo and  trying to keep up with your schoolwork? Was that ever a problem?  Yes. Yes. At that time, it was hard to get any type of recognition from  the college whatsoever. We were strictly on our own. We had to set up  everything on our own and go make our own   they did recognize us as  a club later on   I mean during that time   but as a team we did  everything on our own so we just had to   if we got out of class, we just  took out of class   and it was a problem. Sometimes we just couldn   t go  because we had finals or major tests coming up, so we just didn   t  participate.  Were the rodeos pretty much year-round, like fall through the winter  and even into the spring?  Not too much then. Most of them went on during the spring.  Spring.  There were one or two of them held in the fall, but it wasn   t nothing  like   I think now today they have pretty much both times, spring and  fall   but most of them went on in the spring.  Did you have a car or pick-up truck when you were in school here? How  did you get around?  Car.  You had a car?  Yes, yes. Pulled the horse trailer behind the car.  8  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  You did?  Yes. (Laughter) It was kind of unusual in this day and age.  Was it common back then for people to use cars to pull the horse  trailers?  Oh, yes. Yes, it was. Sure was.  What kind of car did you have? Do you remember?  Finally, or    (Laughter) I think I had a Chevrolet to start off with and  then later on I had an old Buick, then I had a Ford. I think when I got out  of college I had another Buick, I believe.  Sounds like you did a little car trading then when you were in school,  too. Well, since you were in the Class of 1953, I don   t know   maybe  there was some talk about the name change of the college at that time.  What do you remember about that?  I thought it was terrible. (Laughs)  Was that the common feeling that most of the students had?  I think most people did. They had to learn about the reasons and a few  things that they told us that it would do for the graduation and this and  that and the other. I don   t know if it   s still good or not. But I   ve grown  used to it, so it   s fine. I mean it would be hard for anybody now to say  that it was bad because I think it   s good.  Did you ever come across Frank Eaton who was Pistol Pete that the  mascot was modeled after? Did you ever have any encounters with him  at all or see him on campus? I understand he used to visit the campus  sometimes.  I think he came up to one or two of the parades and deal   but as far as  me having contact with him, no I did not.  Okay. Who was the biggest rival for OSU then? Did you all have a  particular rodeo rival? Did the rodeo club have a particular rival?  I think probably   rodeo club per se maybe New Mexico State or Texas  Tech, Texas A M. Those three maybe at that time were pretty much  involved. New Mexico State had some pretty good cowboys, yes.  Did you have some dates with the ladies while you were in school at  9  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  OSU?  (Laughter)  Well, what did you all do? Did you have dances that you went to or was  there a movie theater that you all went to?  Yes, went to movies and went to Leon McAuliffe and Johnny Lee Wills.  They played in town? Where did they play?  The Armory, is that a possibility?  Probably.  Probably. I think it was. That   s been a long time ago.  Was it pretty crowded when they were in town? I bet it was.  Oh my, it was terrible. (Laughter) Yes. Yes. Yes.  What kind of music was the rodeo team listening to back then? Who  were the popular singers   popular music   did you all listen to the radio  when you traveled to the rodeos?  Johnny Lee Wills and Leon McAuliffe and (Laughter) Bob Wills.  (Laughter)  Bob Wills.  Yes. Yes.  Where were your classes held? Were they in different buildings on  campus?  Yes, they was all over at Whitehall and AH   the Animal Husbandry  Building. I   m trying to think of some of the others that     Okay.  Yes, I had classes all over.  Was there anything else that you would like to share with us for the  interviews or for the tapes?  Well, I think that Oklahoma State has so much to offer everybody and I  10  Neurohr  Cofer  Neurohr  Cofer  really encourage them to be a part of it and when I was here, I was. I  probably didn   t mention this, but I was President of the rodeo club at the  time and had been Vice President for one year and President for two  years   so I was really involved with it quite a bit along with the animal  husbandry end of it. And I think people who get involved probably  realize more out of it than just getting here. Maybe I didn   t make as  good of grades as I should have if I   d had more time. I guess it   s because  I didn   t take it, but I think it   s a great college and I think you all are  doing a great work.  Well, thank you. Well, we appreciate the opportunity to talk to some of  the alumni like yourself and learn about what school was like for you  back then.  It was good.  That   s good. Well, thank you for your interview. We really do  appreciate it.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
