 Peters, and today is January 7, 2010. I   m visiting with John  Harrell at his home in Ardmore, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Program. Mr.  Harrell is only one of a handful of wrestlers across the United States to  ever have won an NCAA Wrestling Championship and represented the  United States in wrestling events held in Europe. Before we talk about  your wrestling experiences, I would like to ask some questions about  your early life. Can you share with me some information about your  family, where you grew up and activities you were involved with?  Well, I was a native of Ardmore. I grew up here in Ardmore, went to  Ardmore High School and Ardmore schools. I married a girl, Jean  McDaniel. We had three children: two girls and one boy. They are living  a long ways away, so I don   t see them anymore. My wife passed away  ten years ago, so I have just sort of stayed around here and wait until I  get called to go on. My life here in Ardmore was difficult. I started out  after I graduated high school. I found a summer job, and that was a  pretty nice little thing because they gave me all I could eat along with a  couple of dollars a week pay, and that was pretty good.  What did you do?  I was a lifeguard at Cedarvale, a little swimming hole in the Arbuckle   Mountains . Then I went to school at Stillwater to Oklahoma A M. I  stayed there through the freshman year, and during the summer of    37 I  was able to secure a job in the oil field, which was a little bit better pay,  even though by today   s standards it was peanuts. I stayed there  throughout the first semester of that year and stacked enough money  away then to pay my tuition and fraternity fees for the whole semester,  and I went back to Stillwater.  Well, before you went to Stillwater, in high school had you participated  5  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  in any athletics?  I was wrestling only.  Wrestling only?  Well, I did go out for the football team, but we didn   t have enough of a  football team to mention it.  Who was your wrestling coach in high school?  His name was Leighton Peddy. He went to Oklahoma A M and  wrestled under Gallagher, but he had to compete with Leroy McGuirk.  Of course, if you   re a wrestling person, you know Leroy McGuirk didn   t  bring too many first choices to you. Anyway, Leighton learned  wrestling. He loved it, and he would do anything in the world for us to  get a team started here. He almost lost his job he was so persistent trying  to get the school board to okay a wrestling program for Ardmore High  School, which we had never had before. We started in a classroom  which had been vacant in what they call a middle school. Now it   s a  junior high school vacant room. We went to the Armory and salvaged  some cots, some bed rolls, mats, put them all together, and that   s what  we used for our practice mats. We would go there each afternoon after  school was over and try to learn to wrestle. I think mostly we just had a  good time. It was kind of like we were doing back when we were  toddlers, to wrestle around a little bit and that sort of thing. We didn   t  learn a lot, but we learned as much as anybody else. So, I guess it  worked out all right since I was able to make it to the state tournament  and win that tournament at heavyweight.  Is this your senior year?  Yes, my senior year in high school. So, there, of course, I   d never  thought of going anywhere else to college except to Oklahoma A M to  be coached by Coach Gallagher. That also turned out to be a wise  decision because everything that I have accomplished in my whole  career, I have to look back and focus on how it came about, and it was  because of what I was doing with the wrestling program. That opened a  lot of doors, and it taught me a lot of things about growing up, about  what we had to do in life. As far as what I did with wrestling, I coached  a little bit when I came back out of the service at the YMCA team with  some young boys, ages ten to twelve, and we had a lot of fun and  coached some pretty good wrestlers that turned out good. But that was  my experience with the wrestling program. Because of the wrestling, I  was able to make the United States team that went to Europe in 1938,  along with some of our other members of Oklahoma A M wrestling  6  Peters  Harrell  Peters  team. Won that tournament, and I won my first place at 191 pounds.  When we returned from that trip, we stopped by Annapolis to see our  old friend, Coach Raymond Swartz, and we were not aware of what  Raymond was trying to do. He was a manipulator, and he wanted to put  us up in the finest places available there at the Naval Academy and he  did, bachelor quarters in the boat house, where they have the racing  shells. We enjoyed that and watched everything about the Naval  Academy, and that was with Stanley Henson and Joe McDaniel and  myself. We actually had three of us, Joe, Stanley and myself, and while  we were there we stayed two days and three nights. Ray Swartz, one by  one, he would take each of the three of us aside and quiz us about what  our plans are and how old we were, mainly. It turned out I was the only  one that was young enough to qualify for an appointment to the Naval  Academy.  So, Ray Swartz then went to the football recruiting man, and he told  them that he had a fellow down here at Stillwater at Oklahoma A M  who was an All-American. The only problem was we didn   t get the  press some of the others got, and I would make him a fine football  player. It turned out I had not had any experience with football, and  when I got to the dressing room there at the Naval Academy, I didn   t  know how to put the uniform on, and of course with that I got a lot of     ha ha   s. But it turned out okay. I finally made the team. Only had one  year of wrestling left, then, and qualifications for four years. I had  already used up two of them because you only had three. Freshman year  didn   t count. So, I wrestled that one year, and that was the end of my  wrestling at the Naval Academy.  From then on, I put in my time in the service, and then came back here  to Ardmore and joined my father-in-law in a business of the Coca-Cola  Bottling Company here. So, that   s how I happened to be in Coca-Cola.  My wife   s father had three daughters and no sons, and he more or less  adopted me when I got married to Jean. He was getting along in years  and he said,    We need somebody in the family to run this business for  the family when I   m unable to do it anymore.    And he said,    When  you   re released from the Navy, you come on back to Ardmore and we   ll  break you in here and let you find out.    So, that   s what I did, and I  resigned my commission.  When was that?  That was in    47. I came back to Ardmore then, and put in my career in  the bottling business.  Well, let   s go back a little bit. There are a few more things here. You  7  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  graduated from high school in what year?  Nineteen thirty-six.  And then you started at OAMC, then, when?  Fall of 1936.  You couldn   t wrestle your freshman year at all at OAMC.  Oh, yes, we had a freshman team. Matter of fact, I won the Pan America  Invitational at heavyweight while I was still a freshman.  So, when you arrived in Stillwater, how did you make the connection,  then, with the wrestling team? Did you try out?  Yes, sure.  How did that happen? Was there a tournament or     No, no, you just went in and told them you wanted to try and wrestle,  and so they put you out there and you tried to wrestle, and if you stayed,  I guess, they had some way of figuring out whether or not to keep you.  But they kept me, and I was on their freshman team as heavyweight.  Was light, of course, for the heavyweights at that time.  What did you weigh then?  I weighed about 190. Most of them were weighing 230 to 240, and that  was giving away a lot of weight. But, anyway, I did make the freshman  team, and from then on I was allowed to be a member of the squad.  Could you compete at the AAU  Amateur Athletic Union  meets?  As a freshman? I suppose so, but I don   t think we sent anybody to the  AAU meets at that time. The only AAU time that I can recall is in 1938,  and we went somewhere in Pennsylvania that held a meet, an AAU  tournament.  Might have been Lehigh?  Well, it might have been Lehigh. It might have been Penn State, but I  cannot recall exactly where it was that we went. It might have been  Franklin  and  Marshall College.  I think you might be right.  8  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  I think that might have been where it was. No, that   s wrong, too. That  AAU meet was   if you   ll let me have my notes there for a moment, I  think I   ll show it to you. It   s right here. All right, Wilkes-Barre,  Pennsylvania, that   s where the AAU Tournament was. I participated in  that. Chiga was also there as heavyweight, and I was there at 191  pounds. Made a spot for both of us. Pretty good.  Worked out well. You submitted the Pan American games when you  were a freshman.  Yes, that was in Dallas.  How many wrestlers from this area went to that one? Do you  remember?  It   s the same as I   ve been talking about. Stanley Henson and Joe  McDaniel and George Chiga   I don   t know if Chiga could make it or  not, because I think we had to get our own transportation. This wasn   t  something that the school organized. We had to get to Dallas on our  own.  So, you really represented yourselves then.  Yes, well, we were there as members of Oklahoma A M College, but  we didn   t have anybody to pick up the tab.  So, how did you pay for the tab? Who covered the expenses?  Well, I don   t know. Somehow we got that allowed, but, of course, that is  a little bit foggy. I just remember having a good time there.  You and   wasn   t Henson also a freshman, and McDaniel?  No, they were both ahead of me.  They were sophomores by then?  I believe they were two years ahead of me. They might have been  juniors then. I never thought about what   I just know that they   d been  there before I had gotten there. In fact, Stanley gave me more coaching,  I guess, individually than anybody in the whole squad. I wrestled with  some of the other fellows quite often to go out for the workouts, but  Stanley kind of took me over as his prot  g   and taught me a whole lot  about the way I should handle myself, and I owe him a lot.  Stanley Henson. When you arrived on campus, where did you live?  9  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  I lived with the agriculture professor. His name was Thompson. I got a  room with him.  Was it Hog Thompson or Chicken Thompson?  Hog Thompson. And then I pledged SAE  Sigma Alpha Epsilon   Fraternity and lived in that fraternity house the second year after I went  back in the fall of 1937. I went with them and pledged them, and I didn   t  attend the fall semester. It was the spring semester of    38 that I started  living in the fraternity house. Dates and times are like the wind; they   re  foggy.  (Laughs) You   re doing pretty good. Had you ever been to Stillwater  before you arrived to go to college? Had you ever visited?  Well, my dad had taken me there to see it before we enrolled.  So, you   d been on campus.  I knew where the town was.  What was your major?  I was in the engineering school. I hadn   t gotten into a major exactly at  that time, but I was interested in aviation engineering and, of course, my  schooling was interrupted quite a bit. So, by the time I left Oklahoma  A M and went to Annapolis, we only had one degree and that was  electrical engineering. So, that was what I got my degree in.  Electrical engineering. Do you remember any of your instructors from  your years at A M? Do you remember any of the faculty?  Well, I remember a lot of them, but I don   t remember names.  Do you remember any kind of classes you enjoyed more than others?  We had a physics teacher that I wish I could remember his name, but he  was a very good academician, I guess. He knew what he was talking  about, but he was very strict and he was trying to tell us how to split the  atom, and we were supposed to learn. Of course, I don   t remember what  I scored in that particular course, but I can remember him trying to teach  us how to split the atom and make the bomb. We didn   t know it was a  bomb at that time. We just knew they released a lot of energy, and we  never used the word    bomb    because we weren   t at war. Nobody knew  about war at that time. We were that close, in that little physics class, to  10  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  being historians.  And that was in the late    30s, well before the war.  Right.  Do you remember any of the buildings on campus, Theta Pond, any  special places?  Murray Hall, Theta Pond, sure, knew all of that. And the gymnasium,  which was the Armory. What was that building that looked like a fire  station? One of the first buildings that was built.  Williams Hall?  No, it was something else. I   m sorry I can   t remember that, but I  remembered it at the time. I   m trying to remember the streets there  that   the campus was faced on, I think, it wasn   t Third Avenue. What  was it?  University Avenue was on the south side of campus.  Yes, and then it made a right turn and went north.  Well, Knoblock was on the east side.  All right, then that building we   re talking about was almost on that  corner where the east/west road and the north/south road intersected.  That   s where this building was. I think we called it Old Central.  Did you have to work while you were in college? What kinds of jobs did  you have during your college years?  I didn   t have a job.  But, now, these semesters that you weren   t in school, what were you  doing then?  I worked for the Gulf Oil Company in the Heilton Field out here. They  would put me on when I first got the job there and went back to school.  They told me to finish my education (they wanted to move me up to  petroleum engineer), come back, and then they would guarantee me  employment, and I thought that was as good as I could get. So, that   s  what I tried to do was be a petroleum engineer. But somehow or another,  petroleum never got into the engineering part of my curriculum.  11  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  So, you worked then for them, saved your money.  Saved my money. Learned a little bit about saving money then.  And then headed to Stillwater.  Yes.  Do you remember any favorite student hangouts when you were in  college?  No. I was so broke, I didn   t have anywhere to hang out. (Laughter) I  would play chess with my roommate who was a fellow student from  Ardmore here, and we both played in the band.  What was his name?  Rocket. His name was Louis Rocket, an excellent musician.  What instruments did you play?  I was a drummer; he played the cornet.  What was the name of your band? Did you have a name?  Oh, this was Stillwater   s college band.  Oh, okay, the college band.  Yes.  So, had you been a drummer in high school?  Yes.  Did you perform at halftime at the football games, or what events would  the band play for?  Sure, we played for football games which, of course, I wasn   t there after  freshman year for things like football games. I didn   t go to school at that  time in the fall.  So, when would you play with the band then? Were there concerts?  Yes, concerts. We   d practice with them about three times a week or  something like that. Get up at seven o   clock and go over.  12  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Was Boh Makovsky the director?  He surely was.  What do you remember about Boh?  Eccentric. (Laughter) That   s about the only word I can say about Boh  Makovsky. And I don   t know why he put up with me because I wasn   t a  drummer. I was a thumper, but, anyway, he thought I was doing okay, so  he allowed me to stay.  Did you get any credits for being in the band?  Academic credits? No. That was extracurricular.  So, were most band members just doing it for fun?  Yes, sure.  Seven o   clock in the morning practice?  Well, Boh Makovsky, he was a very well known instructor, musician  and band man, and we were supposed to learn something, which I did. I  think I learned a lot from being with Makovsky. He was a man that you  admired, but you really didn   t want to be like him.  (Laughs) Okay. Well, you had the distinction of wrestling for Coach  Gallagher during the very end of his career, as his career was winding  down. When you showed up and said you wanted to try out for the  wrestling team, did you talk to Coach Gallagher about trying out, or  who did you talk with?  If I remember, it wasn   t anyone who told me. It was just an open  session, and you were invited if you wanted to wrestle to come up to the  wrestling loft and present yourself and what you could do. Of course, I  had that high school championship to present, and of course that was  good enough to get me on the team and work out.  Where was the wrestling loft?  It was in the Armory Building. There was a basketball court; that   s  where the workout was.  So, on the second level there, then, where the basketball court was?  13  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Well, it was the second level, but there was a main level.  Right. And you had to go upstairs, I think, to get to that level. So, were  there mats, then, laid out?  Yes, we had some mats.  So, when did you wrestle in the rings?  I don   t think we ever had a ring.  Never had a ring?  No. I don   t recall having wrestled in a ring while I was in college.  So, by then, you think they were already wrestling on mats?  Yes.  Because earlier on, they had used the ring with the ropes.  Yes, we went to places like Oklahoma Central University which was in  Edmond. I think they had a ring that we wrestled in, but in Stillwater we  didn   t have a ring. It was just a mat.  When did you first meet Coach Gallagher?  I met him in the fall of    36 for the first time, but those are memories that  I have no recollection about to pass along.  Were there certain characteristics that you think Coach Gallagher was  looking for in wrestlers?  Well, I don   t know. Of course, Raymond Swartz was the assistant coach,  and he pretty well handled all of us newcomers, and, no, I don   t know  that he was looking for anything in particular.  So, Raymond was the freshman coach then when you tried out?  Yes, sure.  Were there other assistant coaches?  No, I think there was only one.  So, then, did older wrestlers work with you?  14  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Eventually we got to where we   d work around with those people that  were there and other freshmen. We would be paired off, and we would  wrestle one another and try to learn how to do the various things we  needed to do: one takedown that you could do on anybody, one escape  that you could do, and one ride. If you found something that you could  maybe do, why, you worked on it and tried to do that so that it would  work on anybody. That was the philosophy that we had.  So, how many years did you wrestle at Oklahoma A M?  I wrestled two years, and then I had one year left when I went to the  Naval Academy.  For training, you say, you learned moves with other wrestlers.  Yes.  What did you do for conditioning?  Road work.  What kind of road work would you do? How much would you do?  Oh, five miles.  Daily?  Yes. Sometimes it would be a little dark when you got in (Laughs), but it  was what we did.  Would you do that year-round or just during the season?  Well, we got to where we were doing it year-round; we got to where we  just liked to do road work. I even did that when I came home. So, road  work was part of my ethic. Whatever I did, I liked to go out. Of course, I  got down to where it wasn   t five miles. It was two miles. Then the last  five years, it   s gotten down to where I walk. (Laughs)  But you still do some?  No, I can   t do anything right now.  But until then, you still did.  Right.  15  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Wasn   t that common for most of the wrestlers to do work year-round,  whether road work or     I kind of think it was. I didn   t quiz anybody or know about it, but you  didn   t have people that you ran with. You just got out, and if you had a  track to run on then you   d run around a track. If you didn   t have, then  you   d go out on the highway somewhere until you go far enough out and  turn around and come back. In high school, we   d run on the railroad  track. That was an easy place to be out of sight. So, you   d do that, but in  Stillwater, we did quite a lot of laps around the gymnasium, take about  fifty laps around.  Yes, that last level had a track. And, so, you   d run there?  Right.  And you   d usually run alone or sometimes with people?  Well, there   d be other people, but you weren   t really side by side at all.  Did you like to run in the mornings or evenings, or anytime you could?  We always did it in the evenings, until later on after my career when my  schooling was over, I would run in the mornings.  When you arrived in Stillwater, Coach Gallagher already had  Parkinson   s disease.  Yes.  Can you describe his physical condition during the time you knew him?  All I know  is  his hand was wobbly all the time. You   d shake his hand  and you would have to shake it up and down because his hand was  wobbling all the time. I was amazed what he could do with that  Parkinson   s disease. He was a very intelligent man, and to be able to put  in print everything that he wanted to portray as wrestling, to me, was  amazing because he wasn   t ever a wrestler. In fact, I don   t think he ever  did wrestle.  No, never did wrestle in college. Did he have trouble walking from place  to place, or did it mostly affect his hands?  He wasn   t spry at all. He could walk, but he was kind of like I am right  now without a cane. I can wobble around, but I can   t walk very far.  16  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Coach Gallagher didn   t walk very far.  Would he ever talk to the group of boys together?  I don   t know that he ever had a group meeting that I attended. I sure  don   t.  But he would talk to individual boys, then, before a match?  Like I said, the only time he ever did talk to me was after that fiasco I  had with being unable to break that cross-body ride.  Well, tell us that story again, if you don   t mind.  Okay. Well, this cross-body ride was an experience that I had not run  across, and I was wrestling with Waddy Young from University of  Oklahoma. And Waddy was able to put the cross-body ride, and I was  not able. I didn   t know what it was, and I didn   t know how to break it,  and as a consequence, he had about three minutes of riding time because  of that cross-body ride, which allowed him to have the winning margin  in time and he won the match. But the next week when we started to  come out to the workout room, the coach got me aside and he told me  that this is the way you do to break the cross-body ride, and I guess he  worked with me for thirty or forty minutes, just one on one, letting me  know exactly where I should move and how to move. Then (Laughs) he  came along and said,    Now, young man, it   s no disgrace to crawl off the  mat one time.    So, I learned a lesson there. I thought it was against the  rules to crawl off the mat at any time, but apparently that was accepted  in the way of the rules. They allowed you to do that without penalty, but  I wasn   t smart enough to know it.  But he did work with you that one time, then, when he saw you had been  unable to break that hold.  Yes, he did. As a matter of fact, I got to where I was baiting my  opponents to put it on me, because once they got that on me, I could  break that hold and come out into a pin hold. I was able to make a lot of  foibles that way by breaking that cross-body ride and coming around  into a pinning situation on my opponent. I guess it balanced out the good  and the bad.  So, you said you normally wrestled heavyweight.  Yes, except for the AAU.  Except for the AAU, and then you wrestled at 191?  17  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Yes, I believe that was eighty-seven kilos or something like that.  But Gallagher never asked you to drop weight to a lower level, like 175  or anything like that?  No, he didn   t.  Do you ever know of him asking any wrestlers to drop a lot of weight?  Oh, gosh, yes, a lot of guys pulled weight.  They did?  A lot of them, yes. I just don   t know what my philosophy was about that,  but it seemed like I disapprove of people having to pull weight, certainly  for high school where the young men were still in the growing  capabilities, and then the coaches wanted you to drop your weight, pull  weight down and go on, contrary to what nature was trying to do. That  was something I had to get over, too, but I didn   t allow my boys to pull  any weight. If you can handle the weight that you   re in, fine. If you want  to pull it, try something else, that   s your own business. I   m not going to  make you do that, and I don   t approve of it. And of course, the parents  were all for it. They didn   t want their young men to start starving when  they should be eating more and growing bigger.  Did Coach Gallagher ever talk about nutrition or hydration or anything  like that?  To my knowledge, he never did.  But some of that is in his book, though, where he talks about those kinds  of things.  Oh, yes, sure.  You say Ray Swartz was his assistant during the time you were there.  Are there any other assistants that you remember?  I don   t think there were any more. I don   t recall one.  I think Joe McDaniel may have assisted him in 1940, but by then you  were     I was gone.  18  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  You had gone on to the Naval Academy.  Right.  Why do you think Coach Gallagher   s wrestlers performed so well?  It   s like I told you a little bit earlier in our conversation. He had formed  a dynasty of wrestling, and his graduates from the Oklahoma A M  College who wrestled with him joined then as wrestling coaches. Those  coaches were feeding him wrestlers that had already been briefed in the  way he taught wrestling. So, I think that   s one of the, really, stars to put  on his crown, to show why he had such great success. He didn   t have to  teach them all over again.  So, his earliest wrestling teams, those young men went out to be coaches  in high schools?  Right.  Like your coach had been.  Right.  And mostly in Oklahoma?  Oh, yes. He had Ponca City, and he had   gosh, how many places did he  have ex-wrestlers? I think he had at least a dozen in high schools here in  Oklahoma.  Because wrestling was still relatively new in Oklahoma, like in Ardmore.  It was new everywhere. Texas didn   t even have wrestling. Texas schools  and colleges had no wrestling at all. And they had a few places, like  YMCAs, that had started teaching wrestling, but they were very few. We  invaded Texas from our YMCA here, when I started coaching here, and  we went down to Wichita Falls and went to Dallas and went to  Gainesville. We would present them with a program to their YMCA  boys and directors on what you could do with wrestling, and sure  enough, a few of them began to pick it up, and we would have home  matches with them before I quit. I did that for about four years.  So, that was in the late    40s, then?  Yes.  Yes, so, that was another decade later, and they were still getting started  19  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  in Texas.  Yes. I am not in support of their program at all.  Do you have anything that you remember most about Coach Gallagher?  Is there anything in particular or any stories about Coach Gallagher  that you can recall?  I   m sorry to tell you I don   t. I don   t have those stories.  That   s fine. What about that old gym? What was it like, the first  gymnasium?  It was a cracker box, (Laughter) but we thought it was wonderful.  No air conditioning.  Heavens, no. I don   t think there was air conditioning even available  anywhere.  Not on campus.  Well, in homes.  No. So, you said it was small. Were there large crowds when there were  wrestling events?  Well, yes, it didn   t take too many people to fill it up. Yes, we   d have  crowds. It was popular.  Now, the locker rooms were there? Everything was there in that  building?  (Laughs) Yes. We would go down and check out a wrestling suit with,  maybe, some old dirty socks or something, and then we   d turn them  back in, and we didn   t have to put them in lockers because they   d send  us the laundry every time we   d have a match. Then you would keep a  separate set of wrestling togs to work out in. We didn   t have a whole lot  of money to spare, and we didn   t need it. Really didn   t.  What was the atmosphere like when they did wrestle? Let   s say you were  wrestling OU. What was the atmosphere like in that old gymnasium?  Were crowds pretty respectful?  Oh, yes. Of course, they were like they still are now. It was Bedlam  anytime you went against the University of Oklahoma. It didn   t matter  20  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  what sport you were, why, you were supposed to be aware that that  home team is going to be cheering for you, and if you went to the other  school, you expected you wouldn   t be too popular.  Would they    boo    at all?  Oh, yes, sure.  All right. So, they built the new gymnasium, now known as Gallagher-  Iba Arena, but it was Gallagher Hall.  Well, I think, according to this, it wasn   t even called Gallagher Hall.  Well, it was the 4-H Convention Building, I think.  Yes, it was the Field House.  It was built for the 4-H, for them to have meetings, but everyone called it  Gallagher Hall almost immediately after it was completed.  Yes, and then Gallagher-Iba.  Did you wrestle that match February of    39, that first match in  Gallagher?  I think so. Sure did.  Do you remember anything about that match at all?  I don   t remember a thing about it except it was awesome. I didn   t know  where I was.  Well, Joe McDaniel was the lightest fellow on the team, and he wrestled  first. He was the first fellow to wrestle and win there. Did they wrestle in  weight order? Were you the last to wrestle then, as heavyweight?  Right.  Do you remember when Coach Gallagher died?  No, I don   t. I don   t remember that at all.  Because that was the following year, and by then you were at the Naval  Academy.  Right.  21  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  So, you didn   t attend the funeral or come back then?  No.  When the wrestling team when you were in college would travel, would  they travel by train, by car? How would they get to other meets?  Coach Gallagher had a car, and Ray Swartz had a car, and they   d fill  those cars up. They were old touring sedans, and that   s the way we   d go,  by just riding in somebody   s vehicle.  Would Gallagher still drive with his Parkinson   s, or do you know if  someone else would drive?  Someone had to drive.  Okay, because I know he had a car, but I don   t know if he drove.  He had a car, but I think Swartz drove it for him most of the time. Others  would also drive, but we would have volunteer vehicles that would take  us to the matches away from Stillwater.  Did you have any matches where you had to spend the night away from  town?  Well, at the tournaments.  And where would you stay in times like that?  Hotels.  And those were arranged by the coach or by     By the school, athletic department.  Did you have any per diem for meals, or how would you     (Laughs) I don   t know about all that at all, because I was one of the few  guys that could eat everything in sight and would. (Laughs) We   d sit  down to eat, and everybody else was picking around, didn   t want to get  overweight before the weigh-in, and I was gobbling up their plate and  my plate (Laughter) just like a big, fat pig. So, I had a lot of flack about  how much I was eating. Like my dad said,    If they can feed him, why,  they   re liable to go broke.    So, that was sort of a funny about how much  I was eating.  22  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  When it came time for weigh-in, did you even have to weigh in at all or  did you just say,    heavyweight   ?  Heavyweight. If they wanted to know exactly how much I weigh, then,  yes, I would get on the scale, but not necessarily.  Did you have a nickname? Did anyone give you a nickname?  Never did get a nickname.  There were a couple of heavyweights they called    Butterball   .  Well, somebody has to be around to give you those nicknames, and  somebody never did give me one, even in high school.  Earl McCready, a former heavyweight, his nickname was    Moose   .  What other wrestlers do you remember working with? You   ve mentioned  Stanley Henson, Joe McDaniel, George Chigga, you mentioned.  Yes.  Who were some of the other wrestlers that you either worked with or  were on the team that you remember?  No idea. I   ve just gone blank.  Lloyd Ricks was a little before your time.  Yes.  But he may have been there when you were a freshman. I   m not sure.  I joined the fraternity where he was at.  Sigma Alpha Epsilon?  Yes, and I got to know Lloyd pretty well.  Stanley was a member of the Sigma Chi house, and Joe McDaniel was a  Sigma Chi.  Right.  Harley     Doc    Strong.  Was he a Sigma Chi also?  23  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  He was a Sigma Chi. Frank Lewis.  And then you said that SAEs had several wrestlers. Did other fraternities  have guys that were on the team, too? Do you remember?  I don   t know if Freddy Parkey was affiliated with one of the fraternities  or not, but if he is I don   t remember it. But most of the wrestlers went to  the Sigma Chi house.  In 1938, you were part of the Good Will Tour representing the United  States in Europe.  Right.  How did you qualify for that event?  When we won the National AAU Tournament and I won the 191 weight  at that time and qualified for the   when this thing came along, to go to  Europe, it was an invitational from the Swedish and German  governments to get the United States    team of wrestlers and freestyle to  come and have a tournament so that they could brief themselves on the  way that we wrestled so that they could improve their status at the  Olympics. That   s what this thing was all about. The Olympic Committee  didn   t have a team at that time because they didn   t have any Olympic  tryouts, and so they just took the winners of the AAU tournament as  America   s team and, of course, that was another fortunate thing for me  to be there at the right place at the right time.  No hesitation in going?  Gosh, I loved it. They put us in jail over there. I believe it was in  Frankfurt. The whole team got thrown in jail because we bought a BB  gun and was shooting sparrows out the window of the hotel. Of course,  those Nazi people, they didn   t like that. They sent the Gestapo over there  and threw us in jail.  Now, several other of your college wrestling teammates were on that  team. Who else from OSU was on that team?  Stanley and Joe and myself.  So, you were the three.  Yes. Stanley injured his shoulder and he had to be replaced, and   who  was it? Dale Scrivens replaced Stanley as a member of the team, and  that was all.  24  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  So, how did you travel to Europe?  We went to New York City in my dad   s automobile. He lent us his  automobile, and we went to New York City and we caught the     Were Joe and Stanley traveling with you then?  Stanley had to do the driving. I wasn   t qualified to drive that thing up  there.  So, Stanley was driving your Dad   s car?  Yes.  And Joe was with you?  Uh-huh. And that   s the reason we stopped by Annapolis on the way  home, because it was on the road. We went on the Swedish ship  Kungsholm to Stockholm.  So, you go to Stockholm first?  Yes. That was the main event, and after that we went to Berlin, and then  we went from Berlin to Stuttgart, and I guess that was the only wrestling  cities we went to. Well, after we had wrestled in Stockholm, the team  broke up and we went visiting. I went to one town, and somebody else  went to another town and so forth, to put on an exhibition. I don   t  remember the name of the town where I went, but it was overnight from  Stockholm. They put us on a train, and we went to wherever it was we  went.  Did you have an interpreter with you?  Gosh, no.  No? (Laughs)  Wave your hands. I had the same problem when I got to Japan. I  couldn   t do any good over there, but somehow or another, you could  make people know what you wanted.  So, they would just send you out to a town. The town knew you were  coming. You   d show up     Right, and they would take us to the gymnasium or wherever it was we  25  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  were going to work out and prepare us for the match they were going to  have, and then they would farm us out to some of the residencies there to  spend the night.  And they   d feed you?  Yes.  Okay, so that was from Stockholm you would do that?  Did that one time after the tournament in Stockholm.  And then you went to Berlin next?  Went to Berlin. That   s right.  Now, when did Stanley   s shoulder separate? That was fairly severe. Was  that out at Berlin?  Before Stockholm, before he participated in that. Well, he did  participate, but he was wrestling with one shoulder tied to his side and  that wasn   t    I think he got that in the workouts, and for the match, Dale  Scrivens arrived. He must have had a real trip getting over there by  himself, find the right place to go. But the Olympic Committee paid for  all of that, for our trip to New York, and then the Swedish and German  athletic commissions paid for our trip overseas and back and for all of  our transportation and a combination while we   re on the trip.  What was your record in Europe when you wrestled? Do you remember  what your win-loss record was?  I won them all. The guy that I beat in the finals in Stockholm was the  Olympic champion in    36. That was quite a little feather in my cap, and  a little thing to be proud of, because he seemed to be a real nice guy, and  had a good match with him. Pinned him, though.  Did you have a chance to interact with these wrestlers outside of the  matches?  (Laughs) We had to ride on the bus with them, but they couldn   t tell  what the jokes we were telling were, and we didn   t know what the jokes  were that they were telling. We decided that they were ridiculing us as  much as we were trying to poke a little fun at them. Whatever it was, it  didn   t make anybody mad because we never knew what anybody was  saying.  26  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  So, you went there to wrestle, but what did you do when you were not  wrestling? What other kinds of things would you have a chance to do?  Well, I think we drank a little beer, and we would go and see whatever  kinds of sights were available to see, but, of course, we didn   t drink the  beer before we wrestled. That would break training-type stuff.  Was there a coach traveling with you?  Yes, the name was Penial, Saul Penial, and he was nothing more than a  business manager. He wasn   t a coach at all, but he took care of our  needs and he was happy with us because we brought home some gold  medals.  And you brought home one?  Yes, I had mine.  So, you finish up in Europe. You say it was sponsored by the U.S.  Olympic Committee?  Yes.  Did you hope, maybe, to try out for the next Olympics?  I did. I got to the finals in that, and then I broke a leg. Broke my ankle  bone in the very final match, and that was Henry Wittenberg. He won  the 191 pound Olympic medal, but we were in the final match and I had  those crepe-sole shoes on a plastic mat cover, and we were pushing and  jumping, trying to figure out what we were going to do to one another,  and doggone if I couldn   t move my foot, and I turned it over and broke  my ankle, and that wiped me out.  That was the end of that.  Yes. Verne Gagne. Do you remember that name?  I sure do.  Okay, I had beaten Verne the night before to get to the finals, and he  went in my place as a second place man, and I think he won the Greco-  Roman at that weight at the Olympics. Henry Wittenberg won the title  for Catch As Catch Can, and, I said, Verne won the other title.  Well, you returned to the United States. You   re traveling with Joe  McDaniel and Stanley Henson.  27  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  And Dale was with us.  And Dale was with you. So, Stanley stayed with the group, right? He just  didn   t wrestle anymore.  No, he didn   t wrestle.  But he stayed with the group.  Stayed with the group the whole time because he was paid for.  And you say you stopped at the Naval Academy then?  On the way home from New York we went through Annapolis. That was  really not out of the way, and it was an interesting place to go. None of  us had ever seen the place before, and we pulled in there about two  o   clock in the morning and finally figured out where Ray Swartz   s  address was, and we drove up in his driveway and started singing that  OAMC song (Laughter) and he tried to call the police. He thought it was  a bunch of fellows who had a tipsy a little bit out there, but when he  finally got out and found out who it was, he invited us in, and the rest of  the night, I don   t think we ever went to sleep that night.  But the next day, that   s when he found us accommodations at the Naval  Academy, because he wanted to spend some time while he figured out if  any of us could be eligible for an appointment to the Naval Academy.  None of us had even thought about going there at that time. In fact, we  hadn   t figured on staying more than one night in Annapolis to see Ray  while we were on our way home, but little by little things changed  around, and we enjoyed every bit of what we did. We were sold on that  campus in Annapolis immediately. We couldn   t imagine anybody being  paid to go there. Well, being paid was sort of a misnomer, too, because  you never got the pay. You just got to listen to your name, and you had a  certain amount of money that was issued to you, and out of that amount  that was issued, you bought uniforms and books or whatever it was that  we had to have. That was our tuition. So, they would give it to you and  you would say,    There it is,    and then they would put it over there and  they would spend it for you. So, we didn   t get much out of that pay right  there, but we had a good time.  So, you met Ray Swartz there at the Naval Academy at Annapolis. You  had to return to Oklahoma, though, that year. You go to OSU in    39,  then?  Yes.  28  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Could you still wrestle, then?  At the NCAA tournament. Won my gold medal there.  Do you remember much about that tournament?  I remember it seemed to me they were some big, big men I was  wrestling. Gosh. A fellow named Toll   I bet he was six feet four. A  huge man. And, of course, he was limited in his ability to maneuver,  being that big and a little bit awkward. So, I was able to dance around  him a little bit and finally get him on the mat, and finally got him  pinned. I wrestled one guy that weighed over 300 pounds, but, boy, you  talk about a tug. Now, he was a really fat man. I wasn   t going to allow  him to get on top of me, for sure. I had to be sure that I was not going to  be down in any leg tackles on that fellow. But, again, once you got him  on his back, he was unable to roll over. He just pinned himself, you  might say. Little experiences like that.  Most of the men you wrestled were bigger than you, weren   t they?  They outweighed me, yes. Sure did.  Was Coach Gallagher at that tournament then, in    39?  Yes, he was there. Sure.  Do you remember who else won titles that year?  Stanley won one, and Joe won one.  And you won.  And I won.  Were you the three champions?  Yes.  So, you finished up at OSU in Stillwater, and you   ve still got eligibility.  So, now you head to Annapolis?  Right, because I wrestled on their freshman team without losing any  eligibility, but I was pretty much an assistant coach instead of a  participant. I was helping Ray coach the team, and I enjoyed that and got  to know my fellow classmates pretty well.  29  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  And this was 1940, is when you were in Annapolis?  It was in    39. I went all of    39.  So, you had wrestled that spring at OSU and then immediately went,  then, in the fall of    39 in Annapolis.  Well, actually I went to Annapolis in June. That   s when we were  inducted. If you passed all the tests, then you became a midshipman in  June.  June of    39 you arrived. So, then, how long were you at Annapolis?  Three years. Pearl Harbor got us into the war, and then when we got into  the war, they wanted to get as many people out of the Academy into  uniform as they could. So, the academic curriculum was cut to three  years instead of four years. So, I caught up with one of the years I lost.  When you enter the Naval Academy, you don   t take your college credits  with you. Everybody starts out at square one, and we had one boy who  had already graduated from MIT, in my class at the Naval Academy, and  he was just like the rest of us. (Laughs) He   d go into those classes, of  course, and dream while everybody else was sweating, but he did. He  had to be a plebe like everyone else. I never knew what happened to him  after graduation; didn   t keep up with him.  So, you were a plebe with the rest of them, even though you were twenty  years old almost?  Twenty years. I think if I   d have been two months older, I couldn   t  have   if I had been born in January, for instance, I would not have  qualified, age-wise, to be a candidate.  But you were born in March?  Born in April.  April of 1919. So, you got three years at the Academy. You had one year  of eligibility of wrestling.  You   re right.  Did you compete on any other athletic teams then?  Football. They made me go to football. I told you that little story about  how I got to the Naval Academy in the first place is that Ray Swartz  30  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  pulled the wool over somebody   s eyes and told them I was a football  player. I   ll never forget the time that I was comfortably ensconced in my  little cubbyhole, and the upperclassmen came in and made me come to  attention, do my push-ups and all the hazing stuff.    Why aren   t you out  for football?    and I said,    I understand why I   m not out for football. I  don   t play football.    They said,    You   re going to play football now. Get  out there tomorrow.    So, I did. I went out and told the coach I was going  to join the football team. The coach looked me over and, of course,  that   s when they thought I was some sort of a comic, you know. I had  this reputation of being an All-American football player and didn   t even  know how to put on my pads. Finally, I convinced them that I didn   t  know doodley squat about playing football. Finally, they said,    Well,  we   ve got to put you somewhere. I guess if you wrestle you might be  able to tackle. So, we   ll put you in as a linebacker.    I said,    That suits  me. Just tell me what I have to do and when to do it, and I   ll try to do my  best.    And I made them mad. I played a pretty good linebacker, and I  also was a blocking back on the offense. Just run over somebody if you  can. Knock them out of the way. So, it worked out pretty good.  How many years did you play football, then, for the Naval Academy?  Two.  Two years? Pearl Harbor, we   re in the war. What did you do during the  war?  I was assigned to a heavy cruiser for the USS Baltimore that was being  built in Boston. It was a new design after we had lost all of our  battleships. We had a lot of the ship yards building naval missiles all up  and down the east coast, from Boston down to Norfolk to Philadelphia.  Wherever they could build a ship, they were building ships of various  kinds. This particular one was a new design of cruiser. It was fast. It had  a lot of anti-aircraft armament on it, and it was just a cruise ship, as far  as I   m concerned. My training missiles were the old battleships from  World War I and they were, of course, pretty ancient. But, we got the  same kind of treatment. You had to learn what to do and when to do it.  After I had been at sea for two years, I got an assignment back to the  naval airs training and became a naval aviator. That   s where I was when  the war was over.  So, were you in the Pacific theater?  I didn   t get out to sea until they dropped the bomb. So, by the time I got  to sea, the war was already over. But I did get to Tokyo before   it was a  place called Yokosuka, and that   s where I was when my resignation was  confirmed, and (Laughs) I really enjoyed flying and my skipper air  31  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  group. He said,    Well, you   re grounded.    And I said,    What do you  mean I   m grounded?    and he said,    Well, we   ve got this message here  that you   ve resigned. We can   t let you fly the airplane now. You might  go out and wreck one.    (Laughter) So, my flying career stopped right  there.  So, you   re in the Navy, but you signed up for the Naval Air Corps. So,  you go to fly for a year or two after the war, then, at the end of the war?  Yes, about one year.  So, you resigned and decided to do something else?  Went back here and take up my father-in-law in becoming the family  prot  g   to run his business because he was unable.  Where did you meet your wife?  Here in Ardmore.  Was this before you went to college or after?  Well, I met her my second year while I was at Stillwater, and she was  not at Ardmore High School. She had gone down to Dallas to the  Hockaday School, and so it was, I guess, a chance meeting. One day (I  lived on the same street she did, but we hadn   t met each other) I was, I  guess, mowing the family yard, and two girls came by the street riding  horses. One of them was one that I knew, and they stopped and visited  and that   s when I met my wife.  When did you get married?  I got married in June of    42.  So, this was after you went to Naval Academy.  No, that was just the month after graduation.  Oh, okay. So, where was she? Where were you stationed then? Was she  able to be with you, or did she stay here?  Yes. My first duty was to stay there in Annapolis and be one of the  company officers for training the incoming set of plebes. That lasted for  about three months, and then I was shifted and went to Boston to pick up  my ship, which was still being completed. It hadn   t been commissioned  yet, but that was the next January before I went to sea.  32  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  So, until then you were able to be together?  Yes.  Okay. You resign in Tokyo; was she in Tokyo, also?  No, no. It wasn   t Tokyo; it was a naval base. I was in the Aircraft  Carrier, the Princeton, and we had pulled in there, and that   s where my  orders caught up with me.  So, then you resign, and you return to Ardmore with her. And what   d  you do then?  Bought a house and raised a family.  Tell me again about your occupation.  I was not assigned a job classification. I was simply working to learn  what the business was about so that I could run and manage the business  at the proper time. It was being a trainee. So, that worked out pretty  good.  Your father-in-law owned the business, or managed?  They had a fifty-fifty partnership.  How many employees were there?  I think we had twenty, something like that.  And so you just started learning     Well, yes, it was a simple business, but, you know, someone had to  operate it and I learned.  How long did you do that?  Thirty-five years. In those thirty-five years, I was selected as the  President of the Oklahoma Soft Drink Bottlers Association for one term,  and I became the Vice President of the Muskogee Coca-Cola Bottling  Company and later its president when the president died. I was also on  the board of directors for the Oklahoma Coca-Cola Bottling Company in  Oklahoma City. It didn   t take too long to get situated in management. I  guess one of the main things that I accomplished was to partner and  build a canning company that belongs to the Great Plains Bottling  33  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Company now in Oklahoma City that is a soft drink canning company,  which was a revolutionary idea because we hadn   t started using non-returnable  packages nationwide quite yet. But we built that nice facility.  When was that built?  Oh, gosh, I   ll have to check my books. I don   t remember the date;  probably in    75.  Before that, most things were in glass bottles.  Yes.  And, so, people returned the bottles?  We had a spell in the industry of trying to get new packages, and we had  the Coca-Cola plant here   this is digressing a little bit. We had one  bottle, that six and a half bell-shaped bottle, and then we introduced a  twelve-ounce bottle to compete against our competitors, that other drink,  and that was a heavy thing, golly. And then we went to a ten-ounce  bottle, abandoned that twelve-ounce and went to the ten-ounce. Well, we  still hadn   t gone on to plastic, and here comes somebody that decided  what we needed was to put our product in a thirty-two-ounce, like a  quart milk jar. That thing was so heavy, you couldn   t even pick it up and  take it in. If a lady bought it at a grocery store, someone had to carry it  for her because it weighed too much. That one bombed. It didn   t last  very long. Then we began to find that you could put this product in a  non-returnable tin can, and from there we got into the plastic non-returnable,  and then we finally made a non-returnable glass bottle, which  is still on the market, still popular. It pays a pretty good premium if you  want to drink out of that.  Now, your father-in-law had this bottling plant. What had your father  done? What was his occupation?  My father was a merchant. He had a grocery/meat market-type thing,  and in my early young years, he was a rancher-type person, and that   s  what you did. You didn   t do anything else while you got a little place  and some cattle. That   s what he did first. Then he went into and had a  cotton gin, and that didn   t last very long. It was good, I guess, while it  lasted, and I didn   t know, but it burned down on him and he lost that.  Then he went into the meat market where he raised his cattle and  butchered them and put them on sale, and that   s when he became a  merchant.  And that kind of grew into a grocery store?  34  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Yes, and then later on, he got out of that and went into selling air  conditioning stuff. So, he bounced around a little bit from one thing to  another. He was able to put us through college, though. I had a brother  and a sister here also.  You were youngest or oldest?  I was in the middle.  Did you ever have a chance to return to OSU since you left to attend  reunions of any kind?  Not reunions. I   ve always gone to the wrestling programs that they had  for former wrestlers. That would be once a year. I kept up with that for  quite a while, and they elected me president of that group for one year  and that   s about all. I don   t even remember what year that was.  Well, now, at some point in time, you got involved with the National  Wrestling Hall of Fame.  Yes.  How did that come about?  Joe and Stanley had become members, had been selected into the  Wrestling Hall of Fame, and my name was going to be submitted to be  one of the members of the Wrestling Hall of Fame. I went to talk to the  people up there, and they made it pretty clear that I would have to put up  quite a bit of money. In other words, you had to buy your way in. I said,     Well, that   s not right. If I can   t earn it, I don   t want it.    The same old  thing about drawing off the mat. I didn   t see any point. But then I gave a  donation to their Board of Governors and they rewarded me with that by  putting my name down as a member of the advisory board, which is a  good title, but nothing to do, and that   s why I   m associated there. Of  course, they   ve got my name on the plaque for the winner of 1939  NCAA tournament, but I really am not in a class with those other  fellows as far as having that honor.  Well, I knew you had a connection with the Wrestling Hall of Fame, and  I wasn   t quite sure what it was. Thank you for clarifying that. Do you  have any special memories of your time at OSU?  Nothing special.  Did you attend most athletic events when you were there? Did you go to  35  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  most of the basketball games and the football games? I guess you were  gone for the fall semester.  I never was there in the fall. I had thoughts of trying out for the track  team, but I hadn   t had any prior experience throwing the discus or the  javelin or the field events, and I wasn   t fast enough to go into track. I  could run a long ways if you didn   t mind how long it took you. (Laughs)  I wasn   t fast enough to do anything else.  Looking back on your life and experiences, what lessons would you like  to share of things you   ve learned or things you   d like for us to learn?  Well, I think that I might have already talked about ethics, if what you  do in your own mind is right or wrong as to what ethics really are. I  learned a lesson about that drawing off the mat, for instance, and then I  learned a lesson about the power of money in athletics, which is a very,  very strong element. Little things like that, but I don   t know that that  was advantageous. Just something that you learn.  Is there anything from your childhood growing up that you took with  you? Things your parents taught you?  All I can remember about my childhood is that I loved to tussle. I could  just take care of nearly anybody that was my contemporary. If we ever  got in a tussle, I could throw him down. My brother, who was two years  older, bless his heart, he would take out his frustration by bopping me  around with his fist, and I couldn   t handle him because I   d close my  eyes and all he had to do was hit me right on the end of my nose and the  fight was over. My nose would bleed. But as we grew older, I finally  learned that if I could corner him long enough to get my hands on him,  that   d take care of those fists.  So, one day we were alone at home and, as usual, he started to tease me  a little bit and bump me a little bit, and I caught him and kind of gave  him a little lesson, and from that point on we got along so good that  when people would team up at the school yard as they often did against  you or for somebody or against somebody, and you normally would take  sides, if my brother got in a jam, why, I   d always go to help him out, and  I think he began to appreciate that. We could take care of most of the  guys between the way he handled his fists, you know, little scraps in the  school yard. I don   t know if you ever got into those or not, but I thought  that nearly everybody did. But that was one of the one things I  remember as far as taking to wrestling, it seemed to come naturally, and  that, to me, was fortunate.  Were you always one of the bigger kids in your grade?  36  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Peters  Harrell  Yes, I was fat.  You were fat?  Yes, I was a roly poly. I didn   t gain any height until I got to the tenth  grade, and by the time I had graduated in the twelfth grade, I had gained  three inches in height and lost a lot of my tubbiness and was really ready  to go to college.  How tall were you?  I got to be six feet one. I   ve shrunk down to about five feet eleven or a  little less than that.  But someone six foot one and 190 pounds was a good-sized man.  Yes, I was strong enough. Didn   t seem to me at the time that I was that  big, but, of course, if you look at what they   re doing now on the football  field, boy, those kids are six feet tall and weigh 190 pounds and they run  that forty-three seconds. (Laughter) I like to watch the linebackers when  they   re playing football. Boy, they can get up there and get into that  crease in the line just so quickly. It makes me wonder how in the world  anybody is able to do it. So, yes, I was big.  Well, thank you very much, John. I appreciate meeting you, and I  appreciate your time.  Well, it   s been a pleasure to have you visit. I   m still wondering what in  the world all this is worthwhile for, but I   m glad you find it good  because I like to have company.  Well, it   s meaningful to us, so we appreciate your time.  All right, good.  -------  -------   
