 Gill and today is October 17th, 2008. I   m visiting  David Treece at the ConocoPhillips OSU Alumni Center on the OSU  campus. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. David, welcome back to  campus. Now I understand this is a special weekend, tomorrow the  parade is a special day for the former Pistol Petes.  Yes, we   re looking forward to do that.  Now this is a parade marshall parade week?  Parade marshall as a collective whole with all the old Petes. We   re just  all so excited about this. We are.  You   ll be up there on the float in the front of the parade?  We are. Looking forward to that. We   re always in there somewhere     12th, 13th position but now we get to be the lead dog, I guess.  There is nobody scraping manure.  That   s right. Well they say if you   re not the lead dog you didn   t get any  better, so I don   t know how we can top this one. (Laughter)  Well, let   s go back a little bit. Tell us a little bit about the first time you  remember seeing the Pistol Pete mascot?  Gosh that has to have been high school. Came up for a football game, I  wish I could remember the year.  Remember your first impression?  5  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Oh, just phenomenal. He   s such a big character and everybody wanted a  little piece of him. You know, leading the cheers and he just had a great  time on the field. So I didn   t really think much about it because I wasn   t  sure exactly when I was going to make it up   because I had to go back  to work a little bit before I made it up to college. I knew the career  choice I had wasn   t going to allow a lot of time for any extracurricular  activities, but I remember thinking that it was such a neat thing to see.  David, tell us a little bit about yourself. Growing up, a little bit about  your family     Well my dad was in civil service, part of the military background. So I  grew up in Nevada and, of course, the only football team that you saw  on TV back then was the Oklahoma Sooners. Well Dad, anytime he  could root for anybody from Oklahoma, he would do that. So basically  that was all I knew growing up as a young kid until we moved back to  Oklahoma. I   ve always had something orange on growing up. I just kind  of gravitated to that color.  Did your parents go to Oklahoma State?  No, they did not. They both, right out of college, went into military and  civil service and all of that but they knew that they wanted their kids to  go to a university. Growing up in Edmond everybody just assumed that  was going to be Central State at the time and so that   s where my folks  wanted us to go. The more and more we went, the more my brother   s  started gravitating to Oklahoma State so all of us kids went to  OSU .  Were your brother   s older?  I had an older brother.  Did he go to OSU first?  He did and he graduated in chemical engineering and I would drive up. I  was working and waiting my turn to come up here. So I would come up  to Stillwater on the weekends and my brother and sister-in-law lived in  married student housing. I   d come up after an all-night job at Safeway  Bread Plant. I   d get up here about six o   clock in the morning and sleep  on their couch until game day and attended with them.  What did you first think about being Pistol Pete? When did that first  come to you that you might want to be Pistol Pete?  That   s an interesting subject. You know again, having to work my way  through college, my sister got me a job at the Kappa house being a house  6  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  boy. So the first day there I walked in and I met Rob Reynolds who was  an alternate Pete to Shane LaDuke at the time. So I started talking with  Rob, but Rob and I didn   t hit it off at first because I thought,    Okay  here   s this frat boy    and I was independent. They were talking about all  the frat stuff that was going on and Rob started giving me a hard time.  So I thought,    Oh boy what is this guy   s story?    I come to find out, he  was a Pistol Pete and Rob and I ultimately ended up being very good  friends and did things together when we weren   t in class. We did just  tons of stuff.  Spring break came along and Oklahoma State made it to the Big Eight  Championship game and they needed Pistol Pete to go up there. Shane  LaDuke was going skiing in Colorado and Rob already had other  commitments and they said,    Dave, would you wanna do it?    and I go,     Well I don   t know anything about this    and he says,    Oh well, let me  show you how to do it, put the garb on.     Were you an alternate Pete or anything?  No.  Isn   t that a little unusual?  It was very unusual. I mean to have both Pete   s not having the chance to  go up for the big     Normally you go through the try-outs and special things you have to  learn about etiquette. You put on the uniform?  Well, Rob and Shane spent a little bit of time,    Here   s what you do.    So  I had just a quick crash course and I went up with the cheerleaders that I  didn   t know. But I had a lot of fun. It was a lot of fun and that was the  year     What year was that?  That was    83 or was it    82? Now, I   m getting foggy. I   m getting too old.  (Laughs) But Oklahoma State made it to the championship game against  Missouri and went into overtime and won the Big Eight Championship  up in Kansas City. So when the program for basketball came out, the  Pete that was on there was me instead of Rob, who was the current Pete  or Shane LaDuke. Here was this newcomer   so I was able to use that as  experience when I decided to try-out.  And you liked it?  7  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  I enjoyed it. And, of course, with the backing of Rob and Kurt, both of  those guys encouraged me to try out.  So later that spring you went through the try-out process.  I did.  Can you recall a little bit about the process for trying out for Pete?  What you had to do to become Pistol Pete?  I remember there were three or four former Pistol Petes and they all are  scrutinizing each candidate that comes in and then Myron Roderick   s  wife, I don   t remember what her first name was but she was on the  committee. They asked a lot of interview questions, like why and  backgrounds and things like that and then you had to put on the head and  they would give you a situation and you had to act, touchdown or bad  call or whatever it may be. So you really had to work at the exaggeration  of emotions because everything is so much bigger with that and you  really had to go through that and just act out all the situations right and  left and then new things you would want to bring in as Pete.  What were some of the things after you got chosen as Pete. Did you have  some of this etiquette training, if you will, dos and don   ts?  Well, yes and the year that I was Pete was the first year that the Athletic  Department took it over. Before it was a student activity, so Dave Martin  was the one that took it over and he said,    Remember, you   re  representing Oklahoma State. Everything you do reflects on the  University. Every action, every outing that you do. You   re the  ambassador, you   re the salesman, you   re the marketing guy for  Oklahoma State.    They did talk about dos and don   ts. Again all the little  kids are looking at you, all the alumni, and students are looking at you.  Not that there was a lot of pressure, they just wanted to remind you, at  some point, every part of that game somebody is watching.  And you don   t take the head off.  Right. You want to keep that little bit of mystery and it would get hot at  these games, so you would want to go back in the tunnel and drink sodas  or water or whatever it may be but you always kept that head on. You  always kept that persona of Pistol Pete.  Tell us a little bit about the uniform that you wore; of course you had the  head piece, but about the rest of the outfit as well.  Well obviously the cowboy boots and jeans. That   s the staple right there  8  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  and then the leather chaps that Okmulgee Tech made, so part of the OSU  family. The shoe boot and saddle, they came up there and measured all  the Petes for all the right length. I   m 5   10 but there   s going to be some  Pete   s that were bigger. So they had to make sure that uniform could fit  a group of folks. But the chaps and then the black vest, white shirt, I  think there was a western store down in Oklahoma City that donated the  .357 magnum gun that we carried, the double barrel shot gun   the  noisemakers as we like to refer to them.  Did you have training on those?  We did. Captain Tye was the security guard and he always made sure  that we had the right blanks and we had to order through him. Never fire  at anybody, always up in the air away from everybody. Always making  sure the fire safety issue was well covered. Captain Tye went to a lot of  the away games. He was sort of the head of the security and he kept his  eye out for us, making sure that we were safe as well, but making sure  we followed all of the safety aspects on the firearms. I think that   s still  important today. Probably more so today than any other. I think  everybody is under the scrutiny of the firearm safety.  So can you share a little bit about some of the activities, for example,  how many athletic events in a typical year here would you attend? Just  total events.  Well, obviously all of the sporting events, whether its baseball,  basketball, football, a couple of golf outings when they had the  fundraiser we would attend those. Wrestling events whether it was  myself or Rick Wilson, we attended every sporting event, but then you  would get requests for parades, birthday parties, weddings and things  like that. So the number of Oklahoma State related were probably well  into the hundreds because the Alumni Association would want Pistol  Pete to escort high school honor students to banquets. We would attend a  few of those, so it had to of been in the hundred range for university  events, but by the time you added everything else, I think I counted close  to 350 that year of events that I did.  How did you balance your two lives here? Your Pete life and your  student life? Was that pretty tough?  Well, it was funny, when I interviewed and got Pistol Pete, the dean of  the School of Architecture   I was the first and only architecture student  to ever be Pete. But the dean brought me in and said,    You need to drop  out of architecture this year.    I said,    Why?    And he said,    Well,  architecture is such a demanding career that I just don   t think you can do  both.    So the professor that I had for my design studio, he said,    All I   m  9  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  asking you to do is come and give me a hundred percent. Not a 110, not  a 105, not 98, a 100 percent of your time when you   re in studio and then  you give a hundred percent to your Pistol Pete duties. We   ll work it out.     Do you remember who that was?  George Chamberlain. He passed away a few years back, but he ended up  being my favorite professor throughout, just because of the backing that  he gave to me during my school years in architecture. It was tough but I  had my highest GPA that year. It was all balance and making sure that  you got all the work done, got the design studies done, and still made the  demands that Pete has.  So you had a crash course in time management.  It was a very tough crash course, but I enjoyed every year and again I  just thank Professor Chamberlain for that.  Was the Pete experience what you   d thought it would be?  More so.  Afterwards, looking back  I knew it would be fun. I didn   t realize how much fun. Just the people  you would meet, the first game we went to at Arizona State, we were  playing a nationally ranked Sun Devil team and Oklahoma came in as  underdogs but we had a pretty decent team. Thurman Thomas, Rusty  Hilger, and Barry Hanna   who it ended up being a game saver for us in  the Gator Bowl   but after the game was won some of the alumni came  over and said,    Boy, we   re so happy to see Pistol Pete out here and all  the spirit squad,    and gave us a little something to go out afterwards and  it was just the whole experience, meeting new people, meeting families  and the kids, the kids absolutely adore Pete. They all want their picture  taken and, of course, when you can give them a little bit of the spent  shell when they come up to you and talk to you or autograph pictures,  their eyes just light up. I think that   s the most important thing that I   ve  cherished and I have some letters that I   ll certainly share with you, but  the letters that the kids would write, I think that   s the most important  thing.  Speaking of memories, we talked about the basketball game after you  became Pistol Pete. Do you remember the first time being out on the  field or maybe even in the basketball game too? Was that special for  you?  10  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  I was scared to death, and it was at the Big Eight baseball tournament.  They asked Pete to be there.    What do I do, what shouldn   t I do?    and it  was in the late spring, early summer down in Oklahoma City. Just  watching the fan reaction, making sure you didn   t stand in front of  people, of course, they love Pete, but they also want to see our Pokes  play baseball  (Laughter) So you had to really be aware of that and then  of course with that you would have the   Pete always has an alternate or  second Pete, you need the other person to be your eyes cause you can   t  really see what   s going on. You   ve got two little holes about this far  away from your eyes,  Treece makes hand gesture  you have two holes  in the ear and you kind of have to shrug your shoulders to see that you   re  not bumping into anybody and the chin has a hole, so those are the only  places you can look out so you still need that other person to help you  maneuver.  You were talking about little kids; one thing that you said is that you  have to be careful, that you might trip over them because you couldn   t  see them sometimes.  You   re absolutely right. There   s a lot of times where two kids come up  and where are they and you have to kind of look in the chin and have to  look up and,    Oh there they are.    So then you get down on their level.  Did you find that the kids love Pete?  Absolutely. They would come up and give you hugs. I have one little  three year old who I got something in the mail from the mother. It said,     My three year old daughter was making some Halloween decorations  and she wanted Pistol Pete to have one.    So I got that in the mail and I  have that in my collection of things. But they do, they really think the  world of Pete. Of course, I hope a lot of the kids back then are graduates  of Oklahoma State at this point.  Do you remember the historical Frank    Pistol Pete    Eaton, the  inspirational character for the OSU mascot? What personal  characteristics of Frank Eaton did you try to portray in the on-field  activities?  Well, I think a lot of it might have come from, he was known as a sharp  shooter. Now of course with gun safety, but everybody knew that Frank  Eaton was a marshal and always gave demonstrations on his firearm  expertise and marksmanship here. So you would try to set up some  things even though you would aim high you would act as if you   re  shooting somebody, try to act like they were being hit by the Pete, but  you still would want to make sure that you knew the safety was on.  11  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  What about the Pete swagger?  The Pete swagger, the bowleggedness of the cowboy and the whole  cowboy persona, everything you did you kind of swagger a little bit and  walk bowlegged and the spurs we would have as well.  David, picking of your comments about portraying Frank Eaton, the real  person, did it make a difference for you in terms of knowing that is  OSU   s mascot, that you were actually portraying a historical figure, not  an animal or mythical character, did that make the OSU   s mascot more  special for you?  Well, I think so. Again, everybody knew Frank Eaton and Frank Eaton  Jr. We had a chance to meet him or one of his sons and I asked him,     What do you think about the mascot, knowing your dad was an  inspiration of that?    And he said,    It   s such a touching moment knowing  that that   s a legacy being carried down.    So that   s what I believe, that  Pistol Pete is carrying on that legacy of Frank Eaton. It is special and  you look at some of the other mascots across the U.S. and well okay,  that might be fun, but this is really portraying an individual and  somebody that really means a lot to the history of Oklahoma State.  Picking up on that comment, what do you think Pete represents to OSU  fans and friends of the state of Oklahoma? How does he personify and  typify our values?  Well, I think if you look at anything, the whole persona of a cowboy,  hardworking, typically honest, I guess just the character tradition of the  state of Oklahoma. A lot of ranching, a lot of agriculture, whether that is  still true as far as the agriculture or the persona of a cowboy, I think it  still holds true today, there   s still a lot of good, solid roots     The frontier and the American West?  Exactly, and I think it   s just a unique and special character and I still  think the alumni, I mean any time you were Pete and you would walk  by, you were no longer Dave, you were no longer a student. I was called  Pete the entire time. I think the alumni have really embraced that  character.  You get identified occasionally at OSU functions as a     Former.  Pistol Pete?  12  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Exactly.  Still to this day?  To this day,    Oh, this is Dave Treece, he was a former Pete.    Or    He  was a Pete when I was going to school.    You do. A lot of the alumni or  parents of friends that I have say,    Yup, former Pistol Pete.    And they  say    Oh really? What year?       Oh well I remember this game...    So  they   d bring back a memory of that year and I   d say,    Yeah, I was Pete  that game.     What does Pete represent to OSU alumni? What does it mean to OSU  alumni fans?  Oh man, that   s a good question, Jerry. I would hope that it   s some very  positive feelings with the whole tradition of Oklahoma State and Pete is  just one part of that tradition. I   m not sure I have a good answer for you  on that one.  That was a good answer. Can you share some special and meaningful  experiences and memories that you had as Pete?  There were several. Obviously, you kick off with football and we had a  pretty decent team that year. I think we went ten and two. Rusty Hilger  was quarterback, and Thurman Thomas, Barry Hanna, Leslie O   Neil on  defense. And we're heading up to Nebraska and we all thought that was  going to be the chance that we would finally beat Nebraska at home.  They had just lost to Syracuse and we were talking earlier about Garth  Brooks. He did a song called the    Husker Busters    sort of poking fun at  the Huskers getting beat by Syracuse. We walked in with the boom box  playing as loud as we could and the Husker fans really got a kick out of  that. And the security came up here and you said,    You are not to fire  that shot gun, you are not to fire that pistol or you   ll get kicked out of the  stadium.    Captain Tye overheard that and he says,    No this is tradition.  Pete has to fire the gun. You do what you   re supposed to do as mascots  and I   ll take care of the rest.    And I said,    Okay.     So the football team came out of the tunnel and both barrels going     boom boom    as loud as it could and the security guy started just  marching over at me with this stern look and Captain Tye said,    I gave  him permission to do that. You deal with me, not with him.    We ended  up losing the game and it was a very close game, but still a lot of fun and  just that memory of,    Okay, am I going to get kicked out of the stadium  by doing something as Pete?    So I was a little bit nervous about that.  Then the OU game we came down and we really thought we could beat  13  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  OU at their place, it had been a little while and kept the game real close  and you know that   s a hostile crowd down there. Bedlam means just  exactly that.  Did they ever heckle Pete down there?  Well of course. I mean you   re a target at an away game. You   re the  representative of the University and we scored on them a couple times.  Another close game was Gator Bowl. Those are probably some of the  roughest fans. The curse words, the spitting, people throwing things at  you as you were going through the spirit walk and pep rally. But that  game was fantastic, that   s when everything clicked and, of course the  Barry Hanna touchdown to win that game 20 to 19, I believe was what  the score was. So that was a fantastic year. Getting to meet some of the  football players afterwards and even the players get a kick out of Pistol  Pete and everything else. Leslie O   Neil, I would see him walking across  campus and he would yell at me,    Hey Pete, how you doing?    So I  wasn   t Dave to anybody. I was Pete. (Laughter) And Johnny  Washington, big Johnny Washington.  Did you lose some of your self-identity?  Well, you do you become that character for that year. You do everything  you can to uphold that tradition as Pete.  How is it to have an alter ego?  You can get away with more. (Laughter) Well Pete did that, that wasn   t  Dave. You start talking about Pete as another person.  I gotta ask you, be candid now, your most embarrassing moment or  moments as Pete?  I was asked by a ref to get away from the free-throw line at an OU game.  I was holding up an OU with a big line through it. (Laughs) I was  holding it up and the ref asked me twice to move and he says,    Now if  you don   t move, I   m gonna have to kick you out of the game,    so I had  to kind of scoot over a little bit and he kept pushing me back over and  that was on national TV, so that was the     Well that would have been a highlight, to kick Pete out of the game   Well and it was at Gallagher. You know, I was kind of embarrassed  about the ref getting on me but that was probably the most embarrassing  part. I don   t think I ever tripped, I don   t think I ever did anything too  obnoxious.  14  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Did you ever fire off your gun when you weren   t supposed to?  Well, they did ask us to not fire it off in Lloyd Noble and I got scolded  by this guy for doing that but Coach Hanson came up and said,    Thank  you.    (Laughs) But that   s about it. That was the only time, of course,  you know you go to some places and they just despise the gun because  of the noise and everything and because it just kind of shocks,    Oh  what   s that, oh there   s Pistol Pete again.    But that was the only thing  that I can recall that   others may jump and,    Oh Dave, you did this.     But you know I   ll blame old age. I can   t remember that.  What about your interaction with OSU fans, especially children. You  mentioned that earlier. Did you have some heartwarming moments that,  sometimes you remember?  The Special Olympics. We did a couple of Special Olympic activities  here. Those kids were so loving and you give them just a little bit of  time and attention and they enjoy it. I had two letters from some Special  Olympians that when I wrote the autograph of Pistol Pete, the parents  wrote back and said,    Thanks, it   s up on his wall.     And again, the kids love the birthday parties, the kid was special if they  had Pistol Pete come to his birthday party. But even weddings, you   d go  to OSU alums. My sister married an OU fan. I showed up at her  wedding and, well it   s okay because my nephew plays quarterback now  for us. He   s doing all right. But you go to the weddings as Pistol Pete,  you dance with the bride, you dance with the mother of the bride and all  that.  David, there   s a connection with our quarterback. Is that correct?  That is true.  Can you share that with us a little bit?  My nephew is the starting quarterback at Oklahoma State University,  Zac Robinson. He   s doing okay; he   s turned out to be a pretty decent  quarterback. Quiet kid. I brought him up with another nephew. I had to  take care of some things at the School of Architecture on one of my  visits out and Zac was wearing his OU hat and my other nephew had his  OSU hat. We walked through Heritage Hall and then we took them out  on Lewis Field and he looked around and said,    This would be a fun  field to play on.    I said,    Yeah I think it would be, Zac.    So all of the  recruiting stories went around and we finally landed him here and he   s  solid orange, orange to the bone at this point. Even his dad who played  football at OU, you see him wear a lot of orange.  15  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  At the time, what did it mean, you being Pistol Pete? Wrap up some of  your thoughts of what it meant to be Pistol Pete, at the time.  Well, at the time, as a student, it was just a huge honor. Everybody  wanted to know who Pistol Pete was, but then when people found out  that you were Pete, I think a lot of the students thought that was a very  neat thing, a very cool thing to do. I was very honored to be chosen, it  was a tough interview process, but the competition   the alternate that I  had was Rick Wilson. He and I did so much together, he was a great guy  to hang with on the football outings and to be each other   s eyes and  there   d be sometimes we   re in the middle of the game we would swap  who was being Pete and it was seamless, you didn   t know who it was.  But it was just a huge honor to be Pete. It is something that I   ve held on  and very proud of since graduation, moving on and     Looking back now, what does having been Pete mean to you?  It is something that stays with you the rest of your life. I think you meet  any former Pete, you realize how deep the love of Oklahoma State is. It  is such a deep rooted, we all hang around and we   re looking forward to  this reunion and swapping stories of what we did as Pete, you just can   t  take that away from somebody.  Here   s a little history. This is the 50th reunion of the first year Pete was  out on the field with the hat     The papier-m  ch   hat.  The papier-m  ch   hat, also in 1958, the year Frank Eaton died. So it   s  two 50 year reunions.  Right.  Very interesting.  And a huge honor for us to come back, a privilege and honor to be the  parade marshall and to have all of the celebration with the former Pistol  Petes. Some of them aren   t with us anymore, so we   re going to carry on  their legacy as well. We want to make sure that we don   t forget those  first students that portrayed Pete that started this.  Carry on their legacy. What do you think the collective legacy is of the  Pistol Pete over the years?  I think the overall deep spirit that everybody has and the love of the  University. You can   t watch a game and not look out for Pete anymore.  16  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  You want to make sure that you see him, make sure that that student is  carrying on those same traditions and honor of that legacy. Frank Eaton  was a great character, a great individual and set the standards for what  we as Petes are trying to carry on.  And your legacy? How do you want to be remembered as a Pete?  That I did the best I could. That I tried to make things a little fun. That I  didn   t do anything to tarnish the image of Pete. Hopefully I did achieve  that.  How have your experiences as Pete influenced your life?  I think I came out of my shell. I grew up a very shy and quiet kid. Pete  allowed you to open up some of the quiet, the hidden tendencies and  think,    Wow, life can be much more fun by letting some   don   t keep  your emotions so bottled up, just let it out and have fun.    I   ve become a  little bit more outgoing since Pete, and of course the characters that have  played Pete, the other Petes that we run around with, they don   t let you  keep anything in. (Laughter)  Are there lessons and disciplines that you learned from your Pete  experiences that still influence your life today? You talked about time  management, having to do so much; are there other lessons you  learned?  I think just the ability when you meet somebody, to make sure it   s an  honest handshake, an earnest look at somebody in the eye. Even as Pete,  I wanted to make sure I made eye contact behind the mask and even  afterwards on whatever you did. If somebody knew that you were Pete,  you just want to make sure that you met an honest handshake.  What would you tell a young student, an OSU student or a young person  that is thinking about being Pete? What would you tell them?  Go for it  (Laughter) Go for it  It would be the most fun you would have  in that school year. The opportunities that you get a chance to participate  in, the people you meet. I try to encourage it.    Oh, I   m thinking about  going for Pete.       Well don   t think about it. Do it. It is something you   ll  never regret. It is something you hang onto for the rest of your life.    It is  an honor and a great tradition to portray Pete. All guns out, just go for it.  Looking back, if you had to do it all over again, would you do it?  Absolutely, in a heartbeat, no second thoughts. Maybe try a few more  things; you know,    I wish I would have done that.    But no doubts at all,  17  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  no second thoughts. I   d do it in a heartbeat.  Tell me about your other life at OSU, with some of the other activities,  leadership opportunities, other things you were engaged in here at OSU.  It was interesting, again, with the School of Architecture. That program  is so in-depth and tough. I didn   t have a whole lot of time to do anything  else. You were up all night doing your design work and studies. The  professors put a lot of heat on you, if you weren   t doing this then you  weren   t serious about architecture. The year that I was Pete, again, they  had second thoughts on,    What   s your true dedication to architecture?     So your life as a student was architecture. Now I was a house boy for a  sorority and that was a lot of fun. I got a chance to meet a lot of folks  outside of the studio, outside the life of architecture.  Did you meet your wife here?  I did not. I met my wife when I went to Baltimore and she was working  at the architectural firm that I went to work on.  So you left OSU, can you kind of tell us about your career since then?  I first accepted a job in Dallas. That would be a great place because you  can make it home for football games on the weekend. But the economy  was hitting pretty tough so I went out to Baltimore to interview for a few  jobs and about the only times I could make it back were Homecoming  games. I ended up being a one  time a  year visitor during those times.  But architecture is a great field. We always try to interview Oklahoma  State folks when they make it back out here. I still keep a contact with  Randy Seitsinger now, who is the Dean. I try to bring some OSU folks  out to our area. But it was very tough having gone to just about every  football game in my entire college career here and before when I went  up with my brother, all of a sudden having that streak ended. It was a big  withdrawal. We now have the package to where we can watch  Oklahoma State on TV. Whether its basketball, football, sometimes  you   ll get a wrestling match, it   s not very often, but once in awhile  you   ll catch a wrestling match on TV. So anytime Oklahoma State   s on  one of the programs, I watch it.  Speaking of different sports, did you have a favorite sport as Pete? You  talked a lot about football, what were some of the other events you  enjoyed?  I was a huge wrestling fan. I watched Johnny Smith a little bit and when  he came out and won his NCAA when we were wrestling Maryland, I  had a chance to meet him out there. I   ve always been a wrestling fan,  18  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  that   s a sport that we   ve just dominated and still continue to do so. That  was probably my favorite sport. But not very many people understand or  watch wrestling unless you   re from the state of Oklahoma or Iowa or  someplace like that. But as a student, I never missed a wrestling match.  Basketball we kind of struggled a little bit, we didn   t have very many  great teams at that point, other than the one that went to the Big Eight.  But Matt Clark and Lorenzo Andrews, Barry    Half-Court    Hanna.  Those were some fun times to watch.  You took the job at Baltimore in the same position   have you stayed in  the same firm?  No, I started at a very small firm and then went to a national design firm  and since then I   ve changed twice   I   m with a firm based out of  Buffalo, New York   there are offices nationally and internationally. I  do healthcare architecture   more of a specialized field.  What facilities do you design?  Hospitals, clinics, medical office buildings     So you   re excited about being back for the weekend with the other  Petes?  I was just talking to another Pete yesterday and I said,    It   s Thursday,  I   m flying out tonight and I feel like I   m waiting for Santa Claus.     (Laughter) It   s Christmas all over again. Especially this weekend, but  Homecoming is always a fun event to come back to and of course the  game day spirit was completely different the way it was back in    84, but  just watching all of those new traditions and the tailgates and the Spirit  Walk and everything else the University has incorporated, it just makes  this weekend fantastic.  Does it make you proud that Oklahoma State University has that kind of  Homecoming?  Oh, without a doubt. We always encouraged, I would take out little ads     For Pete   s sake wear orange.    Well, it wasn   t until later on where it  really caught on and you walk in and you see this sea of orange in the  stadium. Some schools have the black out or the white out. Well we  always have an orange out every game and that   s neat to see.  David, you had a chance as Pete, probably more than most people, to  feel that sense of loyalty and pride that OSU alumni have. What is it that  makes OSU alumni so loyal, do you think, and so proud of their  University?  19  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  Gill  Treece  I think its maybe part of the struggle for some   as a football team, we   re  always considered a second tier, in some eyes. Not alumni, we   re there,  we know we   re a lot better. I just think with OSU fans they   re not a  bandwagon fan. That if you   re an OSU fan, it   s a lifelong ordeal for you.  We embrace the team, we embrace the school. We embrace the  University. The whole tradition of Oklahoma State. It   s not,    Well, the  football team may be down this year, so I   m no longer going to wear  orange.    That   s not the case, if anything you become a little bit of a  tighter nit group. Help each other out in the highs and lows. We   ve been  through a lot.  David, anything else that you want to mention, anything that I left out  about OSU or Pete?  I do think it   s important to know that when the Athletic Department took  over helping Pistol Pete and the spirit group with its processes  throughout the year, I think that was a huge advantage that the spirit  groups got with the dedication from the Athletic Department. I think it  gets the spirit, it gets the legacy, it gets a lot of the name brand out a  little bit more with that. All the Petes that were before me that were  under the student activities center kind of had to beg, borrow, and hitch  rides up to a game and now the athletic department has just really taken  it over and did a hang up job. I also really appreciate what you   re doing  with this and making sure that the Pete legacy is continuing on and  making this whole weekend an even more special event for all of us old  guys coming back and trying to relive our youth. I think it   s a lot of fun.  We welcome you back to the 50th Pistol Pete reunion.  We   re looking forward to it. It   s going to be a cram packed weekend.  Thank you.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
