 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Miss Patricia Alexander for the Latino Americans: Five Hundred Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Edmon Low Library on the Stillwater campus of Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Tuesday, June 7, 2016, in the Edmon Low Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma. The interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, Director of Library Graduate Services. Thank you for agreeing to participate in this oral history project, Miss Alexander. I want to remind you that this may be published as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, Oklahoma, and that you have granted us permission to publish the transcript and video in part or in its entirety. Okay, so just to get started can you just tell us a little bit about yourself, or actually more about your family?  Alexander And where I came from? I arrive here in Stillwater, Oklahoma, or United States, in 1981, January the 3, and I came as an international student. I arrived with my sister,  Luz Diaz , and my father helped send us to study here at OSU. We were   we didn   t speak English at all, so we came and started at the English Language Institute. In 1981, that building was over there by the second floor of the police department, what is the police department right now. It took us   well, it took me, the spring semester and part of the summer to study, and learn the English, and pass the TOEFL  Test of English as a Foreign Language  test, and then pass it and start classes. One of the things that we did is being an international at OSU, when you pay classes, they are expensiver, so we figured out that we will go to NOC, Northern Oklahoma College. We started in Northern Oklahoma College and took all those general courses, and then after two years, we transferred over here to OSU. All the time living, here in Stillwater, so my sister and I, we would go back and forth every day to NOC in 1981.  Baeza Actually to go back, where were you born? 5  Alexander I was born in El Salvador. Do you need a time? 1962. I am the second of eight brothers and sisters. We are four guys and four girls, but I   m the second eldest of the family. Bordering El Salvador in the coast, the state name is called La Uni  n, a really small town. Grew up over there until I was nineteen years, and then came over here to United States as a student.  Baeza What was it like being the second of eight children?  Alexander A lot of responsibility. When you have, (Laughs) in this case, would be six brothers and sisters, that it is a lot of responsibilities in your back because if your younger brothers, they do something wrong, they don   t get to them. They get to the older one because you didn   t took care of it, (Laughs) or them. Yes, it   s still   even now that I   m fifty-four, I still have the dynamics of the family still that whoever is the older one in the group, or the activity that we are doing, the responsibility falls in that elder that is over there. It keeps going.  Baeza And your parents?  Alexander My parents, right now   my father was   . My grandparents, one was from China, and the other one was from Spain from my father   s side. My mother   s side, both parents were over there from El Salvador, natives, indigenous from El Salvador. I would say that I have, what, one-eighth of Chinese and one-eighth from Spain.  Baeza What did your parents do?  Alexander My father has already passed away, but when we were growing up and everything, my father used to be entrepreneur, I mean, he will do everything by himself. Everything that he had, he never depended it   like working in a factory or something. Pretty much he did everything. All the businesses that he started, he started by himself. What I remember when I was back home, where I grew up, biggest part, we used to have   I mean, we still have the farm, but at that time the farm was a big production. We used to have a, what we call here in United States, a feedlot. When you have like two thousand, three thousand animals, and then you feed them, and fat them, and then you sell them. He had direct contact with this company called Quality Meat. Believe me, you can find it over there in South America.  They buy all   some of the meat over there, and they bring it to United States. He used to have that part, and I would say the one that my father kind of raised almost all the money, we used to have a ferry. In the   70s, El Salvador and Honduras, the borders were closed because of a soccer match. Believe me, it was a war because of a soccer match. El Salvador won and so the border was closed. Everything from El Salvador that goes south to South 6  America, it has to go through the border of Honduras, and Honduras had closed that border. There is a gulf right over there where I live, and the president of Nicaragua, at that time that used to be Somoza, that dictator, came to my father. Between my father and him, they came here to Louisiana, I think, the first time, and got one of the ferries that they use over there in Washington that they put the cars inside. Before that, they didn   t had a ferry.  They had those barges that they use in the Mississippi River, the ones that you put the grain inside that flat part. What they used to do is from La Uni  n, where we live in the gulf, it would go to Nicaragua, and they would put all these cars on top of it. The only thing holding them was a   by in the tire, how you call those ones, and that was it. Then this huge boat, it would carry them all the way up through Nicaragua and back and forth. That was a really good   at that time, I was growing up and I didn   t pay attention what was going on. I knew the business of what was going on and everything, but I didn   t know the impact in what my father was doing at that time and that period of time in El Salvador. El Salvador was having problems with the borders, and so pretty much what he was doing, he was moving all the cornmeal El Salvador to South American through those boats.  Baeza It wasn   t just your products; it was everything?  Alexander Everything, I mean, I   m talking   I do remember. The ones that I remember really fond are those big trucks, coming in with live pollitos   chickens, chicks because it was first come, first serve. I remember that these guys, they would call like two days ahead, and said,    We are sending these,    so all those ones, they will jump in front because they will die in the heat.  Baeza When was it that you figured it out or discovered what it was that your father had been doing?  Alexander Until I arrived right here, I mean   . After   oh, how you call it, after   . Actually, when I was over here, like my second or third year, and you go through the classes, and you study economy, and all that kind of stuff. I   m going,    Wow, that was a big production  That   s a big thing,    and to hear more, you can go,    Wow, that   s a big thing.     Baeza How involved were you with the farm?  Alexander Well, that   s one of the things that my father did really good. Being eight brothers and sisters, okay, and the older ones being female, the first three ones were females and everything. All the family was involved with anything that he will do with the business. Give you an example. We used to get up at four o   clock in the morning, no matter what, from the top to the bottom. If my younger brother, three years old or two years old, everybody 7  has to get up at four o   clock. What he used to do is he used to from four to, I would say, five-thirty in the morning, six o   clock, he used to sit over there, and tell us what he was doing, what kind of business and what, like I say,    Today we   re going to do this, and this, and this.     Everybody knew what he was doing. For example, you know the sesame seed, the one that you use in the hamburger buns? He used to buy that seed by the pound, or there   s a lot of people around in the state that we lived that they have a what, five acres or ten acres, and they cultivate that and then they go and sell it. He would buy it pound by pound, sure, sometimes a hundred pounds from one person and other kind of stuff, and he would store it in a big room over there in my house. We were also involved in the buying part because there was a log of how many pounds have been coming in, and how much we pay, and all that kind of stuff. Then he would tell us, I said,    Okay, we will know how much that room had,    how many rooms of that sesame seed was in there.  He would come back to us, and said in those minutes, in the morning,    So we know that we had this much and everything, so we have spent this much.    He contacted, he had some contacts over here in United States, so they would buy the seed from him. He will ask us, said,    Okay, I   m going to ask them to pay me in dollars, not in col  nes. Even though we buy this in col  nes, I   m going to ask them to pay me in dollars.    Then he will ask us, said,    Why am I doing that?    He would start from the youngest one to the oldest one, but the key thing was me, being one of the older ones, he would tell us,    You can not say what he said.    You start thinking, and then somebody else said,    Oh my God  He said that  Let   s go ahead,    so he kind of make you think different ways and all of that.  Then he would remember what everybody said, he said,    I think your idea is good, but   that   s okay.    He would go back, and said,    Your idea is good, but this is how it can be improved,    but then he   d say,    I   m going to do it this way,    or he would tell us what he was going to do. In this case for the sesame seed, it was   if he was buying in col  nes, and he was getting paid in dollars, oh, he was making a big killing in there. Also, he will tell us, he said,    Why am I asking them to deposit the money United States and not bring it back over here?    You have to figure it out why, and he would ask everybody why. You have to say,    Because you have to transfer it back to col  nes, and then you lose money.    Things that   and that   s the way, how he would involve us in everything. For the ferry, in this case, we knew the business from top to bottom.  How to do the customs, how to do everything, and also, because the way how things were coming, those barges were coming, and they were getting load, it goes by   we call it marea in El Salvador. Not the wave, when the water goes up and then goes down, so things that you don   t know. He would 8  ask, said,    Why am I asking them to wait until this time to come over here,    so then you have to go and look at the charts, so that when the water or the moon and all that kind of stuff,    Well, today the moon is higher, so the water is going to be higher and everything.    He would involve us in everything, we knew that.  Baeza The tides.  Alexander What?  Baeza Tides.  Alexander Tides, yes  Tides, (Laughs) but anyway, that   s how   and my mother role. At that point, my father was teaching us, but in completely different way. Not academics, but it   s just every day thing, what was going on and everything. Everybody was involved on that, but at the same time. My mom, it would be another person, and she would also contribute, but pretty much all the time is was my father on that part of teaching. My schooling, it wasn   t done in the town that I grew up. It was done with nuns, one of the best schools in my country. The best schools, at that time in the   80s and   70s in my country, they were run by nuns. We go out every Monday, four o   clock in the morning, a car will take us and drive three hours, and take us to this   it wasn   t a convent, it was a   it is a specific for that, just to go over there and get your schooling. You stay over there and sleep the whole week, and then on Friday, they pick you up and come back home, so that   s how I did my schooling. Pretty much for all the three girls, that   s how we did from third grade to graduating from high school. Pretty much with nuns, really strict, but yeah, you learn a lot of stuff over there with them too. (Laughs)  Baeza Did you ever get in trouble?  Alexander Oh God, yes, I did. Not that bad trouble because we knew better from home. If you get in trouble, there are consequences. My older sister did a lot, Luz. Maria, no. I think when you have an older sister, and you see the trouble that they   re going, hopefully,    I   m not going to do that.    Yeah, I think I got less in trouble than my older sister.  Baeza It   s interesting. In many Latin-American countries, and I know in my family history with my grandfather, often they didn   t want the women to be educated, but that seems to be completely opposite. Was that the case in all of El Salvador, or was that mainly just your father?  Alexander It was my father, and let me tell you why. He would tell us this why. His education, it was only third grade. That was it. When third grade   and somehow I think he was...even though he came from an affluent family, a Spaniard and Chinese, he was the youngest one. When he was born and 9  everything, his mom passed away, so everything went in a disarray in that family. Pretty much, my father was raised by the maid, that was it. The maid took him on, and he pretty much   he used to tell us. All those mornings when we used to get up in the morning, he would used to tell us his history. I know pretty much from when he had knowledge and everything. We knew all that because every year, we will hear the same thing, but that time for us it was kind of kind of tiring.  In four o   clock in the morning, can you imagine you   re a teenager and you   re sitting over there, and listening what he   s telling you? No. The older that you get, you   re just,    Wow  I know more than my son knows about me,    at that time and everything. Because of that and because he was raised by the maid, and his family is still there. They lost everything pretty much because they didn   t know how to get used to the money. He was the one who came up, and raised himself up, everything. One of the things that he would tell us is this, he said,    When you go to a place, and you ask for a loan, and they tell you that you don   t have education, and you know that you can pay that loan because you work hard. That   s sad. No, and I don   t want you to go through that.    That   s what he used to tell us. Everybody, education for us, it was his priority.  We knew that after high school, he was going to send us to study abroad. We didn   t know where. I mean, it was   these were the choices: either going to Mexico, United States, Israel. Of anything, I was going,    Why my father wants to send us to Israel to study?    After you learn about all the stuff that goes in Israel, and all the   how they are balancing a lot of things, but those and Brazil. Those were the four countries, and I remember my older sister and I discussing that part after we finished high school. We were going for United States. He was going to send us, almost, to Mexico, to Guanajuato, because we had an aunt over there. She still lives over there, but we were going to go to Louisiana.  I was going to end up in Louisiana, but one time, he had a friend that came by, and my father was telling him that he was going to, my sister and I, were going to send us to study here in United States. He goes,    No, no, no, no, no. Send us to   I went to Oklahoma State.    This guy had been in Oklahoma State, had graduated with a master   s, and he say,    They   re two girls. Over there, there is nothing. They are no going to get in trouble, there is nothing that is that much and everything.    Then two month later, he came up with a pamphlet of Oklahoma State. Said,    Send them over here     (Laughs) That   s how we end up over here in Oklahoma. By that time, when you come with a scholarship with your parents, you don   t have a peep to say where you are going.  Baeza Do you know who this man was?  10  Alexander To tell you truth, I don   t remember. I remember coming to the house so many time, but he graduated in the   40s and   50s over here. What happened is, I think, when the A M universities here in United States, remember in the   40s and   50s, when they advertised   they are well known in South America because of the agriculture and animal science, mostly agriculture. I bet he end up over here because he was involved with agriculture, so he came over here, or I don   t know how he end up over here. It was somebody that my father knew.  Baeza He didn   t work for the university?  Alexander No, no, he didn   t work because he was living over there in El Salvador. Everybody asked me, said,    How do you end up over here?    That   s one of the reasons. On top of that, there used to be somebody else. My father wasn   t even   not convinced on sending us over here. We were going for Louisiana, to go to Louisiana State, and my father   we have the ranch, and the ranch is kind of   . It has some   how I can call it   you know how you call   in South America sometimes, you have places where airplanes land, air strips, but they are not in the charts for commercial airplanes? (Laughs) Just air strips that you do people can load the little airplanes in dust for dusters, that   s how you call it, isn   t it, for airplane dusters.  One night, I remember with having the ferry with Somoza and everything, my father used to have a room like this. They used to have this huge radio that you can hear everything all the way up to Argentina, so you can hear if it had the same frequency on the radio, you can talk to those people. One time, I remember it was at night, it was almost eight o   clock in the night, and you could hear the    mayday, mayday,    and it was a group of airplanes from that day. There was a storm, and they were kind of pretty much lost, and all that kind of stuff, and I remember Father getting with them, and telling them to land over there in the strips, and helping them. Guess what, it was the   I think they   re called the Flying Aggies.  There used to be some   one of the founders of the Flying Aggies I think, Hoyt Walkup. He used to go to Costa Rica, and fly with a group of people from here, and each one in their own plane, and they were jumping to different air strips, and they arrive in Costa Rica. Then lo and behold, there the guy, and that solidified for my father sending us to Oklahoma State. When we arrive over here, he was one of the mentors that we had, and also the contact that we had also over here was Evans. His last name is Evans, Dr. Evans, and he was a director of ELI  English Language Institute  at that time. That   s how we end up here.  Baeza How did you feel about the decision to send you to Oklahoma?  11  Alexander For us, my sister and I, we didn   t knew better. We didn   t grew up in a family-oriented place that you go out a lot, and do a lot of partying, and all that kind of stuff. For me, Oklahoma was like,    Oh, okay.    We were, my sister and I, we were choosing Louisiana State just because a lot of my friends, and a lot of people, and you hear more from those like LA, New York, Miami, and all that kind of stuff. We were going by what is heard more and everything, so for us, it was okay.  Baeza It was you and your older sister who came here?  Alexander Yes.  Baeza And how was that trip, going from there to here?  Alexander Scary because we didn   t speak English. We knew somebody was waiting for us here in Oklahoma City, and that was Dr. Evans. There were other people from El Salvador already here. When we arrive there, there was somebody from a friend of my father   s. My father had some friends, and their daughter was over here already. They, Mr. Evan and this girl, were over there at the airport when we arrived. Coming from El Salvador to Houston, and then transferring over there in Houston, come over here, it was kind of nerve-wracking, but we had directions of how to ask people and everything. Nineteen years old.  Baeza What were your first impressions of the Stillwater and the Oklahoma State campus?  Alexander Impressive, wonderful. I have gone to school with the nuns and yes, those facilities were big, but never   I already had seen the pictures on the catalogues that they send us and this guy took to my father. I pretty much had studied   I   m one of those people that before I go to one place, I do look at details of buildings and everything. I   m not kidding, I think that   s one of the things that I have, and so pretty much they were saying that the ELI was in this building, so I already knew the building in that map. I already knew a lot of buildings, what the name, so I pretty much knew the topography of the OSU. It was impressive. What it throwed me off, it was the color of the building because I would look at this building, I knew the building, I knew what it was.  Then I remember walking over here at OSU, and I knew where to go, but then when I start seeing all the buildings the same color, it threw me off. Instead of turning over here, I kept going on Monroe all the way up over here, and I remember the first time, I end up in front of math building. Where I should have gone is all the way down to the police department, so I took it wrong. Over there, when I was by the math building, I said,    I   m wrong over here, there   s something wrong over here,    so I remember I stood 12  up over there. Was first day of the school, and I keep asking people, said   I didn   t speak English, remember, but I knew how to say    ELI,    and I knew to say,    Hey, my name is   .     I would ask everybody, say,    Where is the ELI, ELI?    I didn   t know that who I was asking were freshman, so they even didn   t know what it was, ELI. I remember walking by myself and my sister, I do remember, I said,    I remembered there was a building that had a round thing,    and that was the annex of the Colvin Center. I remembered the tall building, so I started walking, just by my sister and I. We arrive to ELI almost hour and a half late because I was lost all over and everything, (Laughs) but believe me, I learned better. It was impressive because big at that time, but at the same time, I would say it   s different. When you travel a lot and everything, you get accustomed to bigger structures and all that kind of stuff, so I think I was already accustomed to those part of   those things because of the traveling that I had done back home.  Baeza When you first got here, you mentioned that there was already a community from El Salvador. How big was that community?  Alexander There were one, two, three, four people from El Salvador. Actually, there was one person already from my town that had already made it up one year before me because my father had already said something to them. We end up in here.  Baeza How many people here were from Spanish-speaking countries?  Alexander Remember, I came as an international student first. My status changed one year later, with political asylum. As an international student, when I arrived over here, the biggest population from South America that was over here were Venezuelan. Oh my God, there were almost five hundred Venezuelan people here with scholarships from their country. That was when Venezuela was so fluent with money from the oil. You cannot believe, I would hear them saying,    Oh yes, I get monthly   .    At that time, in 1980, okay, they were getting like seven hundred dollars a month for them to pay for the rent and eat. I   m going,    Wow,    that   s a lot of money, and also they were paying also all their schooling. On top of that, they would get money to travel on Christmas to go back home.  Venezuelan students were really down there, in the scale of   and how many students were over here also. I will say the next group that was over here that is not from Latin-speaking country, it was Indonesians. Big group of Indonesians, but by that time also, and the reason why, and you can put one and one together in this case. The daughters of the President Suharto, there from Indonesia, the nieces were here. Oh my, so if the nieces of Suharto are attending OSU, guess what, I   m going to send, if I was somebody in the 13  status that they had, I will send my   there is something over there in OSU that the nieces of Suharto are over there. There were a lot of people from Indonesia in the   80s over here too. Actually, we got to be good friends with them, my sister and I, that we still have contact with them, still to this day.  Baeza What was the international community like at OSU?  Alexander It was big, really hopping big time, and actually, the Venezuelan community was the one that was making the international community look really good. There were a lot of people from Ecuador, I remember, and then from Bolivia. Oh, I don   t know if in the   80s the United States had a program with different countries, where they will bring them with scholarships over here, and I don   t know why they were choosing because usually what they do is the send them to those A M colleges. I don   t know what was attracting those South American students to OSU, because there was a big group from Bolivia too. Not as big as the Venezuelans, but I will say there were like twenty to thirty Bolivian students over here at OSU. By that time, in the   80s, there were also, I would say, from Ecuador, there were almost ten people from Ecuador. There was big, big group, I would say there was a lot,  like a thousand , just from South America.  Baeza Were they living close to each other or spread throughout campus?  Alexander At that time, remember, 1980s, Forty North was the place to be. I   m not kidding, almost all the Latin community was living in Forty North, but Forty North was brand new at that time, and it was plush. Can you imagine in 1980, Forty North used to have a bus that will leave right after fifteen minutes pass the hour, and then it will come over here to OSU, and then take students and take them back. For us, for the international community that they don   t have cars, and Stillwater doesn   t have a bus, Forty North was the place to be because you had transportation to go to university, and also everybody   s living there. I do remember, I was living over there in the first year, I remember going to the swimming pool. They used to have three swimming pools, I remember that.  Three swimming pools, oh God, those swimming pools, (Laughs) just like you were in Miami. Because all these Venezuelan people is just right over there, hanging out in the swimming pool, and that   s how you met people over there. Then every Friday, Saturday, even Sunday, it was a party. Somebody was hosting a party over there, so there was a party central, dancing, salsa, and all that kind of stuff. I didn   t know how to dance salsa, and I learned really fast how to dance salsa that year. (Laughs) It was a really hopping place, Forty North, at that time, really. One of the things for me was I learned so much. One of my best friends is from Ecuador, I wouldn   t have met before, so it was a lot of things hopping, over there in 14  Forty North. Now, Forty North is kind of run down place, but in the   80s, it was a really good place to be.  Baeza What about the American-Hispanic students? Do you remember seeing a lot of them on campus?  Alexander This is what, for me, my transformation is. Remember, because I came as an international student. After that, after a year and everything, something happened back home with the civil war to the point that my father   one of my stepbrothers got killed. He was a medicine doctor, and so we knew that we were target. My father pretty much took all my brothers and sisters, and brought them over here to Stillwater. At one time, we were going, five of us were in school over here at OSU, but when we came over here, when my other brothers and sisters came over here, that   s when we asked for political asylum. When you change from being international to political asylum, you have different   United States offers you different things, you are treated like a resident.  You can ask for financial aid, you can work now, you can do a lot of stuff that you didn   t do, you couldn   t do when you were international. In the transition, like the first year, two years, I still playing the issue of being an international student because I didn   t know better. When I start finding out all the benefits that I could get being with political asylum, I found them really late in my senior year, but then you start focusing, and the type of people that you talk to and all that kind is completely different and not with the international community. That   s when I start kind of getting to know people. Like at that point, at that time, was   who was the person, like they have the Hispanic coordinator in the multicultural office.  I met Dr. Chip, he was a director at the multicultural office, but the only reason why I met him was   do you remember Hoyt Walkup, I told you that Hoyt Walkup was the person that used to travel to Costa Rica. When we arrive over here, all my brothers and sisters were at that time, Dr. Walkup used to stop by Forty North every day. He will come in, and he would ask us,    Is everybody here?    He wanted to make sure that everybody was over there, my brothers and sisters, because we were a lot of us. Said,    Is everybody studying? Do you need   ,    I mean, he was really asking that. One day, he came in, and I remember he had a huge car, and he piled, he took all of us and said,    We   re going to meet somebody.    From Forty North, he drove us all the way up to I-77, I think it was on Fifty-Sixth Street, and we went to this house. I didn   t know who was the guy, and he goes over and said,    Hey, Pat      His name was Pat Hofler, he says,    I just coming through this   this family is, some of them are over at the university, and if I ever die or something, you take care of this family.    Okay, so we met Pat Hofler. At that time, I 15  didn   t know who was Pat Hofler. Lo and behold, one or two weeks after that, Hoyt Walkup dies. (Laughs) Oh God, it was bad. We were at the funeral, and Pat Hofler comes up and said,    Okay, now you guys are mine. Hoyt Walkup is gone, you guys are my kids,    and everything. To find out Pat Hofler was, at that time, the VP for student services. They were looking for a student VP for student services. He was the assistant, the interim for VP for student services. Then after I think after that they hired Ron Beer. So Ron Beer was his boss, and how you call it, Ron Beer was his boss, and he was assistant VP and everything. Anyway, Pat Hofler took my family on his wing.  Baeza What was that like?  Alexander I   m sorry, because the guy was like my father here. For my family, he would   he really took may family under his wing. He didn   t have kids. He and Irene, they didn   t have kids, so my family, he would say, it was his family. He was the one who taught me how to drive. Even to my sisters and everybody, I need to, gosh   . It   s hard to   hopefully, you will not put this and everything. What he did, I remember he was in charge. In the summers, what he used to do, at least I was the older one at this point, because my older sister, her marry and move to Venezuela. When I was going to school over here, we will stop by the Whitehurst at lunchtime. He will tell us,    Come and lunch,    so my sister and I, we go to lunch, and he would take us to Willham or to Drummond and eat over there, or dinner, or something.  In the summer, what he used to do, he used to   sure, I   d keep taking classes. I kept taking the classes, but in the summer, he would, at least me, and my younger sister didn   t do it that much. But every summer, he would put me every two weeks, he would rotate me. The student services, at that time, it had the Student Union, it had the Colvin Center, it had the hospital. Also, it had Student Union copy center, there was something else   financial aid. Every two weeks, he would ask the director of the financial aid, at that time was Dr.   oh, what was his name, he just retired. I would intern two weeks over there in financial aid, and then he would move me, and then I would go to Willham at the food services, so he was moving me.  Pretty much by the end of the summer, I knew anything that has to do with student services.  Developing , also that he would do because accounting, he was the person that used to do the financial part for Ron Beer. He knew all the buildings, like Willham and Drummond. He was the one who went to Oklahoma City and sold the bonds to build those buildings, so every summer or every year, he would sit down and do all that accounting, and see, find out how much have they paid the building and all that kind of stuff. Do all the budget, and I remember sitting at this huge table, and he had all these papers. These big sheets of   he would tell me, he said,    Okay, so we have this building, so what we are going to do, we are going to take 16  depreciation and this and that.    He says,    Just take away ten percent of it,    and all that kind of stuff.  He would show me first two, and then I start going, and going through the whole line and taking ten percent, everything and all that kind of stuff. Shoot  Probably, I could have done it in the computer, but at that time computers   everything was by hand or by calculator. He would sit me over there, I would spend a full week just only with those papers with him, trying to do all the accounting and everything for him. He taught me. For you to know, pretty much, I went to, and then next summer, I would do it again. Pretty much, I knew what was going on, because of him, on the student services and everything. He really took my family under his wing, he would see us like their daughters and everything, well, my family and everything.  Baeza When you first started here, you mentioned earlier that you went to the NOC?  Alexander Yeah, Northern Oklahoma College, but in Tonkawa. The NOC that is over here right now, that just came in, what, six years ago or something. I wish that was here when I studied in 1980s, but it wasn   t. At that time, I   m not kidding, there were like five cars of Latin people, going and taking classes over there because they figured it out. Taking all those common classes over there are cheaper than taking it over here at OSU, and then they will transfer them.  Baeza Okay. What year did you start here full time on the Stillwater campus?  Alexander I went over there two years, so    81   I think it was    84. I graduated, I think, the spring    84 over there with my AA  Associate of Arts , so I think it was    84, and I graduated    87.  Baeza What program did you start here?  Alexander That   s the other thing. I started computer science, and the only reason why I did computer science because my father. I remember really vividly, being back in El Salvador, I was a junior   no, even before that. When I was in sixth grade, and I was   and remember that all my high schooling, I was with nuns. I was in sixth grade, and learning how to type in a typewriter, usually you will learn that when you were a freshman in high school. I remember my father paying the nuns when I was in sixth grade to learn how to, for my sisters and I, to learn how to do a typewriter. Well, us learning to do that, we would help him in his business with the ferry, and do all the stuff and everything. We were ahead of the ballgame for everybody, even for him.  17  I remember in college, in high school, and one of those mornings that he would sit us and we   d talk about it, he would say,    You know, I think   by that time computers were nothing. He said,    When in ten years, you will see that typing that you know right now, it will come handy.    He would say,    You will be ahead of everybody because not that many people know how to type,    and computers, at that time, you start hearing about,    You will know how to do that,    and he said,    and you will thank me on that one.    We were ahead of it and everything, so for him, the big thing was computing at that time, in the   80s. When I arrive over here, and my biggest thing for him, I think, because education was a big thing for him, having a daughter studying computing science, it was a big thing for him.  Yes, usually you do what your parents   you   re under their scholarship, so you do whatever you are told. I start computer science, I remember that. When I move over here to OSU, I was in the computer science, that was my major. I remembered that I was doing a   at that time, OSU didn   t have the stand-alone computers. What you will do, you can punch, you have all these cards, and you can punch holes on it and everything. Then you will have all your big stack of cards, and then you go to a window, and then you give them, and this big machine will read them. Then they will give you the printout with your program and all that kind of stuff. That   s how I started computer science over here. Everything was going beautifully until I took assembler, that class called assembler.  That   s the class that it is   you do, learn how to do programming with zeroes and ones, binary, yeah. Oh my God, I was having hard time. Because I spent so much time over there in the basement doing the programming and everything, I got to know the people inside of the machine room. The director   I liked it over there, and so I asked the director one time, Mr. McGee, that was his name. I said,    What I can do to work over there?    He goes,    What? You need to talk to me,    I said,    Oh, can I work over there?    (Laughs) Then, yeah, I was the person inside getting those big batches of cards, and putting them in thing and getting the printouts, and giving it to people. I was inside doing that, but then that   s how also I met my husband, James.  He was working for the university, in the first floor, and so he would come down and get his printouts and all that kind of stuff, so that   s how. Assembler, and he was doing all the programming with the zeroes and one, and I was having hard time with that class, so I asked and said,    Hey, can you help me with this?    He said,    Yes, I can help you.    I thought he was going to do the stuff for me, and he goes,    No, I can tell you. I can help you, but you have to do it yourself.    I said,    Oh, God.    (Laughs) I really didn   t do good in that class because at that time I had a   no, I had hard time. He was the one who told me, he said,    Listen, if you don   t like to do this, why don   t you go enter into the   there is a new thing in business. 18  It   s called MIS, Management Information System,    and I   m going,    Oh, I haven   t heard about that.    Said,    Well, you almost have all the courses and everything, and you don   t have to take assembler, but you have to take some business courses and all that kind of stuff.    I   m going,    Oh, okay,    so then I transfer to MIS. I think the year that I graduated,    87, I think it was the first cohort of MIS people at the university that graduated. I might be one of the first ones that graduated from MIS, yeah, that   s how I end up.  Baeza Did you go on to graduate school?  Alexander No, at that time   I met my husband, and computering was   by that time, I was really high in ranks over here, working in the computer center. Graduated, I started taking classes, but then I marry. One of the things, my husband ascending, going up in the rank and all that kind of stuff. One of the things that he told me was,    I don   t want them to think that is nepotismal,    because I would be known to him, but the wife is working over there, and he is getting up and everything. Needless to say, kind of we talk about it, and I came out of anything that has to do with computing at the university, and find something new. That   s when I started working in the Student Union with Dr. Keys, and who put me over there was Mr. Hofler. He told me, he said,    Well, Dr. Keys can teach you,    and so I had already interned in that part with Allen Reding.  Allen Reding was the person in charge of building operations, anything that has to do with the conferences and everything in the Student Union, and I like it. Somehow, I did like that part. Working with Allen Reding, he was a wonderful person that taught me pretty much anything that has to do with conference services and everything in the Student Union. I felt comfortable over there, and I stay over there for two years. I did start taking some master classes in higher education, but then I got so consumed on that, and then I moved to the psychology department in 1992. In that transition and everything, I pretty much, I said,    I   m going to focus more on this then taking classes and everything.    I take on and off classes, but I haven   t finished up a master   s.  Baeza How long have you been working for the psychology department now?  Alexander Since 1992, I started there in the fall, and so what, twenty-four years. I was hired to be the coordinator for the diverse program over there. That was something   coming from El Salvador and working in a program that is for diverse and everything, for me, it was like,    I know how to do this.    I   m a diverse person and everything, so why there are problems with diversity over here in United States, so it   s a challenge for me. The faculty that hired me at that time that was the department head, Vicki Green, she told me, said,    Listen, we don   t want somebody that knows the college over here. We 19  want somebody that relates to the diverse populations and everything. You are the right person for this.    Also, sure, what you do is trying to help the students to cope with the university too.  Believe me, I knew every unit on student services at the university already because I have interned like three or four years already. They said,    You are the right person for this.    It was kind of awkward at the beginning because I was working with psychology students, PhD. All the time you have that thing in the back of your head, thinking,    Are they psychoanalyzing me or something?    You pass that, and I pass it really fast. After two month, I felt more comfortable. The longer that you stay there, the better you feel, and I   m still twenty-four years over there. Really, I feel proud that I   ve been there trying to, helping the students to finish up their PhD.  Baeza You   re still doing the same thing?  Alexander It varies. I feel like I wear different hats, I don   t do the same thing. See, that   s one of the beauties that I like from my job. It   s not the same thing every time, even by year. It is different. Yes, the context of   yes, I do have to do the recruiting. I go around the country, and conferences, and try to meet students, and try to tell them about the program. At the same time, on the retentional component, it   s not the same every year, so every student has different needs, so different problems arises and everything. That   s the beauty that I like from that program because yes, you   re still doing the same thing, but it   s how you solve, the solving problem, it can go any way. You have to be creative, and that   s the stuff that I like.  Baeza Do you think that comes from how your father raised you?  Alexander I think you have to be witty and savvy on things. You tell me you   re having problems with something, and so I start thinking not just only one way. I start thinking,    Oh, probably this, this, or this, or that, or that,    and yes, I would say probably. That   s how those mornings, when my father used to wake us up in the morning, and you being one of the older ones, and you cannot say something that   the same thing. Yes, it make you think different ways, and I think so.  Baeza When you mentioned transitioning from being an international student to being a student under political asylum, did you then start looking for organizations that more Americans were involved in?  Alexander I didn   t know better at that time, and the only reason is because nobody   at that time, nobody taught me. The only reason why I knew about the Hispanic coordinator and everything is because I interned in the multicultural office with Dr. Chip. Then I met the Hispanic person at that time. It was   his last name was Cervantes, he was a director of the Hispanic 20  coordinator at that time. His boss was Howard Chip, and so I learned, and I heard what they did and all that kind of stuff. Even that office was still new also at that time, so yeah, you learn. It   s exposure, even working over there, even doing my transitions after I graduated with my bachelor   s and everything. I do remember that there was one time that that position of the Hispanic person was gone, so there was a semester over there that the Hispanic students didn   t have nobody. I remember being over there for three month or four month, helping in the multicultural office, being the interim for the Hispanic faculty and stuff, Hispanic Student Association.  Baeza How active was the group then?  Alexander Oh, wow  The groups, at that time, I would say it depends on who is in that position. I do remember vividly, his name was Rolando Diaz.  I don   t know if that have come into your archives or something like that , but Rolan   actually, Rolan was the one who was higher up. You know the interim part that I was, he was hired after me because I just was over there trying to help the Hispanic student for that springtime. Rolan came in, and I remember at that time   did I was the Hispanic Faculty and Staff President or not   yes, actually, I was the president  I mean, I   ve been the president of the Hispanic Faculty and Staff like five times in different times, and Rolan, I remember talking with him. Him and I got together really good, and he was one of those guys that was on top of things, so HSA those years, they were really   oh my God  I do remember vividly, but that was between him and I.  I was already working at the psychology department. The Hispanic, they doing the opening for the Hispanic heritage month, I remember having almost five hundred people in those celebrations. We used to bring a mariachi from Oklahoma City, the dancers and all that kind of stuff, and food. I would tell Rolan, I said,    I envision this. Do you remember,    I tell him, I said,    Do you remember when we go to Oklahoma City, and we see all those nice festivals, that they block like one or two blocks in the street? Why we cannot do this over here in Stillwater?    That   s what we were heading too. I mean, we were getting big, having five hundred people from the community. At that time, over here in Stillwater, there were not that many Hispanic immigrants also.  Now you see them more, but at that time, the only Hispanic people speaking Spanish, it would be the international community and the Hispanic students that were here. Some few from the community that they would go, but not like you see right now. We used to have big parties in the way of   when I say party, not party of dancing, but parties of doing activities, festivals. Rolan and the HSA were the ones because of that. The Hispanic faculty and staff, at that time, it was a really integral part for HAS, and what we used to do is we used to do some fundraising to help HSA. Like for these festivals, let   s say HSA, the faculty and staff was in charge. 21  The way how Rolan used to do is so you have the students over here, and they have the different committees: food committee, entertainment, and this, and that. What Rolan and I, we used to do is we used to put one faculty in charge of that group of the food, another faculty in charge of the entertainment, and another faculty in charge of this. The only thing that Rolan and I used to do, we just used to be back, and then let everybody do their own thing and work with the students. It wasn   t Rolan working with the student, it was the faculty and stuff working with the students. That   s how we used to do it. The time that he was over here, he did a lot of changes and everything. We start bringing in speakers, we didn   t have that many Hispanic speakers coming in. With the students and everything, we start doing that and also going to Chicago, taking the group to Chicago for the Hispanic Coalition, something, something.  He was really active at that time. HSA, I   ve seen the changes back and forth and all that kind of stuff. There have been years that have been good, years they haven   t done nothing and come back and everything. Also, it changes with the direction of the office too, the multicultural office because at that time, I think every coordinator in that office, they could do   they would let you be creative and work with the student and everything. Then it start changing to the point they   re saying,    No, this office is just only a retention office. If you have a problem, you come to us, and that   s it. Let the organization do their own things,    and all that kind of stuff. I think that   s how it is right now too. Different, I see things different. Coming from a big family and the way how you organize things, I think you have to be more inclusive and not exclusive and just only doing just only this thing and this thing.  Baeza Back then, did you see the Hispanic students and the international Latin students working together?  Alexander They did. Actually, I was the president of LASA too. (Laughs) When I was international, I became the LASA, Latin American Student Association, I was the president two terms. Yes, we were active big time because HAS, at that time, wasn   t doing that much. They would kind of come and integrate, and they would come and do things with us and everything, but also has to do the direction that is going on over there in the multicultural office and everything. Yes, they did. They went to the parties, they went to the activities that LASA would put together. You see them at the places and activities that   but at that time, for me, I wasn   t focused more in HSA because I considered myself as international. Then things shift when I was more   now, I have residency, and I   m more from United States.  Baeza You mentioned how back in the day the Hispanic Faculty and Staff Association worked really closely with the Hispanic Student Association. 22  Who were   do you remember names of some of the faculty that did a lot of work?  Alexander Oh yes, oh yes   Sera Chase , actually, Sera Chase, I would say,    Have you had a mentor?    Yes, I have,    but Hofler, that he was the assistant VP. I couldn   t have better mentor over here at the university, but yes, I needed a field that speak Spanish and knew things. Sera Chase, Dr. Chase, was for me one of those persons that if something was going on, I would go and talk to her. She also was the president of the Hispanic faculty and staff, so after here, I took over. I would talk to her and ask her some information. Sera Chase was one of the   she was really active. When she talk, everybody go,    Oh, yes. We are going to do that.    (Laughs) She was the mother figure, I think, for the HSA that was over there. There was another faculty in the education, what is his name, I can see his face and I remember that he had a beautiful voice.  Really strong, those radio people that speak kind of raspy, strong voice. I remember him because also, at the commencement, he used to be one of the name readers. His voice was really, it   s just really   you can hear it and really impacts you. He also was a president of HAS, his name will come up, but he was from the college of education. He was also one of those ones that pushed and said,    Yes, we have to work with the students and everything.    I cannot remember his name. There was another faulty in the chemistry department. He was a little bit elder and everything, he would be one of those ones. The way how he worked, it was hands off, but you would go and ask him questions, and whatever he tell you, you go and run and do it.  He wasn   t right there with you, looking after your shoulders like these other people would do, like me, I would do and everything. You would go to him and said,    We need this,    and all that kind of stuff. Said,    Oh yes, let me do this for you, and blah, blah, blah.    That was it, so yes. Who was   there were so many people that the ones that I, the circle that I run the most was Sera Chase, this faculty from the education. There was another faculty from the Spanish department. It was a gentleman. I   m blocking names, but he worked with Sera Chase too, and  Maria Molever  from the Student Union. You know her?  Baeza What was the last name?  Alexander Molever. That lady has worked longer than anybody Hispanic over here than all us Hispanics. She has been a housekeeper over there in the Student Union, but believe me, he knows everybody. She   s from Puerto Rico, and she have been work over there almost thirty years. She   s almost ready to retire. We just did what it comes natural and everything, and then Sera had her husband, her husband also was involved with us. Who was   I do think   I was the president of the Hispanic faculty and staff. I used to   I 23  keep everything, believe me, I still have things from the 1980s. Probably, I can come up with the names of the faculty that was, and staff, that was at those times and everything, but yeah, they were really active.  Oh  Maria Malav  , have you heard that name? She used to be another faculty in the counseling department. She doesn   t work over here anymore, but at that time, Maria Malav   was also involved in the, who was the other one   it   s just   they come up, but yeah, they were really, at that time, the faculty and staff was really involved with the HSA. But everything has to do with the person that is in charge in that office, the director, because if you think you are right over there in thinking you know everything, and you don   t need help from anybody, then you are by yourself. If you go to the community and ask,    I need help,    believe me, people will help, they will do things.  Baeza You mentioned, going back, that your family came here. How many graduated from OSU?  Alexander Okay, so I   m doing it by how old things   so there is Maria, Oscar, Luis, me, and Luz, so five.  Baeza And what are they doing now?  Alexander Luz is   she got married, and she   s in Venezuela, live in Venezuela pretty much. She has her own thing going on over there. You know me. My sister, Maria, she works in the financial aid and worked over there for a while. Oscar got his master   s in engineering, and he   s working at Tinker. He   s one of the engineers over there in Tinker. Luis is back home. He got his master   s in animal science, and he pretty much is running all the family business over there with my mother. Then Pastor was in Albuquerque, working in food services, and now he   s back home, helping my other brother with the running of the business. When I say business, my family doesn   t stay solely with one business. My family has like different type of business, so it is a diverse thing that one person cannot just run it.  Baeza That entrepreneurial spirit that your father   .  Alexander Yes. Oh, believe me, we know how to do a lot of stuff. One of the things that I forgot to tell you is my father went bankruptcy twice. The last time that he went bankruptcy, he had all the eight kids alive, but yeah, he managed and lift up and everything. One of the things that he   I remember. Just imagine you being a teenager, sure, we were with the nuns going to school over there and we would come the weekends. Okay, but then those three months of summer, we would stay home. I really hated it, those three month. At that time, being a teenager, because we used to have like two or three helpers in the house, and he would let them go those three month. 24  What happen is that what he would say, he said,    Okay.    Because the three elder ones were female, he said,    So you are going to   one week you   re going to do the cook for everybody,    like the helper that used   the cook.    Then you   re going to be in charge of the cleaning of the house and everything, and then you are going to be in charge of anything that has to do with the washing, the laundry.     Laundry was a big thing because we were what, nine people. We hated it, and then he would rotate us every two weeks. He would rotate us, so then I would go to the kitchen, then my other sister would do this, and everything. In those mornings, he would tell us and said,    Listen, I can pay somebody to do this, but what you guys are going to be doing? What am I going   .    I tell you something else also, he said,    The only reason why I   m   we do this is because when you get older, and you have a house, at least you will know how to run a house, and you will know what to ask for the ladies to do for you. What will happen if you are sitting over there, and you don   t know what to ask them what to do, or ask them how to clean things.    So that was his teaching, but we hated it. (Laughs) We hated it. There you have me, and you learn.  Baeza With your long history with Oklahoma State, how do you feel about the university?  Alexander It is funny because the older than I   m getting and working in the psychology department for twenty-four years, yes, I am involved with the university. I feel proud that I graduated from here, and I feel proud that I do things and all that kind of stuff, but I don   t do it like I used to do when I was younger. How do I feel about the university? I just see it as my alma mater, but mostly for me right, now I feel like I have a responsibility of anybody that goes through, comes over here and gets education and leave. How I feel for me is that the time that they   re going to be here, like in my case, the students that I work with, they stay over here four to five years. It   s just to make it as easy as possible, those five years that they   re going to be over there in the psychology department. For me is making them feel proud of that they came to university, they learn, but also they had a really good experience.  I feel like I   m one of those persons that should be able to be looking after that. Not with the whole university, but at least with the group that I   m working with. Because if I start thinking of the whole university, you cannot do that, it   s impossible. As long as you concentrate in that group and the area that you   re working with, I think I feel like I   m doing a big change. To give you an example, I   m not the PI of the grant,  but with  American Indians into psychology. This is our eighteenth year that we have this program. It   s to get Native students to continue with their graduate school and mainly finish their PhD. After I go around the country, and trying to 25  meet Native undergraduates to go to graduate school and everything, there is not that many.  It   s not that many. When you bring them over here for the summer program, and try to give them all these skills, and so they can have a leg up when they apply to graduate school, and they look good and continue with it. After eighteen years, it is a slow process, but I will say with this program, I really can say we have graduated almost twenty-one, twenty-two students with PhDs. The number is kind of deceiving because it   s small, but when you look at it in the whole context with the   nationally, when you have only seven Native students graduating in psychology, not in clinical, in all the areas a year, wow. It is a big strike that we are doing in the area, so for me, when I go back to the nations of the tribe and visit, and I see that the director of behavioral health is a graduate from our program, wow.  I feel so proud. I say,    Yes, cheers for the psychology department, but cheers for OSU.    When you start seeing all these Native students in high ranks, going back to their communities with a doctorate, a PhD, (in their communities, they don   t know what is a PhD) but with the knowledge that they have and how they can apply it and work over there in the community, it does make a big change. I feel proud that the students that are graduating, the diverse students in my case, (Laughs) because I want diverse students. Sure, I want everybody, but this Native American student, the Hispanics, the Asians, the African Americans, I feel proud when I see them across the country. I would say, just inside of me, I go,    Yeah, this is one of my students from OSU.     Baeza That   s your proudest moment as an employee. What about when you were a student?  Alexander As a student, the proudest part for me was   okay, let me see   sure, when I graduated, but the biggest part was things that I didn   t know that I was able to do is leadership. I told you, I was president of Latin American Student Association. I did so many things in there, but at the same time, I have been like three or four   more than that, probably five or six times, the president of the Hispanic faculty and staff in all this period that I   ve been over here at OSU. The only reason why so many times is because you I have revived the Hispanic faculty and staff, and then it starts going, and then I let somebody else takeover to be the president, and it kind of flops down. Okay, somebody has to come back and revive it again, so then I become again the president. (Laughs) It   s just I   ve been there to kind of revive the organization, but after a while, you get tired, and say,    Why can   t somebody be doing this,    and yes, they are.  Baeza Is there anything that you would want to say to diverse students at Oklahoma State? 26  Alexander What I will say to them, diverse students, is don   t ever forget where you   re coming from. Everything that you learn at your house, your parents, what they teach you, at that time, it doesn   t make sense, but believe me, you   re going to apply it, and it will make sense later. Don   t forget where you   re coming from. Where you come from, and don   t forget those teachings, family teachings that you got when you were little because, believe me, you will use them.  Baeza And is there anything you want to say in Spanish to the Spanish-speaking students?  Alexander Lo que di   cebolla es general, espanol vas lo mismo que dijen ingles. Y este no sorpiende  de donde viene y quien es son su familia. No   solo porque viene de una familia humilde, este nunca olvid   nunca  sorpiende  de donde viven y quien el es. Hay una razon porque ustedes ven aqui, y la razon es para que siguen su perando y como dije, no surpdiende de donde viene, y nunca  sorpiende  regresar de donde vinieron ya de donde a la persona de donde viene.  Baeza Muchas gracias.  Alexander It   s difficult to speak now in Spanish. (Laughs) Even though I do speak Spanish and everything, I think it   s that   .  -------  -------  
