 Finchum Today is August 19, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University, and today, I am in Sallisaw, Oklahoma, which is in Sequoyah County, to interview Stephanie Robbins Qualls. This is part of our Cowboys in Every County, so thank you for having me today.  Qualls Thanks for coming.  Finchum Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Qualls I was born February 21, 1978, in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  Finchum Almost on your mother   s birthday.  Qualls Yes, almost. We actually all   my brother, and Mom, and I are all within a week of each other.  Finchum All in February.  Qualls Yes ma   am, all of us.  Finchum In Tulsa?  Qualls Yes.  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school? Take me through your early years.  Qualls Growing up? Actually, my parents   I was born at OSU, at the time it was Oklahoma Osteopathic Hospital, which is where my dad was doing his residency, and my mom was a nurse. When I   I guess I was six or seven months old, we moved here to Sallisaw, so I have lived here most of my life. I mean, all the way through   I went to school all the way through graduation here. Elementary school here in Sallisaw, we have one 5  elementary school. It   s called Liberty Elementary, it   s where my kiddos go now. Then we have a third through fifth, which is called East Side. Then our middle school   s sixth through eighth, and then our high school is ninth through twelfth.  Finchum So four different ones.  Qualls Yes. We have a couple of small little country schools in our county, Sallisaw Central and Brushy, which are two schools. Brushy only goes through the eighth grade, and Central, I think, graduates usually about twenty a year. Sallisaw   s our main   we have one elementary, one upper elementary, one middle, and one high school.  Finchum Any of your children have the same teacher you had?  Qualls Not yet, but it   s been so neat, just full circle. I homeschooled up until a year ago, and when we found out I was pregnant, surprise pregnancy, with our number four, I could not wrap my mind around trying to homeschool three grades and take care of a newborn. We decided to go ahead and put them in school. My husband is a police officer here in Sallisaw, but he is our school resource officer, which is such a perfect fit for him. His degree is actually in elementary ed, so it   s a perfect fit.  He   s there at Liberty and East Side, the schools are side by side. They both were the same buildings that I went to school in, which is really neat. The administrators are a lot of my friends and teachers. There are a few that are still left from when I was here, but most of them have retired, and now it   s my friends that are teaching or my friends    friends. It   s been really neat to   . They could not be more loved and better taken care of in that school district. We   re really thankful.  Finchum News makes it back to Mom pretty quick.  Qualls Yes, absolutely, (laugher) and really Dad because he   s there on campus. Anything they need, Dad gets called, and our kids definitely toe the line. He   s right there on campus. Honestly, I don   t know that I would   ve sent them if he had not been right there, but it   s been such a perfect transition for us. He   s good. They know he   s there and know he   s watching.  Finchum What year did you graduate from high school?  Qualls Graduated in 1996.  Finchum Ninety-six, and did you have a favorite subject while you were in high school?  6  Qualls I did, English was always my favorite, which is now what I teach full-time at our community college, and always loved to write. Actually, I had a senior English teacher who was the first teacher, I feel like, that took time   I mean, I had tons of amazing teachers, but she was one that pulled out something in me. She saw that I loved to write and saw that it was something that was a gift. She really, really worked with me, and encouraged that, and pulled that gift out. I really didn   t think   I never thought I would want   I wasn   t the kid that played school, wanted to teach as a kid.  I never thought I would teach and didn   t even get my degree in teaching, but when I went back to get my master   s degree, I got it in higher education administration. Had planned on just working in student support services, and then when we moved back here to Sallisaw, there was a job open, and it was teaching Comp I, Comp II, writing. I said I   d try it, and it has been the most perfect fit. It   s been so fun, and I love getting to work with students, and to see them become better communicators by the end of the semester, so it   s fun.  Finchum You graduated in    96     Qualls Yes.  Finchum    did you debate where you would go to college?  Qualls Sort of. I had it narrowed down to OSU, Baylor, and Arkansas. Those were my three choices. I really wrestled with it through my first semester of my senior year but by Christmas, I think it was during Christmas that I had pretty much decided on OSU. Really, I don   t feel like it was ever a huge   I always knew in my gut that   s where I wanted to go, where I wanted to be. My mom   s youngest sister lives in Stillwater with her family, and my cousins were young at the time, and she was diagnosed with breast cancer that year. I remember really feeling a pull, too, to be close to them as she walked through chemo, and being able to help with my cousins, who were I think seven and four at the time. No, like seven and two, I think. They were real young, so it was fun to not only get to go to where   d I   d always dreamed of going, but then also got to be with my family that year through a hard year. It was good.  Finchum Where did you live on campus?  Qualls I was in Drummond my first year, yes, was on the twelfth floor of Kerr-Drummond.  Finchum It   s still standing I think.  7  Qualls I think it is too.  Finchum So far.  Qualls I know. I keep saying,    Next time we   re on campus, I need to take my kiddos up there.    I remember, we all had room phones because cell phones at the time weren   t   I mean, I didn   t have a cell phone.  Finchum It wasn   t down the hall? You actually had one in your room?  Qualls We had one in our room, yes. We all had our own rooms, and you had to dial out, and then we had   I remember for graduation, I got tons of calling cards. That   s what we used to call home, so I remember calling, or using a calling card for a second, and calling my parents, and saying,    Call me back,    and hanging up, and then they   d call me back. (Laughter) It   s so they   d know I was in my room, so they could call me back, but we went through that.  Finchum Was the bathroom down the hall, or did your room have its own?  Qualls No, they were down the   it was communal bathrooms.  Finchum All girls?  Qualls All girls on my floor.  Finchum In the building, was it   at some point, they switched, and it was half boys.  Qualls Actually, no. We were on Drummond, and so it was all girls on Drummond, and then Kerr was the boys    side.  Finchum Okay. I   m not sure if that   s the way it is now.  Qualls I don   t either, I don   t know. I just remember that it was my first experience with communal bathrooms. I will never forget getting   . I didn   t get sick very often, and I remember getting the stomach flu my freshman year, and throwing up so bad I thought I was going to die, just laying on those floors, the bathroom floor. (Laughs) I remember my aunt ended up coming to get me, and I just slept on their bathroom floor for like three days, but it was so miserable. I thought,    This is so gross. I cannot believe I   m laying here,    but I was too sick to move, so it was crazy.  Finchum Do you remember move-in day?  Qualls I do, so excited. My roommate was a girl I grew up with all the way. We were in kindergarten together, all the way through graduation. We planned 8  all spring and summer about our rooms, and what we were going to do. I remember I had zero trepidation. I was so excited about the whole thing, and got moved in, and it was crazy. I remember us having to haul things up the stairs because the elevators were so full.  Finchum Twelve floors.  Qualls Yes, exactly. It was insane. I think my dad almost had a heart attack, but we got moved in. It was so fun.  Finchum Then after your first year, did you stay   were you still in that one?  Qualls No, after my first year   I had Rushed my freshman year, so after my first year, I moved into the Theta house.  Finchum Is that the same one your mother was in?  Qualls No, she was an Alpha Chi, I was a Theta. My nanny, my mom   s mom, was a Theta at OSU. Then consequently, I have four girl cousins, and every one of them pledged Theta after. They   re all younger than me, so that was kind of fun.  Finchum How was Rush?  Qualls It was so fun  I really honestly went into it not sure I wanted to pledge a house. I wanted to see what it was like, and I was really blown away just by the women that I met. The girls that I went through Rush with, I got really close to, so it was such a fun experience for me. I know it   s not for all people, and I know it   s not the thing for all people, but it was so fun for me.  Finchum Did you have the same housemother all three years?  Qualls I did, and she was so precious. I still try to go by and see her when I   m in Stillwater on campus.  Finchum Is she still there     Qualls She is.  Finchum    in the house?  Qualls Mom Eades, yes. She    still there.  Finchum You called her what?  Qualls Mom Eades. Her last name was Eades, so Peggy Eades is her name. 9  Finchum So she   d be roughly how old now?  Qualls Gracious, I would guess she   s in her late sixties, early seventies probably. Now, I saw she   s still there, unless she has retired in the last couple years. I saw her, I think, the year before last.  Finchum Did they usually live in the house?  Qualls Yes, they do. They have their own apartment.  Finchum It   s usually just   not both though, not a couple. It   s just usually one?  Qualls Right, usually just one. I think they   re generally women that have been widowed, or I guess divorced. I don   t know of any couples.  Finchum Did you have a favorite place on campus, besides the house?  Qualls I loved OSU. There really wasn   t a place I didn   t love. I loved Theta Pond, I loved walking to class. I love football and basketball, the energy and the excitement. I   m an easy crier, so I remember always getting so teary and so excited at football  games  and Bullet would run out and the band would play. I would just get so excited. As a kid, it was such an exciting thing for us to go occasionally, and then getting to do that as a student was so fun.  I loved the Library. I spent a lot of time there studying, and researching, and writing. Trying to think   . I was a family relations and child development major, so the Human Environmental Sciences building is where I spent my junior and senior year, so that was like a home. Everybody, all my professors were so great, and always had couches in their office, and doors open, and always invested in us, if we wanted to drop by.  Finchum Did you have a favorite professor?  Qualls I did. I had several. Several of my major professors, and honestly, it   s been so long now, I can   t even remember names. I can remember faces, but I can   t remember names, but I did have my religion professor, what was his name   . Gosh, that   s driving me crazy. I took Old Testament and New Testament, and I took three or four classes from him, just as elective credits. I adored him, and he was such a good teacher. I cannot remember his name right now, that makes me sad. Yes, he was probably my favorite in terms of teacher and teaching.  Finchum HES  Human Environmental Studies , I   m thinking of Dr. Henry, Carolyn Henry? She may have come after you.  10  Qualls Yeah, I   m trying to remember who else.  Finchum Self, I remember there was a Self, but I think that person is retired too. Pat Self, does that found familiar?  Qualls That does sound familiar.  Finchum She did child development.  Qualls That does sound familiar. I had one, who   she was little, and she had gray, short hair. What was her name? She was so sweet. I can   t remember.  Finchum Sounds kind of like Beulah Heisch  Hirschlein ?  Qualls That   s it. How do you say her last name?  Finchum Starts with an H. I know who you   re talking about, and I never can get it right.  Qualls Gosh, it   s been so long now, but she   s precious. Beulah, I always just remember her first name. (Laughs) Yes, she was wonderful.  Finchum I   m supposed to ask you, do you know the alma mater song?  Qualls I do   Finchum Can you sing it?  Qualls Oh, gracious, I have to sing it?  Finchum If you wish, or at least say it, whatever.  Qualls Let me think how it starts out, hang on. I say I know it, let me see   .  Finchum Hum it in your head.  Qualls I can only remember the last part. How does it start out? I think I   d know it if I could get the first word. Do you know how it starts out? You don   t?    Proud and immortal, loyal and true.     Finchum    We herald your fame   .    Something about halls.  Qualls Yes, oh my gracious  I know the end part of it.    Loyal and true to our alma mater, OSU.    (Singing) I can   t think of how it starts out.    Bright shines your fame, Oklahoma State we herald your fame   loyal and true to our alma mater, OSU.    (Singing) I can   t remember the first part. 11  Finchum More than your mother. (Laughter)  Qualls There you go  She   s the one that taught it to me, and I can   t even remember it now, but yes. (Laughs)  Finchum When you were growing up, I take it, you all went to games.  Qualls We did, occasionally. We didn   t have season tickets, that I remember, but yes, we did. We went to several Homecomings, and it seems like we usually went to about one game a year, or once every other year.  Finchum Campus became   you became familiar with it.  Qualls Very. Oh yes, yes.  Finchum What about Walkaround, Homecoming time?  Qualls Oh yes. That has always been a huge family tradition. We started   I think, we probably went to our first Walkaround when we were very young. We   d go   seems like we went every year for a long time, and then when my brother and I got were in athletics ourselves, we weren   t able to go as much in junior high, high school. We did go, and it was always so fun. We   d meet our whole family there: my mom   s sisters, and my cousins, and my grandparents. We   d walk around, and I always thought it was so neat. It was one of those magic nights.  Finchum It   s just gotten bigger and bigger.  Qualls I know, my kids love it as much as I did. It really is such a   and we didn   t even have   now, they have bounce-arounds, and games, and stuff like that. We didn   t even have that kind of stuff for kids. It still was magical, the lights, and the house decs, and all that.  Finchum Pomping.  Qualls Yes, oh yes. I remember doing hours and hours of, (laughs) hours and hours and hours.  Finchum You mentioned you played sports in high school?  Qualls I did. I played basketball. Yes ma   am. I was not that good, but I played. I was very tall, so I was on the team, and I loved being part of the team. My team was amazing. We won state our senior year and got runner-up our junior year, so I played with really good girls that all went on to play. Some D1, some D2 schools, so really good team. 12  Finchum Did any of them end up playing for OSU?  Qualls No. Unfortunately, one ended up at OU, which made me really heartbroken. Yes, none ended up going to OSU. It was sad.  Finchum You finished, you graduated when?  Qualls Ninety-six. In OSU, you mean?  Finchum Yes.  Qualls I was at OSU from    96 to 2000.  Finchum We were there by then. We came in    96. So 2000, campus has changed a little bit since then. When was the last time you were on campus?  Qualls Let   s see. My nanny and I, we drove around there, probably last time I was there, which was probably January. We drove around, and she showed me a lot of the new things. She   s still, at eighty-six or eighty-seven, however old she is, she   s still pretty active on campus, doing several committees and things like that, so she knows what   s   .  Finchum Human Sciences just opened their new building.  Qualls I   m dying to go by and see it.  Finchum I haven   t been in it yet either, but     Qualls Yes, I   d love to go see it.  Finchum    it looks nice.  Qualls That would be neat.  Finchum And the business, on the other   huge.  Qualls Yes, I need to go by and see that too. That   s where we always used to tailgate, in front of the business building, so I   m sure it   s totally different now.  Finchum The topiary landscape and everything is just really pretty.  Qualls Oh neat, where   s that?  13  Finchum The boot is right there on University and Monroe, OSU boot, near Theta Pond. If you haven   t seen it, it   s really pretty. Then the Formal Gardens, if you   re facing the Library and the Student Union, there   s a hat that   s supposed to be like Garth Brooks    cowboy hat     Qualls How neat  Yes   Finchum    topiary. Then behind the Library, if you   re going toward the stadium, there   s a big OSU that they   ve done. They   ve added that recently.  Qualls How cool. Yes, I   m going to go see that. We   re going this weekend.  Finchum Good photo-op.  Qualls We   ll go see, that   ll be really fun. The kids would love that. They love being on campus, so it   d be fun.  Finchum Your mother said you were in Spring Fling?  Qualls Spring Sing. Yes, they have Freshman Follies and then Spring Sing every year, so yes, I did all that.  Finchum I couldn   t think of that. Freshman Follies, so that   s in the fall?  Qualls Yes, just for freshmen.  Finchum You would sing?  Qualls Yes, sing and dance, great time.  Finchum Whether you could carry a tune or not?  Qualls You had to audition for it, so you generally had to be able to carry a little bit of a tune. Then the dancing part was more choreography, little dance moves. It wasn   t big elaborate dancing. It was fun. They always paired us up with a fraternity, and you did your show, lots of practicing.  Finchum Did you meet your husband while you were there?  Qualls I did not, no. He   s an Arkansas boy. I like Arkansas too. We   re right here   I mean, Arkansas is a lot closer to Sallisaw than OSU. We   re only an hour and ten minutes from Fayetteville.  Finchum Okay, I wasn   t quite sure. You learned to holler    Sooie?     14  Qualls Yes, exactly, and my master   s from  University of  Arkansas. Yes, I have a divided heart now. I   m always going to be diehard OSU, but I like the Hogs too.  Finchum We took our son to basketball camp there, and he refused to holler.  Qualls To call the hogs. (Laughter) Yes, oh yes. My kids were calling the hogs before they could talk, so they think it   s so fun.  Finchum Part of that is we   re from Tennessee, so     Qualls Oh yes, I understand.  Finchum    that   s an issue.  Qualls SEC, yes. That   s fun.  Finchum OSU   s great though, and it   s still orange. Tennessee orange, OSU orange.  Qualls That   s right, true, not that big of a jump.  Finchum Do you have a closet full of orange?  Qualls Not as much as my mom. My mom definitely does, but I do have some. Sallisaw   s orange and black too, so it   s been nice to be able to   .  Finchum I was trying to do   her dad went there, she went there, you went there, and so hopefully, fourth generation will go.  Qualls Could be. So fun. My grandparents had six grandkids, and we, all six, graduated from OSU.  Finchum Proud day for them.  Qualls Yes, and then out of those six, four have graduate degrees, two of which are from OSU, so it   s kind of neat.  Finchum Blood is orange.  Qualls Yes, very much so.  Finchum How often would you come back and forth home while you were there?  Qualls You know, my freshman year, I came home probably about once a month. Then as I got older, it seems like it just varied. I came home when I needed to. My freshman year, I came home more often, especially in the spring 15  because my brother was a senior, and   no, that wasn   t my freshman year. His senior year I came home a lot. That was my junior year of college. He was a senior in high school, and he was an amazing basketball player. He was All-American and really, really good. I always came home for his games and was real excited. I didn   t want to miss anything his senior year, so I came home a lot that year.  Finchum Otherwise, it   d just be in the break between semesters?  Qualls Right, yes. I came home   it seems like I would come home for birthdays, or our hometown   I came home for Homecoming every year and things like that. It wasn   t every weekend, or even once a month, sometimes.  Finchum Since 2000, even the town of Stillwater has changed.  Qualls I know, it so has. We didn   t have near as many options when we were there.  Finchum Did you have a car while you were on campus?  Qualls I did.  Finchum You were more mobile.  Qualls Yes, I was very thankful for that.  Finchum Would you go to away games?  Qualls No. I never did, now that I   m sitting here thinking about it. We, as a family, went to a lot of post-season. We went to Final Fours, and if we were in Bowls, we went to that, but I never went to anything else.  Finchum Didn   t keep the roads hot then.  Qualls Yes, but didn   t go to many.  Finchum Do you remember graduation day?  Qualls I do, yes.  Finchum Where did they have it?  Qualls It was at the football field.  Finchum Outside.  16  Qualls Yes, it was outside. I walked and my parents, and brother, and grandparents all were there, so it was fun. Fun day.  Finchum In June, or was it   .  Qualls It was May.  Finchum Not so hot.  Qualls Not so hot. It was actually early May, I think it was May 6 or 7. It was really nice.  Finchum I don   t think they have them outside anymore.  Qualls Do they not?  Finchum The last several have been in the Gallagher. Since they made it bigger, there   s room now for all of it.  Qualls That makes sense. It   s probably a lot easier that way and not have to worry about weather.  Finchum Outside would be nicer though.  Qualls Yeah, I know, very true.  Finchum You spent time in the Library. Did you have a favorite spot in the Library that you would go to?  Qualls Seems like yes. Always went in the front doors, turned right, and there was a room off to the right. There were several rooms that you could shut the door, and be in there. There was a table, conference tables, or something at the time. I would always go there, and shut a door, and it was a good, quiet time. It was Grand Central Station at our house, so it was nice to have somewhere quiet to be.  Finchum Did you have a curfew?  Qualls No, we did not.  Finchum Didn   t know if sororities had to be in at a certain time.  Qualls No, didn   t have to.  Finchum You had to put in so many study hours?  17  Qualls We did. Yes, ma   am. I did, I studied a lot. (Laughs)  Finchum What was your hardest class?  Qualls Probably my Spanish II and III were so hard. I should not have been placed. I had to take the placement test, and I think I placed into Spanish III, and it was so over my head. I had to withdraw, and then switch to Spanish II the next semester, and work my way up, and it still about killed me. Biology was really hard too. I remember that being a really hard class. I took that my very first semester at OSU, and it about killed me.  Finchum English comp was a breeze?  Qualls I actually clepped out of Comp I and Comp II. I laughed after I started teaching. I thought,    Man, I never even sat in on these classes, so I don   t even   .    I had to do a lot of research as to how they were taught.  Finchum That   s what you teach now?  Qualls Yes.  Finchum At a junior college?  Qualls Yes, junior college.  Finchum Not high school?  Qualls Right, junior college. It   s fun.  Finchum We have a writing lab outpost now in the Library.  Qualls That   s so neat. We have tutoring on campus, but I would love to have a lab. We   re teaching this semester   we have started experimenting. We have an Intro to College Writing and Intro to College Reading courses that are remedial courses for students that score under a sixteen on their ACT, that they have to take before they can take Comp I and Comp II. I usually teach one every other semester, because I only teach two classes a semester with kiddos and stuff. This semester we   re experimenting with it, and we   ve taken   we   re doing a College Reading lab and a College Writing lab that are just one-credit-hour courses. We   re trying that, and I   m teaching both of those this semester. Hopefully, they   ll end up being a way to save time and money for them.  Finchum Will come in handy when it   s your children   s turn to write term papers,    Check this, Mom.     18  Qualls Hopefully, I hope so. I do enjoy editing, so that   ll be good.  Finchum You   re a comma queen then?  Qualls Yes. Well, I don   t know. There   s still times that I   ll look at stuff, and I have to look back, thinking,    I don   t really know.    I know what feels right, but I don   t know what grammatically   I have to look it up.  Finchum That   s nice to know, I still do too.  Qualls Yes, I do. I have to do it a lot. I still look it up.  Finchum When in doubt, don   t. (Laughs)  Qualls That   s right, that   s what I tell my students, for sure.    If you have questions, just leave it out.     Finchum You would   ve had classes in Morrill?  Qualls Yes.  Finchum Did you go up the stairs, outside to in?  Qualls I   m trying to remember, yes, we did.  Finchum We   ve had students tell us that as freshmen, they were told not to do that, or if you did, something would happen. They all would go in the end door, never go up and in.  Qualls How funny is that? That   s so funny.  Finchum Yes, campus lore.  Qualls Of course, there   s so many stories. That   s funny.  Finchum Being in a sorority, when someone would get engaged, did they do anything special? Back in the day, if you got pinned, you got thrown in Theta.  Qualls They still did that when I was there, yes, still did. Yes, and usually, it seems when someone would   we had what were called    candle lights,    when somebody got engaged. It was so exciting because you   d get in a circle, and you pass this candle around in a dark room, (dim, not pitch black) and then when it got to the girl that was engaged, she   d blow it out. Then everybody just went wild because you never knew who it was going to be.  19  Sometimes it was your closest friends, but they would never wear the ring until their candle light. We only had candle lights on certain night of the week. They could get engaged on Saturday, and I can   t remember what night we had it, Thursday night or whatever it was, and they wouldn   t wear the ring all week, just so everybody would be surprised at their candle light. It was fun.  Finchum If no one got engaged that week   .  Qualls No, you just didn   t have one. It was word of mouth. Everybody would say,    There   s a candle light at eight o   clock tonight.    Everyone showed up, it was so fun, if you could.  Finchum Would the girl get thrown in or the guy get thrown in?  Qualls The guy. It wasn   t an engagement though. It was when they got pinned.  Finchum Wonder if they still do that? I don   t know. I haven   t seen anything.  Qualls Yes, I don   t know either. Now that I   m sitting here thinking about it, seems like by my junior or senior year, it became against rules to be able to do it. I think that   s right, I don   t think you can do it anymore.  Finchum Something passed on campus.  Qualls Yes, where you weren   t allowed to be in the pond, I think. Seems like that   s right.  Finchum They may have had a lawsuit or something.  Qualls Probably insurance stuff, yes, probably so.  Finchum The stadium was renovated, I guess, after.  Qualls After, yes. It was after I was gone.  Finchum After you, and the basketball arena too?  Qualls Yes, it was still small, little on top of everybody, when I was there.  Finchum You weren   t in 4-H, so you weren   t on campus for Roundup, or anything like that early on, to get used to campus. You were already used to it with your grandparents.  Qualls Yes, family. That   s right.  20  Finchum Any pictures with Pistol Pete?  Qualls Yes, it seems like we   ve had many. I don   t know where they all are, but I feel like we   ve taken lots of pictures with him.  Finchum You weren   t in the band?  Qualls No, ma   am.  Finchum Didn   t play an instrument.. When you started there, did they require P.E.?  Qualls No.  Finchum They had already switched that by then too?  Qualls Now that you say that, I think we had to have a HPER  Health, Physical Education and Recreation  credit, two hours of a HPER course, and you could pick whatever you wanted. I did a lifeguarding class, so it was in the pool every week for a semester.  Finchum Is HPER, is that an acronym for something?  Qualls Yes. Well, I don   t know what it   it was an athletic class or an exercise class.  Finchum H-Y-P-E-R?  Qualls  HPER.   Finchum I haven   t heard that.  Qualls You haven   t? Yes, that   s what it was called. That was the HPER building was what it was called, where the basketball courts and all that was, pool and all that.  Finchum Where the Seretean   no, Colvin, the Colvin then?  Qualls Yes, they called it the HPER building. There you go   Finchum Okay, I didn   t know that. I   ve had someone else mention HPER, and I just figured it was HHP, like health and something.  Qualls No, HPER. It was  HPER  is how it was on our schedules.  Finchum R is probably recreation, maybe?  21  Qualls Probably. Seems like health   and maybe it was health, P.E., recreation, like physical education and recreation. That would be my   that   s probably what it was.  Finchum That would work, okay.  Qualls The E wasn   t on our schedule, so it was HPER, I remember.  Finchum That helps a lot. (Laughs) One mystery solved.  Qualls There you go. I bet that   s what it was.  Finchum It   ll show up in the transcript. I   ll know the answer.  Qualls There you go, good.  Finchum Your brother went there, he graduated after.  Qualls After me.  Finchum He   s younger than you.  Qualls Yes, ma   am. He was a freshman when I was a senior, so we were on campus one year together.  Finchum Did you socialize?  Qualls We did  We   ve always been really close.  Finchum He claimed you?  Qualls Yes, he did. We had a lot of fun that year. He   s a surgeon. He   s always been really committed to studies, so he studied a ton his freshman year. All the way until he took his MCAT, he worked his tail off.  Finchum He may have been in the Library a little bit.  Qualls I   m sure he was, a lot more than I was, for sure. I   m confident of that.  Finchum Spend much time in the Student Union?  Qualls I did, I really did. It seems like I ate lunch there two or three times a week when my   . I always tried to start my classes at ten, and I was done usually about two. I stayed. Instead of walking all the way back to Theta House and then all the way back, I would stay and eat lunch in the Union.  22  Finchum At the Hideaway?  Qualls Yes, yes. I never walked over to Hideaway for lunch though, but I love Hideaway. It   s one of my favs.  Finchum And Eskimo Joe   s?.  Qualls Yes, very fun.  Finchum I guess, with being in a sorority though, most of your meals were at the house?  Qualls Yes, they were provided and included.  Finchum Dances would   ve been there, plus in the Union, or other places?  Qualls They usually were other places. It was never at the house, and we never had any at the Union. They were usually   there were several places in Stillwater, and they would bus us to the place, and then bus us back. I wasn   t a big partier, but the few I went to, they took you by bus, and then bring you back.  Finchum The girl that you started rooming with as a freshman, did she go to the same house? Did she pledge with you?  Qualls No, she was a different house. She actually pledged Alpha Chi, which was what my mom was. We only lived together our freshman year, but we still stayed very close, did lots of fun stuff on campus together.  Finchum I   ve noticed recently, they   ve just had Rush pretty recently     Qualls Yes.  Finchum    and you   ll see the groups, same color dresses     Qualls Yes, exactly.  Finchum    carrying their heels and wearing their flip-flops. (Laughs)  Qualls I can   t even imagine. I just probably would   ve left my flip flops on. At the time, I do remember we had to wear hose. It was long enough ago that we were required to wear hose.  Finchum Required?  23  Qualls Yes, required to wear hose. It was not fun, looking back on that, that   s so hot. (Laughs)  Finchum Did they have someone do your laundry, or would you have to do it?  Qualls No, we did our own laundry.  Finchum In the house, like you would in a dorm?  Qualls Yes, it   s quite the same.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  Qualls Man, I feel like I spent the majority of my time just talking to friends. Whether it was in our TV room, or whether we went to Sonic and had a drink, or whether we went and wasted time in Walmart, being silly. We spent a lot of time building relationships with friends, and that was pretty much what we   we   d go to dinner and go to the movies. Like I said, weekends were always sports-centered, it seems like, going to games, and sometimes we   d have date parties on the weekends.  Finchum Were you in intramurals since you played basketball?  Qualls I did  I played basketball, and it seems like, one year they even roped me into   I can   t even remember what we played, something else. It was dodgeball or something. It was a nightmare, but yes, I did. I played intramurals all four years. I   ll never forget my junior and senior year, several of the guys    basketball team coached us, so we would scrimmage in Gallagher, and they would scrimmage us. They   d dunk right over our heads. It was so frustrating, but we always had really good intramural teams.  Finchum That   s your fun part then.  Qualls It was fun  That   s true. That   s very fun, tiring, but good.  Finchum No cards, or bridge, or rummy, or any of that stuff?  Qualls I don   t remember playing cards much. It was mostly just laughing, and then talking, and then eating. (Laughs) That was pretty much still what I do for fun.  Finchum Do you have a favorite memory from that time period? One or two? Class you almost didn   t pass?  Qualls Oh gracious.  24  Finchum That   s not a favorite memory, but     Qualls No. One that   s sticking out to me, I remember my senior year trying to figure out what I was going to do with my life, and I had applied to several seminaries. I thought I was going to go on to seminary, so spring break, Mom and I traveled. We went to North Carolina to check out one and went to Dallas to check out one. I put my deposit down on an apartment in Dallas, was planning on attending DTS  Dallas Theological Seminary  in Dallas.  Then I ended up interviewing for a job a couple of weeks after that to go into full-time ministry and ended up   I interviewed at Aspen Coffee Company. That memory sticks out to me so much because I feel like it changed the course of my future. I had the interview for the job, and I knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that   s what I was supposed to do. Got offered the job a week later, that   s where I met my husband, and my dearest friends. Like I said, it feels like it changed the course of my life. That memory and maybe it sticks out, too, just because it was toward the end of my college career.  I think that was in April of my senior year, but anyway, it was neat. I interviewed, got the job the next week, and then it was still another month. I didn   t find out where I was placed until May because this ministry is all over the United States. She had given me six possible locations that I was going to be placed. They were Kansas City, and Orlando, and Nashville, and several places. For the whole last part of college, I didn   t know where I was going to be the next year. It all worked out.  Finchum Where were you placed?  Qualls They placed me in Conway, Arkansas, which compared to all those big cities, it was a perfect fit for me.  Finchum Yes, and closer to home, not too far from home.  Qualls Yes, it was.  Finchum Close to Toad Suck. (Laughs)  Qualls Toad Suck, yes. Toad Suck Days, every year. We went every year until two years ago, my husband and I did. It   s fun.  Finchum You said,    Aspen.    I   m thinking Aspen Coffee, but that   s not   .  Qualls That was what it was, Aspen Coffee. Is that not what it   s called?  Finchum Yeah, but it   s ministry? 25  Qualls No, that   s where I interviewed for the job. I met the lady that was interviewing. We met at Aspen. There you go, yes.  Finchum Okay, that   s the connection.  Qualls Yeah, that   s where   she asked where she could do the interview that would be quiet, and so we ended up meeting at the Aspen.  Finchum Aspen downtown?  Qualls Yes, downtown.  Finchum There   s several now.  Qualls It   s crazy. Yes, the one downtown. It was fun.  Finchum Are you a coffee drinker?  Qualls I   m not. I   m still not. I always have loved coffeehouses, so I always try to find something that I like that   s not super coffee because I love   .  Finchum Smell good too.  Qualls Exactly, and they are always fun places to meet people and visit.  Finchum From OSU, you went to Conway.  Qualls I did, yes.  Finchum Stillwater to Conway. That   s not too bad.  Qualls No, and Conway   s a college town too. UCA  University of Central Arkansas  and CBC  Central Baptist College  and Hendrix  College  are there, so it was a perfect transition and it was still a little fun town.  Finchum How long were you there?  Qualls I was there for three years, and then we got married. We did a camp ministry for a year after we got married, and then moved to Fayetteville so I could get my master   s.  Finchum Then when did you come back here?  Qualls (Laughs) We made several moves. We lived in Fayetteville three years, and then I got pregnant with Abby Kay, our oldest. Finished out everything 26  there, had her in December, and then we moved to Tulsa. We lived in Tulsa for six years, and then moved back to Sallisaw five years ago.  Finchum Same general region of the world.  Qualls Yes, exactly. Conway, Fayetteville, Tulsa, Sallisaw.  Finchum Now, where do you consider home? Here?  Qualls Here, Sallisaw. Yes, ma   am, I do. Lots of places I love though. Anytime I go back to Stillwater, Conway, or Tulsa, any of those, it still feels like home, or Fayetteville, they all have people I love dearly. Those times in my life were very, very sweet.  Finchum Stillwater or OSU   s played a major role in where you are today?  Qualls Absolutely, it has very much shaped who I am.  Finchum You   re planning to be up there tomorrow or today?  Qualls Yes, ma   am. Today, yes, ma   am  We   re leaving after school.  Finchum I was telling your mother, be sure to check out Theta Pond. There   s a new carving at one of the tree trunks. They had someone carve a little     Qualls Neat  We will.  Finchum    it   s a little fella fishing.  Qualls How sweet. Yes, we will. My kids love Theta Pond. We   ll have to go. That   ll be very fun.  Finchum Stop at the Library   Qualls Okay, we will.  Finchum Anything else you want to add before we close out?  Qualls I think I   m good.  Finchum Want to try the whole alma mater again?  Qualls No, ma   am. I truly cannot remember how it starts. If I heard it, I would know all the words, but I cannot think of how it starts.  Finchum I need to learn it if I   m going to ask that question. 27  Qualls True, you should, so you can give a prompt, and some people could take off from there.  Finchum Thank you for talking with me.  Qualls Thank you very much, appreciate it.  -------  -------  
