 Finchum Today is October 6, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum, and along with me is Dr. Charles Abramson. We are in the OSU Library, Oklahoma State University Library, to speak with Dr. Bob Graalman, former director of the scholarship and recognition program.  Graalman Scholar Development and Recognition.  Finchum Get that right, Scholar Development and Recognition here, and you retired in 2014?  Graalman Three years ago exactly, yes.  Finchum With thirty-three years of service, I think I read.  Graalman Yes.  Finchum Thank you for coming today.  Graalman Thank you.  Finchum This talk will eventually get around to Phi Beta Kappa stories, but let   s begin with learning a little bit about how you came to be at OSU, beginning with when and where you were born.  Graalman Okay, I was born in Enid, Oklahoma, and grew up in two small towns near Enid, Okeene and Fairview. We spent a lot of time coming to ballgames in Stillwater, and my father had been a student here in 1938 as a sixteen-year-old freshman. He plowed through the history curriculum so fast that his mentor, who was Dean Schiller Scroggs of the Arts and Sciences college, had him transfer to the University of Minnesota to work with some 5  historians there on topics that were of interest to both of them. Then World War II broke out, and my father signed up to be in the Navy. After serving in the Pacific for a while, he was tested for his language skills. There was a secret program going on to train American military men, Army and Navy, in Japanese so that during the coming supposed invasion, they would be interrogators, and spies, and translators before and during the invasion.  After having been commissioned as an officer, my father received his orders. It was in New York, and was surprised to see that he was being transferred back, to of all places during the war, Stillwater, Oklahoma, seventy miles from where he grew up. That was a program for five hundred highly literate naval officers, who were expected to become totally fluent in Japanese in one calendar year, because that was when the invasion was being planned. The program had been started at the University of Boulder, but it needed more space. OSU in Stillwater, A M at the time, won the contract, and all of those individuals, five hundred of them, returned to Stillwater where they were taught by Japanese natives, who had been incarcerated during the war, for being Japanese.  Those individuals were sent from California and other parts of the country with their families to live in Stillwater, and teach Japanese language and culture basically twenty-four hours a day to these brilliant, young officers in the Navy. Then the war ended about eight months into that time, and my father left, as all the Navy veterans did. The Army won the contract to go occupy Japan, and the Navy men dispersed to their various lives. Interestingly enough, there were so few individuals in the United States studying Asian languages, that at least half, I would say that I know of, of the individuals who were in that program, became academics. The family trees now, in a lot of Asian studies programs in the country, all go back to Boulder  Colorado  and Stillwater, Oklahoma, where those men learned their Japanese.  Finchum That   s very interesting.  Graalman Very interesting, yes. There is more information being released all the time. In fact, I   ve been trying to get the person, who   s responsible for the archives for that program, to come back and do a program here in Stillwater. Many Stillwaterites have no idea that that very unusual program took place with so many, eventually, highly successful individuals.  Finchum Where did they house that many?  Graalman They lived   . I think Cordell Hall was available. People opened their homes. This was seen as a real plum for Stillwater because it had financial benefits. The whole community banded together to welcome these people, and eventually, the community formed a really nice home for the Japanese, 6  too. As you might recall, opinions of the Japanese during World War II were very, very bad. There were anticipated problems with bringing Japanese into this community. In fact, there was a big meeting that was held to try to block the Japanese families from sending their children to Stillwater public schools. There was a loophole that didn   t allow for any ethic group, such as the Japanese, to be sent to segregated schools, so they had to go to the public schools. Two years later, you can see pictures of Japanese in the yearbook, one of whom became the president of the senior class. The whole thing had a very positive outcome and put the city of Stillwater in a good light, and the individuals who studied here have fond memories of the time that they had.  Finchum How did your dad get selected to be a part of that?  Graalman They were all tested. There were some twenty thousand military people who were tested for their ability to break codes and to acquire language. Out of that group, a thousand were selected, and he was one who was sent to Stillwater.  Finchum He would have been young since he started so young here, when he was sixteen.  Graalman Yes, I think he was in his early twenties by that time.  Finchum Did he become fluent in Japanese?  Graalman He is a part of the World War II generation, and in fact, it wasn   t until after he died that I learned quite a bit about this. The greatest generation chose not to talk about their war experiences. We knew that he had been in Stillwater, my sister and I. My mom confirmed that, but we were never really quite sure what he had done here, and I suppose, again, typical of that generation, they had been told this was top secret and not to talk about it.  Finchum Ever.  Graalman Yes, and so that   s what   they followed orders, (laughs) is my impression.  Finchum Was he the first in his family to go to college?  Graalman Yes. He was an only child, too, so he was the only one.  Finchum His parents had not gone?  Graalman No.  Finchum Why OSU? Because it was close? 7  Graalman Yes, just down the road.  Finchum Oklahoma A M, I guess I should say for that time period. Education was important to his parents, I would imagine?  Graalman Yes, definitely.  Finchum He was an only, and then     Graalman Unlike most of the individuals I described, after studying for a master   s in history at the University of Wisconsin, then he decided that he could best satisfy his intellectual pursuits by following his father into the banking business. He returned to western Oklahoma and became a banker in Okeene and Fairview, and did a lot of public service in those towns, on school boards, and library boards, and that sort of thing. We always thought that probably he regretted, to an extent, not going into academia, but I think that he enjoyed his scholarly life in that out of the way environment, really. My sister and I talk about that a lot.  Finchum There are two of you, sister and you?  Graalman Yes, yes.  Finchum Did both of you   well, you came to OSU. Did your sister, as well?  Graalman Yes,  graduated with honors in German .  Finchum Take us through your career really quickly then, your educational background.  Graalman I started here in pre-law, and was involved in several activities, but primarily I enjoyed following OSU sports and hanging out with friends. I was a typical college undergraduate, I presume. Met my wife  Diane, first OSU woman to receive an advanced degree in Ancient History  here, and eventually bore down academically and got a master   s in English here, and then a PhD at the University of Tulsa. In 1977, I got that degree, and then I went off and taught for three years at Illinois State University in Normal, Illinois. That was a temporary job without any hope of tenure-track or permanent status, and we decided that we would probably enjoy Stillwater as much as community members as we had undergraduates and graduate students. My wife got her master   s here, too, in history. We just moved back to Stillwater and got jobs. I started out working in the dean   s office of Arts and Sciences, as an assistant to Smith Holt.  My wife eventually landed a job in the English Language Institute for International Students, and one thing led to another with the Arts and 8  Sciences. Then I became the director of University Scholarships in 1988, which had a list of assignments, primary among them during that time was to improve OSU   s reputation recruiting National Merit Scholars. We were very much running a distant second place to the University of Oklahoma, and the regents wanted to see an improvement in that. For three years, I had a university vehicle, and went around, and tried to meet every National Merit semifinalist in the state, convince them to come to OSU. It became clear that that was a losing proposition for us, and probably wasn   t reflective of the land grant mission so much. That it was a program that maybe was better suited to other schools, but we needed to focus on our mission.  We enacted some scholarships for valedictorians and high ACT students, and then one day, one of my boyhood heroes walked into the office, who was, of course, Henry Bellmon. I   m sure you have a lot of information on him, but I   ll just add my story. At the bottom of my list of assignments was the job of identifying, and recruiting, and training, mentoring students, who wanted to apply for major national and international awards. I didn   t really think that I should spend much time to that when the other things seemed a lot more important, but Henry Bellmon asked to see me, and he pointed to that part of my job. Said he had been on the Truman committee for several years, and he had never interviewed an OSU student, and he wanted to know why. (Laughs) He was such a heroic figure in Oklahoma. I was pretty young at that time, and I was very alarmed.  He gave me the name of a friend in Washington, who was the head of the Truman Foundation. His name was Louis Blair, and he said,    This man can help. You need to contact him.    Then I always remember, on the way out the door, he said,    Young man, I think you need to work a little harder.    (Laughs) That was a real, what would you say, a focusing moment. To make a long story short, Louis Blair came to campus, he gave us some tips. A year later, we had our first Truman, ten out of the next eleven years we had Trumans and became a Truman Honor College. Then we had our first Rhodes, first Marshalls, first Udalls, first Mitchells. Eventually, over a fifteen-year period, we had over seventy-five students who won those awards, primarily because of Henry Bellmon and his interest in his alma mater and his encouragement. (Laughs)  Finchum How had he seen your job description?  Graalman Yes, and so as a result of that, Jim Halligan recognized what a stir this was causing and how OSU   s reputation was changing as a result. He proposed that we set up an office just to do that, and that   s when it became the Office of Scholar Development and Recognition. We turned over all of our basic scholarship functions to financial aid, where they belonged in the first place, and started working with students and setting up programs. We set up a program in Cambridge, we set up some major research programs. Charles 9   Abramson  knows about our Wentz Research that the local Wentz Foundation helped us with. Both of those are still in operation, twenty-five years later. Probably the thing that I   m proudest of is that people started giving money to the office in Henry Bellmon   s name. We decided that we needed to recognize him, so we changed the name of the office to the Henry Bellmon Office of Scholar Development and Undergraduate Research. That   s what it is now.  Finchum I   ve done some interviews about Henry, so that piece is a part of it, too.  Graalman Yes, oh my gosh. I actually found a picture. I had been a page in the legislature when I was twelve, and I had completely forgotten that he was governor then, so I have a picture of him and me. Think I   ve got it in that backpack, I carry it around everywhere. What he did and what he represented, in terms of his public persona, is really hard to describe, especially in these times.  Finchum He was very good at connecting people with   and changing career paths of a lot of people. Then that feeds in to Phi Beta Kappa. When you first came, we didn   t have, OSU didn   t have Phi Beta Kappa.  Graalman I wouldn   t have known what that was at the time. (Laughs) Very few OSU people would because it had never really occurred, I think, for many land grants. I think of Clemson and Texas A M, all of whom have it now. I would imagine the same thing was true of land grants at the time. Maybe Cornell would have been different, since that   s kind of an Ivy-quality institution by reputation. It wasn   t   . I don   t know. Charles, maybe you can help. What time do you remember a lot of the larger public schools, including land grants, hooking on to the Phi Beta Kappa dream?  Abramson I   m not sure about that, but I knew about Phi Beta Kappa for a long, long time. When I was a child, my mother would always push upon Phi Beta Kappa.  Finchum Was your father aware of it? OSU didn   t have it, but his other places, did they? Where he got his master   s?  Graalman I don   t think he ever   . We never talked about it, but yes. I started hearing that we were making an effort. Obviously, by then, I knew what it involved. I actually learned about a couple of efforts but was not a part of the first two. I don   t have the dates, but I know there were two early in my stay at OSU. Then later on, when Dr.  Perry  Gethner took over, and we got a little more serious about this, we were able to tie the Honors College and the Scholar Development Office together to become a crucial part of the application, I think. Bob Spurrier really deserves a lot of credit for that. I don   t know, are you going to interview him? 10  Abramson Already done.  Graalman Already done, good. I   m sure he gave you a lot of information that I wouldn   t have been familiar with. Then it was, I guess, shortly after   I know that there were a couple of times that I heard certain aspects of our university could use improvement, such as foreign language, or at least some focus, along with the focus on scholars. It was about that time that we decided to push that a little bit harder. Then when Burns  Hargis  arrived, it was such a gratifying thing to learn that he wanted to make that a priority.  Finchum You predicted it in the interview with Dr. Gill. He asked you something about something else, and you said,    We   re going to get it.    You were gung-ho at that point.  Graalman Yes, (laughs) right. We were excited that we had some momentum, and people, like Charles, and Perry, and other individuals on campus, were fully supportive. Land grants have that quality. I remember when Blaine Greteman got our first and only Rhodes Scholarship, there was a large contingent of people, who drove through a storm to get to the airport to meet him when he came back from his interviews, having won the Rhodes Scholarship. I don   t think that   s the kind of thing that occurs at a lot of universities, and of course, it was such a relief to have that award in such a public way. I think the headline in the Chronicle that Harvard had not received a Rhodes Scholarship that year, but that OSU had, like,    What   s going on here?    (Laughter)  Phi Beta Kappa was the same way, and we had to really get organized, and have different people playing different roles, such as Bruce Crauder did a lot of work on the data. Perry  Gethner  was an organizer. When we eventually got to the point where it appeared we had a good shot, then Burns  Hargis  made sure that the president   s office was identified as the organizing agent for this. Then at the last minute, we had some real difficult scheduling difficulties, and the president   s office moved in. The people who came to evaluate us seemed to have a good time, and we knew that we were in good shape.  Finchum Do you recall the visit?  Graalman What I recall is the trip to Florida. Now, the visit was exciting, but it was so busy, it kind of all seems a blur. One thing I do remember is that we were so excited to bring these people to campus, and that the Student Union hotel was under repair at the time, and the air conditioning was out. We had one of these sudden heat spells. Wasn   t that in the spring, I believe, it was?  Abramson I think so. 11  Graalman Yes, had an early heat wave, and for people who come to Oklahoma for the first time, this can be a difficult thing to deal with. (Laughs) The head of the Student Union, Mitch Kilcrease, went out and bought window units from Walmart for every hotel room in which one of the Phi Beta Kappa evaluators was going to be staying, and saved the day. (Laughs) That was a memorable moment. (Laughter) It was really fun to observe our colleagues    enthusiasm as they met all these individuals from around the country, who came to look at our programs.  Finchum You said you weren   t involved with the first rounds that didn   t succeed, just in the later ones?  Graalman No.  Finchum What was your primary role?  Graalman I think I was a guide, taking people from place to place. Then Bob Spurrier and I had a session, where we talked about our programs, and how that showed that OSU was determined to set up programming that would give students the chance to achieve at a higher level. Bob was such a great, well-known national figure in Honors that they very much trusted his opinion on that. I will also say, for the final go-around, that we were very fortunate to have, at the time, a well-known provost on campus. Bob Sternberg, who was not only well-known internationally because of his publishing record in some esoteric fields, but he was very well-known in Phi Beta Kappa circles.  I think the first time I really felt confident that we were going to get it was when we went to Florida to observe the final vote. There were about, I believe, four of us plus Burns and Bob Sternberg. When we got to the hotel, everyone just swarmed to Bob Sternberg. His reputation in Phi Beta Kappa and as a scholar made me think that this is kind of our secret weapon this time, that we haven   t ever had this before. I think he deserves some credit for that. He wasn   t with us long, but during that time, getting a Phi Beta Kappa chapter was given a great assist by him. He and Burns made a terrific team for this last effort.  Abramson Do you remember any of the questions the committee asked you when you had your meetings?  Graalman They were not   the first time that I went through it, there were some questions about athletics, and foreign languages, and general studies, the sorts of things that Phi Beta Kappa stands for. You could tell at that time (this was before this previous time four years ago) that they were still in a negative frame of mind regarding OSU. There had been some things that happened over the years of OSU that really made the public spotlight that 12  weren   t very attractive. Appearances of athletics before senate committees, not being able to read, one of the most difficult times, I think, for OSU   s national reputation. This time, a lot of that stuff did not come up anymore.  I think it   s because, again, that with the kind of programs and the leadership that we had, that they recognized that it was OSU   s time to receive a charter. Also, the pattern over the last ten to fifteen years had been that land grants were coming into the fold on a regular basis. Texas Tech had received one, I believe, just a few years before we did. They   re not a land grant, but a school very similar to OSU. Texas A M, Clemson, received one, and Iowa State had had one for some time, I believe. Yes, the last time seemed more routine, more of a formality, thanks to our data that was so convincing. All the other things that had occurred with Honors and the scholars, it was going to happen.  Finchum Every application got a little bit better, a little bit closer.  Graalman Yes, try, try, and try again.  Finchum How did you all celebrate when you got the good word?  Graalman (Laughs) We went, and got on the plane, and came back to Stillwater. (Laughs) That was about it. There was a bit of cheering when we got on the plane, as I recall. A lot of people reflecting, I think, on something very significant that had happened for OSU.  Finchum A private plane or a commercial plane?  Graalman (Laughter) It was a private plane, yes.  Finchum You could cheer as loud as you wanted. (Laughs) If they hadn   t said yes this time, do you think they would have gone another round?  Graalman I   m sure we would have tried eventually, but you have to wait, what, two times or one time? You have to skip one     Abramson You have to skip at least one.  Graalman    yes, you have to skip one application period, and you can only apply every three years. So we would be working on another one right now, probably, would be my guess.  Finchum Did they make you an honorary member?  Graalman They did. It   s kind of hard for me to talk about that. (Laughs)  13  Finchum Try. (Laughs)  Graalman As I indicated earlier, I was a pretty ordinary student at OSU. I had a mentor who called me a late bloomer.  Finchum At least you bloomed   Graalman I was proud of that actually, and he put a lot of faith in me. Before long, I was doing things that I should have done long before, and taking care of business in ways that I always, I think, I had the talent to do. The notion that I would ever become a Phi Beta Kappa was beyond comprehension, so it was a very emotional thing.  Abramson I   m sure your family was very proud.  Finchum You were struggling as a freshman and sophomore with your grades, I take it?  Graalman I was doing a lot of things. It was the   60s  (Laughs)  Finchum I was curious about how your father was reacting to grades he might have seen.  Graalman It was   . See, I was not of   . I   m not comfortable with this.  Finchum That   s okay  (Laughs) The   60s was   . Vietnam wasn   t quite   . It was a little bit later, okay.  Graalman I   ll say that I have had some amazing and fortunate highlights in my life, and I would put Phi Beta Kappa at the top, and that   s because   . Not only for me, but because OSU has been so good to me, and I always, desperately, want OSU to be seen in the best light. Whether it was seeing students win awards, or seeing colleagues succeed, having OSU with what it deserved for so long was very gratifying, too, not just personally.  Finchum You would have graduated when from OSU?  Graalman Sixty-nine.  Finchum Sixty-nine, do you remember your graduation day?  Graalman Yes, it was in Lewis Field. Very hot day, yes.  Finchum Outside.  Graalman Outside, yes. 14  Finchum Who all came?  Graalman My family was here, (laughs) and I can   t even remember who spoke. It was a year later that Richard Nixon gave the   . His last public appearance was at OSU commencement, where he gave the speech, right before he resigned from office. Those were interesting times, to say the least.  Finchum How often would you go back to Fairview when you were a student here?  Graalman Back then, not as many people went home as much as they do now, and the reasons for that were many. People didn   t have cars, for one thing, but it was fun here. There were all sorts of activities going on, and everybody stayed on campus, unlike now, when everybody bails out on the weekends. Yes, I   d go back every   .  Finchum You mentioned that you were a basketball fan?  Graalman Yes, for sure. Henry Iba was   . He is in the same category as Henry Bellmon in most OSU peoples    minds.  Finchum So you got to see him coach?  Graalman Yes, I did.  Finchum Was Eddie Sutton on any team?  Graalman Eddie was on a team that I saw play, yes. I was ten years old, beat the University of Kansas and Wilt Chamberlain.  Finchum You remember that night?  Graalman I remember. I remember where I was sitting.  Abramson Were you at OSU when Iba was a coach of the Olympic team?  Graalman No, that was shortly after I left. You   re talking about the famous   that was in    72, and I was gone by then. That was the Munich Olympics, where they had the supposedly rigged ending, and we really suffered for him, (laughs) having gone through that. He   s such a gentleman.  Finchum You said you remembered where you were sitting?  Graalman I do, yes. I can still remember. That game was a really famous game. That was before the shot clock, and they would let the clock run down. OSU 15  would hold the ball for two or three minutes to take the last shot, (laughs) stall.    The stall game,    they called it.  Finchum Your parents had season tickets, or you happened to be   .  Graalman No, you didn   t need season tickets then. You just come early, and go to the freshman game, and then stayed where you were for the real game. The real game, (laughs) the varsity game.  Finchum They still traveled from Fairview to here to the games?  Graalman Yes.  Finchum What was your major?  Graalman I was in political science, and then I got a master   s in English, and then a PhD in English from University of Tulsa, focusing on the British war poets of World War I.  Finchum Were you planning to teach then?  Graalman Yes, and I did teach. I taught here in the Honors College for most of my career, it was terrific, as a general studies overview. I did that because I thought it would help me in my administrative career. I didn   t teach for a while. I thought I was a fundraiser, and I realized that I was losing touch with the students by not being in the classroom, so I scurried back and never regretted that decision. I was not paid for teaching at OSU. It was all voluntary. Then when I was in my early fifties, I got a little burned out on teaching, and started considering just doing administration again.  OSU sent me to Cambridge. After a summer in Cambridge with OSU students, I realized that I had really not become as good a teacher as I could become, hanging around with those British scholars and watching our students succeed. I completely revamped my teaching approach, and came back, and taught for fifteen more years, following that opportunity. You can well imagine why I say OSU did amazing things for me. Cambridge, the research program, great colleagues, it   s been a great career.  Finchum A closet full of orange?  Graalman Not really, no.  Finchum How do you show your OSU pride when you   re out and about, out of the state say? 16  Graalman I always try to wear a hat or a backpack with OSU, and it always gets a comment. Somebody always says,    Hey, I know about that school,    so I like that. Right now, I   m on the Stillwater School Board. I   m always trying to work on collaborative programs, such as one that   s going on next week at the downtown museum that involves Stillwater Middle School students and a Native American artist, who   s coming to town to talk about creation myths through art. I try to work for the community and the University in that capacity, too. The school board has been a terrific experience after having been involved in college life for thirty, thirty-five years.  Finchum You have children?  Graalman Yes, I have a forty-year-old son and a thirty-seven-year-old daughter. He is a Hollywood film editor. He actually worked with your people a couple of weeks ago on a virtual reality thing that they   re doing on western Oklahoma. My daughter is a makeup artist and performance artist in New York City.  Finchum Did they attend OSU?  Graalman No. Our son went to NYU  New York University , and our daughter went to KU, University of Kansas. During their era, not every Stillwater student stayed at OSU. Especially, it seems children of faculty, they were more inclined to go out and get away. (Laughter)  Finchum OSU doesn   t offer, necessarily, what some want, so that   s okay, too.  Abramson You mentioned before the interview that you were working on a grant for Phi Beta Kappa?  Graalman Yes.  Abramson Can you explain that a little bit?  Graalman Yes, as I just indicated, the museum   which is another of Burns Hargis    great successes. (Laughs) Add it to the list. When I retired, I still had a little bit of energy left, and decided that I would try to set up an arrangement between the middle school and the museum. We had, that year, several visits by the art department of the middle school to the museum, where they received instruction in writing about art, which was very gratifying. Then we used that concept to write a grant that we submitted to Phi Beta Kappa to support this Native American artist who is coming. We were happy to receive that. It   s not a huge grant, but it   s sizeable enough to help. Next week, the art department and some Native American groups in the Stillwater Public Schools will go work with this artist who is here. I think there were five schools who were given   it was from our region. They made these monies available, and we were one of five schools that were awarded. 17  Finchum Any other role within Phi Beta Kappa, do you have?  Graalman Supportive. I   m on a couple of committees. I try to help Perry out, whenever I can. Charles has got this area covered from what I can tell. I try to recruit students. I know a lot of students still. They   re dwindling fast as the years go by, but we try to contact students to let them know what a great opportunity Phi Beta Kappa is. This is not just an OSU thing, but it   s a national thing that Phi Beta Kappa is in the ears of many undergraduates. Yet another society that wants money for you to join, and they don   t understand that it is a game-changer for their resumes. I found out in my previous job at OSU that there are a lot of organizations that don   t necessarily do much for the student   s benefit. It   s not unusual that students get suspicious of every little organization that asks for a hundred dollars to join their club. They have to understand what the value of Phi Beta Kappa is, and that   s a continuing effort for several of us on campus.  Finchum It   s so new, too. Was it 2011, 2013?  Graalman Four years ago, I guess.  Abramson Four years, yes. I mentioned several times that my mother was so proud that she is buried with my Phi Beta Kappa pin     Graalman I know, you mentioned that.  Abramson    and it   s one of the highlights of, I would say, my life.  Graalman I   m sure. I have several friends now around the country who are in, and they all have a similar story to tell about that undergraduate designation and what it means.  Finchum When you first started at OSU, you said you were going around the state, recruiting students?  Graalman (Laughs) Yes.  Finchum What were some of the places that stand out in your mind, from little bitty towns or   .  Graalman I always made it a point to visit Korn and Kolony, Oklahoma. K-O-R-N, K-O-L-O-N-Y. They were out in the middle of a wheat field, and a lot of OSU supporters on these little faculties, so I love going to these country schools. I think that the most entertaining story that I have is that these were heated competitions for these students. There were some individuals out in the Panhandle, who were twin brothers and both semifinalists. I was new to the 18  job, and I thought,    I   m going to make it a point to see that they come to OSU.    I drove out there twice. Once I had to make detours, and the Panhandle is a long way. Thought that I was making progress, and I asked them if there   s anything that they would like to do, if I could get them to come to OSU for a recruiting visit. They said they would like to see Barry Sanders play football, (laughs) so I found a game and brought them here.  I naively said,    That probably did it. (Laughter) That probably cinched the deal     They were really outstanding, and I became, I thought, close enough to them I could evaluate their intent on this. I was dismayed when I called later to find out that they had not decided to come to OSU. I said,    Wow, what went on here? Why are you not coming to OSU?    It turned out that a competitor was aware of their religious affiliation. He sent a person to visit them who, (laughs) was connected to their church, where they prayed about this decision. (Laughs) I always got a big charge out of that. Just when you think you have covered all the possible angles, suddenly there   s a surprise out there. These were really, really competitive years, with a lot of people banking on the fact that OSU could solve any reputation problems that it had with National Merit students.  Well, National Merit is based on the results of a single test, the PSAT. It really does reveal a certain kind of student, who is successful in a certain kind of way. But again, it did not seem to fit the land grant model that well, of someone who is maybe a leader, someone who had so-so but not great scores. We found that that was the bread and butter for OSU, and that we could best locate those students through a valedictorian program. You would get students who had mid to upper range ACTs, but maybe not completely off the charts. Those students would come to OSU and really prove themselves not only as students, but as leaders, and that is what led to so many Truman scholarships. I think we had sixteen or seventeen from the time that Louis Blair visited us for the next twenty years or so. That kind of person is someone who wants to succeed academically but also help others through public service. Yes, those were interesting years on the road. I don   t think I could have done it for too many more years.  Finchum That was before computers. You had to find these students.  Graalman Yes. (Laughs) I know.  Abramson Since we have you here, what led to the decisions to start focusing on research scholarships, like the Niblack, the Wentz, and so on, because that really fulfills a need?  Graalman Interesting story. Has anybody done an interview on the Lew Wentz story?  Abramson No. 19  Graalman Wow, that   s a big one. Probably save that for another time and get Trish Houston in here on that, because I think the Wentz is as much responsible for the Phi Beta Kappa as anything else. He was the Oklahoma oil man, lived in Ponca City, and he endowed several programs at several universities in the state. Originally, the terms were that they were supposed to be primarily loans. That   s what he wanted his money to be spent for, and before long, they were able to figure out a way to alter that slightly so that it could be work-study. That   s kind of what it was when I arrived at OSU. There were a lot of students who were Wentz scholars, who were filing in offices, doing typing, and that sort of thing. They were well-known, very successful, but they were appointed, and they were basically doing clerical work. The Wentz Foundation decided, and rightfully so, that probably, Lew Wentz would have preferred a different sort of program.  Strangely enough, the meeting that took place to discuss whether OSU would retain its Lew Wentz funds occurred during the first month that President Halligan was here and that I was in my job. Someone got us two together to talk about this with some other staff. We decided that we were going to propose to the Wentz Foundation, which at that time consisted of the president of the university, (that would be Jim Halligan) a couple of former friends of Lew Wentz, and a child, whose father was a friend of Lew Wentz, and Trish Houston, who is a Stillwater investor. She is the money manager of the Lew Wentz program in Stillwater, very remarkable woman. She has been named as one of the top fifty female investors in the country. She has a highly successful accounting and investing firm with a branch in Woodward, Oklahoma, and a real go-getter and proponent of OSU and Stillwater.  At that meeting   . This was almost as memorable as the Henry Bellmon meeting. We were informed, in no uncertain terms, that they wanted to see something a little more academic through the use of Wentz funds. After an hour or so of conversation and some very firm instructions, the president turned to a couple of us, who represented the provost   s office, (because that   s where I reported) and he said,    You all need to fix this,    (laughs) because we knew that we probably wouldn   t have the funds for too much longer. It was important because they had just begun   it was a very conservative foundation for many years, and they didn   t invest their money. A recent president had decided that they needed to invest Wentz funds, and it skyrocketed.  It went from something like a two-million-dollar corpus to twelve million dollars in just a few years, so it became big. We were able to take between six and eight hundred thousand dollars every year, because of the interest rates at the time, and apply it in whatever ways we wanted, as long as we satisfied the Foundation. The first program that we started was the research 20  program, and guess who was in the first program, Blaine Greteman, OSU   s first Rhodes Scholar. He wrote a paper on John Steinbeck and the Oklahoma public response to the book Grapes of Wrath, and it was received with great enthusiasm. He had an offer to publish it. The next year, he applied for a Rhodes Scholarship, and he got that, and everybody started saying,    That Wentz program really helps people, doesn   t it?     Every year since then, we have had between thirty-five and forty-five, sometimes as many fifty kids studying under OSU faculty, such as Charles, for a significant amount of money with no strings attached, except that they finish in one year and that it be a legitimate academic topic. It doesn   t have to be in their major. I think that was a really beautiful decision that we made because that gives students the idea that you can be scholarly and have other interests besides your profession. We   ve had a lot of students who have said,    I just want to do this,    and we find them a mentor, and that   s the way it goes.  In addition to the research, we had a leadership component to the Wentz. We actually, for a few years, had a humanities program scholarship under the Wentz. I don   t think it   s   . Charles, you can tell me if this is hyperbole or not. I don   t know if there   s any program that altered the landscape as much for scholarship as the Wentz for undergraduates, other than the Honors College.  Abramson I would agree with that wholeheartedly. My son became an engineering major because of the Wentz, so I know my own students benefit from it. They go on to graduate school, and they continue.  Finchum When you say they have to finish in a year, what is it they   re finishing? An article, or could be anything, a project sometimes or what?  Graalman They don   t get graded on this. They are expected to come up with a thesis and explore it. If their thesis doesn   t work out, but that they have shown for a year that they tried to prove the thesis, then they get credit for it. We never gave them a grade. It was all between them and their mentors, and it was a really exciting connection to watch take shape on a regular basis. There were some times when we wondered. We didn   t want the students to feel anything except excitement to live the life of a scholar for a year, without any sort of grading or anything like that. They did have to show a finished product and talk about it, but they weren   t graded like they would be in a normal class.  Finchum Talk about it to who, the committee or to their department?  21  Graalman We would and still have   the Scholar Development Office still has a spring display, where the students exhibit their work and talk about what they have done.  Abramson Sometimes within a department, the student will have to talk about it in front of faculty and fellow students.  Finchum That   s forty or fifty students per year?  Graalman Yes.  Finchum Wow, I can see how that would be a game-changer.  Graalman It was, yes.  Abramson Then you see the excitement in their eyes when they get one.  Finchum It   s competitive?  Graalman Yes, it is highly competitive, but we were usually able to award at least half of the number of applications, if not more. One thing that was key   and I was really proud of this decision. When the students wanted to have a mentor, and then eventually, if they were chosen as a national or international scholar, we said,    Only OSU faculty. Sorry, no advisors, no presidents, no deans. Only an OSU faculty member, who can direct this and be   .    I don   t know if you have been to the area of the Student Union where a lot of these students are depicted, but those are all faculty members. Early in the program, we had some students who said,    I want my advisor to be it,    or,    I want this dean to be the person whom I recognize.     We would say,    We   re just going to stick with faculty members for this because those are the ones that actually make these programs happen,    and it   s not just because you have a friendship with some administrator. I couldn   t go on the wall as a student mentor, for instance, because I wasn   t a full OSU faculty member. Yes, that was good, and then the Cambridge program was exciting and helpful, but I really think that the one that was a game-changer was the Wentz. You should talk to Trish Houston before this is all over, yes.      Finchum The Wentz Foundation group around that table, how do they feel about all this success?  Graalman Great. Yes, in fact, as a result of the first few years of success, then some of us from OSU got to go watch their deliberations as a board, and how they allocated their money. They always really enjoyed hearing about (we would 22  take students sometimes) the students who are actually performing at a high level, who then became maybe a Truman scholar or something like that.  Finchum You got checkmarks with them. Did Henry Bellmon ever come back around and say,    Good job?     Graalman He did  We became fast friends, yes. We spent a lot of time together. My secretary and I started a book drive of agriculture and public policy textbooks that OSU faculty had. There was a Henry Bellmon Museum in Billings, and we made it a point to take those books up as a gift from OSU faculty for his museum. I spent quite a few wonderful days on his ranch up there, just talking about his career and life at OSU, and it was a remarkable time. I wish I had those conversations taped.  Finchum Me too. (Laughter) There   s a few tapes out there of him, but not many. You have Henry Iba, Henry Bellmon. Any other Henrys?  Graalman I didn   t know Henry Bennett, (laughter) unfortunately.  Finchum That   s a good name for OSU.  Graalman Yes, it is.  Finchum Henry, significant people.  Abramson Let me have one last question. As you were a student here, it must be very gratifying, I know for me as a faculty member, to see how the school has evolved over the years. Did you expect this when you were a student here?  Graalman No, I didn   t even expect it when we returned in    81. As a student, I mean OSU was a great and fun place with a lot of fascinating people, but I didn   t realize how much room there was for positive growth at that time. It never really occurred to me. What has happened with the campus, both in terms of the way it looks, but also in its reputation and its focus on things that it does well, wow. It has really been fun to be a part of, and I find that really to be common at the land grants. Those kinds of feelings are pretty typical. I was sent, by the way, to train for this job to Kansas State, which had an uncommon number of Truman and Rhodes Scholarships at the time. They had a legendary advisor there named Nancy Twiss.  All of a sudden this comes rushing back, and she showed me around campus. This was after I met Louis Blair, then I got instruction at Kansas State on how they designed their program. A few days ago, Kansas State and OSU collaborated on trying to help a student win a Marshall Scholarship. I don   t think that would happen in many places, but the land grant mentality, and I know that Charles feels this because he couldn   t be as 23  successful as he has been if he didn   t have that attitude about students and our school, is something that goes beyond what I see nationally.  I was the president of the national organization of people who do what I do. We started one about twenty-five years ago. The land grants always kind of got off in a corner and compared stories. I think it   s because we deal with so many first-generation kids, who come out of rural environments. All you have to do is get that light to click on once, and then sit back and enjoy the ride. I   m not so sure that that takes place at a lot of universities, where it   s just another member of a family going to get the obligatory degree. I   ve always been really excited to be at a land grant. My job did not require me to go to faculty meetings in my field of English, but it gave me the opportunity to hang out with agriculture teachers, engineers. There are so many differences among those people, but they all seemed really to be invested in making this a wonderful place for students to study and sharing in the community life. If I can make one generalization about OSU, as it applies nationally, I think that would be it.  Abramson That feeling of public service, I don   t know that you would get it at many other universities.  Finchum Sounds like a changing point for OSU was hiring you to begin with, so that you can be in that office when Henry Bellmon came in and said,    Why aren   t you doing this?    (Laughs)  Graalman Well, I will say that I was at the right place at the right time, but there were about twenty to thirty other people, such as Charles. I haven   t even talked about my secretary yet, who for twenty-five years devoted herself to our students in a way that only a faculty member could recognize. She was just as much a mentor as I was.  Edward Jones, who is an internationally known Milton scholar, very esoteric field, was the first person who pulled me aside and said,    I was glad to see you get that job because OSU can win these awards.    I said,    How? How do we do it?    Then he said,    I know two people right now, who are highly qualified to be Rhodes candidates,    and for fifteen years, he and I did strategy on a Sunday morning run around the lake about students and faculty members who could help.  As Charles indicates, at OSU it   s the team. There was a group of people who knew what they had in their classrooms, and they would send them my way, and then we would tie the whole thing together. Yes, with Bob Spurrier and all the people that I   ve mentioned here today, it was almost inevitable that we turn that corner from earlier times. I think it can get even better, I really do.  24  Finchum Do you want to name your secretary?  Abramson Yes, name the secretary.  Graalman Gail Gillilan. Yes, last time I interviewed, I forgot. I immediately set up a follow-up appointment. She was so instrumental.  Finchum Is she still here, or is she retired?  Graalman She is, she has retired happily in Stillwater, still very healthy. She was every bit as excited every time a student did something well as any faculty member. We had a lot of students who came by to get her counsel. One of our students, a Truman scholar, actually practiced his proposal to his wife to Gail. He chose her to go through it before he used it for real. (Laughter) She probably wouldn   t come, I would think. This is the sort of thing that would make her uncomfortable. She didn   t like being in the spotlight, but you might give her a call.  Finchum Yes, we might.  Graalman Yes, she gave OSU every ounce of her being for twenty-five years. I think that that group is every bit as significant at OSU for keeping this place running as those of us who get to go out, and do the teaching, and the recruiting and all that. Across campus, I always encountered a lot of staff people, men and women, who didn   t get a lot of recognition but would work overtime, and really put their careers on the line to help OSU succeed.  Finchum Get air conditioners for the Student Union.  Graalman Yes, that   s right. Mitch Kilcrease, that   s true. (Laughter)  Finchum Anything else you want to know, Charles?  Abramson Just to say it was a pleasure, and I always valued what you did, I still do. I   m sure without your successes, we probably would not have Phi Beta Kappa here. I think that   s   .  Graalman You sure you want to say that, Charles? (Laughs)  Abramson Without a doubt, without a doubt. I don   t know how you   re   .  Graalman What gets me is when I think of the unusual way that I became connected to OSU as an infant. I have a picture being held by the dean of Arts and Sciences in 1947, who   s my dad   s mentor, Schiller Scroggs, (laughs) with an OSU    Nineteen??    on it. Then the people that I met. I met Burns as an undergraduate. Meeting Henry Bellmon, Louis Blair, who was the most 25  influential man in scholarship competitions in the world at the time, who fell in love with OSU and helped us in many, many ways. I   m just glad that it happened for OSU   s sake. Bob Spurrier. I   m afraid I   m going to start leaving people out now.  Abramson There was a question that if we didn   t get it this time, whether we would do it again.  Graalman Really?  Abramson Yes, because people were so burned out, and this was such a good effort. With all the things we had in place, if it wasn   t going to work this time, what would work?  Graalman Yes, I appreciate your saying that. The humble atmosphere of OSU has always been both a benefit and kind of a curse in a way. A benefit in that our students surprised interview committees when they went out because they weren   t the polished, Ivy League type. They had a different approach, and they were first-generation, and they had a different style than a lot of these committees had experienced before. Someone like Blaine Greteman, or Joel Halcomb, or Chris Stephens, and all these people. The list goes on, and on, and on.  Abramson What is Blaine doing now?  Graalman He   s a faculty member. He   s got a great job at the University of Iowa. He is on the English department staff as the resident Shakespearean. He also has a joint appointment at the Iowa Writers    Conference, which is considered the preeminent creative writing program in the world.  Finchum He stays in touch?  Graalman Yes, in fact, Edward Jones, whom I just mentioned, is with him this week at Iowa. My point is that that part of it led to some success, but the flip side of that is that OSU   s,    Aw, shucks. It wasn   t anything,    (laughs) mentality has kept us from promoting ourselves. I served on the University marketing committee, marketing for many years, because I wanted to help make the case for the kinds of successes our students were having. Compared to a lot of universities   and I think you see a lot of behavior in times of crisis from OSU that reflects that. That frontier spirit of,    Okay, this is a bad thing, but we   re going to dig in our heels, and do our best, and see if we can overcome.    You can see what   s happened at OSU in many ways, in many occasions over the years, where that sort of land grant mentality has enabled us to get through tight spots.  Finchum It has built loyalty. People are really loyal to OSU for various reasons. 26  Graalman Yes, I   ve gone on and on.  Finchum No, it   s fine. Anything that we   ve not asked that we should cover?  Graalman I   m sure I   ll think of a million things when I leave here, but not right now. (Laughs)  Finchum If Henry Bellmon was sitting here, what would you two be discussing?  Graalman He would probably be talking about his wheat crop. In fact, I went to school with a man, who is one of   . He and I were on a high school basketball team, and he   . His name is John Gosney, and he and his wife are renowned organic farmers in the state, which is a very hard job in western Oklahoma, to grow crops without any sort of fertilizer, or he would call it, medication. He has been enormously successful, and he and his wife travel around the state, selling their products. Their organic food processers in the state use their wheat, and their steers, and their beef. When I was visiting him about three years ago, right at the time that I had just written something about Mr. Bellmon, John told me that he got a call from a lady, (this was when Mr. Bellmon was still alive) who said that her father was a very successful Oklahoma farmer. He had heard that John, in western Oklahoma, was growing crops without any fertilizer. He wanted to talk to him about it because he thought that it was almost impossible to do.  John said,    I   ll be happy to talk to him.    You can see what   s coming here. The day of the appointment came along, and Henry Bellmon gets out of the car. His daughter had driven him over, and of course, that created a great flurry of activity with my friend. He came in and sat for two hours, and they talked about their wheat, and what John   s secret was, and that he might try some of these things. Anyway, it was the essence of Henry Bellmon. He didn   t try to get an appointment because he was Henry Bellmon. He had a business proposition, and he wanted to see if John could help. Anyway, two years later, then my friend, John, was named the environmentally successful farmer of the year in the state of Oklahoma, and was brought to the Capitol, and given all sorts of recognition, so on and so forth. This was a close friend in college   from high school, and we had a great time saying,    How would we have ever been so fortunate? Who could have ever predicted that both of our careers would lead us to Henry Bellmon?    It   s a pretty amazing story.  Abramson Is it possible to show us the photograph?  Graalman Yes, I think so.  Finchum Was he aware that you changed the name of your program to the Henry Bellmon   was he? 27  Graalman Yes, he was, and he was very proud of that.  Finchum I wondered.  Graalman Right on top. I told you I carry this. You could understand now why I carry this. There   s Mr. Bellmon.  Abramson Where are you?  Graalman That   s me.  Abramson Which one?  Graalman This one right here, and then, this is the friend I told you about, the day we graduated from high school, so I carry those two pictures because both of those guys had meant a lot.  Abramson You never know where life is going to take you, do you?  Graalman Never. Lot of good breaks along the way.  Finchum A good journey.  Graalman Yes.  Finchum All right. We thank you for sharing it with us today.  -------  -------  
