 Ahrberg and today is October 15, 2009 and I am  visiting with Virginia Adams Semrad in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This  interview is for the O-STATE Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Hi, Virginia.  Hi there.  I want to welcome you back to the campus for the Women of Willard  (WOW) Reunion. Let   s start. Can you tell me about your early life,  where you grew up, your family and your school?  I   d be glad to. I grew up on a farm out in northwest Oklahoma, Fargo,  Oklahoma. Not even in the town, on the farm. I am the oldest of four  children and my father was a wheat farmer. This was during the World  War II years, too, when I was a small child. And he, along with none of  our neighbors, had to go to the war and fight because he was a farmer.  And farmers, I believe, were not called because they were needed for  production of food and other materials for wartime efforts. Like I say,  there were two younger brothers and when I was ten years old we had a  third younger brother. But our life was just like anyone else   s lives in  our neighborhood. We didn   t have television, we didn   t have a bicycle. I  shouldn   t concentrate on what we didn   t have, because we had lots of  other things. We didn   t know that the rest of the world was maybe  watching a little bit of television when we were children. Our interest in  anything was from the radio. That   s where you heard some programs  that were designated for children.  We were very active in everything that went on in our little school. I was  in a class of fifteen. We pretty well all went from first grade through  twelfth together. And interestingly, most of our parents had gone to  school a generation before so it was a very comfortable, very wonderful  life. I didn   t know anything any different. We didn   t travel a lot because  5  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  our relatives lived near   at least thirty or forty miles away so it involved  no overnight travel. We had a really nice little country church that we  attended and then we later went into town to church. I went to school in  the town the entire twelve years that I went to school, although there was  a country school just a mile away from our farms, but my father had  chosen to make it possible for me to go into the town school. He really  didn   t want me going to this rural school of only five students in eight  grades. So I was able to always go to school in town, ride the school bus.  And of course high school years were very wonderful with sports and  music and 4-H and church. So it all contributed to a very well-balanced  life. I have no regrets having grown up in a small rural area in western  Oklahoma.  Can you tell us what influenced you to attend OSU? And what year did  you enroll?  I know almost exactly what influenced me to attend OSU. As I  mentioned, I was in 4-H work and when you were like twelve years old  in 4-H, if you did certain things and qualified, you could come to what  was then Oklahoma A M for four days of what was called 4-H  Roundup. I think I was a seventh grader when I was able to make that  trip and I decided that week, this is where I   m going to college. There  was no wavering. My roommate in college, whom you will interview  next, was not from the same county that I was from, but we were there  together and we decided then we were going to room together at  Oklahoma State and it was just a foregone conclusion that that   s where I  was going. Some of my teachers in high school thought maybe I should  consider one of the smaller what were called Teacher   s Colleges around  and I just said,    Absolutely no way. This is where I   m going.    And I  enrolled as soon as we could enroll, my roommate and I enrolled in  college. We started the fall of 1955. I can   t be for sure when we  enrolled, but as soon as we possibly could, we were enrolled at  Oklahoma State   Oklahoma A M.  Did you have a major in mind when you came up here?  Oh, yes. (Laughs) Yes, you know this is a time when women pretty  much majored in Home Economics, Business, or Nursing. And I knew I  probably wanted to be a teacher and that I would like to be a teacher of  Home Economics because of my interest in 4-H and those kinds of  projects that tended to be in the Home Ec-y field. And that   s also where  many other of my friends were pursuing a degree, in Home Economics.  So, again, that   s just what it was going to be. So there was no wavering;  no second thoughts, no second guesses, anything about. And the other  thing, now remember, by this time I   m a teenager and I had heard that  the ratio of young men to young women at Oklahoma State was like four  6  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  to one. So this was very attractive.  Okay, so you arrived in Stillwater. What were your first impressions of  the campus and of the town?  You know, I don   t remember much about the town because, of course,  we didn   t have cars. So everything was related to the campus. And I just  remember thinking   of course I   d been there now most every spring for  4-H Roundup until I went to college. I remember thinking it was just the  most wonderful place in the world. There wasn   t any place that was any  more wonderful than Stillwater, Oklahoma. And the one thing that was  kind of interesting to me, now remember, I   ve spent my growing up  years out in the northwest part of the state where it   s rather barren. We  don   t have trees too much, an awful lot of wind and dust and dirt.  Stillwater had trees and flowers and beautiful, beautiful landscaping.  Beautiful new buildings because the Union was finished in either    51 or     54 so here   s a brand new building that I think is nationally recognized;  the same with the library   beautiful, beautiful building. So I just  thought it was the most wonderful place that ever could be and there  wasn   t any other college that could even come close.  Well, you lived in Willard Hall. Can you tell us what years you did live  in Willard Hall?  I lived in Willard Hall my freshman year and my sophomore year. And  then I had pledged a sorority and I moved off into the sorority house.  But we also had stayed, as I recall, in Willard Hall for a lot of these 4-H  events and so my roommate and I just, like I say, probably as seventh  and eighth graders, we said,    This is where we   re going to live,  Willard.    We wanted to live in Willard because of its proximity at that  time to almost everything else on the campus. And again, it seems like  getting into Willard was a little bit difficult. In other words, you needed  to get your name on the list right early. So as soon as the information  came out   and of course we didn   t have email and computers and all  that to let us know when the deadlines were   but as soon as we knew  any of the deadlines we got ourselves enrolled and placed in Willard  Hall.  Were you assigned to Willard Hall or did you specifically request  Willard?  We specifically requested Willard, yes. And at that time, Stout Hall was  quite new and a lot of young women wanted to live in Stout because it  was the newest of the dorms. But no, we wanted to be in Willard. And as  I recall, the thing that was kind of attractive, too, in Willard is all the  rooms had sinks in them. Now there are no, you know, it   s communal  7  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  showers and bathroom but Willard Hall rooms had sinks. So that was an  attraction to us, too. It   s interesting when you look back what really  made a difference to you. (Laughter) But a sink in a dorm room must  have been real important.  So what was your first impression of Willard Hall? I mean when you  first arrived and you walked in?  Oh, I thought particularly what would be the open-area living space was  just gorgeous. You know, here   s a beautiful grand piano and beautiful  chair arrangements and it overlooked Theta Pond then so the view was  very, very lovely. And I thought it was just probably almost like a  palace.  What was your room like? Can you describe that for us?  I don   t think it was very big. The beds weren   t bunked and we didn   t loft  them or anything. We had two twin beds, two small closets, and in  between the closets was the sink, and we must have each had a desk and  a chest of drawers. It was very adequate for us because we   ve come, for  the most part, from families where we   ve shared rooms. You know, we  haven   t had our own room at home, I don   t think   if any of us had our  own room at home, I maybe did because I was the only girl in our  family, but most of my friends shared their rooms with siblings and we  certainly didn   t have our own bathroom. We didn   t have our own  telephone, we didn   t have a TV, so this dorm room just looked quite  adequate. And I believe, we were on second floor, and we could climb  out the window and get on the roof of the porch below and that was a  good place to sunbathe, if you so desired. (Laughter) I   m not sure we  were supposed to do that, but it happened.  What was it like trying to have a personal conversation on the floor  phone?  Oh, my. That   s really interesting. First of all, I can recall the dorm was  in a U-shape, so each of the sides of the U had maybe one phone on each  of those wings and then one phone in the center wing. One of those  phones there was a closet, kind of a little telephone booth so you could  have a little privacy there. But otherwise everyone knew exactly what  was going on in your life and if you were being asked out by someone.  You know, whoever answered the phone maybe would recognize who it  was. We didn   t spend a whole lot of time on the telephone, just to make  dates and go out.  I   m kind of curious by this question, with so many women in this dorm  how did you decide who was going to answer the phone?  8  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Just whoever, generally. I think the second year my roommate and I  moved from one location to another and the second year was in Willard  and our room was very near the phone. (Laughter) So typically     So you got phone duty.  But there was no assigning of phone duty. And sometimes no one  answered it, but generally someone would answer it. Or they would  holler down the hall,    Please answer that, I   m expecting a call.    So there  was a lot of give and take.  Did it ring a lot, considering the number of women in the dorm?  You know, I don   t recall that it did. It probably rang a lot between about  five and eight o   clock in the evening. Because for the most part, we were  not there during the day and so it wasn   t like one would think it would  be, that it   s ringing all the time. And probably at eight o   clock the  phones   I don   t think that they could be used because now we   re in  school during the daytime and we have to be in at eight o   clock on  weeknights. I think it must have been 12:30 on weekends. So at the eight  o   clock hour, a lot of things were not able to go through. And I don   t  remember that the phone rang at eight o   clock.  Was there a common shower and restroom area on your floor? And how  many women shared the facility and what was that like?  Yes, there was. There must have been thirty or forty women that shared  that one facility. There was a common shower and common lavatories  on each wing. And I don   t know if there were half a dozen showers and  at least that many stools and tubs. It worked, you just made it work. You  know, we weren   t accustomed to having our own anyway so you just  learned. And as freshmen we discovered we were given a lot of eight  o   clock classes. Well, you wised up as you got another year or two under  your belt that you didn   t take eight o   clock classes so we probably had  use of the shower at seven o   clock almost exclusively. The freshmen did  because no one else was there. And I honestly don   t remember, I mean  this hygienically maybe doesn   t sound very well, but I don   t remember  and I think that probably we took showers every day but that just wasn   t  routine then. And shampooing your hair   I happen to have naturally  curly hair and I remember the gals in the dorm just wanted to throttle me  because I never did have to pin up my hair. But every one of them every  evening had little pin curls or rollers in their hair. And I could just sort  of breeze through and not be too concerned about my hair. (Laughs)  Was Willard considered to be a popular or prestigious hall at that time,  and why?  9  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  I really think it was. It   s been fun to go back and look in the yearbooks  that I have from past years and like I said, Stout Hall was brand new.  But in the write-ups about Willard Hall in these old yearbooks it  mentions a lot of women who were very prominent on campus resided in  Willard and it would often list who they were. I think its location was  prime in that. And it was a beautiful   it is a beautiful old Georgian  architect style. Now, this is close to the time the Union was just built. So  Willard is very close to the Union and the Union was certainly a hub of  lots of things. We walked everywhere, so that was real important to be  where you didn   t have quite such a long walk.  In your mind, what set Willard apart from the other women   s halls in the  late 1950s? You described some of those.  And I was also noticing in there that it was one of the few that had its  own meal service. At that time there was Murray Hall and something  else. I did not recall that, but again, that   s probably one of the things that  made Willard a more prestigious dorm to view because you had meal  service there. I   m sure Stout Hall had meal service, but I just recall that  people from some of the other dorms had to come over to Willard to  dine. And that would have not worked for my friends and I. We wanted  everything right there and we were fortunate to have it all right there.  Who was your dorm mom and what do you remember about her?  Well I remember a lady named Virginia Pryor. I don   t remember a  whole lot about them. I noticed from the yearbooks it looked like  Willard had a different dorm mom every year, so I don   t know if we sort  of wore them out or what. The one that was there my freshman year, I  think, had been there many, many years and she later retired. They were  kind of like your grandmother and a few of them were a little bit cranky  and so you kind of wanted to stay out of their paths. And you hoped,  hoped that you didn   t ever, ever have to be called into their offices. So it  wasn   t a real   you know, they were there and we were here. So it  wasn   t a real warm fuzzy feeling about them, but perhaps it was there.  I   m sure for our parents it was absolutely a total safeguard to know that  these ladies were in their place and that we would be closely monitored  and our dorms were locked at   on weeknights they were open till 10:30  but as freshmen we had to be in at eight o   clock until we made a certain  grade point, then we could get out only to go to the library on Monday  through Thursday nights. And fortunately my parents were never called  that I didn   t get in, but I believe there was a system by where if you  weren   t in   there was bed check. And if you weren   t in and you were  known not to be in, there were some penalties to pay.  10  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Now, remember, I   m a product of the    50s when our goal in life was to  be pleasers. And so we wouldn   t have, most of the friends I was with  wouldn   t have done anything to have caused any embarrassment for our  families or any embarrassment for our friends that we weren   t in  properly at the right time.  Did the dorm mom proctor this or was it a student that did the check?  They had student proctors on every floor. And what were they called,  resident hall something. But the night proctor was a person that she did a  lot of it, I think, but students did some of it. Students who were  upperclassmen did some of this.  Was the term WOW popularly used in the late 1950s or do you know  when it was first used?  I   d never heard of it until more recently so no, we didn   t use that term at  all. Just Willard. And our own group, we call ourselves Willard Two  because most all of us lived on the second floor of Willard so we   re  Willard Two.  I would like to discuss some of the WOW traditions with you. The first  one is, what was the Willard Beach and what took place there?  I don   t know what the Willard Beach is.  Something about sunbathing?  I don   t know about that one except that perhaps, like I said, some of the  rooms on second floor had access to the roof and so that may be  something that was after my time, too.  Were there some Christmas traditions?  You know, I don   t remember any. Decorating. I know that we were  expected or asked if we wanted to decorate our dorm doors and, of  course, we all did. I know there was, I think, a seasonal dance every  maybe couple times a year, maybe not seasonal, that Willard Hall  sponsored. But I don   t remember so many of those things that we would  have invited men in to do. We just kind of made our own entertainment,  our own fun, in the dorm and had some really crazy times. We look back  and laugh now at how crazy we were. But those were some of the things  that were fun.  I know we had athletic intramural teams and I think each floor probably  had basketball because I remember playing on the basketball team,  11  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  probably played on a softball team. But we were very active in that role  because most of my friends were like me. We   d gone to very small  schools and we   d all participated in a lot of sports. I think we  participated in the Sing that the campus had where you did a musical  number. I don   t think we ever participated in Varsity Revue. I don   t  remember that we did.  Did Willard participate in Homecoming events and contests?  I don   t believe we ever did a float while I was there, but I think we did  the decorating the dorm or some things like that. But of course, it   s all  women and the men are busy working on their own. I don   t recall that  we ever had a float.  What happened when a WOW member became engaged?  You know, I don   t know that I lived there because now, I   ve gone to the  sorority by this time and I don   t remember that   you know. I know what  we did in the sorority, but I don   t remember what we might have done at  the dorm. Maybe some of the other gals will. I wish I could tell you I  knew. But there would just be a lot of screaming and hollering. It wasn   t  like when someone got pinned or asked to go steady or something. You  know at the sorority house we had a candlelight ceremony that you  passed the candle around. And I don   t remember that we did that in the  dormitory   at least, none of my friends became engaged during the time  I lived there.  Can you tell something about the scrapbooks?  That we all had kept?  How long has the hall been doing them?  Now I don   t know about the hall scrapbooks. I know we personally,  many of us, have scrapbooks. And I don   t even know when Willard Hall  opened. I wonder if it was the early    30s. But many of us have  scrapbooks that we   ve brought.  So these are personal scrapbooks, they   re not the scrapbooks of WOW.  The hall might have had scrapbooks. It seems like I kind of remember  having seen some. We all came back, I don   t know what year it was  when Willard Hall became the College of Education facility, and many  of us who are here now came back for that observation and celebration.  And one of the main reasons we came back is that we have lost two of  our numbers, very young and early, and we wanted to commemorate  12  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  their memory. We were honored to be able to select some paintings,  some nice artwork and hang, as nearly as possible, in the section of the  dorm where we lived. And I don   t know if that was the early    90s or    86,  something about    86 strikes in my mind. So I don   t know if it was 1986  or when it was.  What do you remember or what did you hear about the 1955 panty raid  on Willard?  Well, I wasn   t there and the one thing I remember I was just horrified  and would my parents let me go to college now there because this  horrible thing had happened and would they possibly hear about this and  just negate my going there to college. That didn   t happen. But it was  kind of fun   to me, I would   ve been a little frightened. This was kind of  out of the realm of my comfort level. But some of the gals who are here  now were there during that time and I think it was a little bit frightening.  At first you are tempted to be a real come-on and then when it happens,  you know, what are you going to do with these men in your room going  through your undies? But it certainly created a lot of clamor around the  college, I think, at that time.  We did, the one thing that my group of friends did, during the basketball  season of 1957, Wilt the Stilt was playing for KU and was an absolute  powerhouse alone. They were playing OSU one night in February and  OSU beat them by one point. We always went to all the basketball  games and we came back in the dorm and started parading around the  halls,    We want a walkout  We want a walkout  We want a walkout      And a walkout did occur but anyway, it was probably a rowdiness that  we maybe shouldn   t have done, but that was about as rowdy as we got.  So I wouldn   t say it was too bad. (Laughs)  Was there a dress code in the hall?  I don   t think so. I think if you left, but as you were there, you could sort  of relax and wear whatever you wanted to. But slacks and jeans and  things just weren   t worn a lot. I don   t remember anyone wearing jeans  much at all except maybe to a western style party or something. Because  we all wore skirts and sweaters and bobby socks and loafers. That was  kind of the outfit. And whether it was just what we did as best I know, I  don   t remember that we had a real strict dress code. I think if anyone had  been improperly dressed according to the house director or the hall  monitors they would have been called about that.  Do you remember, or do you recall, anything about a dress code at the  library?  13  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  I don   t. I remember that you were, again, pretty much dressed like you   d  go to class. And you would not have shown up there in shorts or t-shirts.  You know, those just weren   t part of our clothing anyway. Now see after  the first nine weeks if freshmen had made a certain grade point we could  get out and go to the library and we did. But if we had on anything  inappropriate we wore a raincoat or something and went to the library. It  was not a place where you saw people out of their ordinary clothing at  that time.  Speaking of the library, it was a fairly new building at that time?  Yes, it was. It was quite new. I   m not sure when it was finished, but I  believe it was there my first year in college so it almost seems like it was  finished in the early    50s and maybe before that. But yes, it was a  gorgeous, gorgeous building and we did utilize it a lot. Our son went to  college at Oklahoma State a generation later and I asked him one time  about the library and kind of paused a little bit and he wasn   t even sure  where it was. (Laughs) I thought, oh dear, things have changed. But of  course, even in his day, he didn   t have access to the computer like you  do now, but that   s the only place we had to get information was the  library. You know, our textbooks. The dormitory had a few resources  but nothing very extensive so we utilized the library a lot.  Going to a different subject here, was PDA, public display of affection, a  serious infraction when you were on campus?  Yeah, a little bit. I don   t remember anything that happened to anyone.  But I think every little group has their own code of conduct and that was  just unacceptable in our group. So it was not an issue for any of us, we  just would have been embarrassed to have been found courting just  anywhere. But at 10:30 at night   at 10:25 at night at the dorm the lights  would flash and if people were in cars or on the sidewalk, there was a lot  of PDA then but everyone went in and it was all over. But that would be  the one time when there wasn   t too much guarding about what you were  doing because you were saying goodnight to your date. (Laughs)  Did any other dorms come and visit you for an activity or did they share  meals with you?  I have no recollection that any of the other dorms did. Now I think  maybe some of the smaller men   s dorms might have come over and  serenaded us or something because I know that we did get serenaded on  occasion. And that, of course, goes along with the engagement, too. If  the young man was in a fraternity, his fraternity might have come to  Willard Hall and serenaded the young woman who was engaged to him.  I don   t remember that we did much of anything else. We may have had  14  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  some meal exchanges. But according to what I saw in one of those  yearbooks, one of the women   s dorms didn   t serve meals so they would  have just eaten there on a regular basis with us.  How was the food?  You know, as I recall, I thought it was just fine. Now, fast food isn   t an  issue at this point in my life. There are very few of those kinds of things,  so it   s either eat in the dorm or you don   t eat. So you know, most of us  were happy with the dorm food. I do remember that pizza had just come  onto the campus and I remember one of the friends kept talking about  we needed to go to this certain restaurant and have some pizza pie. And I  had a real difficult time ever understanding that she was saying    pizza  pie    and not    piece of pie    because I thought, well what   s the big deal  about going to have a piece of pie?  There was a young man, I even can remember who he was, he and some  fellows in his fraternity had a service where he delivered sandwiches or  something so there was the opportunity to call a few places to have a  delivery of something if you wanted it. But you know, for the most part  we didn   t. Our meals and I think it was all meals except maybe Sunday  night was the only night we didn   t have a meal in the dorm. And, you  know, that was being paid for in our room and board so, of course, that   s  where we ate. (Laughs)  Was the name of this pizza pie place the Hideaway? Do you recall?  Well, I think it was. Although there was a restaurant downtown, I think  it was called Brown   s, and I think that   s one of the very, very first places  that they had it. But I remember the Hideaway and I don   t know if it   s  from my years or later on being aware of the Hideaway. But yes, that  would be one of the first ones that delivered.  Is there any particular special memory that you have about Willard Hall  that always stands out in your mind when you think back to those days?  Probably more than anything was the friendships that developed and  such happy times in that whole arena. That would be my one big  memory of what was life in Willard.  Did you have any tough times when you were in Willard? Was there  something that you experienced that you found very hurtful or negative?  No, I didn   t. I really was probably pretty na  ve, you know. I   m a  freshman and sophomore in college, and I would say that I   m just  enjoying everything that   s going on and studying. The classes I was in,  15  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  somebody else was in those so we had lots of sharing and lots of time to  work on projects and do all those kinds of things. So it wasn   t like you  were alone in your class work or anything. And the sophomores had  been through what we were in the first year, so we had some built-in  mentors to help us.  Was there diversity in Willard? By that I mean were there ethnic and  international students?  There were a few international students on campus that would have  probably been Asian. But other than that, very little diversity. I don   t  remember any persons of color, negroes, although there was one person  in all of our Home Ec classes but she didn   t happen to live in Willard.  We were a pretty homogeneous group.  Were you active in Willard or any of the OSU women residence hall  associations? For example, did you hold a hall or floor position?  Well, I didn   t remember but when I looked in the yearbook I saw that  my sophomore year I was treasurer of Willard Hall. (Laughs) I didn   t  remember that. So, yes, we were all active in every little thing that we  could possibly be active in. The Greater Residence Hall, I don   t recall  that I contributed to that. But yeah, we were very active on our floor;  participated in everything that came along.  Did you work in the hall as a floor assistant or the front desk?  I did not. No, I didn   t ever work.  Were there competitions between the floors?  Yes. Athletic intramural and maybe even some floor decorations  because I noticed, again, in the yearbook the fourth floor got to do  something because they won some contest. So yes, there was  competition among the floors.  When you lived there did they have any kind of etiquette that they tried  to share with you, train you in, as far as when you ate in the dorms  there? Any kind of etiquette?  I don   t recall that there was.  You know, which fork to use and     No, not so much of that. But, of course, we went through a line. Now if  you sat at the table with the house mother you might have been exposed  16  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  to that. That really came about for me in the sorority house, but routinely  I don   t remember. Again, we   re gals of the    50s. We   re going to do  everything as right as we possibly can, you know. If we have the  opportunity to sit down to a more formal meal with all the different  silverware and everything   and of course, again, most of us were in  Home Economics and were exposed to a lot of that in our Home Ec  classes, too.  Why have the WOW women stayed so close through the years and  continue to have reunions even fifty years later?  You know, I   ve really pondered that because I didn   t think anything  about it. But as I   ve told people what I   m doing they are just amazed. I  think probably we were all from very small towns in rural Oklahoma,  many of us were the first one in our families to go to college, we just had  such common interest and we were all bonded first of all through 4-H  and being in Willard and then many of us majored in the same field. We  were so much alike. I don   t have any sisters so these women were all  sort of my sisters. Then we had our first reunion in 1969, ten years after  we had graduated from college. And by that time all of us are married,  all of us have children about the same age, and we had such a good time  then that we said,    We   ve got to do this more often.    So we just made a  real effort to do that. And I think we all get together and it   s like 1955,  the late    50s when we   re all in college together. It   s such a rewarding  wonderful time. Our faith has been very strong for all of us. There are  many bonding ingredients and we   ve all made an effort. Those who  don   t live in Oklahoma make a real effort to get back if that   s where  we   re communing. And, of course, when we realized that we were not  far from celebrating our 50th anniversary, we thought we will all get here  for this. And I think there are going to be about seventeen or eighteen  who have and will be here to be together.  Now let me ask you this question, and I don   t know if it   s a fair question  to ask you, and decline if you   d like. But I   m kind of curious, you said  you were in a sorority and you were in the residence hall. Of the two  groups, which of the women have you stayed closest to?  Interestingly, I   ve stayed closest to the dorm group.  And can you tell me why?  Well, I think it   s probably our backgrounds. Several of us are from a  very  close  proximity out in western Oklahoma so sometimes we   d see  each other. I might have seen my roommate at church where she   s with  her parents and I   m with my mother. I have stayed close to two or three  gals in the sorority, but as far as an entire group of women I   ve stayed  17  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  much closer to the dorm gals.  How many reunions have you participated in and where?  Okay, the first one in 1969 was down by Altus  at Quartz Mountain .  Then we had one in 1974, five years later, at Arrowhead. Then I think  there was one at Roman Nose, maybe a couple at Roman Nose. I didn   t  get to those. Then came a span of time when we all had kids in high  school and it was just impossible to get together too much. So we were  back here and if it was    86 when Willard became the College of  Education we were back here for that. Then in 2002   during the    90s I  don   t know if we got together. Small groups of us did. I was at a  convention in Arizona and about five of us got together there. I think  three or four of the people, but for the large group to get together. Then  we had a reunion where we live in South Fork, Colorado in 2002 and a  lot of gals came. Then we said,    We   ve got to do this in five years,    and  so we had a reunion in 2007 in Oklahoma City, kind of tagged on the  end of the Big 12 Tournament because some of us were there. Then  now.  The other thing I really thought about in my own heart is that our  husbands all enjoy each other. So it   s not just been the gals getting  together. It   s couples, for the most part. And that   s probably unique in  itself. Our husbands are very content to be with   in fact a lot of them  went to college also and know each other so they have a good time  together.  When Willard was converted to administrative use, how did you all feel  about that?  You know, I guess my thought is it   s sure a lot better to do that than tear  it down. (Laughs) And that   s certainly what happens sometimes to those  charming old buildings. I think we probably all recognized that it no  longer was the kind of housing that young women really desire. It  needed to be updated and we were honored that the dorm where we lived  was the one chosen to serve this new purpose on the campus.  Did the WOW group participate in the renovation plans of Willard and  did they lobby for maintaining the original living room spaces on the  first floor?  I wasn   t a part of that. Like I said, our role in that was to find some  suitable memorials for the two women we had lost in our group and we  did lobby to have that artwork put in the area where we lived. So that   s  as much, I think, as we did.  18  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  What do you think about the new residence halls and apartment suites  on the OSU campus? Have you been in them?  I have not been in them, but I think if they   re meeting a need and they   re  staying filled then they must be the right thing to do. Young women now  come to college having had their own bathrooms, their own bedrooms,  their own TVs, all these things that were kind of foreign to us. So if that  makes them happy and keeps them competitive with other major  universities then I   d say that   s what needs to be done.  Can you tell us a little bit about campus life? Were there any student  traditions or important activities of your era that really stand out?  Well, one of the things I remember, I was in Mortar Board and the  Mortar Board gals (we were only women then, I understand it   s co-educational  now) rode tandem bicycles during the Homecoming parade  and so that was a real looked-forward to event. Then when I was able to  be one of those doing it, that was great fun. All of the different campus  organizations and many of us were very, very involved campus-wide  and had some really nice experiences. Beyond that, I just have good  memories of all the things that went on.  What year did you graduate?  1959.  And since that time what have you been doing? Can you share some  highlights of your life after leaving OSU and where are you living now?  We live in South Fork, Colorado. I married my husband the day we  graduated from college so our lives began then. I taught school for two  or three years, then we had children. And we have moved lots of places.  So once we left the state of Oklahoma and I needed new credentials to  enter the teaching field, I only did some subbing and adult education.  And then we   ve lived in Texas, we   ve lived in Iowa, we   ve lived in  Nebraska, and now we live in Colorado. So I   ve had a very full life  being a volunteer with lots of things and on the national level in a couple  of organizations that I was in. And so that   s really totally occupied me.  Wonderful. Were there any classes that you especially remember or  professors who stand out in your mind?  Yes, Mary Cox in Family Relations and Child Development. I don   t  even know if she   s still alive. I hope that she is. And Dr. Hoffer, and I  know Dr. Hoffer is deceased and, again, Family Relations. And then we  lived in the Home Management House. As a Home Ec graduate, you  19  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  lived in the Home Management House. I don   t even know if that exists  anymore.  Tell us about that a little bit.  (Laughs) Really? It was a house that four or five of us to get our degree  in Home Ec Education   there were two houses at Stillwater. And you  lived in this house with these other women and an advisor. Our advisor  was Gertrude McAlester. You lived there and ran the house. Did the  meals, the laundry, the cleaning, everything, and still went to class. And  it was not a looked-forward to event in any Home Ec Education degree   s  life. It was kind of dreaded. But I think we lived there for six weeks and  it was just an interesting experience, to say the least.  Where was it located?  Well one of them was down on South Duck or Knoblock. And the one I  was in was to the north, on past Farmhouse fraternity if it   s still where it  was. But this was a combination of putting all your class work into  action: planning meals, purchasing meals, making schedules   and  sometime during that time that you were there, maybe several times, you  were the person in charge so you made out the schedules and you  scheduled everyone else. But that was an interesting experience, which  is perhaps no longer needed.  What are some of the popular student hangouts where you liked to  hangout when you were on campus? Do you remember any of those?  The Union. And then a lot of us were in Wesley Foundation and I think  we hung out at Wesley Foundation. Again, we don   t have cars so we  don   t go very far. Maybe went up to the theater, which is the corner of  Knoblock and University. I don   t remember too many places up there  where we hung out. But yeah, pretty much we didn   t make a real big  wave and didn   t have a real big path that we swathed.  What about dances? Where did they have dances on campus?  In the Union. And then I think we had dorm dances. And then the  fraternity and sororities had them mostly off-campus at various  restaurants or places where you could have these.  What are some of your favorite memories of your student experience?  Would it be things like Homecoming or your sorority life?  Homecoming, the parties on campus, classes, all the different activities  that we participated in I would say would be real top memories.  20  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  Ahrberg  Semrad  So you did participate in Homecoming?  Yes, particularly once I was in the sorority. Yes, we usually did a float  with another fraternity and we did house decorations. We did everything  that there was to do at that time but it, of course, isn   t nearly as extensive  as it is now.  Is there anything else you would like to add about your OSU experience  that stands out or you   d like to comment on?  Just it was four of the most wonderful years of my life. And I feel real  indebted that my health has allowed me to get to this point, that fifty  years later we still can all get together and have such wonderful times.  There   s one last question I remember. President Willham was the  president on campus?  Yes.  My understanding is he tried to learn all the students    names.  I think he probably did.  Did he remember yours?  Yes.  He did. I think that   s quite an accomplishment for him.  Yes. He was a very gracious man that you would gladly walk up to and  chat with.  How interesting. Well that   s all I have to add unless you have anything.  I don   t think I do. Thank you.  I just want to thank you very much for coming. It   s been a real pleasure  to interview you.  It   s been fun to do this.  -------  -------   
