 Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University, and I   m here  in Taos, New Mexico talking with Martha Reed, who is a 1944 graduate  of Oklahoma A M  Agricultural   Mechanical  College.  Yes.  She   s going to tell a little about her family and then bring us up to date a  little at a time, so thank you for having us today.  Oh, you   re welcome. I   m glad you   re here. My father, Doel Reed was a  painter, printmaker and teacher, and he and my mother, Elizabeth Jane  Sparks, met at Cincinnati Art Academy. My father had been there in  1916, just at the outbreak of World War I. He had gone there to study  with Frank Duveneck but being a first-year student, he couldn   t study  with Duveneck.  He and his buddy were sitting outside the academy one day in the sun  and this recruiter came by and asked them if they   d like to fill in for the  Fourth Division for men who   d been injured or killed, so they both  jumped up and said,    Yes     So, after he was in France, he was gassed  with mustard gas, which the Germans used, and my mother went down  to the academy then while he was there, and that   s where they met. She  was studying art. My father was studying art, and eventually it turned  out that they got married.  Did she finish school at the academy?  Well, they got married, and she didn   t finish, but I don   t think at that  time you had to finish a certain number of years. I was born in  Cincinnati.  Okay.  5  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  I was born in the old famous Bethesda Hospital there. If anybody   s been  to Cincinnati, they   ll know what I   m talking about. In 1922, the first  etching that my father did was to announce my birth. It was a little  picture of a baby   a woman sitting there and a baby in a cradle, and it  said,    The Doel Reeds, a girl, April 23, 1922,    because they hadn   t  really named me yet. He printed it on Joseph Sharp   s etching press. He   Sharp  was a well-known artist from Cincinnati.  My father had very poor health, having been gassed with mustard gas  and the German lung specialist in Cincinnati thought he should go out  West someplace where the air was drier and there was more sunshine  and all. The government doctor thought he had TB  tuberculosis  and  they wanted to put him in the sanitarium. So mother and he took the  German lung specialist   s advice, and my father went to Texas first and  looked around. My grandfather Reed always traveled through Texas,  Oklahoma, Arizona, all those states. He traveled for the Royal Garment  Company, which made very, very, very expensive dresses for very large  women, and they were made outside of Cincinnati. So he knew all these  people, and he suggested to my father that he go up to Stillwater and talk  to them about a job. So, the president of  Oklahoma  A M College gave  my father a job setting up an art department. They didn   t have one and  my father was so pleased because he could do it like the Cincinnati Art  Academy, you know, the way it should be done.  He got settled and sent for mother and me. He borrowed a car from Fritz  Redlich who was then head of the architectural department at Oklahoma  A M, and drove over to Jennings, Oklahoma to pick mother and me up  at the train. Mother said the train backed into Jennings. She didn   t know  why it didn   t go in forward. It backed into Jennings. There was a famous  bank robber named Al Jennings at that time in Oklahoma, and I  wondered if maybe that was named for his family or something?  And that was in 1924?  Yes, 1924. So my father rented a little bungalow, an Oklahoma  bungalow, on Washington Street   Fourth and Washington   for us, and  that was called Faculty Row because down Washington Street, every  house on that left side was where some faculty member lived except for  Judge Woodward and his wife who lived in the middle. They were all  faculty people that either taught art or English or whatever they taught.  They all lived along there.  What did she think of Stillwater when she first moved there?  Oh, she said she was shocked. They didn   t have any shrubbery around  (Laughs) and not too many trees. They had, of course they still have,  6  Finchum  Reed  Bermuda grass, you know, and in August it turns brown. Well, they  didn   t have a lot of landscaping, but after awhile my father just got crazy  about Oklahoma, and   well mother liked it, too, but I think she would  have liked living in a bigger place. But I liked Stillwater. I loved the fact  that everybody knew everybody, and if you were a kid growing up there  they   d call you by name, you know.  Mother was quite talented, too, and my father liked very much being  there at the university and the climate agreed with him. He lived to be  over ninety-one. Our doctor here  Taos, NM  said he would have lived  to be a hundred if it had not been for his lungs. The inside of his lungs  were burned with mustard gas, as well as the outside of his body. I  wasn   t quite two years old when we went there  Stillwater, OK .  After I got out here  Taos, NM  and was in the dress business, a woman  called from Northeastern State College. I guess now it   s called  Tahlequah  Northeastern State University, Tahlequah Campus , and  wanted me to come back and bring my clothes from my shop which was  called Martha of Taos, and show them there. I said,    Well, I   d love to  come.    She said,    We   re including all native designers,    and I said,    I  wasn   t really born here. I came, but I was not quite two.    She said,     That   s alright. We consider you a native, so you just come.    (Laughs)  So that was kind of nice because that   s very beautiful over around  Tahlequah, and all the girls were beautiful young Cherokee girls going  to school. They looked so cute in the clothes. The clothes that I did were  based on Spanish broomstick skirts and it   s the kind of skirt that   s done  in three tiers and it gets fuller as it goes down, and then they   re hand  pleated. They   re pleated with water and originally they were just tied on  a broom handle or a bamboo pole to dry. The one that I had was tied on  a bamboo pole, but that   s how they got the pleats in them.  If you pleated these on a board, how many would you do at one time?  Could you just do one at a time?  Well, yes. You   d spread out the skirt. The skirt would be about this wide   opens and stretches out both arms  down at the bottom and so you get a  board that   s gonna be long and wide enough, and you can get beaver  board or whatever, and coat it with white paint or something, and then  you just use that over and over for pleating the skirt.  Each skirt   s done by hand, see? It   s not anything that   s done by  machinery or in a great volume. I had people come in from New York to  find out how the pleating was done. I had somebody from California by,  and several people came in from New York. They   d never seen such  remarkable pleating, and they wanted to know how it was done. I  7  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  noticed after we made them for years and years and years, a lot of the  Eastern designers and some of the Italians began making pleated skirts.  They were made in tiers, some of them and some were just one piece,  but they flare out nicely if they   re made with the three tiers. I was in  business thirty-eight years, and we did that type of skirt, and that   s a  long time to be in business.  It is.  And especially, well, here in Taos where it   s hard to make a living in the  winter, you know. But we had customers all over the world, and I had  some   I had Dorothy Brett   s nephew and his wife.  At OAMC, what did you major in?  Well, I majored in art.  Art.  I started out to major in English, and then my second year in college I  switched over to art. My father being an artist, and mother being an  artist, and it was in-born   and I loved growing up in Stillwater. I went  to grade school there. I went to Eugene Fields School. It was named for  the poet from Chicago that wrote children   s poetry, Eugene Fields. Of  course, being Americans, they tore it down and made a parking lot out of  it now. (Laughs) Americans are nuts. They tear everything down that   s  old and interesting and make a parking lot out of it. (Laughs)  Anyway, then I went to high school there  Stillwater, OK , and then I  went to college there  Oklahoma A M , and I went through Rush like  the girls all do, the fellas, too. I joined the Chi Omega sorority, so if  anybody   s listening that   s a Chi Omega, they can call me up. (Laughs) I  went through and I got a degree in art and then I stayed and did graduate  work, two years    graduate work in art. I was going to work on a master   s  degree in art, but then they decided they hadn   t given one for so long  that they   d have to figure out the curriculum again. So, at that time, I had  a chance to go to Italy, which I wanted to do, but that didn   t work out. I  got a scholarship, but it turned out to be to a men   s college, and they  didn   t take women. (Laughs)  Interesting.  I had applied for a Fulbright, which I didn   t get. I almost got it, but I  didn   t   but I wanted to go to Italy and study art and that sort of thing.  Eventually I got there. I didn   t study art, but I did get there. I won a trip  to Italy, and that was after I had moved out here. It was a wonderful,  8  Finchum  Reed  wonderful trip. It was a ten-day, all expense paid, trip to Italy     That was great.     including the airfare on Alitalia, and that was such a marvelous  airline. God, it was so great and so attractive. (Laughs) They were the  first airline in this country that took off from the ground and went  straight up like this  raises arm straight up  to get out of the way. Air  France and those other airlines went along like this  stretches arm  straight out in front of her , and they   d go a little higher, and they   d go a  little higher, and everybody said that   s why they had wrecks, you know,  fairly often. Alitalia was going along and all of a sudden it went up like  this  straight up , but it was just elegant.  The whole thing was ten days, all expenses paid. We went all over Italy.  We landed in Rome and we stayed at the Massimo D   Azeglio Hotel  which was very elegant. It was up by the Piazza Republica. They said at  times they were terribly busy with tourists in the summer. It was a five-star  hotel. I don   t know how they got us in, you know, but anyway here  we were. Then we went north and went to Florence and stopped all  along the way. I was just overwhelmed with all the churches that had  these frescos, you know, by the famous artists. Artists that I knew and  things I   d seen in art books.  We came back down to Rome and went across to the Gargano Peninsula  on the Adriatic  Sea . That was interesting because they, I don   t know  who, were building these big resorts along that area, and I think that   s  why they wanted us to go there, you see? Then we could talk to people  about how marvelous it was. It was interesting. We went clear down the  Adriatic  Sea  and first thing when I got back, Rex Cunningham came  over and asked me if I saw the Trulli houses. I said,    Yes, we did.     They   re those houses that are kind of round and the roof is made of  black stone and it   s just put together and it all stays there. They   re very  famous. They were built very early in history. In fact, we stayed in this  one that was like a tourist court. So my room was a Trulli house. It was  round like that, and it went up like a dome, you see, inside, but those  stones were not put together with cement. I don   t know how they did it,  but it   s a real famous area down on the Adriatic. I was so glad I   d seen  them because he asked,    Did you see the Trulli houses?    And I said,     Yes      But that was wonderful winning that trip. I just loved it. Well, I   d always  wanted to go to Italy and then all of a sudden. Somebody asked me how  I won it, and I said,    You know, I really don   t know.    I was shrinking a  whole bolt of muslin for my shop because we made a lot of dresses out  of unbleached muslin. That was a traditional material used for wedding  9  Finchum  dresses here in this area in the early days, and we put hand-crocheted  lace in here  bodice , you know. I went down with this bolt of muslin.  We cut it in two and folded it back and forth so we could put half in one  washer and half in the other. We had to shrink it because it shrinks very  much. If you don   t shrink it, it   s gonna shrink about three inches after  it   s washed. So in trying to get there, I forgot to take anything to read,  and I looked around and I finally saw this publication and it didn   t have  any front or any back on it. It was like something out of a newspaper,  like one of those   what do they call them? The small ones that they put  in the papers?  inserts  But it didn   t have anything on the front or back  to say what it was. I saw this ad about this big  4 x 6 . It says,    Are you  interested in traveling in Italy?    This was in Stillwater, of course, at the  washer-mat, and then it says,    Are you interested in history?    It went on  down the line and then it got down to cuisine and all this, you know, and  I checked history and   I guess it was history and art I checked   and  this man from Oklahoma City said he checked cuisine and he won, but  we all won these trips to Italy, this ten-day, fully paid   even the airfare  was paid. It was put out by the Italian State Tourist Bureau.  Well, we went across and clear down the Adriatic  Sea  and back up and  we came through Naples. I thought Naples looked like a stage  arrangement for an opera because right down in the middle of the city,  all these buildings built of stone and, you know, about five stories high,  and they all had wash lines across to the other side of the street, and the  washing was always pink, lavender and orange. (Laughs) It just looked  like something they   d made up for an opera set. (Laughs) And I just  loved it. Then for extra money we could have gone to Venice. I wanted  to go to Venice so badly. I think it was a five-day trip to Venice. There  were two buses of us. There was one of Americans and one of British  people. We had a delightful British man that came over and rode in our  bus.  Then there were several other places you could go. You could go to  Sicily. Now I   m sorry I didn   t go to Sicily because I always wanted to  go there, too. And these other people who were from Massachusetts that  were of Italian heritage went to Sicily. They were not related, but they  were a man and a woman both of Italian heritage, on the tour. Then the  man who was going to go to Venice decided he didn   t want to go after  all, and I wasn   t brave enough to go by myself, see. It was nicer to go  with somebody. I wish I had gone to Venice, but finally I said,    Well, I  think I   d better stay here.    We had gone to the Vatican, but I hadn   t seen  the Sistine Chapel so I picked that. It was   I think it was fifty dollars for  three days   something like that and we still stayed at the Massimo  D   Azeglio Hotel. I just loved Italy. I   d like to go back.  Did you travel much within the United States?  10  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Well, yeah. Barbara Latham, Howard Cook   s wife   they were both  well-known painters   and I went to New York. They had somebody  from Santa Fe to do the clothes, Southwestern type skirts and blouses.  They were   God I forget   it wasn   t Macy   s. It was a department store  up a couple of notches from Macy   s, and had a fashion show. This girl  did these skirts that were   they weren   t pleated like broomstick skirts.  They were just flared out at the bottom. Then she had, what are those  shoes called? Are they called Mary Jane   s? They have a little black  strap? Well, they didn   t wear Mary Jane   s around here, you know. They  wore huaraches and they wore pumps but they didn   t wear Mary Jane   s.  How could they have picked her to   well, we never heard of her after  that anyway. She   d have these skirts that were kind of full and then  they   d have a flounce on the bottom. We didn   t think she had any color  sense at all, but we enjoyed being in New York. We had a lovely time.  The Waldorf Astoria was where part of the group stayed, and our group  stayed at the St. Regis, which was my idea of an elegant   small, elegant  hotel. (Laughs)  It   s pretty.  I don   t know how they got us all in there for those prices, but Barbara   Latham  had called and she was giving the Smithsonian a great  collection of Howard   s graphics that he had done. He was very well  known for, you know, graphics and wood cuts and that sort of thing.  You wanted to talk a little bit about the Bennett   s?  Yes, I don   t want to forget them. Dr. Bennett was President of the  college, the university it is called now   long, long time, and he kept  everything very steady. They were such nice people, and during World  War II, he was appointed by General Marshall to help with the Marshall  plan to help get Europe back on its feet. So he and Mrs. Bennett would  fly from one country to the other. It was quite an honor to be picked, too,  by General Marshall. Anyway they were in Iran and their plane crashed  and they were both killed. We were   well, everyone, you know, was  upset and when the plane brought the bodies back in the big box   coffin  boxes, the plane arrived at night. The little Stillwater Airport was very  small to begin with, but everyone in town went out, especially faculty  members, see, to await the plane. I remember when the plane landed and  they brought the two coffin boxes off, and it was so moving. Nobody  said a word, and they, you know, everybody was quiet, quiet   and it  was a very moving experience.  It must have been terrible for Tom and the children, you know, to have  that happen. I was really disappointed when I got back this last time,  to  Stillwater, OK  they   d taken the Bennett   s house down because I want  11  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  them to leave everything. It was such a nice house, you know, and it was  there close to College Street. It was a nice house, but of course  everybody says,    Well, you know, everything changes.    (Laughs)  Anyway, but we felt bad about it.  What else was I going to tell you? We lived out by the college farms,  and we could hear the little calves, you know, and the momma   s mooing  at night because they were just right over from our house. And the  momma   s would moo and moo and moo at night, and the next morning  there would be these little tiny calves, brown and white with a snow  white face that had just been born   be out there walking around. It was  real cute. It was kind of rural. I went back once for a high school  reunion. All of us kids who had grown up in Stillwater, you know, kept  together, and I didn   t go back for college reunions because college was  very big by then with a big population and the only people I knew were  in the art department and the drama department and stuff, but I always  went for high school reunions, and I remember we stayed at the   God,  what was that hotel out on west Sixth? Anyway, it was very close to the  pig farm. (Laughs)  It   s called the Del Sol now, but     Yeah. It was really overpowering, but there   s something kind of nice  about that odor, you know. It   s   people are living and growing things  and taking care of things. But I remember it was real hot weather. It was  June when we were there visiting, and Carol Wood and I went back  together and shared a room. It was pretty heady.  Well, when I was a kid growing up, there were two faculty members  named Thompson. They were both kind of in agriculture, so to tell them  apart they called the one    Hog Thompson    and the other    Chicken  Thompson.    (Laughs) But it was a nice way to grow up. It was, as I say,  a kinder, gentler world like the first President Bush said.  Katz Department Store was down on the corner of Seventh and Main     and the one time Jean Hellis and I went back for a reunion and this  friend of Katherine Wentenberg came up from   we flew and oh, I met  Jean at the airport in Albuquerque here and picked her up. I had this new  little car, which I still have now, so we drove back, you know, and we  went through Amarillo and all. The thing I noticed that was so strange,  going through that part of Texas, the dirt in the fields was like chocolate,  just dark brown, chocolate brown with green grass. And when we got to  the state line where Oklahoma was, the earth was bright red, you know  that red earth.  Red earth.  12  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  It looked like God had drawn a line down there and separated them, but  anyway, Katherine Wentenberg came up from Shawnee to meet us, and  she was gonna pick us up the next day at our hotel in Stillwater. She  popped in the door and she says,    Where do you want to go first, Katz  Department Store?    And we said,    Yes,    because Mr. Katz was a  wonderful man. He got all of his nephews and relatives out of Germany  when Hitler was on the rise, and then he would give them jobs working  in the department store. All these young German fellas were so bright.  They  Katz Department Store  had a mill system and mother couldn   t  figure it out. She   d just hold out all these funny little coins that, you  know, they used, and the fellas would pick out of her hand what they  wanted. He got so many of his nephews out of Germany and gave them  jobs, and he really was a remarkable man.  Well, tell the story about Rex Cunningham again, about the Mexico trip.  Yeah, well, Rex Cunningham   it was very early when my father started  to teach there  Oklahoma A M . It would have been 1924 and right  after he  Doel Reed  came home one day, he said to mother he had the  most talented student, a young man who was from Pawnee. He said,     It   s just amazing. He   s just, you know, a farm boy from a small town  here, and he   s so talented,    and he said,    His name is Rex Cunningham.     Well, Rex turned out to be very, very talented, and he did study  architecture and got a degree. Then he was taken on the faculty there and  when I was telling something about Rex yesterday, Bob Parks said,    Oh,  I studied with him. I studied with him. He was a remarkable person.     Rex did the most beautiful water colors, and I asked everybody if they  had seen any because I wonder what happened to all of them. Rex would  go to France every summer when he had the summer off, you know,  because he didn   t teach summer school. He   d go to Fountainbleau and  he had such a lovely color sense. An attorney in Norman called me one  time. He was getting a collection of Oklahoma painters together. He  called and wanted to know if there were any that he didn   t have, and I  said,    Well, Rex Cunningham was one.     Anyway, Rex was really so talented, and he came out twice  to Taos,  NM  to see us for old time   s sake. He just got in his car one time and he  came out and he peered at the door   it was summertime, and he said,    I  was so homesick for you people, I just had to come. It   s been so long  since I   ve seen you, and I thought I might have a nervous breakdown if I  didn   t get out here.    (Laughter) It was real cute, very sweet.  Well, he went to Mexico with you once?  Oh, yes, yes, he did. We went down and we drove to Mexico City, and  13  they were just widening that highway, making it double lanes. It was one  lane. It was all up in the mountains, you know, and while we were in  Mexico City, the rainy season began. But, Rex did go with us and  Raymond Lovelady was another. He had been another architectural  student and was taken on the faculty, and a girl named Lorraine  Moore   her father was in the oil business in Oklahoma City   and  mother and me   it made six in our little car.  Rex was a chain smoker. So we   re going along over all these mountains  and this narrow road getting to Mexico City and, of course, if you met a  car, one of you had to back up until there was a wide place so you could  get around. The rainy season began, and my father said to mother he  didn   t know about driving back. He said Rex was always burning him  with his cigarette. He said,    I think we   d better just ship the car back on  a flat car.    So he went down to find out about it, and the Mexican man  down there says,    Oh, you don   t want to do that. When it gets to  Monterey, there won   t be anything left. The wheels will be gone. The  tires will be gone.    (Laughter) And so Rex went back on the train by  himself, but we got caught in it  rainy season , it delayed us.  A big Caterpillar earth moving machine had started to tip over, fall off  of the mountain. It was 6,000 feet down to the valley, and this one  engineer   I   ve got to look up and see what his name was because he had  worked with one of the engineers that worked on the Panama Canal. He  was very well-known   but he said,    Well, they used to just push the  thing off.    It was easier to push it off than to try to, you know, get it  back on the road but the company got tired of that. They had to replace  so many of these earth moving machines.  When we got there, we had gone to Santis   what is it? No, Sanford     what was that big restaurant called? Sanford   s? It was something like  that and gotten box lunches. So there were five of us in the car coming  back and we had five box lunches. We had a big glass bottle and had  water in it, and when we got there, the scoop shovel had been coming  toward us and it slipped off and it was leaning over the valley, and so the  engineer said they didn   t want to push it over because the company was  tired of replacing them, so all these peons were digging out on this side  so it would lean back toward the mountain, you know. We were there  about two and a half   three days   and it rained the whole time.  Nobody had any food. We had to share our food with them, which we  did   I mean we didn   t have to, but we did share the food with them and  it was very, very dramatic because at night the mud was so deep. For  some reason we were the only car that had a tow rope with us, and my  father and all the American men that were in the group would get out  and pull the car through this terrible, terrible mud, you know, and the  14  Finchum  peons would stand up over here where they   on this ridge with torches,  and it was, you know, black dark and they had torches, and it was very  dramatic, and they   d all watch us.  So, finally when somebody in the group got the idea they should offer  the Mexican men a peso for each car that they pulled through, see, and  have them come and pull through but   we had this tow rope, and there  was a German man in the group. There were a lot of Germans in Mexico  then, and it was just before World War II. We had met a young German  man, and he was so concerned about whether World War II was gonna  break out, which it did right after that, but   and of course it was pouring  down rain, and we were all trying to get back up to Monterey and  civilization. The German man got in the car and the driver of each car  would pay the men who pulled it through the mud, you know, the  Mexican men   a big silver peso. That was when they had silver money  and very little paper money, and so the German man got in the car.     Come on honey. Are you giving a lecture Martha?       I   m trying to  sweetheart,    I said, on one of my better days. And he gunned the motor,  and the men were pulling the car, and he got his motor and shot through  between the men that were pulling it, and took off with the rope. The  men were so mad at him. He didn   t get out and help. He didn   t pay  anybody, you know, for helping pull him through. We never saw him  after that. We don   t know whether he got back to Monterey or went off  the edge. (Laughs)  So anyway, my father went to the bank one day to get a temporary check  cashed, and he came back and said he could hardly walk. He had all of  these silver pesos   you know how big they are, like this, and heavy, and  he could hardly walk. He had both pockets full of silver money. After  that, they  Mexico  got paper money started, but it was interesting in  those days. But Rex was awfully nice, and going down we stopped at  this   well, like a tourist court, which was in Mexico. Very few people  could speak English and so mother and Lorraine and I had to share a  room, and when we got in the tourist court we found out the walls only  went up so far and then, you know, about higher than a man   s head   but  the rest of it was all open and there were all people in there. They didn   t  have room for Rex so one of the Mexican families took him over to this  little stone house for him to sleep in. He didn   t have a candle, a  flashlight or anything, and my father went to get him the next morning  and Rex was sleeping away   didn   t even know it was daylight. The  little building didn   t have a window or anything in it. (Laughs) But he  was a good sport and he was a nice, nice person. But it was certainly an  adventure. (Laughter)  Well, when you were at OSU, did you visit the library?  15  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  I worked in the library.  You did?  All the way through college and graduate school.  What was the name of the building then?  Well, I don   t know, but I didn   t see it this time when I went back.  Was it Williams Hall? Does that sound right?  It might have been Williams Hall.  Was it the one that had turrets   looked like a castle?  No, I had some literature classes in that building.  So what     It was     I   ll have to look     No, it was over there on the other side of where the chemistry building  was. The chemistry building was the only one that I could spot this time  that was there. It was right outside of the Atherton Hotel, out the  window     What did you do in the library?  Well, I worked downstairs where the new books came in, and I   d print  the numbers on the outside and I learned all about the system. I guess  they don   t use that system now, do they? (Laughs)  It has changed just a little bit. We still number the books.  It was up to me, anything that had a torn page, I could fix, you know,  and they used tape that you had to wet. It was really made out of like  rice paper from Japan. They didn   t use anything like 3M because, you  know, it eats through the paper. (Laughs) So I   d fix up all the books and  then I   d put the numbers on them so they would be right, and then I  worked upstairs at different times, and I   d go and get the books that  somebody wanted, you know. I just loved it because I was brought up on  books, and I just love libraries    till this day. Then they built the new one   library  over there while I was still there, I guess, doing graduate work.  16  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Did you attend any sporting events?  No, I wasn   t interested in sports. My folks were not either   see, they  were creative people. When I was a little kid and my father was first on  the faculty, we used to go to the football games, and the only thing I  cared about was finding if there were any peanuts on the floor where we  sat. It was all made of cement   and I must have been, just, you know, I  don   t know, four or five, six years old. I   d get down and look in all those  red husks to see if there were peanuts. I remember my mother telling my  father to get up and go buy me some peanuts. (Laughter)  We went to all of the musical things, and the three engineers, Mr.  Maleve, Mr. Oberkoff   I can   t think of the other one   s name   were  Russian engineers. They were in the engineering department, and Mr.  Oberkoff had a very fine voice. He was a baritone, and I guess he   d sang  in the opera in Russia. So he would give these programs on Sunday  afternoon, and they went on forever because it was all about the life of  the czar, you know, but we   d all go and sit through it. We wouldn   t get  out till five in the afternoon and it began to get dark, you see.  And we had very good things that came to the college then. It was     what was the man   s name? I   ll look that up, too. I   d   before I was sick,  I could remember everything. We had all kinds of dancers, very famous  violinists, cellists that came to the university and gave programs. There  was a famous man in New York that handled this group that came out,  you see. So we went to all of those things. But my folks weren   t  interested in sports.  Well, once you graduated, what did you do right out of college?  I had a job offered to me, to come over to Philbrook Arts Center  in  Tulsa . Mr. Hert was chairman of the board, and he offered me a job. I  worked there two years. Then Jerry Bywaters, who was the director of  the Dallas Museum of Fine Arts   that   s the one that was in the old  building, not this modern thing they have now. He and Mary, his wife,  and my folks were friends, and so he came up to Stillwater one time and  asked me if I   d like a job at a bigger museum, and I said,    Yes.    But I,  you know, I think I made a mistake because Philbrook was so beautiful.  The building was so beautiful. I thought if I   d stayed there, I   d have  been close to my folks, you know, seventy-five miles away. I could have  gone back and forth   but I went off to live in Dallas.  Of course, I loved that, and the Metropolitan Opera Company came to  Dallas in the spring, and we heard marvelous singers. They put on four  operas. I don   t suppose they do that now. I don   t know whether they do.  It doesn   t sound like it. I think you just have to go to New York if you  17  Finchum  Reed  want to go to the opera   but they traveled, and we heard Gerst and  Flagstaff and all kinds of remarkable people. So I went to three operas  that first year when I was there in Dallas. I wanted to go, and I didn   t  have a car, and I lived in Oak Cliff. If you know Dallas, Oak Cliff was  way over here. It   s an old part of Dallas. I was fearless, but I think you  could do things then you couldn   t do now because I would go down to  downtown Dallas on the traction car that went from Oak Cliff, and then  I   d get the bus to go to Fair Park where the opera house was. Then I   d  reverse the thing to come back   you know, I   d come back late at night  by myself, but I just loved it. That   s where I first saw La Boheme, and I  saw   wait a minute, Lily Pons in what is that thing about the girl from  India? She has a beautiful voice in the thing   and,    Lily Ponds,    we  called her   friends called her.  Well, why did you decide to leave the museum work and come here  to  Taos ?  Well, the house where I was living belonged to a very prominent judge  in Dallas, and he had a lovely wife and she had come out to New  Mexico and was always talking about Taos, and one day the top of their  house caught fire. She had a sister who was always smoking, and was  kind of languid and lived with them. They had a bedroom upstairs and  the sister threw a lighted cigarette in the trash can and the trash can was  some kind of woven straw or something, and came down to dinner.  I didn   t eat with them, and the other two girls who rented rooms upstairs  from them didn   t eat either. We just rented rooms, you see, so I had a  room to myself and these other two girls shared one. The house was a  lovely big house and it was two-story and it was on Crawford Street. I  had come home from the museum and it was terribly, terribly, terribly  hot, like Dallas can be in the summer, and so I decided to take a bath. I  got in the bathtub and all of a sudden these girls that rented the other  room began banging on the door.    Let us in, let us in.    I said,    Well,  wait a minute, I just got in the tub. As soon as I get out, you can have it.     And the one said,    You don   t understand. The house is on fire.    So I got  out of the tub dripping wet and opened the door for them and they came  flying through it from their bedroom and tore down the steps. I   m  always very slow on the take-off, so I went out and looked and I could  see that whole end of the upstairs was in flames, where the sister had  lived and thrown the cigarette in the trash. I was standing there thinking,     I wonder which way I should go out?    I thought maybe I should go  back in my room and go out on the roof, and just then this young man  came up the stairs looking for me. He was a boyfriend of one of the two  girls that lived there, and he came up and said,    Come on down. Come  on down. The whole thing is burning.    And so I had a housecoat on  because I didn   t have anything under it. I got out, wringing wet out of  18  Finchum  Reed  the tub. And I remember holding it up like this  over her mouth and  nose  because it was so smoky, you know, and we got out in the yard,  and the fire truck came and they grabbed my clothes.  I guess they did the same thing with the girls   , and threw them on the  bed and then put a big tarpaulin over the bed, but the tarpaulin leaked so  all of my clothes got wet. A very nice woman, whom I did not even  know, lived down the street from us and asked me to come and spend  the night with her in her house which was very nice because the whole  top of the house was burned off, the bedrooms and all. I called my folks  and told them we   d had this fire, and I did go back to try to get some of  my clothes, and the fireman said,    Just leave it. They   ll be safe there.  We   re gonna have watchmen here tonight.     Of course, the man was a very prominent judge, you know, so they were  really trying.    Just leave everything. We   ll have watchmen here.  Everything will be all right. Nobody is gonna take anything.    But the  tarpaulin leaked and my clothes were all soaked. So I said to mother on  the phone,    Bring me something to wear. I   ve just got this housecoat  on.    (Laughed) And my folks came to get me, and then I decided when I  got back to Stillwater that I would just stay and do graduate work then. I  thought it would be too much trouble to go back down to Dallas and try  to find another place to live and go through all that again. So I just  decided to do graduate work and worked on a master   s degree in art.  I don   t know why I didn   t decide to go back down to Dallas, but I liked  it. Everybody at the museum was very friendly. They were all well-known  artists and they all knew my father and mother, and they were  always getting together. But I guess I was homesick or something so I  decided, you know, to stay and just work on that degree. Let   s see, I  skipped a lot. When my father retired from teaching, the school was  already called Oklahoma State University. He taught there thirty-five  years, and we had come out to Taos for about six summers, my parents  and I. My folks would rent a house and we   d live in a different area  because the areas of Taos are   well some of them are kind of safe and  some of them aren   t. (Laughs) But Taos is the third oldest community in  the United States. Saint Augustine, Florida, is older and Santa Fe is older  than Taos. Then Taos came along a couple of years later, so it   s the third  oldest non-European settlement in the country. I guess in non-  European   anyway     And you moved here  Taos, NM  in 1953?  I came in 1953 to live. And my father retired in 1959 there at the  university, so he and mother came out later, but I was here six years   before her parents moved there .  19  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  And when did you start your business here?  Well, I had to start to work right away when I came. I got a job the first  fifteen minutes I was in town. I went up to Charles and Ruth Reynolds     gallery, art gallery, and Charles and Ruth were from Tulsa and we knew  them. Charles had been an accountant for   I was gonna say Stanford,  but it begins with an    S    and that   s it   so when he retired, he came out  and took up painting and he turned out to be an awfully good painter. He  did lovely, beautiful things   of night skies and things like that   and  they had a gallery on Carson Road. So I went up to tell Ruth I was in  town and I was gonna look for a job, and she said,    Well, why don   t you  go down to Al Thoralson   s place?    He sold Indian pawn jewelry. It was  on the plaza, and he had hired Indians from the pueblo to make  moccasins. So they made moccasins in the back of the shop, and she  said,    He was wanting somebody to help him the other day. You   d better  go down and see about it.     So I walked down the plaza, and he was real tall and thin   and he was  from back east someplace, you know. Many people come from back  east   and I said,    Well, I   m Martha Reed and I want to stay here in  Taos. I   m looking for a job.    And he sat in there   he had western boots  on and he   s rocking back and forth and he had his hands in his back  pockets of his jeans, and he said,    All right, I   ll give you a job.     (Laughs) And then I went in to see about it the next day, and he said,    I  like the clothes that you wear because I   ve noticed them. Where do you  get them?    And I said,    Well, I design them or my mother designs them,  and she makes them.    And he said,    Would you make some for me, for  the shop if I get a couple of seamstresses to make them here?    So that   s  how I got into the dress business, and I had a broomstick skirt already  because my father had come out.  So you designed them and your mother made them?  Yeah. My father had come out with another member of the art  department. By then, my father was head of the art department at  Oklahoma State University     Okay.      and J. Jay McVicker had been a student there and was very talented,  and they had taken him on the faculty. So people who knew all of us at  that time would know J. Jay McVicker. And I guess they had a meeting  someplace in Denver or somewhere   and then they came down to Taos  and Santa Fe. So my father saw these cute skirts that were hand-pleated  and they were tied on a broom handle. They would tie them on while  they were wet. Wrap them round and then tie them and then wait till  20  they dried, and that   s what made the pleats in them. I could design the  clothes. Al Thoralson said,    Well, I   ll get two women to do the sewing.     So he reached in the cash register and took out a wad of money and he  said,    Here, go up to the corner Penney   s and pick out the material you  want.     They   re made, most of them, in little calicos and nice colors and things  like that. And so we made lots of calico skirts, different lengths. Then  we made them so that we could shorten them   if we took out the  waistband, we could shorten the skirt two and a half inches. We told  everybody not to take their skirt home and have somebody shorten it at  the bottom. That ruins the proportion of the flounce. And so we just had  loads of customers from all over the country. They thought the skirts  were so cute, and you could travel with them. You would fold them  twice long-ways. You   d fold the skirt, waistband this way and then fold  it again and pull a stocking down over it or a pantyhose leg, and then  you   d twine it around in your luggage and it just packed beautifully.  Then we told people to send them back and let us either alter them if  they had to be altered or to let us wash and repleat them. And then my  mother figured out   because she had always sewn   figured out a way  to make the skirts longer out of the same material. If we didn   t have  some of the material left and somebody wanted longer she would take a  piece out of the bottom tier and split that in two and then make the extra  tier that way.  We had very interesting customers. Saki Karavas, and his mother, Noula  Karavas had the La Fonda Hotel on the south side of the Taos Plaza, and  they knew everybody. Saki was quite elegant. They were a Greek  family, and they   d had a hotel for years there. Then Saki   s father had  died, but they kept on with the hotel, and Saki would come in with the  most interesting people from all over the world and introduce them and  they   d buy something from me. The woman from Texas who was a  secretary to Lady Bird Johnson when Kennedy was assassinated, wrote  the thing for Lyndon Johnson to read when he got back to Andrews Air  Base, and Saki brought her in, and she liked the clothes so she bought a  number of things from us. Then one time she came back for the summer.  They   d spend part of the summer in Santa Fe and she said to me she was  having a party, cocktail party, before opening night of the Santa Fe  Opera and could I come. She   d like me to come down, and I said,    Oh  yeah, but I   m gonna have three people with me.    She said,    That   s all  right, just bring them.    (Laughs) So we met more interesting people  there, and I was thinking of that because Lady Bird just passed away. Of  course, Lady Bird Johnson   s brother was Taylor (I can   t think right now  of his first name) had the Old Mexico Shop in Santa Fe. They were very  interesting people and they were at the party   and his wife.  21  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  I was in business really thirty-eight years and I had lots of different  seamstresses. I figure I helped a number of girls through college by  giving them jobs. They   d come and work on Saturdays and work after  school, and they were a big help, too. I always asked them to wear the  skirts because people could see how they looked then.  Well, if someone wanted a special-ordered one, did they have fabric to  pick from?  Oh, of course. We kept bolts of fabric. After we got going   after I went  up to the Penney   s store and got what I wanted to start with, and then  some material I liked a lot, I just bought a complete bolt of it from  Penney   s. Then we began ordering from the mill in Memphis for these  famous old calico prints. So we just had loads of bolts around. They  could pick out whatever they wanted, you see, whatever color   and then  we made some that were solid colors. I liked the calicos better but we  did make solid colors, and then we did do the skirts in velvet and the  tops in velvet like the Navajo women wore. The reason they wore those  was because when the railroad came in, first into Gallup and then into  that other area, the train seats were made out of plush and that   s a  heavier velvet that goes all in one direction, and the traders always  carried the plush out there. It was made in New England, but they would  split it down. It was woven very wide, and they would split it down and  then take two and a half yards and fold it up, put it on the counter in the  trading post, you know, and the woman could pick out what color she  wanted. So we began making the dresses then in   if you did a plush top,  you had to have a cotton skirt or a satin skirt because it was too heavy to  pleat. But we began making them in velvet, chiffon velvet, and we had a  couple of our velvet Navajo dresses that went to state dinners at the  White House on our customers.  The Navajo style has lots and lots of tucks. Traditionally, when the  government was trying to get material to the women   give them some  material to get started on and three head of sheep or cattle to the men,  you know, after they brought them back from wherever they moved  them   I forgot   I   ll think of it at midnight. The velvet dresses, our  beautiful skirts are eight yards at the bottom, and they go from two, four  to eight   and the blouses had all these tucks in them because the article  I read in the Navajo Times said the women didn   t have scissors and so  they had to borrow their husband   s knife and cut the material and then  they   d take tucks to make it fit. So we had this one style that has tucks  front and back in the blouse. We   d put a hundred sterling silver  handmade buttons on it, you know.  And where would you get those?  22  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  From Gallup. There were silversmiths, and I   d go out to Gallup and get  them. We had some silversmiths here who made them. The Buffalo  Dancer shop here often carried buttons. If you had to get a silversmith, it  would make, you know, one to make a hundred of those tiny fluted  buttons and     Do you remember how much that would cost?  Oh yeah, quite a bit. (Laughs) I wanted to do them traditional. My  mother cut the pattern for those dresses. She was very gifted that way.  She could look at something and figure out how to do it and how to cut  the pattern. Those dresses are made with usually a yoke here and in the  back, you see, and then all these tucks up here and then a long sleeve  with a cuff on it and lots of tucks in here. Sometimes we   d put two  hundred buttons on the blouses if a person wanted them, and we charged  a little more. That   s tedious to sew those buttons on, you see.  The buttons actually have to be tied on because they   re usually cone  shaped. I bought whatever shape I could get. Sometimes they   re dome  shaped and sometimes we did the dresses with dimes on them. It was  traditional that women would get the dimes that the banks released, you  know   the old dimes   and they were silver, of course, so they   d sew  those on. But just sewing those little cone shaped buttons on is terribly  hard. You can   t do it with a needle, of course. We had a doctor who was  gonna sew the buttons back on his wife   s blouse after the cleaners took  them off. I told him not to take the thing to the cleaners. The velvet  could be washed. You just left the buttons on, and if you washed it in  real soap, not detergent see, it would take the oxidation off of the  buttons. I don   t know, they didn   t pay any attention to me, so I got a  little folder that I got printed that had what to do for the cotton skirts and  what not to do for the velvet ones, and to send them back and let us wash  and repleat them. The little folder went with each skirt, and I still have  had customers call up. Last year   I haven   t had any this year, but  customers will call up and want to know if I was still in business and  could they get a skirt made or could they get one of theirs altered or  washed and repleated, you know, and we still do that.  You still do that now?  Yeah, after thirty-eight years. (Laughs)  Well, who would do them now?  Well, the women who worked for me. Let   s see, Maribel Archiletta still  does it. She worked for me and could do the pleating in cotton or velvet  either one. I had one woman who did the pleating for years until she left,  23  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  but     Can you describe that process, the pleating?  Well, yeah. If you saw those skirts, you see. We made the skirt and then  you left the side seam open, and it   s all sewn on to a waistband, and you  dip it in water, lay it out flat on a board and then you pleat it by hand,  you see, like this. Velvet is pleated by hand that way. It takes a couple  days for it to dry, and for velvet it takes longer   like three or four days  for it to dry so you don   t take it up off of the board until it   s completely  dry. And you sew up the side seam, and there   s, you know     So when you would repleat it, you would have to un-do the seam?  Well, yeah, but that   s not bad. Just rip out the side seam.  Okay.  Anybody who knows anything about sewing could do that, you know.  The reason I also got the little brochure thing printed that went with the  skirts was because I would always tell people,    Send the skirts back and  let us repleat them,    and we   d repleat them for  6.50. Then I had a  customer who just loved her skirts, but she decided they were too big  around the waist, and, you know, I always said,    Let us change the  waist. It just takes us a half an hour.    I still remember. She lived in St.  Louis, and she said,    Well, I have an excellent seamstress here. She   ll  know what to do.    And the next thing the poor woman called me. She  was in tears. She said the excellent seamstress had ruined her skirts.  Instead of just doing the thing around it for how big it needed to be in  the waist, she cut the whole two sides out and ruined the shape of the  skirt. I felt so sorry for her, and we had extra material that hers were  made out of, so I told her to send it back and we   d fix them for her. But I  don   t know   when people looked at it, they had no idea how it was put  together. Their brain sort of flew out the window when they were  supposed to alter it. But our seamstress had been born and raised here  and knew what to do, you see.  Were you one of the few women that had a shop when you first started?  Well, there were a lot of shops here and they sold different things like  Indian jewelry and moccasins and things, and there were two other  women who did southwestern clothes, and I guess there were three.  Then I was the fourth one   but I had a different color sense than a lot of  people and people loved the colors that I picked out and put together.  They loved the style of the skirt and we made blouses also so it could  have a matching blouse or a little like a peasant-style blouse done in  24  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  white gauze or something like that. So we were very successful. And  then later of course there was a time when the movie actresses wore a lot  of Indian jewelry, you know   really good Indian jewelry and little silver  concho belts and all, and then that sort of wore off and people moved on  to something else, but it   s still a classic style. I still wear lots and lots of  Indian jewelry, Navajo     It   s beautiful, yes.     and some Zuni. Zuni is   the stones are smaller, closer together. I was  trying to think of what else we had.  Well, tell me a little bit about your mother.  Well, my mother was born in Springfield, Ohio.  Okay.  My father had grown up in Indianapolis, and mother had always done  sewing when she was a child and she made her own clothes and she  made a lot of my clothes.  Did she paint?  She painted and she did some sculpture, and then she gave it up. She  said one artist in the family was enough. So after awhile, she didn   t do  any paintings, but she would when she came out here for the summer.  She did very nice water colors. I have two   one out there in the living  room and one there in the kitchen on the wall. She would do a lot of  interiors for different houses that we rented around here and she was  very good that way. And then she would help me in my shop anytime I  was short of help, she   d come down and help and so she was always  there backing my father and me up. (Laughs)  Let me get one of your shirts, and you can tell a little bit about it.  You could get one of the cotton ones. That green one with pink flowers  is nicely pleated. Did you find the blue velvet dress?  Well, I think there   s one in there. There   s one that   s teal.  25  Reed  Yes, that   s what I   m talking about because it   s made from a different  pattern   but it was   I wore it an awful lot. We used it for a lot of  fashion shows, and it   s kind of beaten up. It has a skirt that goes with it  and I   ve got a piece of velvet where I was gonna make it bigger or  something. And this has all of these tucks I like, and I like the feel of the  velvet, but this is   they don   t even make plush anymore. Those mills  were all run by elderly men and their grandchildren didn   t want to be in  26  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  the fabric business, so they just   all of them closed up and went out of  business.  Well, this is one that you pleat?  It   s pleated, too, just like the cotton skirts and     It   s heavy.     well, it is. I had a red velvet skirt which went with this, and it wasn   t  quite this shade, but I sold it to a friend because it was so heavy. I  thought I wasn   t strong enough to carry it around anymore.  You want to tell how you did the metal work?  Well, these are buttons. I didn   t make these. These were made by  Indians.  In Gallup, you said.  27  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Yes. We used to go   I used to drive out to Gallup and take somebody  with me, look around for things like that. These came from the Nageezi  trading post out near Cuba, New Mexico, and Nageezi is a Navajo word  and then all of these small ones are more than a hundred years. If I get  with it, I   ll have to put some of these back on   but we bought these at  that trading post. I   ll have to stop and think if that   s the Nageezi. It   s out  in that area.  And what about     Yes, well, these came from Gallup and, you know, these are between the  conchos here   the concho belt   and the women, if they restring a belt,  they   ll likely take these off. They   re called butterflies   and put them up  and down here. You   re not familiar with any of that type of clothing.  Well, I   d better get out that photographer   s book and show it to you.  And the same for these?  Well, yes. They   re all handmade. They   re silver. They   re sterling silver  and they   re handmade, and any time we found any old ones mother and I  would buy them right away for whichever thing we were going to be  doing next, you see, and this was my dress and I wore it a lot and then  we used it for a lot of fashion shows. Did you find that Dubonnet color  in there with the plain blouse?  What color is that?  Dubonnet. You don   t know about Dubonnet wine? I   ll come and get it  and show it to you. It   s velvet, but that skirt will go with it. Dubonnet is  a dark purplish maroon, and it   s made   very lightweight velvet   yes,  doesn   t that have a blouse with it?  It says Martha of Taos.  Well, that   s a blouse. It   s made from the men   s style shirt, see, and it  turns   these turn back and you can put silver collar tabs on here, and the  men   s shirts are made this way and you usually have a silver button  here. I had some of these buttons that had turquoise in them, but these  are not the ones. It always has a little slit there. It   s worn as an over  blouse. You don   t tuck it in.  28  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  It   s a very pretty color.  It   s gorgeous. This is one that we made for somebody, and I walked into  the Now and Again Shop down here, and Sandra said,    Martha, one of  your dresses just came in.    And this girl was with me, and she was  determined she was gonna buy it, and Sandra said,    No, Martha gets to  take it first if she wants it.    So I bought it back and I love the color.  Yes.  And see when you   re traveling, you can fold them twice there and then  pull them through a stocking, see, and they just come out perfectly. But  these are all pleated with water, and the side seam is open and then  you   after it   s dry, you sew up the side seam wherever the placket is  here   over here. You open this side seam.  29  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  Reed  Finchum  That   s where the     Over there, yes. And we didn   t put zippers in them because that   s kind  of bulky. And so I was so glad to get it because I had always loved that  color.  Any idea whose it was?  No, I don   t really remember. I know we made this color for one of the  women who was from Oklahoma and then moved out here, and he   s a  writer and collects etchings     So how long would it take to make something like this?  Well, if you   re gonna make one with all the silver buttons, it   s gonna  take about a week, you see, because you have to tie those buttons on.  The skirts don   t take that long, but velvet slips. You have to know what  you   re doing.  And that   s what you were talking about, tucks?  Yes. Well, you have to be able to sew straight. (Laughter) This one has  been washed many times, so it doesn   t look straight. It was originally.  This is my favorite.  Yes, I just love that. I bought this material out at Nageezi trading post to  go with that because it   s a purpley-red, so this was the original skirt that  went with that plush top. When I was out at the trading post, the Nageezi  is over there by Cuba, New Mexico   the Indians at the trading post I  notice would look at your feet first, and if you had moccasins on they  were trying to figure out what tribe you   re from, you know.  Oh.  And I had moccasins on that day from Oklahoma that had fringe on the  back, you know, that   s supposed to cover up the tracks (Laughs) so bad  spirits can   t find you. (Laughter) And they were so interested in that.  That   s interesting. (Laughs) We   ve been going for awhile now, so let   s  take a break. Thank you for sharing your story.  -------  -------   
