 Gill. Today is December 18th, 2008. I   m visiting with  Dr. Sidney Ewing in the library on the Oklahoma State University  campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project which is part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Dr. Ewing, I appreciate you taking time to be here today.  I   m glad to do it.  I know you had a long and illustrious career at Oklahoma State  University, but could we back up a bit and find out a little more about  you? Could you share a little about your early life, where you grew up, a  little about your family?  Sure, I   d be glad to do that. I   m originally from Georgia. I should have  been born on a farm like all my siblings were but I always said I created  problems even before I got here. So my older siblings and my younger  brother were all born at home, but I was born in a hospital, Emory  University Hospital near Atlanta, Georgia. I grew up on a farm that  became a dairy farm, was a cotton farm at the time I was born but later  my parents went into the dairy business. I went to grade school at  Mansfield, Georgia, a small community in Newton County, Georgia that  was formed in 1821 from three existing counties. My family has been in  that county since it was formed, and they   re still there, except for me.  After grade school, I went to high school in Covington, Georgia, the  county seat. About the time I was in the ninth grade they combined all  the high schools in the county so I was in the first class, the class of  1952, to graduate from Newton County High School. I then went to  Emory University   not the main campus in Atlanta, but the original  campus which was founded in 1836. It   s in Oxford, Georgia. Today it   s  called Oxford College of Emory University. I went there for one year,  and then finally decided for sure I was going to become a veterinarian so  6  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  I had to transfer to the University of Georgia to finish my pre-professional  work. Did that, and then graduated from the Veterinary  School at the University of Georgia in 1958.  Let me ask you, was there an influence, something that caused you to  decide you wanted to be a veterinarian?  Yes, I think it   s fair to say that I had a lot of interests. I thought about  journalism, I thought about horticulture, I thought about botany. I had an  older brother who studied animal science and was coming back to the  farm with my dad. I knew I didn   t really want to do that, but I was  interested in animals and also in medicine. I thought a lot about dentistry  and then an old dentist said to me one day   he happened to be the  family dentist   he said to me,    I hear you   re thinking about going into  dentistry.    And I said,    Well, it   s one of the things I   m considering.    He  said,    You see this little circle? I   ve been walking in this same circle for  40 years. You don   t want to do that.    I decided he was probably right.  It also happened that my father had been a hunting buddy of his own  local veterinarian in the late thirties and that local veterinarian had later  decided to go to graduate school and got his PhD and had come back to  the University of Georgia from the University of Illinois. He was  actually the founding dean of the veterinary school. This man, whose  name was Thomas J. Jones   he was actually a Welsh man transplanted  into Georgia   he had an impact on my decision ultimately to try to go to  veterinary school. So I did that. Of course I always said, my father  thought I would come home and be the veterinarian for the dairy farm,  which was attractive in a way, but I decided instead to go to graduate  school. I   d become very interested in parasitology as a veterinary  student. With my background in dairy, I decided to go to the University  of Wisconsin to study dairy cattle parasites.  Did your master   s work?  I did a master   s degree at the University of Wisconsin. But the day I got  there to start this  degree program, things had changed . I   d been up to  Madison to interview and they   d accepted me and they   d agreed that  with my background in dairy cattle it   d be good if I studied dairy cattle  parasites. I was very pleased with that. When I arrived a few months  later to actually start they said,    Oh by the way, we just got a big grant  from the National Institute of Health to study swine influenza. We need  you to work on swine lung worms.    At that time, they thought there was  a tie in between swine influenza and the lung worm, so I found myself  working on an entirely different host animal. But I learned in a hurry to  enjoy working with swine and did that.  7  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Can you tell us a little bit about, there in Georgia, was that one of the  earlier classes?  I think we were the eighth class. Now the University of Georgia had had  a veterinary school before the Great Depression. In fact the University of  Georgia got started with a veterinary school at the same time that  Oklahoma A M attempted to start a school right around the time of the  first World War, 1917-1918, that era. Georgia got off the ground, where  Oklahoma State University or Oklahoma A M did not; I   ve written a  book about that by the way  called Oklahoma Aggie Ambition . I think it  was in 1933 that the veterinary school closed at the University of  Georgia. Dean Jones, who I referred to a little bit ago, was fond of  saying he closed the old school and then he re-opened the new one  because he was a member of the last class that graduated. Then of course  he was in private practice and then he went and got a PhD at Illinois,  then came back, and he really was the founding dean of the new school  which started about the same time Oklahoma A M did, right after the  second World War. So they graduated their first class in 1950. I was a  member of the class of 1958. Oklahoma A M graduated its first class in  1951.  Dr. Ewing, you did your master   s work at Wisconsin right after you  finished at Georgia. That was in the College of Veterinary Medicine that  you did your master   s there?  Well, Wisconsin did not have a College of Veterinary Medicine at that  time. They had a Department of Veterinary Science, which was devoted  almost exclusively to research and graduate education. Besides graduate  courses they offered one or two undergraduate courses; it was just the  Department of Veterinary Science. But it was one of the most active  graduate programs in veterinary science in the U.S. Interestingly though,  I have told many students over the years that I grew up enough at the  University of Wisconsin to realize that the major professor was more  important than the university. I got my master   s and then transferred to  Oklahoma State University because in my opinion the best veterinary  parasitologist in the country was Wendell H. Krull who was teaching at  Oklahoma State   it was Oklahoma State by that time.  Only later did  Wisconsin develop a College of Veterinary Medicine.   You sort of answered this question, but how did you find out about  Oklahoma State, or at that time Oklahoma A M?  Well actually it was Oklahoma State by the time I knew it. I finished my  master   s in 1960.  Oh, that   s right.  8  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  And Oklahoma State I believe shifted its name in 1957.  Correct.  Well the veterinary community is really a fairly small community. In the  process of being at Wisconsin for two years, I learned a lot about who  was doing important work in the field of veterinary parasitology. I had  learned while I was a veterinary student at the University of Georgia  about a piece of work that Dr. Krull had done. He was already on the  faculty here but he went out to Cornell University in Ithaca, New York  in the summer to work on a specific problem that folks at Cornell  couldn   t solve, and he solved it. That was one of the reasons. So I wrote  to Dr. Krull and he said,    Well I have a position for a teacher and since  you   ve got a DVM and you   re about to finish a master   s, you would  qualify. And you could also at the same time work on your PhD.     So I came down over the Fourth of July holiday and interviewed with  Dr. Krull. In those days, you could fly clear to Stillwater on a  commercial plane. But anyway, I came here and interviewed and then in  September of 1960, I came to OSU, which turned out to be the first of  three times. I   ve been here, went away to teach at Kansas State after I  finished my PhD and then went to Mississippi State. It did not have a  veterinary school at that time; it does today. But I went there in my first  administrative role as a department head of Veterinary Science, very  much like the department that had been at Wisconsin, although not  nearly as big as Wisconsin   s, nor nearly as well known.  You make it sound like Dr. Krull was a legend. Could you tell a little bit  about Dr. Krull and your relationship? He was pretty tough, I  understand; a pretty tough taskmaster.  You know that is his reputation and it is true. He was tough. But he was  fair. And I got along with him very well. I think maybe he had mellowed  some by the time I arrived here; I was his last graduate student actually.  But there are many, many stories from his veterinary students who said  he was really tough. But I came here specifically to study with him and  to teach here. I can remember one of the stories I enjoyed telling over  the years; I met a faculty wife, her husband was in pathology, and the  first time I met her she said,    Are you that new guy in parasitology?    I  said,    Yes I am.    And she said,    And you expect to get a degree from  Krull?    I said,    Well I   m intending to.    And she said   now mind you, I  was 25-26 years old. She signaled her waist and said,    You   ll have a  grey beard down to here before you ever get a degree out of that man.     Did that cause you to have second thoughts?  9  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  I have to say, it did make me think about whether I had done the right  thing. But it turned out that it really was quite the best move I could  have made.  What did you learn, more than anything else, from Dr. Krull?  Well I learned the necessity for very meticulous work. I learned that you  have to do the laboratory work yourself. You can   t turn it over to a  technician. Now to be sure, there are things, especially in the modern  day, that you absolutely do depend on technicians for. But if you do, you  must be certain that you have trained them to do the work at the level of  competence that you would do it yourself. But in those days, of course  we didn   t have many technicians around Oklahoma State University. I  was just thinking earlier today as we approach the holidays, of course  I   m retired and have been for some years, but if I   m in town I   m at the  vet school almost every day, because I still have things I   m working on  that I   m interested in, in parasitology and other things too.  But I was just thinking today that this is the time of year that I would  always find myself under pressure because the veterinary students that I  had hired to help me with my animals and my research would be going  home for the holiday. And that meant seven days a week over the  holidays I would be the one taking care of the animals as well as any  sampling and everything. So yeah, I learned you have to be on top of  things. And it served me well, because even while I was working on my  PhD with Dr. Krull I discovered a parasite that had been known in the  Old World for a long time but we were the first to find it in North  America, and in fact only the second to find it in the New World. And if  I had not been working and having the sort of work habits that I had of  being with my animals every day, seven days a week, having my hands  on them, I might have missed that. So that was a very important thing  that I learned.  I want to pursue your research a little more, but I want to ask you first of  all, you seemed to know early on that parasitology was what you wanted  to do. What influenced you to go into parasitology?  Well when I was a veterinary student at the University of Georgia, I took  my first parasitology course and I was just fascinated by the  phenomenon of parasitism. When I was a pre-vet student, I had taken, as  I had to, of course, botany courses. I was always interested in botany; as  I said earlier, I even considered majoring in it. But one of the things that  happened when I took botany was I was hired to be a teaching assistant  in the Botany Department. I did that until I got in veterinary school. And  then once I got in veterinary school, there was no time, I had to be in  class all day long. But the Botany Department liked me I guess and they  10  Gill  Ewing  let me stay on and my job was to grade papers. I would grade papers at  odd hours. When I would get tired of studying, I would stop and grade  papers. Well what this led to was, the head of the Botany Department  recommended me   I   ve always been sort of astonished by this     recommended me rather than one of his botany students to the U.S.  Department of Agriculture where I worked for a plant pathologist as a  summer worker.  It was a piece of good luck. I really enjoyed coming to know this plant  pathologist and I worked two summers assisting him. One of the things  that I did in the process was to examine the soils where pine tree  nurseries operate. I had a piece of good luck there also in that I  discovered a previously unknown nematode. So that fit right in with  what I was learning in veterinary school; there are nematodes that  parasitize plants as well, others that parasitize animals. So that probably  underscored my interest and sort of pointed me towards veterinary  parasitology.  We talked about Dr. Krull. Who were some other professors you  remember? The graduate program just started in    53, didn   t it? And you  started in    58. So actually you were one of the earlier graduate students  in the program?  Yes. Dr. Krull and Dr. Stan Newcomer are two people who I remember  who were on the committee  that prepared a plan for graduate  education . Krull was the chair of the committee that actually got the  graduate program off the ground for the veterinary college   of course it  was in the graduate college, but it was tied to the veterinary college. And  so Dr. Everett Besch, who left OSU in 1968 to become the founding  dean of Veterinary Medicine at Louisiana State University, was Krull   s  next-to-last student, and I was Krull   s last student. On my PhD  committee, Krull was the chair but I also had Dr. Andy Monlux who was  the head of the Pathology Department. I had Dr. D.E. Howell who was  known as Mike Howell for   I   m not sure why. He was the head of the  Entomology Department. And then Dr. Bill Brock, who was later a dean  of Veterinary Medicine, was also on my PhD committee. And then the  final member of the committee was a young man, Dr. Dwyer who was in  agronomy; he later left OSU.  But as to professors that I really remember, of course   the very first  course I took when I came here was Dr. D.E. Howell   s medical  entomology. I sat in on Dr. Krull   s veterinary parasitology courses but  he wouldn   t give me any credit for that because I had already had  veterinary parasitology at the University of Georgia, but I had to be there  every day, and of course it was good because I learned so much. I also  was then a better teacher in the laboratory, teaching the laboratory  11  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  section of Krull   s course or helping him teach it.  But probably one of the greatest scholars in my opinion that I ever ran  into at this university or any other was in the Agronomy Department  here at OSU. His name was Jack Harlan. He later left and went to the  University of Illinois. But he was a great wheat geneticist. He was  interested in grasses of all kinds. He traveled all over the world and  collected germplasm from all over the world. He taught a course in  classical evolution, and he taught another course in sort of mechanics of  evolution. Dr. Harlan was terrific. So all of the members of my  committee were good folks, but I would say the great teachers that I took  courses from, I took graduate courses from Krull and he was a great  teacher. And Dr. Harlan was wonderful, a fine scholar. And D.E. Howell  was also very good.  What do you remember about the facilities? Could you discuss the  facilities and equipment in the clinics and the labs?  Yes. When I came here in 1960  things were improved over the early  days . The veterinary school as you may know was really built in  phases. There was a wing built in the forties and then there was a wing  built in the fifties, and that   s the one I moved into. It was the new  facility. And then very early, I think around 1962-63 while I was still a  PhD student and a veterinary teacher, they built a third wing, we call it  the south wing of McElroy Hall today. This was well before the teaching  hospital. The teaching hospital was in that middle wing that I was in;  that is, the small animal part was. The large animal was over in the old  1940s wing and the faculty offices for the large animal clinic were an  old temporary building.  I heard some of the offices were even stalls? Is that right?  Yes, I believe that   s right. They had been stalls. But even though I was  in a new wing, we didn   t have a lot; but I didn   t really need a lot. I  needed a microscope and I needed a place for experimental animals. One  of the shortcomings was that we did not have good isolation facilities the  way we have today, so that was a problem for me. But we managed, and  sometimes when we got handed a lemon, we made lemonade out of it.  It   s too technical to go into probably, but this disease that I referred to  earlier was called ehrlichiosis. We had a naturally occurring case in the  clinic. We don   t like to admit it, but we had a tick problem in our own  teaching hospital. And I believe what happened was, a tick     It   s a tick-borne disease?  It   s a tick-borne disease. And a tick probably bit that naturally occurring  12  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  case in our hospital and then later transferred it to an animal that  shouldn   t have had any disease. And so it turned out that those were one  of those cases where we made lemonade.  Good isolation facilities of the  sort available today would have been a great help.   Now you went on and did some pretty significant research, you and I  think some of the other professors. Could you discuss that a little bit?  Well, we were fortunate in finding that organism to be a problem in  dogs. I did work on that for some time. And then soon after I came here  the second time, which was in 1968, one of the 1965 graduates of our  college was in practice over in Arkansas. He remembered learning about  ehrlichiosis. He called me one day and he said,    I think I   ve got a case,  but I   m not sure. Can I send you some blood?    And I said of course. So  he sent me some blood and he remembered that some of my dogs, my  experimental dogs, really became very, very ill. This dog he was  working with was sick, but not seriously ill. Well it turned out that the  blood he sent me I then put into an experimental animal and produced a  disease that was similar but milder than that we   d seen earlier.  Eventually we discovered that that was another new       new    in quotes     organism. We found that in 1972, and twenty years later that organism  was named for me, Ehrlichia ewingii.  Would you say that again?  It   s called Ehrlichia ewingii. Just put two I   s on the end of Ewing.  Scientists at the Centers for Disease Control did that, and the reason they  did that is because in 1987 there appeared in the New England Journal  of Medicine a case report really of a man who was from Detroit,  Michigan visiting in Arkansas, and he was bitten by ticks while he was  in Arkansas. So this was published in the most prestigious medical  journal in the country and they reported it as Ehrlichia canis which was  the organism I had found in dogs here in 1962, as the first case in human  beings.  Well this didn   t make very good sense to us. So a couple of former  graduate students and I wrote a letter to the New England Journal of  Medicine contesting this identification. The upshot of it for me  personally is that I was invited down to the Centers for Disease Control  in Atlanta and helped to sort out what turns out to be human ehrlichiosis  (that is what they called it) but it really is a white-tail deer disease agent  that gets transferred into people by the bite of the ticks. And in the  course of working with those people I guess they came to think that  maybe that organism I had found, really one of my veterinary students  had found and I was able to demonstrate it was a different kind of agent,  they finally gave it a name. There was a lot of controversy over the years  13  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  about it,  but my position was eventually shown to have been correct .  For you to get your name attached to that one?  It was. But it was very interesting work with the CDC because I had  already started some work with physicians of the State Health  Department in Oklahoma City and we had established that human beings  in Oklahoma who physicians in Oklahoma said had Oklahoma Tick  Fever looked a lot like Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, but they didn   t  have the spots. So I was involved already in working with physicians in  the State Health Department where we found that indeed human beings  do have ehrlichiosis in Oklahoma. And then when I was at the CDC we  found that here is another organism and it   s called Ehrlichia chaffeensis  and it   s called Ehrlichia chaffeensis because the guy from whom the  organism was isolated was a soldier at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas, and  that   s how it got its name.  Now in addition to working with tick-borne diseases, did you spend  some time on anaplasmosis?  Yes, when I came back here the third of three times in1979, Dr. Bill  Brock had recently died and Dr. Kathy Kocan was a graduate student  and she really needed a major professor, so I became her major  professor. She was already working on anaplasmosis   she had been  with Dr. Brock and Dr. E. Wynn Jones. Dr. Jones had left Oklahoma  State to go to Mississippi State, and Dr. Brock had died, so Dr. Kocan  was in a lurch. It was a piece of really good luck for me because even  though I had worked with tick-borne diseases for a long time, I had not  actually done any artificial or experimental transfer of disease by way of  ticks. I had always done it with a hypodermic needle. Dr. Kocan was  already doing tick-transmission studies.  Another very important thing that had happened in the time I was away  from here, I spent from 1972-79 at University of Minnesota, and during  that interval, I don   t know exactly when, Oklahoma State Agricultural  Experiment Station set up   through the Entomology Department   a  tick rearing facility. And so Dr. Kocan was using ticks that were being  raised by the OSU AES  Agricultural Experiment Station  tick-rearing  facility. So I joined in the anaplasmosis studies and I did work with  anaplasmosis for a number of years with Dr. Kocan and she still is  pursuing that area of study and is internationally known for her work.  You talked about your three different times. I know one time you went to  a deanship position so you came in initially in    58?  No, I graduated veterinary school in    58 and then went to Wisconsin.  14  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Then I came here in 1960. And then in 19     You were teaching parasitology?  I was helping Dr. Krull teach the veterinary students and I was also  teaching a service course in the College of Agriculture. It was called  animal hygiene, often called veterinary parasitology although it was  much more general than veterinary parasitology. I taught that. And then  I also taught the first graduate course in protozoology.  But after getting my PhD I moved to Kansas State in early 1965. I was  there for a few years and then I   it was either 64-65, I   ll have to look at  the C.V. You   d think you wouldn   t forget that but anyway.  1965.  Yeah, early in the year. So I was there for a few years and then I went to  Mississippi State. Then when Dr. Besch left OSU to become the  founding dean at LSU, I came back here in his job, which was originally  Dr. Krull   s job. Dr. Krull had been forced to retire actually; system-wide,  in my view a terrible mistake on the part of the Board of Regents,  but they in those days could force retirement so anybody who was 65  had to retire. So even though Dr. Krull had been promised by President  Willham and Dean Holm that he could teach until he was 70, he was  suddenly forced to retire just because of this new system-wide rule. Dr.  Besch became the head of the department. So then when Dr. Besch left  in April of    68, they got in touch with me in Mississippi and I came back  November 1, 1968 as the department head. I was here then until the end  of    72, and I went to the University of Minnesota where I served as dean  of the College of Veterinary Medicine.  That   s quite a significant honor to be dean.  Well it was; I enjoyed it very much. I have enjoyed every job that I   ve  ever had. I feel very fortunate in that regard. And then I moved back  here in January of 1979, into my old job as head of the department.  Is there a story there, Dr. Ewing? I mean, you were Dean, a pretty  prestigious job and you were there what, seven years. What brought you  back to Oklahoma State?  Well one thing that brought us back was two jobs. My wife had gotten  her PhD at Oklahoma State. She actually finished up the research work  while we were at Kansas State but she had gotten both her master   s and  her PhD in the zoology department here. While we were here in the  period of    68 to    72 she was teaching invertebrate zoology. But when we  15  Gill  Ewing  moved to the University of Minnesota, it was just a bad time for  zoologists and she could not get a job teaching in her field. So she did  sort of a self-supported post-doc, learned a lot about water and water  quality and mycology, but what she really did in terms of professional  work outside of just taking some more courses was she became an editor  for the University of Minnesota Press.  She edited a number of books,  some in science and some not.   Dean Brock had retried and Dr. Patrick Morgan had become dean of the  veterinary school. We were friends and actually classmates at the  University of Georgia and he had approached me about coming back in  my old job. I said, well I   d need two jobs. So they found a temporary job  for my wife, Dr. Margaret Ewing, and that eventually grew into a tenure  track job and she found herself as a middle-age lady trying to earn  tenure, which she did. But it was really a chance for both of us to work  in our field that was important in bringing us back.  Did you feel any sense of loss or demotion or prestige of     Well, you know, I really did not. Money was never really that important  to me. I was making more money there, of course I took a pay cut  coming back here. But it was cheaper living here too. But I really knew  that I would have a limited life as an administrator. My wife definitely  did not want me to go any higher in administration. I was approached,  for example, about a job as an academic vice-president. She was just  very plain that she really didn   t want that kind of a family life. So that  had an impact, of course. But we both loved Oklahoma and it was good  to come back. I liked my old job here and I knew I would have more  time to get back to some bench research, which I really had not done any  bench research at the University of Minnesota. I had stayed in touch  with my field of veterinary parasitology but to a much more limited  degree than I would have liked to have.  Plus the fact that I had done a lot of things that I wanted to do at the  University of Minnesota. We had built a new building, we had almost  had things in hand for a second new building. And I had already told  Dean Morgan that I would come back to OSU irrespective of what had  happened in the legislature in Minnesota that spring. It was very  interesting. The veterinary school funding got tied up with the   it was  kind of the veterinary or the law school was going to get a new building.  Well we had had a new building fairly recently, but we still needed  another new building. But the law school won out. So it was after I left  that they finally did get the new clinical facility approved.  But it was a very interesting experience because one of the members of  the Minnesota Legislature was a veterinarian. He was actually a black  16  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  veterinarian who was a graduate of Kansas State University and he was  a great supporter of us in the Legislature. But he was also tied up in a  situation where they needed a new prison at Saint Peter, Minnesota, and  he was on the committee that was trying to get that funded. So between  the new prison at Saint Peter, Minnesota, and the new law school on the  Minneapolis campus, we ended up on the short end. But I   d already  decided to leave anyway. Many people thought that I left because of  that, but I had already decided to leave. But it was a lot of fun. I enjoyed  my time there, it was a great place, a great university. But I was also  reluctant to grow old in that climate. I really like the winter climate in  Oklahoma.  You   ve had the gamut. You   ve taught in classroom instruction,  researched, extension work, certainly administration, department head,  dean. What did you enjoy the most out of that? What appealed to you  most?  Well it really is a hard question to answer. As I said earlier, I have liked  every job I   ve ever had. But if I had to just select one, it would be  teaching. I really love teaching. But I   m still doing research. I   m in my  75th year and retired. And of course I still do teaching. I don   t do much  formal classroom teaching; I give guest lectures mostly, but I do offer an  elective in veterinary history. I   m not offering it this spring because I   m  going to be gone on a trip to India, but I really enjoy interacting with  veterinary students.  Do you have a recollection of some students you have particularly  enjoyed and have gone on and enjoyed success?  Yes, there are an awful lot of those. I   ll mention one first from   of  course I taught, as I mentioned earlier, here on the main campus rather  than in the veterinary school. I had a man named Herschel Giles who  later came to veterinary school and he said that he wouldn   t have gone to  veterinary school if he hadn   t have taken my undergraduate course. He  later got a PhD with Dr. Roger Panciera who I know you have  interviewed. Dr. Giles became a well-known veterinary pathologist in  his own right. There was another man in that same course   not the same  semester as Dr. Giles   but his name was Bill Hohenboken, William  Hohenboken. He was a student from Illinois who had come here to  major in Animal Science because his family farm back in Illinois, there  was some connection with faculty in animal science here. Well I had  him in that undergraduate course. He later was in the military and then  got out and he was farming and he ran into some health problems and  decided to go back to graduate school and became a PhD animal  scientist. He taught at Oregon State and Virginia Polytechnic Institute,  VPI. I   m still in touch with him all these years later.  17  Gill  Ewing  When it comes to veterinary students, of course there are an awful lot of  them that I could name. One of the latest was a young man who worked  in my lab as a pre-veterinary student and then I would never hire a  student to work for me during his or her freshman year in veterinary  school. I felt they had to get their academic feet under them because it   s  a different league than the pre-professional work. But his name is  Dennis Crow, he   s from out near Blackwell. And Dennis Crow worked  for me as a pre-vet student and then from the second through the fourth  years he worked for me. Now he   s a dermatologist, a veterinary  dermatologist in an exclusive practice in Dallas, Texas, just making a  wonderful name for himself as a dermatologist. I would like it very  much if he were an academician, but you know, over the years I   ve had  some very good graduate students. Dr. Kathy Kocan was an outstanding  graduate student. She is, as I said, a Regents Professor today as well as  an endowed professor and internationally known. My last graduate  student was a man named John Shiens Mathew. He   s actually from  India. Today he works for Merck   Company in Rahway, New Jersey,  but both Dr. Mathew and Dr. Crow named sons for me, which is better  than having a parasite with my name   That   s great. You had an opportunity to work under several different  deans through those years. From a faculty perspective, can you share  some insights of the leadership and the contributions of each?  Yes, I   d be glad to do that. Dr. Glenn Holm was the dean when I came  here. He had been Dean of Agriculture I believe at North Dakota State.  He had very good rapport with the agricultural experiment station here at  OSU. He had been Director of the Agricultural Experiment Station of  North Dakota, sort of like it is at OSU, Dean and Director and you cover  the College of Agriculture as well as the experiment station. So I think  that helped Dean Holm very much in our interactions with the  experiment station. He also had a philosophy that he wanted strong  academic department heads, and I think that he had strong academic  heads, definitely with Krull, I believe with Dr. Dwayne Peterson, and  Dr. Leslie McDonald. All of these people were strong academicians. He  supported them to run their departments and I think he was a very  successful dean. He also had good contacts with other deans around the  country and I think he joined forces with some of them to help get  favorable legislation passed at the federal level.  Dr. Brock became dean under very trying circumstances. We had a dean  whose name was Karl Reinhard. And Karl Reinhard was a very, very  well trained veterinarian; he was a public health specialist and had a lot  of experience in public health service also. He did not have a lot of  experience in veterinary schools, and no experience in being dean of the  veterinary school. He got crosswise with I think the old department  18  heads and with the central administration, and in my judgment was not  really given a fair opportunity. He was forced out as dean within a year  of his appointment. So it   s hard to know what might have happened  under his guidance had things not gone awry. I personally had a  wonderful relationship with him and was very saddened when we had  the uproar over that.  Then Dr. Brock became dean. I think he was a very good appointment as  an interim. I think when he was made permanent dean, it was very hard  on him and probably hard on the school in my opinion   of course I left  and went to the University of Minnesota during this time. He and I  remained good friends and he visited me at the University of Minnesota  and we talked about one of the very sad things that had happened at  OSU, and that was that the Legislature had inserted itself into the  admissions process at the veterinary school. That was a tough, tough  time. I don   t think Dr. Brock was really up to the job, the political  aspects of the job. He was a very nice man. He was, I believe, a good  veterinary scientist. But well, Dr. Boger, President Boger, actually said  to me soon after I came back here,    I think we finally killed Bill Brock  by keeping him in that job too long.     Then Dr. Brock was followed by Dr. Pat Morgan who I mentioned  earlier was a classmate of mine at the University of Georgia and we had  been good friends. I thought Pat Morgan was absolutely the perfect  person to follow Dr. Brock because Pat Morgan had political skills and  he had been in the State Health Department in Oklahoma City. I think  from a political standpoint Pat was excellent. But we fell on hard times  with him too for reasons that maybe don   t need to be reviewed. Suffice  it to say that the academic department heads had some differences in  opinions with him and they came down to the academic health of the  college, so the central administration made the decision to remove all the  heads, and within a short time after that Dr. Morgan resigned and the  regents gave him a year and he went to the Caribbean to work for Ross  University and then he came back as a faculty member after that.  He  also worked in Public Health again before retiring.   After that we had Joe Alexander. And Joe Alexander was, I think, a  highly successful dean in that he had good political instincts and he also  was a bit like Glenn Holm in that he wanted strong academic heads. I  think he more or less gave the academic heads the freedom and he  supported them as best he could. And then President Halligan tapped  him to move to the central administration on an interim basis but it  turned out to be permanent I guess. Dr. Alexander had brought back one  of our graduates, Mike Lorenz, as an associate dean. Dr. Lorenz  graduated   he was a senior when I came back in the fall of 1968, so I  didn   t actually teach him, but I   ve gotten to know him over the years  19  Gill  Ewing  very well. He had come back as Associate Dean for Academic Affairs. I  had actually served in that role on an interim basis for Joe Alexander  when Dr. Mack Oyler retired. But then Dr. Lorenz became the interim  dean and I was ready to retire but he asked me, what about being interim  associate dean, that is, be in administration again? And I said, well if the  faculty wants that I will delay retirement, so I did and did  another stint  in administration .  Well then, of course Dr. Lorenz was eventually appointed permanent  dean and I think he has done a fantastic job. He is one of those persons  who is an excellent teacher, he   s a skilled clinician, and in spite of being  the dean, he has managed to keep his hand in the clinic with neurologic  cases. The clinicians respect him for that, the practitioners in the state  respect him for that and I think that he is, having been born and raised in  Oklahoma, he   s probably more at ease with the political environment  here than, for example, I would be as a dean. I just have to honestly say,  I would probably   I was okay as a department head and okay as an  Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, but I probably wouldn   t be very  suitable for Dean of the Veterinary School at Oklahoma State because  I   m not as at ease with the political aspects of the job as I was at  Minnesota, for example. That   s sort of my thumbnail sketch of the deans  I   ve experienced here.  I appreciate it. Granted you left a couple of times, but you came back.  You   ve been here several years. What kept you at OSU for so long?  What kept you going?  Well when I came here in 1960, I thought the esprit de corps among the  faculty was just excellent. I worked with Roger Panciera over the years.  I worked with a man named Ralph Buckner, who is now deceased, who  was in the small animal clinic. We had a wonderful working relationship  and I thoroughly enjoyed that. And the people of Oklahoma; I really like  the friendly atmosphere of Oklahoma. I like Stillwater. And as I said  earlier, I like the winter climate here much better than Minnesota. I still  miss the green pine trees of Georgia and I never have gotten to like the  wind in Oklahoma, but that period from 1960 to early    65 was  wonderful. The period of    68-   72 again, my wife and I both had jobs  here, we both loved our jobs. We had a house from which we could walk  to campus, both of us could walk to campus. We had small children and  could afford to have someone come into the home to take care of them  when we were away. Then we went to University of Minnesota and we  loved it there. But when the opportunity came for two jobs and to come  back to Oklahoma, I just thought it was the thing to do and I have no  regrets. I have enjoyed it very much.  I do regret, of course, that we had some difficulties over the years. There  20  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  were really three that all related to the Board of Regents. The first was  when they forced Dr. Krull to retire. I remember writing Dr. Willham a  letter about that. That was a sad day. And then the thing over Dean  Reinhard, that was another difficult time for us. President Kamm and I  had our differences there, but we remained friends after that. And then,  of course, when Dr. Boggs and Dr. Boger and I guess the Board of  Regents actually decided to remove all the academic heads  who were in  conflict with Dean Morgan  and then shortly after that Dr. Morgan  decided to leave the deanship. Those were all sad times. But the school,  I hope, didn   t suffer too much for it. We certainly made our efforts, that  is Roger Panciera, Dan Goodwin, Fayne Oberst, Everett Short and I all  made our efforts to shield the faculty from any of the adverse effects  from the debacle in 1984.  But what   s kept me here is that I just like the place and I   ve invested a  lot in it. I like to think I   ve made contributions that have been useful and  I feel as if I have. Just earlier this month the Conference of Research  Workers in Animal Diseases in Chicago, Illinois, was dedicated to me.  That was the first place I gave a professional paper, 50 years earlier to  the month. It was the 89th meeting of that group. They started in 1920  and they dedicate the meeting to somebody each year and this year it  was me.  That   s pretty special. Wow.  Yeah it was   and I   ve been recognized probably more than I deserve.  Here in Oklahoma I   ve been inducted into the Higher Education Hall of  Fame some years ago. It   s just been a good place to work. My wife and I  both like it a lot.  That   s great.  Now all of our kids live on the east coast so I suppose eventually, when  we get old enough we   ll have to move. But right now we   re retired in  Oklahoma and thank goodness I   m still welcome at the veterinary  school. And they depend on me some there for institutional memory.  I   ve written three little books about either veterinary history or  veterinary history associated with Oklahoma State University.  It   s too bad by the time you could have written a Centennial History  book you   d have been retired.  You know I did contribute to the centennial history book. The chapter in  there   Dr. Williams, of course, was the chief author. But the chapter on  graduate education I wrote, and that was in part because Wendell Krull,  who was my major professor, had such a central role in getting graduate  21  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  education started.  What are some special memories for you? Some highlights of your  career here at OSU?  Well, I would say that the interactions with students and you know there  are so many of them that flood my mind. The joy of working on diseases  that the teaching hospital deals with, I always tell young faculty, the  teaching hospital is a laboratory of naturally occurring disease, and you  need to take advantage of that. It   s important for us as faculty to address  issues that are of importance to the state of Oklahoma and to have been  involved in the discovery of Ehrlichia canis for the first time in North  America; to have been involved in the study of what is now called  Ehrlichia ewingii; to have been involved in the discovery of human  ehrlichiosis in Oklahoma. And to have more recently, continuing with  Dr. Panciera, who has been retired even longer than I have, to work on   American  canine hepatozoonosis  ACH , first discovered in Oklahoma  in 1996, 20 years after it was first found on the Gulf Coast. It   s just been  a great deal of fun to do the detective work.  And we probably published, I don   t know how many papers, but in  connection with my being honored in Chicago earlier this month, I gave  a talk in which when I was putting it together my wife, Dr. Margaret  Ewing, asked me how many people I had published with. I said, I don   t  know. So she sat down with my C.V. and counted and it was I think  180-some odd people, maybe 160-some odd people. And anyway, I do  remember this figure, 81 of them are people and there are 20 different  institutions   maybe a few more than 20 institutions   where I have co-operative  work, me in Stillwater and them wherever, and we   ve  published probably in the neighborhood of 200 or more papers. To have  those affiliations here and at other institutions has just been a continuing  series of highlights.  Well did you do any outreach or extension work with Dr. Tom Thedford?  Well you know I never had an extension appointment but I did do a lot  of what I call extension work because I would go out and talk to  veterinarians about what I was doing and what was new in the field of  veterinary parasitology. I would also field an awful lot of calls. Nothing  like  the number fielded by  Dr. Roger Panciera. He has done more     he   s never had an extension job either, but he   s done more extension  work than probably anybody because veterinarians call him all the time,  still do to this day, with questions about cases. So yeah, I did outreach  work although not in a formal way.  Dr. Ewing, how important is it from your perspective that the college  22  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  stays connected with practitioners? That you go out and interact with  and give presentations, meet with, bring them back on campus; is that  important to the college?  I think it is exceedingly important to the college. And I think that   s one  of the things that Dr. Lorenz has been more successful with than any  previous dean. We need the alums and other veterinarians to know that  we are here for them. We need them to feel that they have a  responsibility to us. I think that the more we can interact with them to  help them with their problems, to have them feel free to come to us with  their diagnostic problems and with their concerns about things that the  school can address that they cannot as individual veterinarians, I think it  helps the profession in the state and it helps the school enormously as  well as helping the individual practitioners.  Is it easy to get disconnected? I mean unintentionally, just to get  wrapped up with research and teaching?  It is very easy to become disconnected. And we have some people on  our faculty today who are full-time researchers, some of whom are not  veterinarians. Some of those people are exceedingly important because  they  do good research and  bring in outside money that brings in  overhead. But in terms of really being an integral part of the college,  there   s a dimension that   s missing. They can   t really interact with our  graduates  very effectively . They do some things that some other  faculty can   t do, like succeed in bringing in money that has overhead  attached to it.  But when I was department head, and when I was Dean, and Associate  Dean for Academic Affairs, I had the philosophy until very late in my  career that a land-grant institution has three responsibilities: teaching,  research, and outreach. And I thought a faculty member in a veterinary  college ought to be able to produce on two of those three fronts, and that  it was a mistake to sequester faculty into any one of those three. Full-time  teachers can get stale. Full-time researchers can become too  centrally focused, and full-time outreach people can be so over stretched  that they don   t have time to stay up-to-date.  Later in my career, of course, I had to accept that we probably had come  to a point when we might have to have full-time researchers. Just  because, in order to compete in the arena of raising money that has  overhead attached to it, it   s very, very hard to compete there if you have  very many other responsibilities. I would still contend that those people  would be better researchers if they at least taught graduate students,  graduate students who were veterinarians. People who had already got  their DVM degree who are working on master   s or PhD degrees or are  23  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  working on Specialty Board Certification. I think those faculty ought to  do some of that because it would be good for them as well as for the  school. But I   m glad I   m not dean now.  When I was interviewing Dean Joe Alexander, a lot of his mission was  outreach and connections and he talked about (though he didn   t do it for  that reason) an important unintended consequence was fundraising  where you develop relationships and sometimes it wasn   t with the  practitioners but with the practitioner   s customers or clients.  Yes, Dr. Alexander was very successful in that way. I think that the  Sitlington money that has been very important really came because Mr.  Sitlington   s veterinarian told Joe Alexander about here   s this   I think he  was a dairy farmer   who has got all this land that they   re going to make  Quail Springs Mall out of or something of that sort. Not only Veterinary  Medicine but Agriculture got a lot of money from Mr. Sitlington. And  those kinds of things I think are very important. I think Mike Lorenz has  followed Joe Alexander   s lead with those sorts of things and then like I  said, I think Mike has been very, very successful in staying active  himself as a consulting neurologist and that has made a lot of friends for  the college with the practitioners.  You talked a lot about different aspects of the college. In your opinion,  how has it changed over the years?  Well, of course it   s gotten to be a lot bigger. The esprit de corps that I  saw there in the early 1960s I   m sure probably exists in isolated spots,  but for the whole faculty it   s just not there because it   s too big these  days. And the other thing that I just discussed where we have now some  faculty that are sequestered into roles strictly as researchers, a few who  are strictly teachers, and maybe one or two who are pretty much full-time  extension. In my view, the college would be better served if we  could cling to the old philosophy, and I admit, an old philosophy of  mine, that you should be producing on two of the three fronts. We   ve  had some triple threats. Roger Panciera was definitely a triple threat. We  have Tony Confer today who really does all three. I say of myself that I  probably did all three things, and through a bit of it, administration along  the way. But I probably just have to admit that there are certain roles in  research that maybe I have to accept, that if we   re lucky enough to get a  non-veterinarian who is interested in working on animal diseases, we  may have to accept that they   re going to do research only. I don   t like it  though.  Has another change been more women in veterinary medicine?  Well of course in terms of the student body and the faculty as well, that  24  Gill  Ewing  is a terrific change. And I hope that some real historian is going to take  this on as a project some day, not just for Oklahoma State, but for the  profession in general. When I came here, we had just one or two women  in the class   mostly women from Texas because Texas A M didn   t  accept women at the time. My class at the University of Georgia, there  were 64 of us and only two were women. But of course today, women  outnumber the men nationally and our school, we were probably the last  school to have a class that had more women than men and that has not  always been the case. I don   t even know what the figures are today. We  certainly have a lot more women than we used to have.  I was the department head who hired the first full professor who was a  woman, Dr. Helen Jordan. Dr. Jordan, who had a DVM and a PhD, had  taught parasitology at the University of Georgia, and when I came back  here in 1968, in 1969 I hired her because I was the lone person in  parasitology. Dr. Besch had gone to LSU, and I was department head  and teaching. My goodness, when I came in the fall of 1968, November  the first, they had not even taught parasitology in the beginning of the  semester. I had to teach six days a week. Six lectures a week, two  laboratories, and those laboratories were split, so four laboratories a  week by myself while being department head. So I was so glad that I  was able to lure Dr. Jordan away from the University of Georgia, and I   ll  be forever grateful to Dr. Reinhard who was the dean at that time. She  was an associate professor, already tenured at Georgia, and she   d been  an associate professor for awhile. We believed she was qualified to  come in as full professor and she was the first woman to be full  professor in veterinary medicine in Oklahoma.  That was 1969.   Well speaking of changes, looking at the profession broadly, not just  Oklahoma State but the veterinary medical profession, how does it  change and how does it continue to change?  Well one of the changes is that we have so many specialties now. The  first specialty board was veterinary pathology. And over the years, I   m  not sure just how many boards we have now, but all of these operate  through the American Veterinary Medical Association. We   ve never  had, interestingly enough, a board for veterinary parasitology. The  reason for that is that a lot of people who call themselves veterinary  parasitologists are actually animal parasitologists who are not  veterinarians but they work on veterinary problems. And that   s a good  thing because we never did have enough DVM PhD   s to really do the  job that needed to be done. Dr. Krull had his PhD a long time before he  got his DVM, and we have a couple of those around the country. But  anyway, that   s been a major change.  There is a move afoot to have a  specialty board in parasitology in the USA; one exists in Europe.   25  Gill  Ewing  And one of the important things about that for our particular veterinary  school is that we are one of the smallest schools and we just don   t have  the budget, we don   t have the Oklahoma money behind us to have as  many specialties as we should have if we   re going to compete  successfully at the national level. I think Dr. Lorenz has an approach to  this that   s being very successful, but if we could find a way to get more  state money to fund some more specialties in the teaching hospital it  would be good. It impacts us in multiple ways. One of the ways is that, I  mentioned Dr. Dennis Crow earlier, I   d love it if he were an  academician. But when he was doing his residency in dermatology at the  University of Florida he said to me,    You know, Dr. Ewing, I don   t see  very many faculty who are happy in their jobs.    He said,    I know I will  have a lot more time for my family if I go into a private specialty  practice.    Well we see that a lot. We have difficulty keeping good  faculty in our clinic because they have the opportunity to go elsewhere  and earn more money and they don   t have   if they don   t have the  dedication to teaching and the dedication to trying to pursue in-depth  study of naturally occurring disease, they are going to go someplace  else. I think that hurts our school and profession   and that   s not just a  local problem. I think it   s more difficult at Oklahoma State than it is at a  place like the University of Minnesota because our funding base is  smaller and our faculty is just smaller. We   re a small program.  Is the change from large animal to small animal practice, has that  significantly impacted the profession?  That   s been a problem for us for a long time. Our college has come  under some criticism at times from people who said, well you   re just  taking smart students. You ought to be taking some of these farm boys  who would come back and practice large animal medicine. But we know  that really has never worked here or anywhere else. You look at me  personally; I grew up on a dairy farm but I didn   t become a dairy  practitioner. You just cannot take students who are not academically  strong. What I mentioned earlier about Dean Brock facing that problem  from the Legislature, that was a politically well-connected student who  did not get admitted because he wasn   t qualified. And when he was  forced on the faculty, I wasn   t here as a part of it, but of course he  struggled. We   ve seen that when we get down to taking people who are  marginally qualified, we get in trouble.  Now I don   t think we   ve ever taken anybody who couldn   t do it  if they  applied themselves . But what we have done is taken people who think  they could do it and they have other things they are trying to do.  Probably for good reason, they have to have a job, they have a family  they have to feed. But they need to understand, they must understand, if  they are really not academically very strong, they are going to struggle,  26  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  and they may flunk out. And it is a terrible thing when we lose a student  for academic reasons  when, with proper study, they could succeed.   What is that rate usually from starting in the freshman year to  graduation? What percentage typically will graduate?  Well we aim to have a hundred percent graduate. We   d like a hundred  percent to graduate in four years. It is much better now than it was  during that period there in the 1970s when we were forced   I wasn   t  here   when the school was forced to take marginally qualified people.  You   d have to ask Dr. Lorenz what the latest figures are. But the last  stint I did, I did two stints as the interim Associate Dean for Academic  Affairs, it seems to me that we were up to losing two, sometimes three  out of a class of about seventy-odd. We had a way of giving them a year  off and if they could qualify, or compete to get back in, sometimes we   d  let them back in without competing with the incoming class, it just  depended on the situation. There is a faculty committee that makes that  determination. It was not an administrative   well ultimately it was an  administrative decision, but it was always carefully considered faculty  opinion in the form of an academic standards committee. So we had  some   we readmitted   I can think of about two or three that we  readmitted who had washed out again and never made it. And that is  tragic for them individually and it   s such a waste of resources for the  institution and the tax payer, obviously.  What events have been significant milestones for the college over the  years? Significant achievements?  Well I would say that   you know one of the embarrassing things for  Karl Reinhard when he came in here as dean, he was not told that the  school was on academic probation with the American Veterinary  Medical Association,  our accrediting agency . And I remember the day  we got the letter and we were looking at it and he said,    Oh, I think  when it says that we are    continued on probation,    I think that just means  that the school is continued and will be on probation.    It turned out that  the school had never been fully accredited, and it never did become fully  accredited until the Morgan administration. So that was a milestone. I  mean, the school put out perfectly qualified people. You look back and  some of the giants of the profession got their DVM at Oklahoma A M  and at Oklahoma State University, there was no question that we were  qualified to be granting the degree. But it was an embarrassment for Karl  Reinhard obviously and the faculty. That should have been shared with  the faculty; I don   t know why it wasn   t.  Was the lack of the teaching hospital part of the problem too?  27  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Yes, that was part of the problem. That was one of the things, when  Senator  Bob  Murphy was very instrumental in getting the  appropriations for the teaching hospital   again, I was at Minnesota at  the time, but I know he was very instrumental with that. I don   t know  just what the tradeoffs were for getting that, the  veterinary  medical  teaching hospital. It   s all right, it has the OU President   s name on it.  Still ranked with some alumni.  No doubt. But yes, once that teaching hospital came along that made it  possible  to gain accreditation . It was never really the faculty, although  the faculty numbers were slim enough that there were problems. One of  the little books that I wrote  details a similar problem from much earlier  in OAMC   s history . If you read our official history book it says that we  had a veterinary school here in the late 19-teens, early 1920   s. The  official history that Dr. Williams wrote says that we don   t know why  there were no graduates. Well what I discovered in the National  Archives, actually when I was there looking for material about Dr. Krull,  what I discovered was correspondence between L.L. Lewis and the  Bureau of Animal Industry that reveals that Oklahoma A M was never  granted the authorization to grant the DVM degree; that   s why we had  no graduates.  The BAI was the accrediting agency for veterinary  schools prior to the time the AVMA took that responsibility.   OAMC was granted, back there in, I believe it was 1919,  BAI  granted  this school the opportunity to do the first two years and then the  graduates  of that program  could go away to a place that could grant the  DVM degree. That   s a very important piece of history that had been lost.  As far as I can determine, there was no record of it here, but I   m glad I  stumbled onto it in the National Archives. And what had happened was  that C.H. McElroy, who was our founding dean, was on the faculty of  that old veterinary science department. He was teaching microbiology  and Dr. Lewis hoped that the Bureau of Animal Industry would count  him as if he was already a veterinarian, but they were not having it.  Schools had to have a minimum of five graduates who graduated from  veterinary colleges that were approved by the government (BAI) and  OAMC was not that well staffed.  Then McElroy went to St. Joseph Veterinary College in St. Joseph,  Missouri. And the official history book that Dr. Williams wrote says he  was over there four years and he came back with his DVM degree. What  I discovered in the National Archives was that he went over there in the  Fall of 1918 and he came back after one academic year in 1919 with his  DVM because he had done his two years at Oklahoma A M, and they  were at the point of shifting from three years to four years but he was  grandfathered in and did it in three years.  28  Gill  Ewing  The other interesting thing to me is that there had been a local  practitioner in Stillwater who had been assisting Dr. Lewis with the  work in the college, then the college herds. He had his own private  practice. He was a licensed veterinarian, but he was a licensed non-graduate  veterinarian. And I tell this story in the book I wrote about the  history of the Oklahoma Veterinary Medical Association. The graduate  veterinarians  in Oklahoma Territory  started before statehood trying to  get the Legislature in Guthrie to pass a law that you had to be a graduate  of an approved veterinary college in order to practice. Well they never  got the job done. We became a state in 1907 and they still hadn   t gotten  the job done. I believe it was maybe 1913 when they finally got  legislation passed that you had to have a license to practice veterinary  medicine in Oklahoma. However, on the day that they first issued  licenses, they issued two kinds of licenses. One was to graduate  veterinarians, and the other was to non-graduate veterinarians. If you  look at their licenses, the only difference is they both had a number on  them, the non graduates had an    N    following the number. Well there  was at least one of those persons still practicing in Oklahoma in 1960.  But to go back to the earlier story, McElroy really was the second  member of the Stillwater community to go over to St. Joseph, Missouri.  This local private practitioner was admitted over there before McElroy  was. And he would have come back in the spring of 1919 with his  degree, I   m confident, but instead he came back in a pine box. He got  the flu, there was a great flu pandemic, and he died in St. Joe. He   s  buried out here east of Stillwater. So that all, I think, is a very interesting  story that has been lost here on campus and I   m really glad that I just  stumbled upon the correspondence in the National Archives  and was  able to record the history in Oklahoma Aggie Ambition, which is  available in the OSU Library .  In your opinion, what have been the strengths of the college over the  years?  Well I think that we are well recognized in a lot of places outside of  Oklahoma as producing graduates who are ready to practice. Now a lot  of our graduates go and do internships and residencies. A lot of them go  to work for private practitioners. They are not as ready to practice as  they will be in a year or two. But they are much better qualified than  graduates of many institutions where they do not get as much hands-on  opportunity as they get here. When we   this was especially true in the  1960s   I remember we had a small animal clinician named Bruce  Blauh. Dr. Blauh got his veterinary degree, a VMD, at the University of  Pennsylvania. It   s the only school that gives a VMD. But he said,    My  goodness these students go out of here      this was the sixties now        these students go out of here so much more ready to practice than we  29  Gill  Ewing  were coming out of the University of Pennsylvania.    And it was because  we had such a small faculty that they had to do many procedures. They  learned to do it while they were still students. So I think that   s one of the  things we   ve been known for.  Dr. Lorenz was telling me recently that the Associate Dean for Research,  Dr.  Jerry  Malayer, has done an analysis that shows that even though  we   re a small program we leverage the money that the state puts into  veterinary medicine through OSU to a greater extent than almost any  other school. So the state dollars are really an investment   a good  investment for the state. So I think   I hesitate to say this, but I   ve said it  privately and I may as well go on record as saying it   that our school     and I might even include the whole university here, not just the  veterinary college   we probably are better than we deserve to be, given  the funding level we   ve had. We   ve made do. And I know the veterinary  college more intimately, obviously. But it   s kind of a double-edged  sword. You make do with what you get and then it   s expected that you  can do it, therefore you will do it. And that has happened.  But I   m not sure it can continue to happen if you don   t have people like  Roger Panciera, for example. He could have gone any place he wanted  to go, but he chose to stay here. And I   m not sure we can depend on that  in the future. At some point it   s likely that they   re going to have to put  more state money into the program. I thought at one point, just before I  left to go to the University of Minnesota there in the early seventies, I  thought we might actually have to fold as a school. I knew from my  discussion with Dr. Krull and with Dr. Panciera, who was of course a  student, that there in the late forties or early fifties, there were times that  they weren   t sure they were going to be able to make it. But they have  made it and I think they   ve made it not just hanging on by fingernails  but have really made it   a lot of it has come out of the hides of  dedicated faculty. But I think it   s a good solid school and I just hope it  can remain so.  Speaking of remaining so, Dr. Ewing, what advice would you give to  current and future faculty, administrators, to advance the mission of the  college?  Well I would say continue this work of Alexander and Lorenz and stay  well connected with the profession. Stay well connected to agriculture as  best as we can. I mean the political clout of the agriculture community in  this state is still important. The veterinary school needs to be doing its  part to stay in the good graces with agriculture so that OSU as a whole  flourishes and the veterinary college specifically flourishes. The  veterinary college can help, as we talked about earlier, in staying  connected with the profession. The veterinarians themselves probably  30  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  don   t have too much political clout, they   re too small a group. But they  have connections with their clientele that are very important. So I think  those things are important to do.  It   s also very important that the academic leadership of the college stay  well connected to the academic community nationally. The veterinary  profession is fairly small but we need to know where good graduate  education is going on so we know where to recruit faculty. We need to  build our graduate program so that people look to us. I   m glad you  raised this question because Dr. Kathy Kocan who, as I   ve said, I took  on as a graduate student, and today is herself a very well recognized  scientist. She is not a veterinarian; she is a PhD but she works on  anaplasmosis which is an important disease. She does not work on the  clinical aspect of it but she   s working on vaccines that are important  clinically. But she gave a paper in New Orleans earlier this month right  after the meeting in Chicago. She gave a paper at the meeting in Chicago  where I was recognized, and then she went to New Orleans and she gave  a paper on the current work that is going on here with ticks and  anaplasmosis and their interrelationship. And I was told that after her  paper a person said,    Do you have any post-docs that are ready to move  on? We will take any post-doc that you send us.    And that   s what we  need. We need programs that people recognize as being important to  produce new veterinary scientists. We   re doing it in a few disciplines  and we need to do it in more disciplines. We need to be able to compete,  not only to attract faculty but to keep faculty. As I said earlier, people  get opportunities to go elsewhere and a lot of it is to go into these private  specialty practices where they can make more money and they don   t  have committee work and those things. You need to work at identifying  people who care about teaching. You need to be able to find out what it  is that makes them tick and then see that you try to keep them and keep  them happy.  We   re going to close with a couple of paired questions here.  All right.  What do you feel has been your legacy? I know it   s a tough question to  answer, but all humility aside.  Well, I think I   ve had an important impact   they tell me this, people,  that I   ve had an important impact on a number of lives and on a number  of graduate students. I appreciate that very much; I appreciate that  assessment and I hope it   s true. People kid me a lot about the care of  which I write and the care with which I insist graduate students write.  Dr. Kocan presented me as the dedicatee in Chicago and she told a story  that was probably true, that I made her write her thesis six times. So  31  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  Gill  Ewing  that   s probably     That was the Krull effect.  Yeah, that was the Krull effect. He made me write mine probably six  times. So yeah, I think I   ve had some impact on individual persons. On  the institution generally, I hope I   ve brought some insistence on high  academic quality; and through my interest in history, I hope I have  engendered some appreciation for the institution   s history. I was so  pleased when Dr. Lorenz decided to mark this as the 60th year of the  beginning of classes for the veterinary school. He has an appreciation for  history. I hope I live long enough to see the 75 year celebration. We   ll  see.  So on those things I think I   ve had an impact. And I   ve been lucky  enough to have research that has gotten some national and international  attention. So that has helped the school, I think. The last graduate  student I had, I mentioned him earlier, a man from India. He came to me  because his parasitology teacher in India sent him to me. That man had  gotten his master   s degree with Dr. Krull at the same time I was working  on my PhD and we had stayed in touch over the years. So that was   and  I   ve had other students who came to me because of my reputation and  that has an impact on the   I think the academic milieu is enriched by  having people from other cultures and other institutions and so I hope I  have had a positive role there.  How do you hope people will remember Sidney Ewing, DVM?  Well, maybe as a person who spent most of his professional career at  one institution but also worked at a couple or three others. I hope I had a  positive impact on all of them. I just am very grateful I had the chance to  work at Oklahoma State three times, and have the chance as a retiree to  still work there.  Anything else you can think of that we haven   t covered? With your long  history, and I know you   ve written some of that history but you   ve lived  a lot of it also. Is there anything we haven   t covered that   s important  that someone listening to this interview ten, twenty years from now  would want to know or pick up?  Well I don   t know. I just hope that some of the things we   ve talked  about this afternoon in terms of the importance of the school staying  current with the profession in this state and nationally and  internationally that, I think that   s an absolute must if this school is going  to prosper. And I also think it   s probably a must that some way be found  to undergird with state money or with money from wealthy donors to  32  better endow the program because it is a competitive situation today. We  are a small program but a good program. We don   t need to get big, but  we need to be big enough to stay strong academically. I just hope that  that can happen. And I have confidence that it will.  I hope that whoever follows Mike Lorenz as Dean will avail himself or  herself a look at the history of the place and understand how it has come  to be what it is and will have the vision to help make it what it deserves  to be in the future.  -------  -------   
