 Finchum Today is March 8, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum and I am with  Oklahoma State University. Today I am in Norman, Oklahoma,  Cleveland  County  to interview Mary Joyce Hurst, and this is part of our Cowboy in  Every County project. Thank you for having me today. Let   s begin with  learning a little bit about you, starting with when and where you were born.  Hurst I was born on a farm in Cotton County  Oklahoma  March 7, 1934. I grew  up on a farm, all that time, until I graduated and went to OSU, Oklahoma  A M.  Finchum Were you actually born at home?  Hurst At home  I   m sure my dad had to go, probably fifteen or twenty miles to get  a doctor, but a doctor delivered me and my brother and sister all at home.  Finchum Are they older?  Hurst No. They   re all younger than I am.  Finchum You were the oldest.  Hurst Uh-hmm. It was a good life living on a farm. You learned more than if you  lived in the city that you wouldn   t ever learn, you know.  Finchum What did he farm? What was his products?  Hurst Well, when I was real young, he farmed with two mules, and he farmed  cotton. Things got different. Anyway, he went from row crop farming to  wheat farming. I picked a lot of cotton and chopped a lot of cotton and corn.  We all worked. When I got a little bit   I mean I   m really young at that time,  you know. My mother made us a cotton sack, and if we could get a hundred  pounds in it, we were really doing good. We were really young.  5  Finchum A hundred pounds a day?  Hurst A day.  Finchum A day   Hurst But we   re pulling cotton, pulling bolls. It   s not like the seeds have been  taken out of it. It   s all of it that you see out in the field. The whole thing, I  guess that is probably too much, a hundred pounds. Anyway, we all worked  hard.  Finchum Do you remember how much you got paid for it or did you?  Hurst I don   t. I   m sure we got paid some, but it couldn   t have been very much  because we didn   t have much money. Farmers don   t have much money at  that stage in life. Then later, when Dad was working in the fields in the  summer time, I had to milk his cow. (Laughs) We only had one milk cow,  so     Finchum And he had mules?  Hurst He had two mules he was plowing with at first.  Finchum Do you remember their names?  Hurst No, I don   t.  Finchum No?  Hurst I   m sure they had a name.  Finchum Do you remember when he got his first tractor?  Hurst That was quite an experience, something else. I just don   t remember a whole  lot about it. It was still pretty young. That was a whole lot easier work than  row crop farming with two mules.  Finchum You were born kind of in the Depression?  Hurst Oh yes   Finchum Did your mother work outside the home?  Hurst Oh no. She worked out in the farm too. Just as much as the rest of us, you  know.  6  Finchum Did you have chickens?  Hurst We had chickens and at one time we had some turkeys. I can remember  Daddy built some kind of shelter for  them . He dug a hole and he could put  a fire in down below, to warm the earth,  where  he built his chicken coop  over, to keep the baby chickens warm. I don   t know. We grew up about a  half a mile from the farm, or maybe a bit further, I mean from the creek.  There was always plenty of wood to build that fire to keep those baby chicks  warm. Of course he would have to order the chicks. We didn   t hatch them  out ourselves. It was a good life. My brother and I, we always had a steer  that we were feeding out, for showing purposes. He just made sure that we  had everything that we needed, and we had to work to keep it going.  Finchum Were you in 4-H or FFA?  Hurst In 4-H.  Finchum In 4-H.  Hurst Uh-huh. We went to a little small school that I can remember there was  three Jimmys in my class and one other boy. There were three girls and  that   s how big my class was when we were in high school. I transferred out  of that school district, because we didn   t have a whole lot of classes that we  were taking so I transferred out to Walter   s high school. That   s where I  spent my senior year in high school. Then, on to Oklahoma A M.  Finchum What was the name of the country school?  Hurst Union Valley was the country school.  Finchum Was it a one-room or a two-room?  Hurst No. There was one room for the first and second grade, and then the third  and fourth grade were, we had one bigger building that housed the third and  fourth grade, and the seventh and eighth grade in another room. Then, the  high school in another room. We were always in a room with another class.  Finchum Combined with a class    Did you have to do the    Pledge of Allegiance?     Hurst Oh yes  We did that early in the morning.  Finchum And say a prayer?  Hurst I don   t remember a prayer.  Finchum What would you do for lunch?  7  Hurst I don   t remember the first few grades. Later, we had a lunch program. It was  before, I   m sure that we had to take our own lunch for a while, and I don   t  remember. It might have been fifth or sixth, or maybe, it could have been  junior high age before we had a lunch program. I don   t remember when that  was started.  Finchum How would you get to school?  Hurst We rode the bus until I was a freshman. We lived about one, two, three, four  miles from school. We rode a bus and we had to go way out away from  school to pick everybody up. Then when I was a freshman in high school,  Mother and Dad bought a new house on another farm that wasn   t an Indian  Lease. We were a mile from school. Sometimes Mother took us to school  then. We always rode the bus, most of the time, especially when we lived  farther away from school. You understand when I say I was born on an  Indian lease?  Finchum No. Indian lease?  Hurst Oh, I didn   t say that? We were all born on an Indian lease.  Finchum I   m not sure what that     Hurst Well, Daddy was renting the property, which was in quarters. You know  what a quarter is, of a section?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Hurst He was renting two quarters, by the time I was born, from the Indians. They  owned that land around that area. I guess that is when the government gave  them their quarter.  Finchum What tribe?  Hurst Comanche.  Finchum Okay.  Hurst Then my mother inherited another quarter a mile from school, and that is  when they built a new house and we moved. I was a freshman in high school  then.  Finchum Did the new house have running water?  8  Hurst Yes, we had never had running water. We had never had a toilet, a  bathroom. I can remember being small, very young, we bathed in a tub in  the kitchen, on the kitchen floor, you know. We had an outdoor toilet. Most  of everybody in that community where I grew up, I don   t know whether all  farm related houses, that is where they had their toilets. They were all  outside. We didn   t have electricity until my sister was in the third or fourth  grade. I would have been in junior high. They, my mother and dad, they  never had a phone until I had already finished college. Then some company  came out from Vernon, Texas, and built lines out in that part of southern  Oklahoma, southern Cotton County anyway, for a phone system.  Finchum They trusted, had to rely on mail service?  Hurst Oh yes  I remember one time, Mother felt like she needed to take me to the  doctor, and Daddy had gone somewhere in the pickup. She didn   t have any  way of taking me. My dad   s brother lived two miles south of where we lived  so Mother caught the mailman, who came from Randlett, and told him to tell  my mother   s sister-in-law to come and get us so we could go to the doctor.  You know, it   s hard when you don   t have a phone. I grew up that way, so  you make plans to do something else about it.  Finchum Needed a horse I guess.  Hurst Yes, I guess we could have. We were too far away from the doctor to ride  the horse. (Laughs)  Finchum Being Indian land, were you in a class with the Indians, any Indian  children?  Hurst No. The Indians didn   t live there. Not until I was in high school that some  Indians moved in close to the school. I had classes with some Indians then,  and played basketball with them. Up until I was in high school, we didn   t  have any Indians in class.  Finchum You played basketball?  Hurst Yes, I played basketball. (Laughs) And a big basketball fan.  Finchum What position did you play?  Hurst It   s not like basketball today. This was three on three. You know what I  mean by three on three? I played on the offensive end. The other end was  the defense.  Finchum You didn   t have to run full-court.  9  Hurst No. It was half-court. I was such a basketball fan, and when I went to OSU,  that was one thing that I really enjoyed doing. The dinner hall opened at five  thirty every evening. I tried to be first in line because I wanted to get over to  the, it wasn   t Gallagher Hall then, it was the fieldhouse, to watch the  freshmen. Freshmen didn   t play basketball with the varsity at that time.  Finchum Junior varsity or something?  Hurst Well, it was the     Finchum Or just freshmen?  Hurst Well, I know they were freshmen, but I don   t remember what they were  called. Always enjoyed watching Mr. Iba   s basketball teams play.  Finchum That would have been 1950-what? When did you finish high school?  Hurst Fifty-two.  Finchum Fifty-two, so    52 is when you went to Oklahoma A M. Why OSU? Why did  you choose to go there?  Hurst My mother went to school there. As far as we were concerned that was the  only school you need to go to. Also, in 4-H clubs, in May, they have 4-H  groups come into the state, at OSU, for dress revues and demonstrations and  a bunch of things. I always was going, after I got big enough to do that,  through 4-H.  Finchum Roundup, I think.  Hurst Uh-huh   Finchum I don   t know if it was called that then, but it is Roundup now.  Hurst I think it was Roundup then, now that you mention it.  Finchum You got familiar with campus early.  Hurst Oh yeah  Of course it changes every year.  Finchum Sure  Where did you live?  Hurst I lived in Willard Hall on the first floor. That way it was easy to get to and  from classes. (Laughs) Most of the other girls stayed in Murray and Stout  Hall. Both of those are still there, right? When my girls started college, they  lived at Bennett Hall. My youngest one said she could never figure out  10  directions, but she lived at West Bennett so she knew which was west.  (Laughter)  Finchum When your mother went, did she graduate from there?  Hurst No. It was during the Depression time. Well she, let   s see, she must have  started in 1928. She was real good in art. I can remember when I started I  had an art class under Mrs. Britton. Miss Jack was still there and that is who  my mother had her art classes under. I just always enjoyed all that so much.  Finchum Miss Jack, J-A-C-K?  Hurst Uh-huh. I think her first name was Ella, Ella Jack I believe. She was still  there when I started. It was the only place to go and you know, as far as I  was concerned that was the only place for my girls to go also. We made sure  that they knew where to go, because we kept going back to basketball or  football, or some other sports. They went on 4-H trips also, to Stillwater. It  just came normal that you, if you were going to go to college, you went to, it  was OSU by the time they started.  Finchum Sure. How would you get back and forth from Walters to Stillwater while  you were in college?  Hurst While I was in college?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Hurst Went by car  My mother, though, went by train from Waurika to Stillwater.  That was the closest way and they, I   m sure, went by horse and buggy. I just  remember when they moved to that part of Cotton County, they moved by  horse and buggy. Times had changed by the time I went to school. (Laughs)  Finchum Were your parents from Oklahoma or Texas?  Hurst Daddy was born in Texas, northern Texas. They, the family moved from  Iowa Park  Texas  to Oklahoma across the river, Red River, by horse and  trailer, not trailer, well anyway, buggy and so forth, with all their cattle,  because my granddad   they   d move from one place to another. Their  children were born in different counties, so I know they jumped around in  northern Texas. They moved from Iowa Park to southwest Cotton County   Oklahoma  when he was three. My mother was born on the verge of getting  into Oklahoma. Her folks were moving, and they had to stop in Nevada,  Texas, and she was born in the Love Hotel as they were moving to  Oklahoma. (Laughs)  Finchum That   s a pretty good story.  11  Hurst They were both from Texas, but their ancestors were farther south.  Finchum Well, when you were growing up, was church an important part?  Hurst Yes, we went. We had church activities at the schoolhouse,  nondenominational. Then later my brother and sister and I were, before we  were teenagers that group wanted to be known as the Baptist church, and  they had a Baptist preacher. Most of my mother   s family was from Temple   Oklahoma . They all went to the Temple Methodist Church here, so we  drove.  Finchum When you were into high school, did you have a favorite subject?  Hurst Basketball. (Laughs)  Finchum Basketball.  Hurst No, not really, but nothing that I can remember.  Finchum Math, science, history, none of it?  Hurst No.  Finchum Were you a pretty good student?  Hurst Yes, I was a pretty good student. Not that I worked very hard in college,  but     Finchum Being involved with 4-H, was there a county agent?  Hurst Oh yes.  Finchum I guess home demonstration would have been the other?  Hurst Uh-huh. Yes. Most of them I remember. I remember most of them   s name,  after I got a certain age. They were all nice people.  Finchum Did they come out to the farm?  Hurst Yes, they   d come out to the schools, too, at different times for meetings.  They would have a county group that met once every so often. I don   t  remember how long, but we had officers, county-wise, and just like   I  guess they still do, I don   t know.  12  Finchum They participate in the county fair, that type of thing. Was your mother a  member of a homemaker club?  Hurst Yes. They called it home demonstration club then.  Finchum Do you remember the name of it?  Hurst Yeah, well. Her club was Busy Bee.  Finchum Busy Bee.  Hurst More people ought to be involved in farm life, because I guess     Finchum It   s more well-rounded. Isn   t it?  Hurst Yes. You learned a lot and you   ve seen a lot. Maybe you didn   t learn much  about it, but you   ve seen calves being born, pigs being born, and a lot of  things that you know, people in town, kids especially, have never seen.  Finchum You also see the life cycle, too, because you end up butchering some of  those.  Hurst I can remember, we always butchered a hog on the first day that, one of the  days that it was going to be a Northern come in and be really cold. Stick a  hog, and hang it, let it bleed. Can   t remember now what the proper word  was. It wasn   t bleed, but yes, we raised chickens. We dressed chicken fryers  all day and take them to town to put them in the freezer. If you don   t have  electricity, you can   t keep stuff like that. We put it in the freezer. We put a  whole chicken in one container. You could get, I believe it was quart size.  Heavy white   I do not remember what you called the stuff the container,  the fabric, the paper and stuff that it was built out of. If you dressed fryers  when they weren   t too big, you could get a whole chicken in a one-quart  container. That fed all five of us. Each one had our own piece that we got  when we had fried chicken.  Finchum What was your piece?  Hurst It was the pulley bone   Finchum I know what that is.  Hurst You know what that is?  Finchum People don   t anymore though   Hurst Well I guess. When you go buy a chicken, it   s not cut into a pulley bone.  13  Finchum Yeah.  Hurst Well, my daughter said last night that she wanted me to fry a chicken. She   s  just hungry for one. I thought,    Well I guess I am going to have to go buy a  whole chicken and cut it up so she   ll know what part she   s eating.    (Laughs)  Finchum Did you do that?  Hurst We just talked about it last night. I   m planning to.  Finchum I   ve never cut up a whole chicken. That is a skill that they taught long ago.  Hurst Well, I learned that early in life. My mother could wring a chicken   s neck  and let it flop outside until it quit, and then we   d stick it in boiling water and  take the feathers off, cut it up. It was ready to be frozen.  Finchum Did she usually fry it or bake?  Hurst We had fried chicken.  Finchum Not baked.  Hurst No. And we always had to butcher our own calves, beef. We never had  anything but chicken-fried steak at home, as far as the steak was concerned,  and I   ve not eaten one since then and I   m not going to cook one. (Laughs) I  guess that   s what Daddy wanted. We had chicken-fried steak, potatoes and  gravy, and I don   t eat any mash potatoes either anymore. (Laughs)  Finchum Had too many of them?  Hurst Yeah  I   m sure that my kids are the same way. They are not going to do this,  because that is all we had at home. (Laughs)  Finchum They raised their own potatoes?  Hurst Oh yes  We had a big, always had a big garden. In February is when they  would plant onions and carrot, not carrots radishes. Those are the two things  that I can remember that they planted early. You plant certain things, I guess  it   s, then you know, I guess it   s okra, same time you plant cotton. I mean, I  guess that   s the way Dad grew up. They knew when to plant certain things  for the garden. We always had a big garden.  Finchum You canned a lot?  14  Hurst We canned a lot. Then we got the electricity, then you could freeze a lot of it  too. You didn   t have to can as much but they still canned a lot even until, I  guess I was probably a freshman in high school.  Finchum Well, when they went into town, what would be some of the things that they  would buy, if they did all this at home? Sugar I guess?  Hurst Sugar and flour.  Finchum And flour?  Hurst Shortening or yeah, that   s probably the main things.  Finchum Do you remember your first bought loaf of bread, like sandwich bread we  have?  Hurst I don   t remember. I don   t think   I don   t remember that Mother made a  whole lot of bread. Maybe that   s one thing that we bought a lot of. We only  went to town on Saturdays, you know, when I was young.  Finchum The town would have been Walters?  Hurst Temple.  Finchum Temple, okay.  Hurst That   s mainly, I   m sure, because of my mother   s, most of my mother   s  family lived there. Well, it was twelve miles to Temple and fifteen miles to  Walters.  Finchum Kind of in the middle. And Temple is still in Oklahoma?  Hurst Yes. It   s still in Cotton County.  Finchum Did it have a movie theater?  Hurst No, Temple didn   t. Walters had two movie theaters when I was growing up.  One on the west side of the street had a lot of cowboy movies. You could go  watch Gene Autry or Roy Rogers, or something like that. We didn   t get to  go to the movies very often. They   d always take us for a child movie, I  guess you might call it. We saw Lassie Come Home, and My Friend Flicka,  and that type of movies. They   d always make sure we would go to town and  see that, as a family. We were pretty young when those came along.  Finchum Would they give you an allowance?  15  Hurst Yes. We got a nickel a day.  Finchum A nickel a day?  Hurst Uh-huh. At the end of the week they   d give us thirty-five cents for our  allowance. When we   d go to town if we wanted to buy candy, that   s what  we bought candy with. My brother was always saving his and my sister  would have to buy from him, because she couldn   t keep hers lasting a whole  week.  Finchum And would they actually give you the physical nickel each day or at the end  of the week?  Hurst No. At the end of the week we   d get thirty-five cents.  Finchum Three dimes and a nickel or a quarter and a dime, or just various?  Hurst I don   t remember.  Finchum That was quite a bit of money though.  Hurst We had chores to do. A lot of chores.  Finchum Milking the cow     Hurst Milking cows, feeding chickens, and all these good things.  Finchum Were most of your chores inside or out?  Hurst My sister   s were inside. I was working outside. We were driving a tractor by  the time we were ten years old and plowing. After the wheat harvest is when  Daddy would put us on the tractor and let us plow. Of course he taught us  how to do it and how so forth. We did a lot of     Finchum That   s just part of life I guess. Well with all that work, what would you do  for fun?  Hurst Well, at school we always had basketball games at night, and so we saw a  lot of basketball games. I don   t remember   of course the country schools  were too small to have football, so it was just basketball. And it seems like  to me sometimes the boys played baseball. I can   t remember. That was it. I  can   t remember. Or train your calf, your steer to lead and so forth. That   s  just part of farm life.  Finchum Go fishing?  16  Hurst Mother would take us occasionally to fish. We lived right there on the creek.  She would also take us to swim in the creek at times. One time we were  down there swimming and she quickly got us out on the bank. Here comes a  wall of water down the creek. You know if it rained up farther north in the  state, it would come rolling down. You know, you can really see it. It was a  wall coming through towards you.  Finchum That would be kind of scary too.  Hurst Uh-huh. She quickly got us out. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you know how to swim?  Hurst I don   t think so. I never was a very good swimmer. Even with my swimming  classes, I could just do enough to finish it. I didn   t like it in my nose and  ears, and eyes. (Laughs)  Finchum Speaking of that, did they make you take swimming when you were at  Oklahoma A M?  Hurst We had to have two years of exercise classes. We had a choice. We had to  take swimming. We could have dancing, we could have golf, we could have  tennis, and bowling. We had a lot of choices along the lines, but you had to  take swimming.  Finchum You had to learn to swim or not pass the class?  Hurst Yeah. I think most everybody knew how to swim, we just didn   t know real  well. We can do better than what you learn on the creek. (Laughter)  Finchum Dog paddling? Besides swimming, what did you take?  Hurst I took bowling and I took tennis. I certainly didn   t take dancing. I   m not  that     Finchum What kind of dancing did they have? Ballroom or square dance?  Hurst Well, one of my friends, I can   t remember but she was always taking  dancing classes, and she loved it, but I can   t remember exactly now what it  was.  Finchum Well, now did they have dancing when you were growing up? Would your  parents go to dances?  Hurst Well, no.  17  Finchum Didn   t have them at your house?  Hurst Huh-uh, no. They probably couldn   t dance, so we didn   t learn either.  Finchum What about music?  Hurst We always took piano lessons. Started out with, from the lady at church at  Temple, she also taught. When Daddy would go to do business that week,  he   d take us. David and I took at the same time and we could walk back  down town. That was probably three or four blocks. We started with her and  later we took from a lady, or I took from a lady in Walters. Then, later I took  from a lady that taught in Buckburnett, Texas. It was seventeen miles,  nineteen miles to Buckburnett. It wasn   t very far.  Finchum They were committed to having you learn, weren   t they? The expense to  have done that too?  Hurst Yes, uh-huh.  Finchum They had your brother take lessons too?  Hurst He took lessons   oh from that first lady we took two or three years. Enough  to try and teach him something. He never, I don   t know that he ever learned  to play very well. I can   t remember that. My sister did later also.  Finchum Well, did your mother sew?  Hurst She sewed.  Finchum Make your clothes?  Hurst Yes. She is the one that taught us to sew. We, you know, by the time we  were eight, she was teaching us. That is kind of the way I feel about   when  I had girls, it was my duty to teach them what I felt like they needed to  know, sewing, cooking and so forth.  Finchum Not leave it to the home ec teacher?  Hurst Yes. Well, they didn   t take home ec. Their mother should have been doing  that. That   s kind of the way I felt about it, you know. They could take  something else, because they didn   t really need that.  Finchum You had already taught them what they needed. Well, did your mother make  your clothes from patterns, or make up your own patterns? Do you  remember?  18  Hurst When I was smaller, I don   t remember seeing a pattern so I don   t know.  Later, I know, she made all of our clothes.  Finchum Where would she get her fabric?  Hurst At Temple or Walters.  Finchum Okay.  Hurst There was a store.  Finchum Wouldn   t mail order?  Hurst I don   t remember it being mail ordered. It could have been. There were  community, I don   t know what to say, there were stores     Finchum Kind of like a mercantile or whatever?  Hurst Yes, store in Temple that they sold everything, and you could also take your  milk and eggs and so forth to sell them there. It just had everything, you  know. I   m sure she bought fabric there.  Finchum A general store I guess.  Hurst Uh-huh.  Finchum Would she sell her cream and eggs for her spending money?  Hurst I   m sure she did. I don   t remember how much. You know we probably had  more of that than we could use so I   m sure that she just took it. I just  remember her mother   well that   s a long story. My granddaddy was the  sheriff, on my daddy   s side. I know he was the sheriff in 1929. Before that,  he appointed a man at Temple to be marshal. One night he told this Harry  Adair to go home because he was drunk. Well Harry Adair went home but  came back with a gun and shot and killed him. That turned out to be my  mother   s granddad. The sheriff was my daddy   s daddy. There was no  connection with the families back then. Later, my mother, they moved from  the Temple area to out west twelve miles. That   s how the family got to  know each other, so I had double cousins. My mother   s cousin married one  of my daddy   s sisters, and the family has always been together since then. I  thought it was strange they didn   t know each other back when my granddad  appointed Mr. Graham as his marshal.  Finchum What was your granddaddy   s name?  19  Hurst Joe Kerr. (Pronounced Karr) It   s spelled, K-E-R-R. It   s Kerr. If you saw it in  Oklahoma, you would say Kerr. It was pronounced Karr. It came from  Scotland, and     Finchum So what was your maiden name?  Hurst Kerr.  Finchum Kerr, okay. We should back up then. How did you meet your husband?  Hurst When I transferred high school to Walters, he was in my class then.  Finchum You knew him before you went to college?  Hurst Uh-huh. Yeah.  Finchum Were you married before you went?  Hurst No.  Finchum Halfway through or something?  Hurst We were married before I finished my last semester. He had another year  and a half in engineering.  Finchum You did finish though?  Hurst Oh yeah.  Finchum In what year?  Hurst Fifty-six.  Finchum What was your major?  Hurst Home economics.  Finchum That is why  It all adds up   Hurst That   s why I felt like it was my job to teach my girls, so they could take  something else in high school.  Finchum Who were some of your teachers in home ec? I probably won   t recognize  them anyway.  20  Hurst Well, no. I   m sure they   re all   Ms. Coe, C-O-E. There was two sisters that  taught at the home economics department. I can   t remember now if I had  both of them in different classes or what. I don   t remember that. Lela  O   Toole was the dean of the home ec school.  Finchum I recognize that name.  Hurst She was there for a long time.  Finchum I understand she wore gloves a lot.  Hurst I don   t remember that.  Finchum Don   t remember that?  Hurst Huh-uh. I had another teacher that I liked real well. I can   t, I had two  different instructors in food classes. I can   t remember their names.  Finchum Was there a required dress? I mean, could you wear pants? Did the girls  have to wear dresses or do you remember?  Hurst We didn   t wear pants back then.  Finchum Not that you couldn   t, you just didn   t?  Hurst Well, I never saw anybody wear pants and I certainly didn   t have any.  (Laughs) I don   t know. I don   t think there was any rule against wearing  pants, but no girls ever wore pants that I can ever remember. One thing that  I do remember about going to my English class, from Willard Hall over to     now I can   t think of the name of the building. It   s where all the English  classes were taught, behind the fire station. It was a long walk through there.  Every morning, I guess it was Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and I don   t  remember whether that was my freshman year or my sophomore year. I met  this group of girls that were all laughing. They all knew each other. One  lady stood out. She was a head taller than the rest of them and very striking.  Of course I didn   t know who she was.  We moved to Norman in 1960. The lady across the street invited me to her  house one morning for some women   s group from her church. There was  this lady that I had seen many years ago walking across the campus. Found  out that was Betty Bellis. Well, of course it wasn   t Bellis when we were all  in college. Several months later, I was getting ready to take a job, so I asked  the lady across the street if she knew somebody that she might recommend. I  needed a babysitter. I had a two-year-old. She said,    Well Betty keeps kids.     That   s when our friendship started in 1961 and we   ve remained close friends  ever since.  21  Finchum Over fifty years   Hurst That   s pretty much my life story  (Laughs)  Finchum Did your husband go to A M with you?  Hurst Yes  He went.  Finchum He got his degree from there too?  Hurst Yeah, uh-huh.  Finchum Well, did you have a practice house? I have heard about practice houses.  Hurst Oh yes  I forgot about that. Yeah, that doesn   t sound   .  Finchum Maybe it was a home demonstration house. You know what I am talking  about?  Hurst That sounds more like it than practice house   Finchum Uh-huh.  Hurst Yes, I had that after I got married. That was my last semester. I had one  semester after we got married. That is when I was at that house. Where we  planned meals and did everything.  Finchum How did he ask you to marry him?  Hurst That I don   t remember.  Finchum What was his name?  Hurst Phil Hurst.  Finchum Did either one of you get thrown in Theta Pond when you got engaged?  Hurst No. I don   t ever remember seeing or hearing about that when we were in  school.  Finchum You lucked out then.  Hurst Yeah  (Laughter)  Finchum Theta Pond was there?  22  Hurst Yes  Oh goodness, it was there. I don   t know whether it was there when my  mother was in school. I just remember she had a lot of classes in that, I  started to tell you that old first building.  Finchum Old Central   Hurst Old Central. Okay.  Finchum It   s still there being used. It   s very pretty inside.  Hurst So that is my life story I guess. I don   t know what I left out.  Finchum You are doing fine. When you went to basketball, to watch the freshman  team, you were talking about Iba. Was he the head coach then?  Hurst Oh yes. Of course the varsity teams played immediately after the freshmen  played. I watch the games now, I watched a lot of basketball. When they  would have timeouts, he was setting in his chair and he would have all five  players come and lay flat on the floor with their heads right at him looking  like this. (Gestures) You don   t see that anymore. They rush out five chairs  instead and sit players on them. I just, that is different. I just thought he was  the best coach ever, and probably still is.  Finchum He had a lot of winning seasons too  Well, was the current Library there?  Hurst The Library was   no, the library wasn   t there when I first started I don   t  think. The Union was one year old. The Library was built after the Union.  Finchum It was probably being built, in the process of being built.  Hurst I worked at Oklahoma Natural for a while, until we left Stillwater.  Finchum Did you have to work while you were in college?  Hurst I did some with them, Oklahoma Natural, through their home demonstration  groups. They would have groups that   d come in and demonstrate different  things that they would show them. I worked for them some until I graduated  from high school. Then they let me work at taking the money from people in  town that had gas service. You know, I was appreciative of that.  Finchum Did you parents pay your tuition, or did you?  Hurst No. My dad gave me a hundred dollars every month. He put it in the bank  for me. I had to make do with a hundred dollars a month. If your tuition is  only forty-eight dollars for no matter how many classes you took, a hundred  23  dollars was  enough . I didn   t spend a lot of money, because I wasn   t used to  having a lot. That   s what I went to college on.  Finchum Do you remember graduation day?  Hurst Not very well.  Finchum Where the ceremony was?  Hurst It was out at Lewis Field.  Finchum Outside?  Hurst Uh-huh. I was, back then, I think it was later in the season. It is pretty early  anymore, in May. I think it was probably later, it seems like to me it was  later.  Finchum In June maybe.  Hurst I don   t know if it was that later or not. It could have been. I just don   t think  it was as early as now. We didn   t start school, classes, until after Labor Day.  That would push the whole cycle of classes back later than in May like they  do today.  Finchum Were you in any clubs or organizations?  Hurst I can   t tell you the name of it. There was a group that was 4-H people, 4-H-ers.  I can   t even tell you the name of it. I   ve forgotten. I could have gotten  out an annual and looked at some things, and been able to tell you more.  That   s about all I remember about clubs.  Finchum So you got married, and then you graduated, and then you moved to  Norman?  Hurst No. We moved to Ohio   Finchum Oh, okay   Hurst He went to work, my husband went to work as a   no, I can   t even tell you.  Chemical engineer but he went to work in sales. We spent three long  winters, (laughs) bad winters, in Ohio. I knew on the way going up there  that it wasn   t going to be good, because we came to Terre Haute  Indiana ,  and the buildings were all black with soot, and it was just not a pleasant  looking sight. I was glad, mighty glad to get home to less severe winters.  You know, all three winters were different but they were all terribly bad.  24  Finchum Where in Ohio?  Hurst In a town named Mount Vernon which was about thirty or forty miles north  of Columbus.  Finchum Pretty, pretty far north then. How did you end up back, in Norman then?  Hurst He wanted to go to law school.  Finchum Okay.  Hurst So that is what we did.  Finchum Is it hard to live here when Bedlam time comes around?  Hurst No. I just don   t like to go to the University to watch a game even when  OSU   s playing. They have the worst fans in the world so I just stay away  from them. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, Bedlam was big even back when you were on campus, wasn   t it?  Hurst I don   t remember it being big.  Finchum Not so much.  Hurst No, but OU never had a very good basketball team compared to what OSU  had under Iba.  Finchum That   s true.  Hurst I don   t know, that might be. OSU never had a very good football team so it  didn   t make much difference. I wasn   t a football fan anyway. I   m more so  now because I like, I want to watch Mike play, not play, but coach. He was  playing as quarterback when my youngest daughter worked at the football  office. Several years ago when we were up there, she always liked to go  back to the football office. At that time, the same secretaries were there  when she worked there. One day we walked in and one of them says,     Wendy, Mike was here, he just left. He will be back in just a few minutes.     Sure enough he was. Wendy says to him, he walked on by,    Mike, I just  wondered if you remember me.    He comes over and he looks at her, gets up  close and looks her in the eye and calls her Wendy. That had been since, that  had been thirty years, you know. For him to remember Wendy, it was almost  unbelievable.  Finchum You have two daughters?  25  Hurst Two daughters. Wendy was the second one. Robin was the first one. She  finished in Microbiology and went to University of Arizona for graduate  work. Came back to OSU, and then decided not to work on her doctorate.  Somebody, one of the fellows that she knew, that she had had some classes  evidently with, was working for a company in Wisconsin. So she decided  maybe the money sounded better, but who would want to live in Wisconsin,  but she went up there and they hired her. She has been there since   well,  over twenty years. Therefore, we don   t see much of them.  Finchum When did she graduate from OSU?  Hurst Nineteen eighty-one.  Finchum Okay, and then when did Wendy?  Hurst She didn   t graduated, but she started in   now I can   t remember. It was  probably    82 or    83 is when she started.  Finchum Okay, what was she majoring in?  Hurst I don   t know that she even had one. (Laughs)  Finchum Okay.  Hurst That   s the difference in children.  Finchum Yes. You said you just had the two?  Hurst Two, uh-huh.  Finchum Take us a little bit through your career once you started to work?  Hurst I taught school in Ohio, one year.  Finchum Home economics?  Hurst Yes. The next year, I was, I got a job there in town that I didn   t have to  commute. I saw the doctor and I had already had two or three miscarriages.  He put me to bed. That   s the story. That child was born     Finchum    and then you met Betty? With that child?  Hurst    with that child and Betty helped raise her. That   s right   Finchum Then where did you go to work when you did go to work here?  26  Hurst For City National Bank downtown, which is no longer called City. It   s First  Fidelity Bank out of Oklahoma City. When I was working there, every day,  at the end of the day, I would have to write a check for and to Fidelity Bank  in Oklahoma City. I didn   t sign it. I filled it out. There was some family  connection. At that time the grandson was about five years old, of the people  that owned the bank. He is now president of the First Fidelity, so it   s a  family, some kind of family attachment there.  Finchum Well, did you do that type of work the rest of your working career?  Hurst After Wendy was born, I taught school a couple of days, a couple of hours a  day in Sulphur  Oklahoma . It   s because they lost their junior high teacher.  There   s a whole lot of easier work than teaching school.  Finchum I noticed your tape measure, what are you doing these days?  Hurst I do alterations.  Finchum Still using your sewing?  Hurst I   m using my sewing. I have been doing alterations ever since I came back  to Norman in 1989. I rented a house at first over on Berry and Cadel. After I  bought this house, the owner came by and wanted to know if I would help  take care of his rental property so I   ve been doing that since 1991.  Finchum Wow   Hurst I am doing alterations and taking care of his rental property.  Finchum Staying busy.  Hurst Yes.  Finchum You said, when you came back to Norman?  Hurst Yeah, when he finished law school, we went to Sulphur.  Finchum Still in Oklahoma though.  Hurst Oh yeah  We spent, I spent twenty-some odd years down there. Knowing  Betty was here, it   s a convenient town to go wherever, and I-35 is right there  and you can hop up to the airport or I-40. It   s just a convenient town to live  in to get to wherever you might be going. It   s not that I might say it   s as  easy to get through as Stillwater, you know, it   s a pretty nice place to live.  Finchum Having your best friend close by counts a lot.  27  Hurst It helps.  Finchum Some of the things the two of you have done through the years?  Hurst Well, you mean together?  Finchum Yeah.  Hurst Well, mostly   she married. She always worked at the, when I came back, at  the geology   no, that   s not right. Something related to geology on campus,  and then she was secretary for some group that met all over the country. She  married   I can   t tell. She can tell you about that. I don   t know what  terminology, something related to geology. He died three or four years ago.  We have been close. We do things more together now.  Finchum Do you talk OSU pride?  Hurst Yeah, we go to alumni groups together. A lot of times I try to get her to go  in and watch games with me. She likes to go to the Philharmonic on  Saturday nights in Oklahoma City. We just have different interests except  we, that doesn   t keep us from being close friends.  Finchum Sure. And you didn   t know each other when you were on campus?  Hurst Yeah. Isn   t that strange?  Finchum Yeah. Do you have a favorite memory from campus? Besides freshman  basketball?  Hurst That was my entertainment.  Finchum That was it?  Hurst That was about it. You know when you enrolled, you only got half of the  tickets to the ballgame, but living on the little area on the first floor of  Willard Hall, not everybody wanted to go and see basketball games. So, you  could always get a basketball ticket. I just never missed one.  Finchum You remember what your room number was?  Hurst I think it was 121. I   m not positive.  Finchum We have heard some people talk about the    Women of Willard.    I don   t  know, that may have been after you. Groups refer to themselves as    Women  of Willard.     28  Hurst I don   t remember that.  Finchum That   s okay. Were there a lot of cars on campus when you were there?  Hurst Well, sure. But not like there are today.  Finchum You   d walk to places where you wanted to go? You didn   t have a car?  Hurst I didn   t have a car. We just walked, you know. A lot of times there would be  several of us that would walk downtown. That   s quite a distance.  Finchum From Willard, yeah  Did you have a dorm mother?  Hurst I had a dorm mother. I can   t tell you what her name was.  Finchum Had curfews?  Hurst Had curfews, you had to be in by ten thirty at night during the week. Of  course the Library didn   t close that early. I remember that, not that I was  always at the Library. (Laughs) Weekends, it was longer. I can   t remember.  It seems like to me one night was twelve o   clock.  Finchum I would think Saturday night or Friday maybe? Would you come home very  often during the semester or school year?  Hurst No, not really.  Finchum Would they come see you?  Hurst No. They only came up for my graduation.  Finchum Well, did they drop you off when you first started?  Hurst No, I came with a friend. No. They just sent me up here.  Finchum With one suitcase or two?  Hurst (Laughs) I probably didn   t have but one.  Finchum Well, would you come home like for holidays, Christmas, Thanksgiving?  Hurst Oh yes. You know, campus life was good I thought, maybe because I wasn   t  used to a whole lot. I thought it was good. Especially since it had basketball.  (Laughs)  29  Finchum The Dairy Barn was there? Yeah, I would have thought the Dairy Barn  would have been there, with ice cream and cheese?  Hurst Oh yeah. I don   t know but you would have had to walk way out there to the  Dairy Barn.  Finchum It   s not there anymore.  Hurst Later, I remember taking   my daughter lived up there. I took my grandson  out to the Dairy Barn.  Finchum Well, will he go there or did he go to OSU?  Hurst No. They moved to Wisconsin when he was almost four. He went to college  at the University of Minnesota and majored in finance and is now working  for a financial company in Portland, Oregon. I don   t get to see him often  either.  Finchum They are spread out a little bit.  Hurst Uh-huh. Yeah. I blame her for moving away from Oklahoma for that.  (Laughs)  Finchum Maybe she   ll come back someday.  Hurst I don   t think so. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, Oklahoma, you consider home. I mean, without Ohio in the mix, most  of your life   s been here.  Hurst Yes.  Finchum Good place.  Hurst Yes  You know there are bad places all over the world, and I   m sure there  were some bad times in Oklahoma right now, like the oil production. You  know, there is always good and bad wherever you go. You just live with it.  Finchum Well, anything else you can recall about OSU days? Oklahoma A M days  for you? Did it bother you when they changed the name?  Hurst No, it didn   t really. I had already, of course, finished. I think it was the  summer of 1957. Am I wrong?  Finchum No, you   re right.  30  Hurst When they changed the name because my husband had just finished. That   s  why I can remember it was    57. It   s a little bit more prestigious looking to  be called OSU than Oklahoma A M.  Finchum And from Aggies to Cowboys. And Pistol Pete? Was Pistol    no.  Hurst No, we didn   t have Pistol Pete. We did not have a mascot, or I don   t  remember ever seeing one.  Finchum Well, they were Tigers     Hurst Tigers were initially     Finchum Probably when your mother was.  Hurst Probably was, but I don   t ever remember seeing, hearing her talk about it.  She kept her yearbook.  Finchum In    56 was Vet Village still there?  Hurst Yes.  Finchum Was it?  Hurst Yes. We had friends living in Vet Village. Yes.  Finchum I   m not entirely sure where that was, but I   ve seen pictures.  Hurst Well, you know where the stadium is? It   s northwest of there. North of what  is   what   s that runs on the North side of stadium? I know it     Finchum There is Hall of Fame?  Hurst No.  Finchum McElroy?  Hurst No. It   s south of there, right by the stadium  Finchum The only thing I can think of is Athletic Road or Farm Road. I don   t know.  I   ll look at a map.  Hurst No, just immediately north. Right there within this many feet of the stadium.  It was north. You would go   you know where the Vet school is? I would  say that it is approximately due north of there. Maybe not quite that far west.  31  Finchum Kind of between Washington Street and     Hurst Well, it was     Finchum     Western.  Hurst I think it was close to Washington Street. I can   t remember now what street  you took to get up there.  Finchum It was just little shacks or was it     Hurst No. It was two-story buildings that military personnel had been involved  with.  Finchum Okay.  Hurst They were being converted, I assume, into apartments. Up and down, first  and second floor. That   s what I remember friends living in.  Finchum Do you remember who the president of the University was when you were  there?  Hurst Yes, Willham.  Finchum Okay.  Hurst And Willham was from the same county, grew up in the same county where  I did. I assume he went to Oklahoma A M as an ag major.  Finchum I would assume.  Hurst That is what I remember.  Finchum That   s pretty good.  Hurst Yeah.  Finchum And the Library wasn   t there. The Union had a bowling alley?  Hurst The bowling alley was in the basement of the Student Union. I am assuming  that they still have one there, I don   t know.  Finchum They took it out.  Hurst They took it out.  32  Finchum When they remodeled they took it out.  Hurst Well, they have had several remodeling jobs.  Finchum Beautiful building still though, I think. Anything else you want to add? I will  make you sing the song   Hurst (Laughs)  Finchum The alma mater song?  Hurst I don   t remember anything else, you know. You   ve had to jog my memory  about some of that.  Finchum You   ve done good. You ate in the cafeteria a lot and it was in the dorm?  Hurst In the dorm.  Finchum In the dorm.  Hurst I think most, best I recall, that most every dorm had cafeterias, their own  cafeteria.  Finchum Was the food pretty good?  Hurst As I recall, it must not have been bad.  Finchum No chicken-fried steak?  Hurst No, probably not  (Laughter) But I don   t remember disliking it, so it must  have been okay. It might not have been Mother   s cooking, but     Finchum It was included in your tuition or did you have to pay separate for it? It may  have been part of your room and board?  Hurst We paid room and board.  Finchum Yeah, okay.  Hurst I don   t remember close to even what that was. I just remembered how much  the tuition was.  Finchum You wouldn   t have had to pay each time you went through the line then?  Hurst No, huh-uh. No, we paid room and board.  33  Finchum Did it have an elevator? Did Willard have an elevator?  Hurst Oh yes  I think it did. It seems like they did.  Finchum Probably did. It wasn   t the one with the iron, the old gates that would come  across it?  Hurst Well, (laughs) it could have been but I don   t remember. I don   t remember.  Finchum You lived on the first floor, you didn   t need it.  Hurst I didn   t need it. I have a picture in my mind where it was located.  Finchum How would you do your laundry?  Hurst We went to the basement. They had laundry facilities in the basement. Uh-huh.  Finchum You had to have money for that     Hurst You had to have money for that. Between the first and, the first floor was  divided with a living area. I mean, the meeting area or something.  Finchum The parlor?  Hurst Parlor type, between the two wings.  Finchum Well once you got married, where did you live?  Hurst The first house we lived in was on Hester and Sixth. There was an apartment  house on the south side of Sixth and Hester. Then after I went to work for  the gas company   we didn   t have a TV. I hadn   t been used to one at home  anyway. It was kind of dingy. I moved that summer, with the help of some  friends from the gas company, to an apartment upstairs in a little, it   s still  there. You know where West Street is, from Eskimo Joes? Half a block up  the street is an apartment house. It was a lower and a top. I moved into the  top one, top floor. It seems like to me, I bought a used TV. My husband had  gone, as part of his classwork I guess, I   m not positive about that, to south  Texas to work for Magnolia Oil Company. There   s a college there. I can   t  right off hand remember the name of the college. I was there all summer by  myself. I got tired of living in that dingy apartment. You probably know  where that apartment house is.  Finchum Yeah, I got an idea.  34  Hurst Of course, Eskimo Joes wasn   t there either way back then. If you   re  standing there in front of Eskimo Joes, you can see it.  Finchum I   ll pay attention the next time I   m up Duck Street. I   ll look.  Hurst Yes.  Finchum Close enough you could walk to work, and close enough for him to walk to  campus if he had to go?  Hurst Yes. It worked out fine.  Finchum Overall, been a pretty good life?  Hurst Oh yes, uh-huh. There is up and downs in any life, but most of it   s been  good.  Finchum No regrets having gone to Oklahoma A M?  Hurst Oh goodness no  No. As you can see, it   s on the curb, it   s on the front of the  house, and it   s in there in living room, and     Finchum And    Go Pokes.     Hurst That   s right   Finchum I think that   s probably a good way to end, don   t you?  Hurst Yes, I do.  Finchum Well, thank you for sharing with us.  Hurst Thank you for coming.  -------  -------   
