 Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Today is January 5, 2007. We are very privileged to be in Tulsa,  Oklahoma at the University Village, and we   re here today to talk to a  very special alumni of Oklahoma A M College, Miss Elsie Chase  Kilpatrick.  You graduated from OAMC in what year?  1927.  1927. And we   d like to ask you some questions about what life was like  for you as a student at OAMC in those years.  Okay.  Do you have a particular story you want to start off by telling us about?  Well the one that I forgot last time about how it was against the rules to  ride in a car. Well, I like to tell that because I like to shock freshmen in  college now. I couldn   t ride in a car.  At OAMC during the time  Kilpatrick attended, it was against the rules for women to ride in cars   But we couldn   t, and my husband had a brother that was on the faculty  there and he had a car. Well, there was an airplane out in the country  taking people up for a ride. Well I   d never been in an airplane so he said,     I   ll get the car and we   ll ride out in the country and take a ride in the  airplane.    Well, okay. I knew I shouldn   t ride in that car, but I went out  and got in and the Dean of Women saw me. (Laughter)  Oh. (Laughter)  So she reported it, and I was called up for the   I don   t know what they  called it, the committee, and they didn   t know what to do with me. I had  5  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  made a remark a week before,    Here I am about to graduate and I never  got in trouble.    I was a senior at that time, and I rode in a car. So  anyway, they sent me to the discipline committee, and they didn   t know  what to do with me so they sent me to the President. (Laughter)  Oh, and that would have been President Knapp?  Yeah. I don   t think he knew what to do with me. (Laughter) So he said,     Okay, you   re disciplined  on probation  for a week past and a few days  in front.    He really didn   t put any pressure on me. So anyway that was  the discipline.  Oh. Well, did you get to go up in the airplane?  No, it wasn   t even there.  Oh it wasn   t? (Laughter) Oh my goodness, after all that trouble.  After all that, I didn   t know.  You didn   t get to see the airplane or ride in the airplane.  No. I saw my first airplane when I was in grade school. It flew over, and  that was the first time I   d ever seen an airplane, but by that time people  were taking rides in the airplane and I thought I   d like to do it, too. But it  got me in trouble.  You mentioned the Dean of Women, and it looks like that might have  been Mrs. Freeman. Was it Blanche Freeman?  She was in charge of the dormitory. That I know. I   ve forgotten what her  name was.  Did you know her very well at all?  No.  Just hadn   t ever had any encounters with her?  No.  So were you frightened about what was going to happen since you knew  you broke the rule?  No, not particularly. I thought,    I   m so near graduating, they can   t stop  me.    (Laughter)  6  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Oh goodness. Well that is a good story and just for riding in a car, I  mean, who would think nowadays that students could get in trouble for  riding in a car?  They are so amazed and I say,    Well, you   re living in a time   other  things are gonna be as archaic as that. For instance, when was the first  time you would wear pants to church? When was the first time you  could cut your hair?  Well let   s talk about clothes a little bit. When you went to school at  OAMC in 1923, I understand that you ordered a trunk from Sears  (Laughter) to take your things to school in.  Yes, and I ordered too big. I still have it.  You do? So when that trunk came in     Two dresses   two new dresses.  You had two new dresses for going to school.  And a big trunk.  Oh you did? (Laughter) Well how many pair of shoes did you have?  Well, normally you just had two. You had work shoes and dress shoes,  and every style has come back and I went all these years I was hoping  button-top shoes would     Button-top shoes?  Yeah, button-top shoes. But it hasn   t.  So if you just had two dresses for school, then you just had to change     Well, I had two new ones.  Two new dresses, okay. How did you do your laundry? When I looked  through the pictures in the yearbook, all of the women just looked so  beautiful and they are dressed so attractively. Did you have a place in  the dormitory where you lived, for laundry?  I   m trying to think. I don   t remember. Well, we had everyday clothes  and then Sunday clothes, and probably we had on Sunday clothes.  Oh, okay. And you lived in the dormitory when you were a student?  7  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Yes.  What do you remember about where you lived?  Well, when I first went, I wasn   t in the dormitory. My brother and I  rented a room.  Oh.  But then I moved in the dormitory and it was then called Women   s  Building, but I was the first one to move into Jessie Thatcher Hall.  Oh.  And she was the first woman to graduate at Oklahoma State. Did you  know that?  Yes.  Well, there was a dormitory named after her, and I moved in there. I was  the first one in that dormitory.  So it was a brand new dormitory?  Brand new dormitory.  That must have been a nice feeling to be able to be one of the first  students there.  Well, I don   t know. At that age you just take things for granted.  Oh do you? (Laughter) And did you have roommates when you were in  school?  Yeah.  And were they people that you already knew?  Well, one time, my friend Inez McSpadden, which is the one that named  her son Bennett, was my roommate because she was from Ralston too.  And Ralston was your hometown?  Yeah. It   s out from Pawnee.  And was it pretty far away from the campus? How did you get to school  8  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  when you first went there? Did your parents take you to college?  Yeah.  They did? And so they had a car. Your brother, did your brother have a  car?  No.  No, so your parents took you to college and dropped you off. What was  that like, your first day?  Well, I thought about that. We didn   t get any help much from our  parents. We were sort   ve on our own. I   ve thought about it, and then I  thought,    Well, they didn   t have it.    My mother was always very much  for education and so my brothers went to college and I went to college,  too. I just went. I didn   t have to take any examinations. I didn   t have to  learn a language. None of the things that they do now.  So it   s really changed a lot, hasn   t it?  Yeah. Well, you know, when they talk about poor education   I went to  a one-room grade school and I did go to high school. In fact, I rode a  horse to high school two years and then I drove a Ford car one year.  You did? To high school?  But anyway I made the remark,    Pioneers    children and gold miners     children have something in common. They learned to do a lot with a  little.     That   s changed, hasn   t it? How was it that people paid for school back  then when you were growing up? You said that your brothers went to  college, too. Did any of you have to work to help pay for     Yeah.     college? You did? Okay, let   s talk a little bit about your freshman year  at OAMC. We talked about how your parents took you to school and  dropped you off. What else do you remember about that very first year of  college?  Well, I liked it.  Were there a lot of activities that you could participate in?  9  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Well, pretty much. What do they call that building now where students  go?  The student union?  The student union. It wasn   t there when I went to college.  Was there another place that the students could go?  Not much.  One of the things that I saw in reading the article about you was that  you were involved in the Women   s Athletic Association, and I haven   t  talked to anybody before that was a part of that, and I think that   s a very  interesting thing. Could you tell me a little bit about the Women   s  Athletic Association?  Well, I don   t know. It wasn   t a national one. (Laughs)  And what did you all do in there? Did you have sports that you could  play?  No.  Did you have basketball or     Well, to get the O-sweater you had to make so many teams. You had to  captain a team, and well   just be persistent. And I never was an  outstanding athlete. I just kind of liked it, and I made the hockey team  and the soccer team and the rifle team. But I was just there. I wasn   t the  top one, except in the rifle. I started to tell you that about the other girl  and we were competing for high honors, and she finally won.  Oh.  So a few years ago, I think it was in The O   Collegian, there was an  article about her. She was an architectural student and she went on to be  a prominent bridge builder.  Oh.  So I said,    I   m sorry I didn   t look up her address because she   s had that  gun long enough.    Now it   s my turn.  Oh. (Laughter) Was riflery your favorite activity?  10  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Yes, I think it was.  And     I guess because that was one that I was tops in and when it came to these  others I was just on the team.  So what was it like with the riflery? Did you all have shooting  competitions?  Well, we shot intercollegiate.  You did?  Yeah. People say girls didn   t do that then, but Iowa State has always  been a competitor of Oklahoma State in the wrestling, so it   s been a  competitor of Oklahoma State, Iowa State, in other sports. So I  remember we shot against them.  Did you travel to other schools for these competitions sometimes or did  they come to OAMC?  I think they came there. I don   t remember going to     You don   t remember going on a bus or anything for the competitions?  Did people come and watch when you had the competitions?  I don   t remember. (Laughs)  Well, that   s okay. Now back to the O-sweater. I   ve seen a picture of you  there with your O-sweater. Did you keep that sweater a long time?  I did. Because you know sweaters shrink, and of course I grew.  Oh. (Laughter)  Anyway, I have a granddaughter who   s quite athletic so I gave it to her.  You know, it comes to a time in your life you   ve got to get rid of all the  things that you   ve hoarded, and so I gave it to her. And my husband had  an O-sweater, too. He was on the wrestling team.  Oh, so he got his O-sweater for being a wrestler?  Yes.  Do you think it was harder for the women to get the O-sweater than for  11  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  the men to?  Well, they had different qualifications I know.  And, from what I understand, you had to participate in different sports?  Yeah.  And you had to get a certain number of points     That   s it.     to get the sweater. And so was it your senior year when you finally  were able to get the sweater?  Now you   re taxing my brain.  I   m sorry. (Laughter)  I don   t remember when I got that sweater.  Okay.  I just remember getting it.  I   ll bet you were excited when you got it, weren   t you?  Yeah.  Yeah, that would have been quite exciting.  Because not too many girls got it.  No, I looked and there was a picture in the yearbook, and it looked like  there were hundreds of women that were in the athletic association, but  there were only maybe six or seven women that got that O-sweater every  year     I know.     and you were one of those very few.  I was one of them.  That was a wonderful accomplishment.  12  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Well, some people didn   t think so. Girls are not supposed to be athletic.  (Laughs)  Oh, is that what a lot of people thought? So they didn   t think that was a  good accomplishment then?  Oh, I don   t know. I guess they did.  I   ll bet some of the girls did though, that really wanted to get there and  earn that sweater. That would have been really, really special. What  color was that sweater?  Same as it is now, orange and black.  It was orange and black? So the sweater was black. Was the    O     orange? It was? Because I had never seen one so I didn   t know, and in  the picture I couldn   t tell what color the    O    was.  The    O    was orange. The sweater is black.  Okay.  Talking about the picture, when I was a senior I had always been  accused of smiling too much. So when they were gonna take my senior  picture I said,    This is gonna be one picture where I don   t smile.     (Laughter) You know if you smile too much, people don   t take you  serious.  Oh, is that right?  That   s right.  Oh. So you wanted to be careful about that then?  Yeah, I wanted to be a dignified senior.  Oh, well okay. What was your degree in that you earned?  I got a degree in home economics and two minors. One was physical  education and one was elementary education.  That   s quite an accomplishment, too. Do you remember anything about  your classes in particular or any of your professors?  I especially remember a home economics professor, Dr. something. I   ll  think of it in a minute.  13  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  What do you remember about that person   s class? Was it one of your  favorite classes?  Yeah.  And why is that? Why did you like that class?  Well, I guess I liked the teacher. She was an encourager.  And do you remember the laboratories or the practice house that you  all     Yeah.      had for the home economics school?  Yeah.  Can you tell me a little about that?  Well, we had to go there and do all the planning.  Planning for things like what?  Oh, diet and the kitchen and some of the running of the place.  Was that fun for you? Did you enjoy that?  Yes and no. There was one other girl there that was disobeying all the  rules and as my turn I kind of got after her.  Oh. (Laughter) Do you have any other memories about any of your  classes or what types of things that you learned when you were in school  that you kept using?  You know, I   ve thought about it. What did I learn in college? I don   t  remember anything I learned.  You don   t?  No. I remember being there, but to be specific, no.  So what are most of your college memories? The rifle team?  Yes.  14  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  And what about Homecoming? Did you remember Homecoming?  Yes.  Can you tell me any of your memories about Homecoming?  About mine or when I was there as a student?  When you were there as a student.  I just remember I said something about it later,    There were more people  at the Homecoming than there were students when I was there.     Oh, so it was a big tradition even back in the 1920   s then?  Well, 1930   s.  1930   s. Did you ever participate in the Homecoming parade? Did you  go and watch the parades when they had them?  I don   t remember them having them.  Okay. One of the things that I read about the rifle team was a reference  to the death legion and that the women had one of the best rifle teams in  the southwest.  We did have.  And that,    These girls have won many competitions with some of the  largest schools.     We did.  Did you have a coach for the rifle team?  Yeah, it was a master sergeant in the army.  A master sergeant in the army?  That, and see then we had a 30-30 rifle   that   s a big gun.  That is a big gun. Did the school provide the rifles for the team?  Yeah.  And did you have a lot of practices?  15  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Well, I say a lot. We had to practice, that I know.  If you wanted to practice on your own, would they let you do that? Or  did you just practice with the team?  Well, if you could schedule a date, they wouldn   t let you just go over  and have a gun.  Oh.  They had to have a certain amount of supervision.  And did you shoot at targets?  Oh yes, you know. Now I don   t know whether you   re interested in  this   you know how I shoot now?  No.  I shoot and then draw the circle around it.  (Laughter) So you always hit the target? (Laughter)  Yeah.  Well, I think that   s pretty smart. (Laughter)  One time I hit the target, but now I   it   d be the center of it and you   d  shoot and then draw the circle around it.  Oh, so that would be your way to hit the target now?  Yeah.  Well, that   s pretty good. Did you keep up any shooting after you were  married? Any riflery at all? Did your children ever see you shoot a  rifle?  No.  They never did?  No, they grew up in New Jersey.  So you never had occasion to use a rifle anymore after that. How did  you learn to use the rifle?  16  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Well, I had two brothers who did. In fact, I have a picture of one of my  brothers handing me a rifle. And, I   ve thought about that since. You  know, I think that is one of the heredities, eye-hand coordination. I think  they had it. I think I had it. And so I   ve thought about it since. I   ll admit  I accomplished something, but I had inherited, too.  When you said that your brother taught you how to use the rifle, you had  one when you were a child   your family had one?  Yeah, but I had two brothers who graduated from A M. My younger  brother and I graduated the same year together. Now I don   t know  whether you want to hear this story or not     Well, I do. (Laughter)  It   s always kind of funny. My one younger brother and I always were  pretty close and, in fact, I did very little with my sister, but my brother     and he pulled a lot of stunts on me, too     And he was over at the gym one night and he called up and he said,    Do  you and your friend have a date?    He said,    I   ve got a fella over here  who   s very lonesome.    So he brought him over. Well from then on, my  husband-to-be camped my trail and I wasn   t particularly interested in  him. I was interested in somebody else at the time. So after I started  going with him, my brother called me up one day and he said,    I   m  gonna come over and talk to you.    He said,    If you marry that guy all  right, and if you don   t all right, and I   m gonna wash my hands of the  whole thing right now.    (Laughter) So I assured him that I was not  gonna marry that guy.  Oh. And you had already made up your mind, hadn   t you?  Well, I didn   t think I was then.  What changed your mind?  Well now, I guess because he was persistent and now this is something  that I thought I   d tell to some girls to not be jealous of their mother-in-law.  Oh.  Because when he wanted me to go up home with him one time, when we  got there his mother had chickens and produced eggs, so she wanted him  to go down and look at her chicken house. I remember them walking off  to see that chicken house holding hands and I thought   you know, I  17  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  think that   s the one thing that sort of changed my mind about him.  Oh.  In other words, if a fella is good to his mother, he   s probably gonna be  good to his wife.  That   s a wonderful observation.  So I know a lot of girls would have been jealous, but I was not jealous. I  liked it.  Well, I think that was a good story there about going to their house and  seeing how he treated his mother.  Yeah.  Yeah. How did you get to the house? Did Lester have a car?  No, his brother had the car.  His brother had the car so did Lester borrow his brother   s car?  Yeah. It was his brother   s car that got me in trouble.  Oh, it was. That   s right. (Laughter) It was that same car? (Laughter)  Oh. One of the things that I saw in the yearbook that happened your  second year of college was that they started trying to build a new  stadium for football.  Yeah.  Do you remember anything about that at all, or any of the buildings that  were being built?  Well, I remember them doing it and I especially remember because my  one brother was a main wrestler when he was in college.  And what was his name?  Ward.  Ward. .  And so I used to tell people,    Look up his history, not mine    because he  really started   he and this friend of his both went off to war. The other  18  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  fella had his foot shot off, and he always walked with a limp. So when  war was over, my brother was the wrestler and he was captain of the  football team. That   s one of those caricatures from Pawnee   made up,  so it   s someplace around. I had an OSU magazine with that in it, but I  don   t know where it is.  Did you go watch your brother   s wrestling matches?  No, because he was a number of years ahead of me.  What about your brother that was there when you were a student? Did  you go watch his wrestling matches?  Yeah.  Were there a lot of people that would go and support the wrestling team  and watch them?  It depended on what school it was. Iowa State, yes.  Oh, that was the big rival?  In fact, I have something and I think I   ve offered to give it to the  museum of wrestlers and my husband had written on it the score of that  year.  You must know a lot about wrestling. Your husband wrestled and your  brothers wrestled.  Well, as much as you can just looking on. (Laughter) I didn   t  particularly like it.  You didn   t? Why not?  I don   t know. Just something about it, throwing each other around. Now  I believe in athletics, but I don   t like football.  You don   t like football?  I don   t see any sense in that laying down and getting up.  Oh.  And that   s all it is.  So what was your favorite sport?  19  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Baseball.  Baseball. And did you play baseball when you were in school?  Yeah.  You did?  I was a pitcher on the girls    team.  You were a pitcher on the girls    team. Well, did you all throw   was it  fast pitch baseball?  They wouldn   t let me, but I wanted to. They made you do that  underhand thing and I think it   s awkward. I don   t know why they said  you had to do it.  Oh.  So people can throw it back   fast ball   but I learned to pitch overhand  and that   s     Who taught you how to pitch a baseball?  I guess playing with my brothers.  And did you have your own baseball glove? Was that something you  would borrow from your brother or     No.  No?  You just caught it the best you could.  Oh. You didn   t have a glove at all? You just had to use your bare  hands     Yeah.     to catch the baseball? I   ll bet that hurt sometimes.  Well, depending on who the pitcher was.  Oh. (Laughter) When you played baseball on the women   s    team, did  you ladies wear dresses to play baseball in or could you wear pants?  20  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  We wore overalls.  You did?  That was before you could wear pants.  But you could wear overalls when you were playing sports?  And you   d wear knickers. I have a picture. I have knickers someplace.  And what kind of shoes did you wear, just your everyday shoes?  Yeah.  I think that   s something that the athletes today don   t even think about.  They have special shoes for this and that and the other. They have all of  their different uniforms, and so it was different for you then.  Yeah.  And these are the kind of things that it   s good for us to hear about so we  can preserve those memories of what it was like.  When I went to shoot the rifle, of course you had to lay down to shoot.  Oh, you did? I didn   t even know that.  Well you could   there were some knee positions, but mostly it was, you  know, you laid down and shot at the target.  Did you wear overalls for that as well?  Yeah.  When you played baseball, was your baseball field the same size as what  the boys played on?  As I remember it, yeah.  It wasn   t any different? Okay. I   m just looking at my notes here about  when I was looking through the yearbooks about some of the things that  were happening when you were a student there, and one of the things I  wanted to ask you about was the school mascot. What was the school  mascot?  It was the same as it is now. In fact, the fella that they use as a model  21  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  was on campus one time.  And that would be Pistol Pete?  Yeah.  Did you see him when he was on campus?  Yeah, they just announced he was chosen and he was on campus then.  Oh, he was?  But it was just to let us look at him.  Oh. (Laughter) What did he look like?  Like the pictures.  He did? He had a cowboy hat and     No, he didn   t.  He didn   t have a cowboy hat?  No.  Did he have long braids?  No.  I must be thinking of something else then. So you had the same mascot  that you have now.  In fact, he was made official then.  And he was made official, okay. So you remember that?  Pistol Packing     Oh.  What   s his name, Pistol Packing what?  Pistol Pete.  Yeah, Pistol Packing Pete.  22  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Pistol Packing Pete. Do you remember anything about the library when  you were a student?  Well, we had a library, but not as extensive as it is now.  What was the library like when you were there? Did you ever go study in  the library?  Yeah.  You did?  We couldn   t turn on a computer like you can now and bring up all these  things. You had to go research it out yourself.  How did you do that? Were there     Well, there was always     Lots of books and things that you had to look things up in? The students  sometimes don   t understand that that   s how people used to do their  research in the library. Were there rules in the library that you had to  follow?  Yeah, you get too loud you got kicked out.  Oh you did? Did you ever get kicked out of the library?  No, I never was   I had a lot of things, but I wasn   t loud.  Were there any other rules that they had on campus that you had to be  careful about or in the dormitory? What were some of the rules the girls  had?  Oh, one of the things that used to make me awful mad   we had to turn  off our lights at 10:00, and we   d look across to the boys    dormitory and  all the lights were on, and we didn   t like that.  Why did they get to stay up later?  Why a lot of things? (Laughter) Why the double standard? It hasn   t  changed since when I was a student way back because I remember when  I was sixteen, I said,    Someday I   m gonna change all these rules.    But it  hasn   t changed a bit.  Were there any other rules that you remember? What time did the girls  23  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  have to be back in the dormitory? Did they come and check to see if you  were in your rooms?  Yeah.  They did?  I think it was 10:00.  Do you remember any other rules on campus? We talked about the car  and now we heard about the lights being out and you had to be in your  room.  Yeah, they   d check your room.  Oh, they did?  But then they had a student going around and checking to see if you  were in.  It sounds like you were a pretty good student and you didn   t get in  trouble...  I didn   t.     except for that one time.  That one time.  Oh.  But I got in it then. (Laughter)  Okay.  I was not an    A    student.  Did you have to study a lot?  Yes.  But did you make time for fun, too?  Oh, yes.  What did you like to do for fun when you were in school? Were there  24  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  dances?  Yeah, but a good Baptist girl didn   t dance.  A good Baptist girl didn   t dance? Could you go watch?  I don   t think I ever     You don   t think you ever watched either?  But I just know that was one of the rules, and so today if a religion has  too many rules, I   ll shy away from it.  You do?  Because you can get so bound in rules that you forget anything else. But  I do know that that was when I was growing up as an early teenager  ministers would preach a sermon that Paul said,    Don   t cut your hair.     Oh.  Well, I had long braids so I decided one day I was gonna read the Bible,  and I picked it up and I just turned it automatically and guess what I  turned it to?  To Paul?  To Paul, and he didn   t say,    Don   t cut your hair.    He said,    Don   t braid  your hair.     Oh.  Oh, and I had a hard time proving it.  So did you cut your hair after you read that?  No, I didn   t cut my hair, but I had long braids and Paul said,    Don   t  braid your hair.     Oh.  If you   re gonna go by all the rules    (Laughter)  Did you have long hair when you were in college?  Yeah.  25  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  You did?  Probably down to my waist.  Down to your waist. I   ll bet it was beautiful hair. I   ve seen some of the  pictures and     I did have nice hair, and I had a lot of red in my hair.  You did?  And being busty and sort of red-headed    (Laughter)  What did that mean?  It means that the boys went by you and did this.  Kilpatrick gestures   (Laughter)  In some of the yearbook pictures I saw, it looked like you women had  little waves or kind of curls in     Oh yes, that   s called a Marcel.  A Marcel?  They had an iron that they   you went and had your hair Marcelled.  And how often did you have to do that?  Oh, not     Maybe every week or something?  Well, if you could. If you were gonna go to something special, but of  course you had to pay for it.  Did it hurt?  No. No.  No? Was it fun to go have your hair done?  I didn   t mind. In fact, one of the girls that were here had done some  makeovers. She had a curling iron and she kind of put a wave in my hair  and I said,    Reminds me of the olden days.    And I was looking at your  glasses     26  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Oh?  Just like my grandmother   s.  Oh. (Laughs) Yes, I just have to use these for reading so that   s why  they   re down.  But the small lens and that middle all the way around them   I   ve always  been sorry I didn   t keep her glasses.  Oh.  Because everything we think is new, ain   t. (Laughter)  No. Well, you have a little authority to say that, don   t you? How old are  you right now?  I   m a hundred plus.  A hundred plus. When is your birthday?  29th of May.  May 29th.  That   s when they had that big party for me down in   where was it?   Sue Bennett joins interview   Just down the hall? Your hundredth birthday party?  No, the one     Oh, at the historical center.  It was really quite a party.  Well tell me about that.  Well, there   s a society that looks after those and keeps tabs of them, and  he came to see me and invited all the people a hundred and gonna be a  hundred, and they had the Governor there and the Mayor there.  Oh.  And standing room only.  27  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Bennett  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Oh, how exciting.  I invited Sue and she said she couldn   t come, and I said,    Well, tell your  husband he can come.    And they had to stand up.  Oh.  What did he say about that?  It was great. It was really well done. They interviewed the people, and  it   s amazing, you know, the stories   just what you   re doing now. You  know, so it was great. It was just packed, totally packed.  And this is Sue Bennett, who   s talking on the camera too, and Sue is a  good friend of Elsie   s.  Always getting me in spots.  Sue is always getting you in spots.  Good spots. (Laughter)  How did you meet Sue?  Well, we were in the same Sunday School class, and the first time she  kind of put me on the spot I had sort of a little collection of recipes. My  daughter put them together and published them, and I gave her one. And  I went to Sunday School one day and here she was   Sue had them  copied and was passing them out, and I thought,    I hope they don   t think  I did that.    (Laughter) See what I mean? She   s always putting me on the  spot.  Tell me a little bit about your daughter. Her name is Maritha?  Yeah. Well, I had two sons and a daughter. One of my sons died, and my  daughter was an easy child to rear.  Was she your third child?  Yeah.  So she was the baby of the family?  My second son had a hard time at junior high school. They started  bullying him, and I don   t think he ever quite got over it.  28  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Oh.  You know, it destroys their ego somehow.  Well, I   m sorry about that.  And I always thought,    Well, why didn   t I do something about it?    And  I thought,    Well, what could I have done anyhow?     And you were a teacher, weren   t you?  Yeah, but I wasn   t in his school.  What did you teach?  A little of everything.  You did?  That   s how I got educated. Well   now, that   s something. I taught one  year in Oklahoma at Mounds.  At Mounds, Oklahoma?  Yeah, down the road. Well, it was what they expect of a new, young  teacher right out of the school. I had everything, but anyway, it was such  a traumatic experience I said,    Well, if this is school teaching, being  married couldn   t be any worse so I   ll just get married.     Oh. (Laughter)  So I got married, but that was pretty tough, too. (Laughter)  Did you coach when you were teaching?  I had to coach and teach seventh grade. And I hadn   t studied the seventh  grade books since I was in seventh grade     So you didn   t have time for much else then, did you?  I sure didn   t.  But Lester was waiting for you to get married?  Well, yes, because he had gone to Kansas State and got his master   s  degree and then he went to New York. He had a job.  29  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  And so were you writing letters to each other?  Well, we kind of kept up with each other. And that   s another crazy thing  I did. I got on the train and went all the way to New York by myself.  You did? To see Lester?  Yeah, to get married.  To get married. Oh my. What did your family think about that?  Well     Were they happy for you?  Not particularly.  They weren   t?  No. I thought they thought they were just getting rid of me.  Oh. (Laughter)  Well, not quite like that but     One of the things that I was wondering about was when you were a  student and you were in an organization called Pi Zeta Kappa. Can you  tell me a little bit about that?  Well, it   s a religious organization.  And was it for women to be in?  Yeah, well there was one for the men, it had another name     And what did you do? Did you have Bible studies?  We did, and we had to memorize so many Scriptures.  Oh.  It was sort of run by students.  Was it a nice organization to be in?  It was.  30  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  And, also, the YWCA. Were you in the YWCA, Young Women   s Christian  Association?  Not much.  No? What about the debate and oratorical club?  Well, I guess maybe I belonged to it, but I never was much of a debater.  What was graduation day like when you graduated from Oklahoma  A M? Do you remember graduation day?  Oh, yeah.  Did your family come     Yeah.     to see you graduate? And you said your brother graduated the same  year that you did?  Yeah. That   s another thing. This is getting off track. My brother and I  were about two and a half years apart. I was four years older than my  sister. I don   t know how that happened but we ended up in school  together, my brother and I, and my sister was four years behind me.  Now I didn   t skip any grades.  Did your brother skip any grades?  No, and I know the year that we moved, he was probably out of school a  year.  Oh.  Put him behind.  Was it nice having your brother in school there? You were good friends  you said, so     Well, yes.  Did you see him a lot then?  Well, I saw him occasionally.  I   ll bet that was nice to know that you had a family member close by like  31  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  that.  We graduated from college together.  What did he get a degree in?  Poultry science.  Kilpatrick is talking about the major of Lester, her  husband   In poultry science?  That   s when he  Lester  went to Kansas State.  Oh.  I like to tell this story. He doesn   t like me to tell it. You know, they  didn   t use to be able to tell them   the sex of chickens, new chickens.  You can   t tell until the roosters begin to get a crown and then you know  they   re a rooster. Well, when you   re raising poultry for meat and eggs,  you want to separate them out pretty soon, and I remember him saying  that was one of the things he was doing on his master   s degree, and he  said,    I don   t know how many chicken behinds I   ve looked at.     (Laughter)  Was that Lester     Yeah.      that was working on the master   s degree?  Yeah.  Oh. (Laughter) That   s a funny story.  But they   ve learned since then. A Japanese person discovered how to  tell, and it   s common practice now.  Oh.  They like to separate them out as young chickens.  I didn   t know that. That   s interesting. Do you remember any kind of  picnics or banquets or anything on graduation day? No?Did you have  graduation outside?  I don   t think so.  32  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Well, what other stories do you have that you might want to share with  me today?  Well, I remember especially women getting to vote.  You do? Well, tell me a little about that.  Well, the great big reason they weren   t supposed to get to vote was  because they weren   t smart enough. They had to ask their husband how  to do it.  Oh my.  Well, anyway   to bring that one up to date, when I was in college I  remember asking,    Why aren   t there more colored athletes on teams?     You know what the average answer was?  No.  They aren   t good enough.  Oh.  Now that   s what?  (Laughs) It   s changed, hasn   t it?  It   s funny because most of the good athletes are colored.  Do you remember when Oklahoma became a state? You were just born  right around then, weren   t you? And what was it you told me that your  sister used to say?  Oh, she used to say she was an Oklahoman and I was just an Indian     Oh.     because I was born in Indian territory.  You were born in Indian territory.  So the next year we become a state and then she was born in 1908 and I  was born in    06, see?  Oh yes. What was it like growing up in Ralston, Oklahoma?  33  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Well, it was pretty rural.  Was your dad a farmer?  Yes.  Did all of the kids help out on the farm?  Yes. And I always knew I didn   t want to live on a farm. I never liked to  get dirt under my nails.  Oh you didn   t? So you weren   t interested in becoming a farmer?  No.  Or a farmer   s wife?  No.  Well that   s an interesting story.  Because my sister could dig a hole in the ground and pat it, and a plant  grew. If I did that, it   d die.  Oh, it would? (Laughs)  But I was a lot better cook than she was.  Well, you must be if you had those recipes that were collected and     That   s just kind of like my thing, I hear them and I keep it.  That   s nice for your family that you have that. Where does your  daughter live?  San Antonio, Texas.  That   s a nice city. I lived down there for about a year.  I don   t care much for it.  Oh you don   t?  You   d just as well go to Mexico.  Do you still have family in Oklahoma?  34  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Not anymore. When I moved back here I did, but my brother and my  sister and my mother have all died since. I   m the only one left.  What made you and Lester decide to move to Tulsa?  Well, back in those days we had a house with quite a lot of ground  around it, and he was getting too tired of keeping that up.  And where was that house?  In Virginia.  In Virginia?  We decided to move. We moved from New Jersey to Virginia. But that  land there was a half an acre and it took a lot of care. So back then there  weren   t many places you could go to retire like there is now.  So after you married, you never moved back to Oklahoma until Lester  retired and you retired from teaching? Were you glad to come back to  Oklahoma?  Oh, yes and no.  Why is that?  Well, people in the north think they can   t read and write. (Laughter)  Oh. (Laughter)  No, I   m just telling that because that was true, but then, on the other  hand, people from Oklahoma talked about the    damn Yankee.     Yes. (Laughs)  It   s a two-way street.  Yes. And Oklahoma   s a young state compared to the states in the north,  isn   t it? Virginia   s having their 400-year centennial, and we   re having  our 100-year centennial. So you have a nice life here in Tulsa at  University Village?  Well, I   ve had to get used to it. You know, when you go to a retirement  place it   s a whole new life.  You   ve had a very long, rich and full life, haven   t you?  35  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Bennett  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Well, I   ve had my troubles, too.  Well     Ask her some of her favorite sayings.  What are some of your favorite sayings?  (Laughs) You know, the funny thing that   s happened recently   the  children of some of these people want to come over and visit me and I  laughed. I said,    A nine year old wants to stay all night with a ninety  year old.     Oh.  So I was teaching her some of my sayings. Well, then the mother of two  boys knew about it, so she brought them over so I taught them some  sayings.  You did? (Laughter)  And none of them are original with me. They   re copycats. Now my  husband had original ones, but I didn   t.  What are some of your sayings?  All right.    Words have wings. Once you let    em go, you can   t get    em  back.    I think that   s a good one.  I like that one.     Our life is like a fragrance. It lives on after we are gone.     That   s nice.  One that one of my grandsons likes,    Relationships. Relationships are  like plants. If you don   t water    em and tend    em, they die.     Oh. There   s a lot of wisdom in your sayings.  One that was put in my head when I was a child   two of them, because  I had a big head. I still have a big head. And I never could just go to the  store and buy a hat. They were always too small. Well, this is one my  brother   s and my sister said to me,    Little head, little wed. Big head, not  a bed.    (Laughter) Well, that was said to me so much I didn   t forget that  one. And then another one   I like to whistle and I whistled a lot. Well,  36  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Bennett  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  they said another saying to me,    A whistling girl and a crowing hen is  sure to come to some bad end.     Oh. (Laughter)  So I didn   t forget that one. (Laughter) It was said to me enough. I   ve  said recently,    What happens to a whistling girl? What happens to a  crowing hen? Now I know what happens to a crowing hen. She gets her  head chopped off.    (Laughter) Is that enough?  Oh, You can just tell me some more if you want to. (Laughter)  Sue, are any of the copies of those recipes up here back of me?  Let   s see.  This is the one that she copied and handed out to my Sunday School  class.  Kilpatrick shows the interviewers the recipes   Oh.  Just because I gave it to her. (Laughter) See what I mean, getting me  into something?  You know what, Elsie? I have a copy at home. Why don   t I make one  and send it to them? Would that work?  Okay.  Okay, that would be     But I thought there was some there.  Well, there   s one, but I was thinking of the whole package of them.  Oh well. Because my daughter made an outline of it and copied them.  Who made this? I think your daughter sent this to Sue. Yeah, the  timeline.    The Life and Times of Elsie Chase Kirkpatrick.    Who put that  together?  Well, she did   my daughter did most of it. Another person who had a  computer looked it up.  Oh.  37  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  People will say,    Nothing happened in my lifetime.    Well, you   d be  surprised   your lifetime. How many wars, how many inventions and if  you put when you were born, the dates down the side and then fill it in,  you   re gonna be surprised at what you   ve lived through.  Well, it   s very interesting, and it is something that we don   t stop and  think about. Do you think everyone should take the time to do something  like this?  That   s what I tell them because sooner or later, somebody   s gonna be  asking you, or your kids, and you say,    I don   t know.     Yeah, and this one even has the pictures on the back page.  Oh, that   s my brother and the rifle.  That   s your brother, Lee, with the rifle, and you, and then this is you in  your O-sweater.  And that   s when I was riding a horse.  Riding a horse to school.  I   ve gone from the covered wagon to the walk on the moon.  Yes. That is something. Is there anything in particular, in looking back  over the years that just amazes you now that you see or that you never  would have thought of?  Well, I remember my grandmother saying,    What   s the world    a coming  to?    And I said,    I   ll never say that.    (Laughter) But there are some  things that sort of bother me, and one of them is most of our kids have  too much. What are they gonna do if we have another Depression?  Because it could   I remember the Depression. Men lined up around the  block for a dollar an hour job.  Those were hard times, weren   t they?  Now I never had to live through it. My husband always had a job. We  were poor, but not that poor. But when I see the disregard that kids have  for clothes   and one of these people that comes here has a couple of  sons and she   s recently talked about paying a hundred dollars for a  game, and I told her that was not being a good mother.  Well, and with your background in education and teaching, then I think  you know a lot about what   s good for children and what isn   t.  38  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  They give them too much. You teach them a regard for some things. If  they get everything they want when they want it, they think that life   s  gonna be like that, and it ain   t. Excuse my word.  That   s okay. (Laughs) Is that one of the ways that you tried to raise  your children?  Well, they had to work and they had to keep their room clean, and they  didn   t go out to play until they had done it, so     So they had rules they had to follow.  They had rules. And I think kids like it.  I think it   s good for them, too.  Do you happen to have any teenagers?  Well, I actually have a grandson. I have two sons and I have a grandson,  and he lives pretty close to here. He   ll be a year old in February, so I     my husband and I raised two boys, and they both went to Oklahoma  State University.  Well one of my sons went there.  Oh, he did?  In fact, he hurt his knees as a wrestler.  Oh.  So now I think he   s worse off than I am.  Where does he live?  He lives in South Carolina.  Oh.  And my daughter lives in Texas. And one of my granddaughters lives in  Tortola. Now do you know where that is?  No, ma   am, I don   t.  I didn   t expect you to. (Laughter) I didn   t either, but it   s a Caribbean  island close to Saint John   s and Saint Thomas.  39  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Oh.  But it   s British     Oh it is?     so her kids have a dual citizenship.  I think I read something about one of your birthdays and something that  you did special to celebrate. Was it your ninetieth birthday?  Oh, I don   t know. (Laughs)  Did you go snorkeling or something like that?  I heard that I did. I don   t remember it. (Laughter)  Do you have anything else that you want to share with us before we stop  recording? And we   d be happy to come back and get some more stories  from you sometime if you think of some more.  Well, I   m just trying to think.  Let   s go back to being a student at Oklahoma A M College, and maybe  what that meant to you or what it did for you. How do you feel about  Oklahoma A M College?  Well, I liked it and when I think about those days, I got in as a college  student when I didn   t have a lot of the requirements that they have now.  In other words, I can   t speak another language. You know, I   ve thought  about that. Why is it so many of children my age got through school?  And now there were some dropouts. In fact, that girl that was on that  horse with me, we rode a horse to high school     In this picture?  Yeah. And she didn   t finish high school, and that was a disappointment  to me. But the love bug bit her.  I thank you very much for letting us come and interview you today for  the O-State Stories oral history project of the OSU Library. We  appreciate your time and all of your wonderful stories. This has been a  privilege.  As I   ve said before, if you want to know the history of OSU, you should  look up my family   s story and my husband   s family   s story. Now there   s  40  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  Kilpatrick  Neurohr  something else. I was one of six, and five of us graduated from college.  My husband was one of eight   nine   well, one died   eight   and six of  them graduated from college, and we all went to college on a shoestring.  I think that   s remarkable that that many people in your families     But people said,    Why   d you do it?    Well, we both happened to have a  mother that believed in education, and we just grew up   that   s what we  were supposed to do.  It was expected of you. You accomplished a lot. You accomplished a lot  in your time at OAMC, in your activities that you were in, and then also  with your life and all of the experiences and things that you have done,  and it   s just been very special to be here today.  Well, thank you.  Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
