 Sherman and I   m with the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program  of the Oklahoma State University Library . We   re  here in Gallagher-Iba  arena  today interviewing Roy Peterson, pitcher  for the 1959 Championship Cowboy baseball team. First off, I   m going  to ask you questions about your pre-OSU experiences and then get into  your OSU experiences. First off, where did you grow up?  I grew up in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Went through the Tulsa Public School  system and graduated from Roy Rogers in 1955.  When did you first become a baseball player? Did you play little  league?  Yes.  What was that experience like? How old were you when you first played  the game?  Oh gee, I think probably nine years old. I played in the summer leagues  actually until I went to college.  Did you play for your high school team?  Yes.  Was that spring baseball or fall baseball?  Well, they only had spring baseball.  Okay. What positions did you play in high school?  I was a pitcher primarily but played third base and we won the state  5  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  championship my junior year.  Can you share a little about that experience?  Well, I played against several of the boys that came on to Oklahoma  State or to OU. We played Chickasha in the semi-finals and then  Oklahoma City Harding in the finals our junior year. Then senior year  we played in the regional finals against Tulsa Central who ended up  winning the state championship and we would   ve won the game that  year too, but the second baseman dropped a pop fly, kept us out of the  championship game. So I   m still kind of hacked off about that.  Fifty-plus years later. (Laughter)  Fifty-four, but who   s counting?  Where was that state championship game played?  It was played in Chickasha, Oklahoma.  Did they host the tournament or was     Yes, it was their turn.  Okay and back then the tournament rotated every year?  Yeah, they moved it around the state.  Did you pitch in that championship?  Well, as a junior I pitched in the semi-final game against Chickasha.  Their catcher was a guy named Duke Holderman who came and caught  for his two older brothers that played at Oklahoma State   Oklahoma  A M, as a matter of fact. When I came here it was Oklahoma A M but  we changed the name when I was a sophomore. We got tired of the  A M deal.  Now were you recruited to come to Oklahoma State, or how did that  process work?  Not really. I made the All-State team as a senior and Oklahoma A M  was the number one rated baseball team in the nation. They had won  twenty-two in a row, went to Omaha to the National Championship and  they lost in the finals in the spring of    55. It was the year I was a senior  in high school. They came to Tulsa and played the University of Tulsa  and I went out and watched them. Then that summer I went up to  6  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Coffeyville, Kansas and played in the Ban Johnson League, which was a  semi-pro league for college boys. My manager or coach was Carl  Pevehouse who was an ex-OSU pitcher. He knew Coach Greene real  well and I assume he contacted Coach Greene when I started pitching  for him and I got a letter and a scholarship offer from Oklahoma State  that summer.  Oh wow. Now were you planning to go to college before the  scholarship?  I planned on it, yeah, but nobody had really asked me. My feelings were  hurt but I just went ahead and kept playing.  (Laughter) Now were you expected to go to college just for academic  reasons before?  No, I think I probably would   ve tried to play pro-baseball. No one in my  family had ever gone to college, so there was not a big push for college.  I went to college primarily to play baseball. Then I grew to appreciate it  after I got here.  Can you tell me your impressions of Oklahoma State University when  you first stepped onto campus?  Wasn   t even in existence. Oklahoma A M was about 8,500 students,  but once again, they were the number one rated baseball team in the  country and so that was the attraction. I wanted to play for the best. They  were considered at that time to be at the top of the heap and have been  for almost all that time.  Oh yes, definitely. Now when you were named All-State was there an  All-Star Tournament?  That was the one year, they had been playing it before then and they  took it back up the next year. But in the    55 year they didn   t have a  baseball game. I think most of the kids were out playing semi-pro ball  somewhere anyways so you   d have to come back to do it, but we  probably would   ve done  it  if they   d had a game.  Now how many  of your high school teammates  played college  baseball?  I can   t think of one right now.  What years did you attend Oklahoma A M/OSU?  7  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  From    55 to 1959. I actually graduated in the spring of    60.  What was your major?  Education.  I was  going to be a coach.  Is that the main reason?  Yeah, I wanted to stay in athletics.  What emphasis did you focus on in your education?  Staying eligible. (Laughter)  I mean your major, was it physical education?  Yes.  Did you have any classes with Mr. Iba?  No, I didn   t. In fact, he didn   t teach any classes when I was here. He was  athletic director and basketball coach. He didn   t have any classes. None  of the coaches did any   oh they would have a Theory of Basketball, I  guess. Sam Aubrey probably taught that but I never took it.  Do you remember any specific professors that you had in the College of  Education?  Let   s see, Dr. Colvin was a   he actually wasn   t a doctor, but everybody  called him that. But he actually didn   t have a PhD, he told me later. He  was the head of the Physical Education Department at that time. I can   t  think of their names right now.  Where did you live when you were attending school here?  I lived across the street in Bennett Hall on the second floor and the next  year I was on the second floor and the next year I went to the fourth  floor     Moving up in the world.  Yeah, that   s right, we got a suite. We had three of us combined and we  had beds in one room and had a little study room. On the fourth floor  we   d see everything. We   d see the baseball field. It was a great life.  Nice. Do you have any stories that you could share about the dorm life?  8  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Oh, gee whiz. Probably not anything for this that would serve any useful  purpose.  We   re just here to collect stories, too. Who were your roommates?  Well, the first year I roomed with Bob Warner, who was the first  baseman on the Oklahoma City team, Northeast I think it was, that we  beat in the championship game when I was a junior. I roomed with him.  He was a first baseman and a left-handed pitcher. I roomed with him  again the second year and then the third year Bob and I roomed with a  guy named Larry Allen from Duncan. Then senior year I lived off-campus  with Roy Carver and Jim Fleming, who were basketball players.  We lived down by Stout Hall. It was closer to the girls so it was better  than having to get all the way across campus.  (Laughter) Now was it a requirement that the baseball team live  together as roommates or was it just circumstance?  No, because at that time they didn   t have an athletic dorm. All the  athletes were in Bennett Hall. Most of the upperclassman on West  Bennett and the freshmen sometimes over at East Bennett. They didn   t  build the Iba Athletic dorm until later. So no, we didn   t have an athletic  dorm and all the athletes that were not married or living off-campus  were in Bennett.  How did you come to know the two members of the basketball team?  We were all in the same dorm and there was a great camaraderie. The  football players, everybody, we were all together. The football players  were always the trouble makers.  Why   s that?  It   s just their nature. But the basketball players and all of us were all  right there together. We ate together three times a day so you get to  know them and meet them and run with them. We knew a lot of them  from high school. I mean, at that time probably 75  of the athletes were  from Oklahoma. Now probably 10  of the athletes are from Oklahoma.  I think we   ve still got a good majority.  Do we? That   d be interesting. That   d be an interesting little study.  Depends on the sport though. Now besides baseball, what other  activities did you do here on campus?  9  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Intramural. We had intramural football teams, intramural basketball  teams.  That was allowed?  Yeah. The athletes were playing on the intramural teams, yeah.  Oh, I did not know that. Because nowadays I   m sure that wouldn   t be  allowed.  Yeah. But to answer the question, yes we did. We used to have Monday  night    they   d have the girl   s dorms   because there was no co-ed, you  guys got the good life. We had boys on this side of campus and the girls  on the other side of campus. On Monday nights in the girl   s dorms  they   d have a sock hop or a DJ, well they   d just play music, and you   d  go dance and meet folks. It was part of a socializing, bonding concept.  Did you do any dating on campus?  There were a couple of guys I liked real well. (Laughter) No, yeah I  dated all the way through college, yeah. You want me to talk about the  girls, is that part of the deal?  Sure, if you want to. (Laughter) These guys would want to     Well, I met his mother here so, you know.  How   d you meet her?  It   s an interesting story, I   m glad you brought that up. A girl I went to  high school with, a year behind me, her name was Ann Adams and she  was a Pi Phi. She was talking to a girl over there, her freshman pledge. I  went over to talk to Ann Adams and she introduced me to this girl who  later became my wife and we   ve been married for forty-two years. The  girl that introduced us got married to a Stillwater boy named Lynn Pitch.  Her name turned to Ann Pitch and she was the first OSU women   s golf  coach. So see, it   s just a small world.  What was dating life like?  Well, normally Friday nights you   d go to a movie. We had one movie  house down there, I guess it   s still there. Go up to the Student Union on  the fourth floor there, they   d have the jukebox going, you   d dance up  there. If you could talk the girl into going out to Boomer to see the  submarine races you tried to sell that deal.  10  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  The submarine races?  Submarine   you   ve never gone out to see the submarine races out  there?  No.  Oh, it was a big deal. Big deal. A lot of times you couldn   t see the  submarines but you had to stay there a long time.  Could you describe that? Is this for     Well, you   d be sitting looking out at the lake, and you   d put your arm  around her and you   d say,    Did you see that submarine over there?     (Laughter) They never saw the submarines, but that happens in the best  of worlds. Or you   d go out to Lake Carl Blackwell in the spring. We  didn   t get to do much of that in the baseball days because we were  playing on the weekends, Friday and Saturday nights. We didn   t really  do much dating during the week because they locked the dorms at 9  o   clock. If the girls couldn   t get back by 9, they couldn   t get in the  dorms. Sometimes they   d have to crawl in the windows. So it was  entirely different than you spoiled kids of today.  Now, you were here when the name change occurred.  That   s correct.  What was your opinion about that?  I thought it was neat. We had a big election and you had two choices     well there might   ve been more choices but I think it was Oklahoma State  or stay Oklahoma A M. I don   t remember what the percentages were  but it was student vote and we voted   they might   ve changed it anyway,  you know how legislature works, but anyway. But they did give us the  ability to vote on it.  Do you consider yourself an Aggie or a Cowboy?  I think really both. I think a Cowboy more. I mean we acknowledge  Aggie, that   s not a derogatory term, kind of like Okie, I don   t think  that   s a derogatory term.  And you were also here when Pistol Pete came into existence.  He was actually there, alive, the real Pistol Pete.  11  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Do you have any Pistol Pete stories you can share?  Just watching him ride around in the stagecoach hanging on for his life  going around the football field on the track, that   s all I can remember.  So what years did you play baseball here at Oklahoma State?  Let   s see, that would   ve been    57 season,    58, and    59.  Now was this all Big Eight or were you still in the Missouri Valley?  We were in the Missouri Valley my sophomore year and I think we only  played about fifteen games because if you got rain they didn   t make up  games. In fact, we went up to play Bradley for the Missouri Valley  championship and it rained so they flipped a coin to see who went to  Omaha. I mean, that   s how it was. And then the next year they did the  same thing when we were the first year in the Big Eight. We went to  Columbia, Missouri, whoever won that series at Missouri, whoever won  two out of three, would go to Omaha. Well, we lost the first game and it  snowed that night and we didn   t play, snowed and rained, so it was only  one game and today they would make those games up, they would play  them. But we got in the car and drove back to Stillwater. You know,  played one game so they got to   and they were national runner-ups that  year in    58. Then in    59, of course, we won that championship.  Now was there competition difference? What league had the better  competition?  I think University of Texas in the Southwest Conference had a strong  program. The West Coast, Arizona, University of Arizona and Southern  Cal were coming on. Of course, we were the first year they had the Big  Eight. They had the Big Seven, which Oklahoma was in, and then when  we came in it became the Big Eight. I would say OU probably had a  strong baseball program until we got in and then we just started kicking  their butt regularly.  That   s always a good thing.  Yeah, it is a good thing.  Now was there a noticeable difference between playing the champion,  say playing Bradley versus playing Missouri. Was there a difference  between the two leagues?  No, I don   t think so. You have to play well to win, I don   t care who  you   re playing. So it doesn   t make any difference.  12  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Did you guys drive yourselves to the games?  Oh, yeah.  What positions did you play here?  I just pitched.  No fielding positions?  Well, the pitcher has to field. Sometimes they hit them back at you and  you need to get them.  Were workouts underneath Gallagher Hall here?  Well, in the winter, yeah, before you could get outside. It was too cold in  January and February to go out so we   d go down to the basement.  What was that like?  Well, it was an experience, because it was all that red clay and red dirt.  And the track team would be working out running laps, where you see at  the weight room you see that black track  today , that was red clay.  Track guys are running around that thing, baseball guys are inside the  posts. Those great big posts are every twenty feet or whatever they are.  So we   ve got one batting cage and a light at each end. It was great being  a pitcher because the hitters could never hit you down there. You could  just smoke it by them. But then once they got out in the sunlight, then it  was a new game.  How often did you practice down there? Like what was your season?  Normally I think we   d start, I don   t remember, probably 3 o   clock and  we   d practice down there for two, two and a half  hours  until everybody  hit and all the pitchers that needed to pitch pitched and all the hitters that  needed to hit hit. It was primarily a hitting and pitching operation.  What time of year did your first official practice start?  When the second semester would start. Normally in January sometime,  seemed like, was when we   d start. We   d play down there, if we could  get a day to go outside, we   d go outside but if not    and that was in    57.  That was the first year of the new park. The year before that they played  in one of the city parks.  Was it Couch Park?  13  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  I don   t know, I think so. That sounds like that might be it.  So you came and you first played in Couch Park.  No. The first year I was here as a freshman they opened that park here.  The year before I got here, they had played in Stillwater somewhere.  Couch Park maybe.  What was the stadium called before it was called Allie Reynolds?  Oh gee, it was called the ballpark. I don   t know that it had a name. They  didn   t put Allie Reynolds on it until after we were gone. In the    60s I  think sometime maybe, maybe even the    70s. I don   t know when they  did it.  What was that stadium like? Obviously it didn   t have all the seating that  it does today.  Yeah, we dressed here in Gallagher Hall down here in the south end.  The southeast corner was the baseball locker room. We   d dress there and  walk down to the ballpark when they opened it and that was pretty much  the routine. They had bleachers, they were not stands. They were just  regular bleachers, like steel bleachers. But we had big crowds, I mean  probably had 2,000 or 3,000. I think we had better crowds than were  there today, I know that. But we were one of the top clubs in the country  so they   d come. Everybody likes to watch a winner. More fun.  Yes, of course. Now how did you travel? Getting back to     Well, in those days   you   ll love this story. My first road trip with  Oklahoma A M we were going to Houston. And we got about halfway,  we   re still in Oklahoma, we were down   no I-35 in those days   we   re  going down 75 probably. An old farmer in his pickup pulled out right in  front of us and we sideswiped and we went in the ditch. So there were  four of us in the car, nobody got hurt, we got out. Here came Coach  Greene in his car with two guys and another. He said,    Anybody hurt?     We said,    No.    He said,    Alright, we   ll see you later.    (Laughter) He  drove off and Bobby Sloan, a boy from Stillwater and I, we hitchhiked  back to Stillwater to get my car and turned around and went back and  picked up the other two guys.  Mayo Hemperly, it was his car, he was a senior, I was a sophomore.  Sophomores didn   t drive. Seniors drove because you got about ten,  twelve cents a mile. So you make a road trip, you might make seventy,  eighty bucks. Gas was a quarter a gallon or whatever it was. You could  make money if you were one of the selected guys to drive. And it was  14  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  legal. But anyway, I picked up the other guys and I had a    56 Bel Air  Chevrolet, two-tone green, and spoke wheels. We took off and we were  the first car to Oberholtzer Hall in Houston. Coach Greene walks in and  we were sitting there in the lobby waiting on him. He   d left us  hitchhiking back to Stillwater to get my car. We didn   t stop to eat. We  were trying to catch up. They stopped to eat and we drove by them.  They were in Huntsville I guess, and we kept on rolling. So we were the  first car. So Coach Greene said,    What the hell did you guys do? Fly?     But like I said, different, different times.  So there was no team bus or anything?  No team bus, no van. It was players    cars and Coach Greene   s car. And  the guys that had to ride with Coach Greene and his wife, I mean that  was the ultimate put-down if you had to ride with Coach Greene in his  car, because there was no talking, no radio, no nothing. He always had  the guys that   if you started, you didn   t have to ride with him. It was the  guys that didn   t start so he could keep his thumb on them.  So I imagine you   ve made some pretty long road trips then.  Houston was probably the longest trip. Of course, we drove to Omaha in     59. I mean we played all of our games within the Big Eight and the  Southwest Conference, which included Arkansas. So that was pretty  much it, Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas was it. All of  our games were in that area.  So longest trip would probably be up to Columbia then?  Yeah, probably. Lincoln, maybe. And down to Houston, that was pretty  much it.  Now besides Toby Greene being the quiet chauffeur, what else can you  recall about Coach Toby Greene?  Well, I mean, he was a man of few words. He   s from the old-school.  That if you started and were one of his players he didn   t ever give you  any problems. The ones he always picked on were the guys that weren   t  playing. Hollering at them, yelling at them, it was a lot of fun.  Did you get razzed then?  He never said anything negative to me.  Okay, so why was that the case then?  15  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Because I was producing. I was playing. I started twenty-two games and  won seventeen times, so he liked that. So did I.  What were his coaching strengths?  He was a great recruiter. He didn   t coach, I mean, from the standpoint of  telling you how to grab the bat or how to grab a pitch or how to do this. I  think he was a great evaluator of talent and it was a big deal to get to  come to Oklahoma State. So he got really good   we probably had half a  dozen guys every year sign, because then you could sign any time you  wanted to out of high school. So we had guys coming through all the  time, didn   t recruit any junior college guys. We were talking today of  our National Championship team, four were from Oklahoma City  Capitol Hill, two from Tulsa Will Rogers, two from Stillwater, and two  boys from Texas, and that was primarily our team. Which when you  look at the team today, I mean, California, Pennsylvania, South  Carolina, Florida. So it   s just a different animal.  So boys wanted to come here to play?  Yeah, if you get   I mean, Oklahoma State was one of probably half a  dozen schools that offered baseball scholarships. Nobody else gave  baseball scholarships. And so to get a scholarship to play baseball, there  probably weren   t ten, fifteen programs in the country that had any.  They   d give a lot of half scholarships or they   d give half a dozen. But  we had twenty-five or thirty guys on scholarship, which was a big deal.  That   s why you could really pick and choose and get boys in here.  So that was the draw then, free school basically?  Well scholarship, yeah. If you think a scholarship would make a  difference where you went to school, pay at one place or they pay you to  go.  Were you recruited anywhere else or just Oklahoma State?  Not really. Well, the University of Tulsa offered me a scholarship. I was  the first baseball scholarship they offered. They didn   t have any  scholarship boys until then. They started and they built a real good  program behind us because a lot of Tulsa boys were going to OU and  OSU. In fact, the    55 team that won twenty-two in a row, number one in  the nation that was favored to win the National Championship, you go  around that team and once again they were almost all Oklahoma boys.  Maybe one or two Texas boys.  Can you tell me about the    58 season before we get into the    59 season?  16  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Yeah, the    58 season we had a real good ball club and it was one of  those deals that I mean we played in the Big Eight. We played all the  upper-echelon teams, meaning you have a round robin schedule. But  Missouri and Oklahoma State went down to the last series, as I said  earlier, and the winner of the two out of three series was going to go to  Omaha. We had played all the upper-echelon teams and got rained out  on all the lower-echelon teams. Missouri, on the other hand, the same  weekends we were playing top teams, they were playing the lower  teams. And they played them, they didn   t play us. I think they got rained  out in the OU series, so of the top half of the conference Missouri didn   t  play anybody.  I don   t know what the year was, when Gary Ward had one of his big  teams the only year the NCAA and it   s always been a double-elimination  tournament,    78 or whatever the year was, Oklahoma State  was undefeated and Georgia had lost a game. Because they wanted to  televise the College World Series, the television networks didn   t want a  double elimination. They wanted to do one game and have a winner. So  Georgia played Oklahoma State in the championship game. Georgia  won. So they both had one loss. Georgia wins the National  Championship and OSU second. So they changed   there was so much  aggravation.  Was Missouri a good team though?  Well Missouri had two or three guys that I played against in pro ball that  year. They had a good team. But I don   t think they would   ve been tied  with us going into that last series had they had to play us three times,  play OU three times, and whoever else they didn   t play.  So was that a major disappointment?  Yeah, I think it was kind of frustrating. But going to the National  Championship game or the tournament in Omaha was not as big as it is  now. They didn   t televise it. I mean OSU with Bill Platt was one of the  few radio stations even broadcasting the games. Nobody filmed them, no  one did. You can   t go back and see any of those games because they  were not on tape, they were just broadcasted. But OSU was  one  of the  eight schools there. I think there were only two, I don   t remember.  Maybe Arizona was broadcasting their games back but nobody else.  So did not making it to the National Tournament provide motivation for  you guys coming into the    59 season?  Well, I don   t remember that specifically being a big item. I mean, we  knew we had a good ball club coming back and you   re playing to win.  17  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Getting to those tournaments, it   s more a result of what you do that gets  you there than you   re setting out at day one saying,    Gee, I want to go to  Omaha.    You want to win this series. When you go to Houston to open  the season   we   d always go down and play University of Houston and  Rice and Sam Houston and Texas Lutheran or play someone down there  in the south. You always wanted to win that next series. Then you get  into the Big Eight. Of course, we always wanted to beat Oklahoma, that  was a big deal. And the end result was you end up qualifying to go to  Omaha. But I don   t think then it was   I mean it   s just a lot bigger deal  now because it   s so much harder to get there. Because in the Big Eight,  you won, you went to Omaha. Now you win the Big XII, you   ve got to  go to a Regional and then a Super Regional before you get to Omaha.  So what were the team   s expectations coming into the    59 season?  Well, I think that we wanted to win the Big Eight. I think that was our  goal and aspiration. We knew that we had a real good pitching staff. We  knew that we were going to be very competitive. And we won twenty-seven  out of thirty-two games, so we expected to do well and we did do  well.  What was your performance like during the year? What was your  pitching record?  Okay, well my senior year I was nine and two. We won twenty-seven  games, so I won a third of them if you look at them that way. But I  didn   t think of it that way, once again, you go one game at a time. I think  the most satisfying deal at Omaha, I beat Penn State in the second game  of the series. I was the winning pitcher. Then we lost to Arizona the next  night and so there were three teams with one loss. There was Arizona,  there was Oklahoma State, there was Fresno State from the West Coast.  So they flipped a coin and Arizona won, so they sat out. We played  Fresno State with the winner going to play Arizona the next night. I  pitched against Fresno State in that game to put us into the National  Championship. We won four to nothing.  Did you pitch that night against Fresno State?  Yes, against Fresno State. I pitched nine innings, four hits got out. So  that put us into the Championship game.  During the World Series, did you have a day off between the Penn State  game and Fresno State?  I don   t remember. As a team, you mean?  18  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  No, you personally.  Well, yeah. I mean, we played what, five games? I pitched two of them.  So three games I didn   t play. Joel Horlen pitched two and he didn   t play  in three. Dick Soergel pitched two and he didn   t play in three. That   s  kind of the way it worked. I mean in those days, Joel Horlen, Dick  Soergel and I started every game of the season. Every game. And only  when we got to the final game against Arizona, I   d pitched the night  before, Horlen had pitched two nights before, and Soergel had pitched  three nights before. So a guy named Toby Bensinger started for the first  time in his career. He pitched the first four or five innings and then Dick  Soergel, because he had had three days off, came in for relief and  pitched the last three innings. We won five to three. When we were  talking about it the other night, Lew Wade went to Tulsa Will Rogers a  year behind me. He came up for the only time that I think he batted all  year and got a pinch hit. Drove in the run that put us ahead that ended up  winning the game in the eighth inning or so, seventh or eighth inning.  The most memorable thing about it was that when the game was over,  Byron Bird, who was the trainer and the assistant coach, I mean he just  traveled with Toby Greene. No pitching coach, no hitting coach, no  offense coach, no defense coach. You had Toby Greene and Byron Bird  was the athletic trainer and he travelled with us because he and Toby  were good buddies. When we got the last out in the Arizona game, of  course Toby was about 5   6   , Byron lost a leg at  the Battle of  Saipan,  was a terrific football player in the early    40s, went into World War II,  lost a leg, came back and was a trainer, but he was a big broad-chested  guy. He reached over and put his arms around Toby, and picked him up  and hit his head in the concrete ceiling of the dugout and almost knocked  him out. I mean, Toby went rolling around, but everybody was very  excited so it was a lot of fun.  Were pitchers back then expected to pitch all nine innings?  Yeah, that was the deal. You didn   t have a set-up man or a long-relief  man, a closer, I mean we all pitched. I always pitched the Friday game,  that was the nine inning game, then we   d play a double-header on  Saturday and Joe and Dick Soergel would pitch the seven inning games  on the double-header. That   s the way we went all season long. Then on  the playoff all the games were nine innings.  Oh wow. What would happen if you would just get shelled?  Well, it just never happened.  You never got shelled?  19  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  I couldn   t tell you about that cause it never happened. I mean, like I say,  I don   t think that if you look back at the pitching records in the    59  season, I don   t think there was   I don   t remember five guys pitching all  year. The three of us pitched. Toby Bensinger pitched that last game.  I   m sure someone pitched in relief sometime during the season, but it  wasn   t very much when you look at the innings. I   m sure between Joe  and Dick and I, we pitched 99, 95 percent of the innings, I think, but I  could be wrong. The older I get, the better I am.  (Laughs) Completely different era then.  Yeah. Absolutely. Different game, everything was different.  Now did you guys play with aluminum bats?  No. Wood bats.  Wooden bats.  Wood bats, yeah. Those aluminum bats today, I mean, they whip that  ball out of there.  What was your ERA during that year?  I have no idea. One something I   m sure. Right at two maybe, I don   t  remember exactly. I know I went  the  first twenty or thirty innings and  hadn   t given   I shut out Houston, I shut out Rice. The first run I gave  up was in the OU game and I don   t remember if that was the third or  fourth game of the season. OU guys were making a big deal out of they  were ruining my ERA because I hadn   t been scored on yet. But they lost  anyway.  That   s good. Besides pitching, what were the other strengths of this  team?  Well, they were very good defensively, had a lot of speed, and we didn   t  really have power hitters. I mean we had no Incaviglia or anyone even  similar to that. But I mean it was a different   you just didn   t hit the  home runs. Of course, we didn   t do the weight training. I mean the guys  today are bigger and stronger. It   s just an entirely different scenario on  how you train. We did a lot of running. We were in shape but the idea  was you didn   t lift weights   basketball players didn   t lift, baseball  players didn   t lift, even the wrestlers didn   t lift. They   d wrestle and do  what you do but we didn   t have   we were talking about that today at the  weight room. In Gallagher Hall in 1959 there weren   t ten weights in this  whole building. And if there were, you   d have to go down to one of the  20  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  racquetball rooms to find them. They   d be in a corner over there in one  of the racquetball rooms.  So you ran a lot then?  Well, you   d run the steps at Gallagher Hall, up and down all the way  around. Or else in good weather you   d go out and run the stadium all the  way to the top and back down, up, and back on the stadium steps.  How often did you throw in the off season?  I didn   t throw at all in the off season.  Oh, really?  We went to football games and basketball games and  would  go out to  submarine races. (Laughter)  Now you guys won the Big Eight, right?  That   s correct.  Can you detail how you won the Big Eight for us?  As I recall it really wasn   t that close. I mean we got off fast. I know  Missouri came down here late in the season, we swept Missouri. I don   t  think it was even close in the Big Eight. I don   t recall anybody that was  giving us any real, you know. I mean we didn   t beat everybody ten to  nothing. We   d win them five to three, six to four, eight to five, whatever,  eight to two. You just have to look at the   but no one won a series from  us. I mean anybody in the Big Eight, we didn   t lose a series, I   m just  positive. Well, we only lost five games all year so you   re not going to  lose very many series if you only lose five games all year.  Did you pitch against OU?  Yes.  What was that performance like for you?  We stuck it to them. They were crying. They were begging for mercy  when it was over.  Did you also play Tulsa?  Yeah, we did play Tulsa. I played against a bunch of guys I went to high  21  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  school with and we played them in Driller Park there in Tulsa. We  kicked them two or three in a row. I don   t remember how many but it  wasn   t close.  Did that give you some gratification to play in your hometown?  Well yeah, you always like to get your buddies out. You always like to  do that. I mean it   s really funny, one of the guys I played with all the  way through high school, he was playing for Tulsa, his name was Rex  Graves and he got up and I saw him about six months ago. He said,     Man, I hit a line drive off you in that Tulsa game.    He called it a line  drive, I called it a pop-up. But I mean, I could see his eyes, he was  hanging on for dear life. He did not want to strike out.  Now once you won the Big Eight, you were seated in the National  Championship Tournament, right?  Right.  And that   s double-elimination?  That   s correct.  And there were eight teams up there?  That   s correct.  Can you remember the eight teams?  Well yeah, we played Arizona, and it was Arizona, Clemson, Penn State,  I think Minnesota, Fresno State and Arizona, I don   t know how many  that is. But we didn   t play a couple of teams, they were in the other  division, I think they must have seated them. We played Arizona in the  opening game and we won that game and we played Penn State the  second game, then we played   no, we didn   t do it that way because we  lost to Arizona in the third game so we wouldn   t have played them in the  first game. I don   t remember who we played in the first game.  Were you guys considered the favorites going into the tournament?  I don   t know. I think Arizona, they   d already won fifty games. We   d  only won twenty-two.  But they play in better weather so they get more games.  Yeah, they play all the time and we didn   t make up if you got a rainout.  22  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  We didn   t play but Friday and Saturday. We didn   t play Sunday. We  didn   t play anybody Monday other than the Houston trip. We   d go down  and play Houston on Friday and Saturday and Rice on Monday and  Tuesday and we   d come back.  Was that considered like the Spring Break trip?  Well, it wasn   t Spring Break, but it was the   I mean it was March, when  the season would start.  So obviously the NCAA World Series has changed since then. What was  that tournament like back then?  Well, it was a big deal. I mean they had I don   t know how many people.  There was the Triple A. We played in the Triple A stadium there where  they still play it today.  Yes, Rosenblatt Stadium.  Right. Rosenblatt, yeah. I   d say there was 10,000 seats and we had a  great following. As I recall they didn   t have all the seats out in the  outfield like they do now, but it was full.  Was there a lot of media coverage?  No, I wouldn   t say a whole lot. No television, because they were just  starting to do that stuff. I don   t know when they did the first television  game. As I said it was only   I know Bill Platt was there with the  Stillwater station and we were on the radio there, but there wasn   t  photographers lined up or a big well of them taking pictures, no. There  was none of that, no.  So was this your first experience in a Triple A stadium?  Yeah.  What was that experience?  Well, the Double A, we played Tulsa in a Double A stadium. I hadn   t  thought about it, but we hadn   t played other than when we played at  Rosenblatt, that was the first Triple A stadium.  Now did you have press coverage coming up besides the radio?  Well yeah, sure. The Tulsa World was there and I remember, oh gosh I  can   t remember Vince   s last name now but he wrote for The Daily  23  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Oklahoman, Bob Dillinger wrote for The Oklahoman, he was there. Bill  Connors with the Tulsa World and that was pretty much it. And The  O   Colly, the good O   Colly was there, they were faithful.  Now can you try to piece together your games that you pitched up there  for us?  Well, the Penn State game I don   t remember what the final score was,  I   m going to say it was about six to four, something like that, six to  three, but we beat them anyway. Then the second time I pitched was the  Fresno State game that put us into the Championship game.  What kind of pitcher were you? Were you a junk ball pitcher or a  fastball pitcher?  I was really a sinker-slider type pitcher.  Those were your two pitches?  We didn   t have guns so we didn   t know how fast you threw. But you  know, I would think probably throwing a ninety, around that range. And  had good control, didn   t walk very many guys. So that   s it, seventeen  and five, that   s all I can tell you.  Were you a strikeout pitcher?  Yeah, I got my fair share, probably seven, eight a game, something like  that.  As a pitcher, did you have any superstitions? Because baseball players  are known for their superstitions.  Well, no, I can   t think of any. I mean, you wouldn   t step on chalk line  going to the dugout back and forth, but that   s primarily it, jump over the  line for sure.  Did any of your teammates have any superstitions?  No, most of them weren   t smart enough to.  So you guys won. What was the reaction like? Did you have a  celebration back here in Stillwater?  Yeah, we got in our cars the next morning after we won and we had the  National Championship trophy and we drove back to Stillwater. They  had us stop I think in Ponca City and wait while they were getting a  24  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  bunch of people down to the Student Union and all that. So we had a  little parade down Main Street in Stillwater and the cars were honking  the horns and then up to the Student Union   because it was summer  school, I mean school was out, it was June, almost July when we got  back.  That   s right, because the World Series    Had you graduated then  already?  No, I graduated the following     Oh you graduated in    60.  Yeah, I came back. That fall I was a freshman backfield coach for the  freshman football team and stayed on scholarship an extra   because I  was going to coach so Cliff Speegle was the coach   well, Toby Greene  was one of the freshman coaches and Jack Baker and so anyway, we had  a lot of fun.  What happened after you graduated? What did you do afterwards? Did  you play minor league ball?  Yeah, I played six years in the Yankee organization, in the Cubs  organization. But in those days you just didn   t make any money. Mickey  Mantle was making  100,000 a year and now they   re making  25  million. Minimum salary for a big leaguer was seven grand. You know,  that   s not even  600 a month. I mean it   s just a different   there was  only sixteen major league clubs, now there   s thirty-two. So it   s just an  entirely different deal.  Where did you play minor league ball?  Oh gee whiz, Fargo, North Dakota; Binghamton, New York; Richmond,  Virginia; Amarillo, Texas; Arlington, Texas.  So after your minor league stints, what did you then do?  I tore my rotator cuff in    64 and I went back to Tulsa and got into  insurance, so I was in the insurance business for awhile, got into real  estate and things like that.  Speaking of, this is the fiftieth year anniversary of this, have you guys  met before as a team?  Yeah, they met at ten years and then they had a Hall of Fame when Dick  Soergel was inaugurated into the Hall of Fame, they gave us a  25  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  recognition as a    team of distinction,    they call it, for your National  Championship teams. That was 1999 and we had a good group there.  We   ve had a couple of guys pass away since then, but this is the third  time that I know that we   ve been at a meeting or been together.  Could   ve been more but that   s what I remember.  Is there still a lot of camaraderie between the fellows here?  Most of those guys I can   t stand. (Laughter) No, they   re all good guys.  We have a lot of fun.  Do you still keep in touch with them?  Yeah. Well, not as much as you   d like probably, but the last few years  we   ve had some of them have serious health problems, one thing or the  other, so you try to stay in better touch. When you   re raising your own  family and have got your own job challenges, you always consider them  friends, but you don   t see them or stay up with them like you would like  to. If they don   t live close or are not a part of your family, you kind of  lose touch. When you see them, it   s like it was just yesterday.  Yes. Same inside jokes and all that?  Yeah, that   s right. We   re still telling the same stories.  Good times. How do you think that this 1959 team would rate against  the other great OSU baseball teams?  Oh gosh, I would feel like we   d be competitive. I mean there   s so much  more special   baseball is just entirely different. I think that the pitchers  that we had, I mean Joel Horlen went on and won 116 games in the  major leagues. I think he could get these guys out today. I think I could  get these guys out today and I think we could hit with them. The game  hasn   t changed. It   s still you gotta throw strikes, you gotta catch the ball  when it   s hit. I think the difference between  then and now , we played  thirty-two games. How many you think OSU will play this year? If they  were to go to the National Championship, they   d probably play sixty.  That makes a big difference, you know, in playing that many ball games.  With almost anything you do, the more you do of it, the better you  should get at it.  What do you think of the proposed new stadium on campus?  Well, I think it   s great. I assume they   re doing it so they can have a  bigger seating capacity so they can get Regional games and Super  Regionals. If you don   t have the seats, you   re not going to get the  26  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  tournaments. If you don   t get the tournaments, you   re not going to be  able to recruit. My biggest disappointment I think in the stadium out  there today is that they don   t acknowledge anywhere out there the  accomplishments of the OSU baseball team over the history of the  program. I mean, that could be an intimidating thing when you go into a  place and you see that they   ve been to the National Championship  twenty-something times, and this school you   re playing has maybe never  been there or been once or twice. But you go into that stadium today and  look out there, you don   t see any recognition of the history and tradition  of the program. You go into Gallagher Hall, you see plenty of history  and tradition. I think that   s a real mistake that they don   t do that at the  baseball field. I hope the new stadium, it should be an intimidating     when you come to play Oklahoma State in baseball, it ought to be  intimidating. It should be intimidating when you go in there that you  know these guys are good. And one of the deals, when you look up there  and you see all of these teams that have gone to Omaha, that does  separate you. I just think that that   s really important. I mean when you  get out there, you still gotta play, you still gotta win     You just want it for a mental edge basically.      you gotta produce. But it should be; teams don   t like to come in and  play at Gallagher. We win games there in basketball because they   re  intimidated by the circumstances. The students and everybody get into it  and it has a very strong psychological impact. I don   t think we get that in  the baseball park today. I think with Gary Ward   and I   m not criticizing  the coach, I mean that   s not my point, but I know in the big days when  OSU was real strong in the    80s and    90s when Gary Ward was there, it  was an intimidating deal. When you went to play Oklahoma State you  knew you were probably going to get your butt kicked.  Have you been an avid Cowboy supporter since?  Sure, yeah. I mean I followed them, always. Been strong, glad to see the  football program going like it is. I think Gundy   s doing a great job. I  think he   s the kind of guy, because he bleeds orange, that it   s something  special to him and having Coach  Bill  Young come back and things like  that, I think that   s good stuff.  So are you planning on going to the spring game then?  Plan to. I personally want to thank Mr. Pickens. I mean what he and  Mike Holder have done for the University is unbelievable. We can  compete with anybody now. I think those two guys are the ones that are  responsible for it.  27  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Peterson  Sherman  Is there anything else that you would like to add to this?  Well, I   d like to get my check and I   ll get out of here. (Laughter) No,  that   s it. The only thing I   m disappointed you didn   t ask me is who was  the leading hitter in the 1959 College World Series?  And who would that be?  That was Roy Peterson, a good friend of mine.  What was your average then?  I don   t know, I think I was five for eight or something like that.  So did you pinch hit?  No, that was just in the games I played. I have to admit there was a little  blip over second base and I hit a ground ball to shortstop that hit a rock  that bounced over short stop. But they all count.  That   s right, a hit   s a hit.  A hit   s a hit, in the scorebook it says base hit. But I   m one of the few  guys that know that. I happened to see it in the book. I didn   t know it  until I looked in the book and it showed the leading hitters of the  College World Series for that year and there I was on top. I thought, gee  whiz, that   s neat and I didn   t even know it. (Laughter)  Well, thank you for your time and congratulations and welcome back to  campus.  All right, appreciate it. Thank you.  Thank you, sir.  -------  -------   
