 Neurohr  Allison  Okay, we   ll start with some introductions here. My name is Karen  Neurohr and I   m a librarian for the OSU Library. Today is October 20,  2007. We   re at the ConocoPhillips OSU Alumni Center and we have an  interview for the O-STATE Stories Oral History Project of the OSU  Library. Would you introduce yourself, please?  L.D. Allison from Claremore, Oklahoma.  Mr. Allison, what year did you graduate from OSU?  1957.  So this is a big year for your class isn   t it?  Yes, it is. It   s the 50th.  And what was your degree in?  Animal science.  And what made you decide to come to school at OSU?  I think one of the main reasons, I was in 4-H when I was in school and  had the opportunity to come to Oklahoma State as a 4-H Club member  to 4-H Roundup and that gave me some encouragement to come to  Oklahoma State.  I   ve heard of 4-H Roundup but I don   t know a lot about it so I   d like to  hear some more about that. How old were you when you started coming  to that?  Well I think I was a junior or a senior and we came up and gave  5  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  demonstrations that we had been practicing on in our club. And then it  was a contest up here for that.  Was it a statewide event?  Yes it was. Probably like 2,000 or so 4-H-ers from the state were here on  campus at that time.  And where did you stay for the 4-H Roundup?  We stayed in dorms. This was when school was out in the second or  third week in June and the dorms were available.  And do you remember what projects you demonstrated when you came?  Oh, one was cranking a tractor and a holding the crank the right way  without breaking your thumb. And another one was on planting  tomatoes. I drove a tractor one time in a tractor driving contest. I won  second, I think, and won a 4-H jacket.  Was that the blue jacket?  No, it was probably a green jacket.  Oh, a green jacket?  Yeah the blue is probably     The blue is probably FFA  Future Farmers of America . So were you in  FFA also?  No, at the school we went to they didn   t have FFA.  Okay.  I went to a small country school.  And what was the name of that school?  Irving High School and I graduated in    53 and the school closed in    55.  So it was a fairly small school.  Did your family have a farm or ranch?  Yes, three miles from school is where we lived. We lived on a farm.  6  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  So you ended up coming here because of 4-H Roundup.  That was a big part of the decision, yes.  Did you have family members that came to school here?  No, I was the only one. I have a younger brother but he didn   t come to  school here.  So tell me about what it was like to be in school here at OSU in the  1950   s.  Well it was quite a change from the school that I came from. But I was  fortunate to be able to stay with   my roommate was a neighbor about  two or three years older than I was and I got to stay with him. That really  helped me get acquainted here. I told his father that I would like to go to  OSU and he said,    Well I   ll take you if you want to go.    So when he  was going to bring his son up, his son was working in Cordell Hall so he  came up a couple of weeks ahead of school starting. I got to ride up with  them and he came by the house about five o   clock one morning. I had  one suitcase packed with a couple of pairs of khakis in it and some shirts  and that   s the way I came to OSU.  Were you pretty excited that day?  Oh yes, but I hadn   t even enrolled. I enrolled after I got here.  Did you know at that time what you wanted to study?  Pretty much. Being in 4-H I knew the county agent and one time I was at  Waurika, the county seat, one Saturday night and a group of farmers  were talking to him on the street. And they were asking all kinds of  questions about farming. I thought that was a pretty good deal to try to  be a county agent and that   s what I went to school for. That   s what I  turned out to be.  So you completed your bachelor   s degree and then did you start on a  master   s immediately?  No. After I finished the bachelor   s degree, I came back and did sixteen  hours before I went to work for extension. So I got sixteen hours on a  graduate degree. Then after working with the extension, they started  really encouraging a master   s degree. So I did finish my master   s degree.  And what is your master   s degree in?  7  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Rural adult education.  Rural adult education? I   m not sure that they still have that degree.  I   m not sure they do.  And so from there, you spent your career with the extension agents.  Yes.  And where did you work?  I worked in several counties. When I went to work, there was a training  program for extension. It was a three month program. I went to  Ardmore, Oklahoma and then I moved from there to Purcell as the 4-H  agent there. Then I was in the military for about a year and a half. Our  reserve unit was activated and so when I got out of the reserve I went to  Pawnee, Oklahoma. I was there for a short time and then I went to  Frederick. And from Frederick to Bartlesville and then from Bartlesville  to Claremore, which is where I stayed until I retired.  What were some of the classes that you took when you were studying  here? What classes or professors do you especially remember?  Oh, there were a lot of very good ones. Bob Totusek, Bob Noble. And I  was really fortunate I think, Fred LeCrone was my adviser. He really  took care of you, made sure you graduated, checked on you enough to  know that you were going to get through in time. So I really appreciated  having Fred LeCrone as an adviser.  You said he    checked on.    Did he just call you or watch for you and try  to talk to you? What do you mean by that exactly?  Well he would help you make out your classes you would take each  semester and guide you into what classes you needed. I felt like he was  really a friend and was looking after us here.  That   s nice to have a good professor like that.  And Randall Jones was a good one.  Do you have many memorable experiences in certain classes that stand  out in your mind? Things that happened or maybe a particular really  interesting unit of study that you just really loved or anything like that?  What was your favorite class?  8  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  It would be an animal science class. Production of animal science, I  think were some of my best classes.  And were those dealing with all different types of ranch and farm  animals?  Yes. In the field I went into as county agent, we need to know a wide  variety of things. So it included sheep production, dairy production,  swine production and beef production, too. So I enjoyed all of those  classes.  Did you have a favorite? My husband was a rancher and so cattle were  his thing and he would not have enjoyed sheep or the others.  Cattle was by far the most enjoyable for me.  Okay, so you moved into Cordell when you first came?  Yes. I moved into Cordell and the first couple of weeks were free  because we were up here before it was open. And I didn   t bring any  food. I actually didn   t bring hardly anything and my roommate had some  watermelon rind preserves and after about a day of him eating and me  not eating anything, he offered me some. So we ate those for the next  two weeks. His mother had made a lot of watermelon rind preserves and  I had never eaten those in my life. But we used those for the first two  weeks we were here. Then of course, the dorm provided food so that  took care of all that. I was here about five or six weeks. My roommate  said,    Did you pay your tuition? Your room and board?    And I said,    I  didn   t know anything about it.    He said,    You better go to Whitehurst  and get that done.    So I went over there and paid that.  Do you remember how much it was?  I don   t know. I   m think it would be in the range of  50 to  55 a month  and I worked in Cordell when I was here, about forty hours a week and  about .55 cents an hour.  What were you doing?  Maintenance work in the dorm   replacing light bulbs and working on  door closures and whatever the maintenance department had for us to  do. And it was a real opportunity because across the street was the  Animal Science building so we would do something in the morning  before we even went to class. Then we   d go to class and after class we  would come back and he would give us something to do. We   d do that  for 45 minutes or so and then go back to class. So it blended in real well  9  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  with going to school.  Was the supervisor you reported to in Cordell also?  Yes, yes.  And were there other people besides you that reported to him?  I guess there were eight to ten of us. So that was my job when I was  here.  So did you do that all four years?  Yes, yes.  So what was it like living in Cordell?  Oh I enjoyed it. I got to know a lot of boys and being in maintenance, I  was all over the building. So a lot of boys got to know me. So as I go  around the state, a lot of people remind me that I lived in Cordell Hall  and they remember me from there.  What was your room like?  Oh I had three or four different rooms. I didn   t stay in the same room all  the time. But it was really nice. We had steam heat which I had never  heard of before coming here. And it was very nice. When I came here, of  course, Bennett Hall was just completed and it was down the road a little  ways. So I went down there just to look at it.  Where was the dining hall in Cordell?  In the basement.  Oh it was? Was the food good?  Very good. One of the things I remember was French toast and I had  never had French toast and I got all excited and really enjoyed it. I guess  it   s just a piece of bread with some batter on it that   s fried up, but it was  great for me.  Do you remember anything else about the food or the kitchens or the  dining area?  No, but I   ll tell you I always cleaned my plate.  10  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Well I hope you didn   t have to eat watermelon rind preserves very much  after that?  That was just for the first two weeks.  Did you develop a dislike for it after having it so long?  Oh no. I would actually like to have a recipe and try to make some now.  Oh you would? What about your social life when you were in school?  Were there dances?  There might have been but I didn   t have much of a social life. I didn   t go  downtown to speak of much. I stayed in the dorm and studied or worked  and went through college that way. Actually, I didn   t go home but three  or four times a year, and would catch a ride home with somebody else  from my area.  How were your parents when you would go home? I bet they were happy  to see you.  Oh, I would guess so. Things went along well there so I was happy here.  Well, you   re back for Homecoming weekend this time. Do you come  back to Stillwater and OSU often?  Not real often and I   m really glad to be here this time. Things are so  nice. The campus is changing quite a bit and it   s good to see all the  changes that are taking place.  What is especially noticeable to you about what you see as far as the  changes? Or what do you like?  A lot of new buildings, especially the stadium is being changed a lot.  And the progress in the Athletic Village is going to be taking place. But  there are just a lot of new buildings that look real nice.  When you made your career as an extension agent, did you work with  young people at all?  Yes, for about the first half of my career was with 4-H youth. Then I  became county extension director and then it was with adults, taking  research from research stations to the producers in the county.  So did you bring the youth back for the 4-H Roundup?  11  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Several years. My mother was in 4-H and came to OSU with her 4-H  work oh, I   m guessing around    26 or    27. So she was here at that time.  You wonder a lot of times who packed your parachute   or in other  words, who helped you through life. And I think my 4-H leader in my  high school did. Then the neighbor that brought me to OSU, then my  advisors at OSU have really opened some doors for me.  Well when you were here in the    50s, what were the new buildings? You  mentioned Bennett Hall was new and it had just opened. What about  some of the other buildings that were new or had just opened within a  few years of when you came? The Student Union building?  The Student Union was being built. I went by there one day. I had just  been on campus a few weeks, and there was a neighbor of mine that was  here in school a couple of years ahead of me and he was working with  brick and handed a guy some bricks. I said,    What are you doing?    He  said,    I   ve got a job here helping them build the building.    And that was  the Library. And then later the Classroom Building was put in.  Did you spend a little time in the Library when you were in school?  Probably too little.  Probably too little? (Laughs) Well, a lot of your classes were hands-on  classes, I would imagine, with what you were studying, too.  Yes.  So, you said you didn   t have much of a social life particularly, but what  about music? Did you all have radios going and music playing and  things like that?  Yes. The only food I would bring into the dorm was popcorn. At night, I  would put on some popcorn and it would bring a lot of people down to  the room to share in the popcorn.  Well you know, now we have microwave popcorn so how did you make  popcorn in the 1950s?  Well I had a popcorn popper and we would make a little batch at a time.  An electric popcorn popper?  Yes, yes. And after I did that one year, Jerry Trotter, from the eastern  part of the state, who also worked where I did in Cordell Hall, he  brought in about 100 pound sack of popcorn and he said,    This can keep  12  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  us in popcorn for a year.     (Laughs) So I bet everybody remembers you as being the person who  made the popcorn for them. That   s great. Well do you have any stories  about Frank Eaton or Pistol Pete?  I had the opportunity to see him in a history class one day. The history  teacher felt that it was important since he was the school mascot that  people get to know him a little bit. So he did come to our class and talk  to us a while.  So kind of describe what that was like. Did you know ahead of time that  he was coming that day to that class?  Yes, the teacher told us that we would be having a guest. I don   t know  what I could say other than he wasn   t really a handsome man.  He wasn   t? A little rugged looking?  Very rugged looking and had quite a reputation. With his history, he is  quite a character and makes a good mascot, I think, for OSU.  Do you remember what building that history class was in?  The history class that he came to was in the Classroom Building.  The Classroom Building? So what else do you remember about that day  or about what he looked like?  I think that was the day that he went to the Student Union and shot his  gun.  Oh really? (Laughs)  Accidentally by chance it happened to go off. And that might have  curtailed his return to the campus.  Oh, and how did you hear about the Student Union experience? Did the  word just spread or was it in the paper?  Yes, it was probably the next day that I heard about it. A little later.  Did you go see the bullet hole in the wall?  No, I didn   t do that. Maybe I didn   t have time.  13  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  So what all did he talk about when he came?  Oh, some of his life history and his work with the hanging judge. I think  he talked a little bit about his family and how he had to hunt down some  people that had mistreated his family.  Yes, he was a colorful character from what I   ve seen and read. Did he  seem to enjoy talking to the college students?  I think he did it more out of obligation than anything else.  Oh really?  Yes, but I don   t remember him as someone who really wanted to talk  that much.  Did you attend sporting events when you were in school?  Actually very little.  Very little.  Where I went to school we didn   t have football. So on Saturdays when  we would be having a big crowd, I would park cars for the football game  and I wouldn   t go to the football game. I also was in Cordell Hall and on  the east side on the second or third floor you could see most of the game.  (Laughs) So I saw it that way. But I really wasn   t that much involved  with football because I hadn   t ever played it.  What about basketball or wrestling? Did you go watch any of those?  I did. And the one game that I missed was when OSU beat Kansas State  and I wished I   d been at that game. Eddie Sutton was playing that night.  I bet that was a big game. And Kansas State, was that Wilt  Chamberlain?  Yes, Wilt Chamberlain.  That was that game. So you stayed home and you were studying. Do you  remember what happened after the game was over, in particular? When  people came back from the game, were they celebrating? (Laughs)  I don   t know what all they were doing. But the next day there were  ladies garments hanging off of the window shades.  14  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Ladies garments hanging off of the window shades? Ladies  undergarments     Off the lampshades     Oh, all in Cordell?  In several rooms in Cordell. Uh-huh, that was not there the week before.  (Laughs) Oh. Well how did that happen?  Well now see, I was studying that night so I couldn   t tell you.  Okay. (Laughter) What about Theta Pond? Any stories about Theta  Pond?  Not much. I really wasn   t around Theta Pond very much. That was a  long way off from where I lived, about three or four blocks. I was there  one night when they were pulling a car out of Theta Pond. I don   t know  how it got in there. It was a pledge car or something but I stayed and  watched them   I guess the fraternity   get a car out of Theta Pond and  that   s about all I know about Theta Pond.  What about Old Central? Did you have classes in Old Central?  I did. I had an English class there. Professor Leak was my teacher, I  believe. And I wasn   t a very good essay writer and I think he found that  out.  What was it like   you attended a very small, rural school and then you  came to OAMC at that time. That was before the name changed  to  OSU . So you said that was a huge transition for you.  Yes, it was.  Academically, how did that affect you?  Probably chemistry was one of the toughest classes. I   d taken two or  three chemistry tests and was leaving the room one day and I heard one  student say to another,    How many answers did you mark?    And I  listened to him a little bit and he said,    Well I marked 112.    And the  other says,    Well how many did you mark?    And he said,    I marked  115.    Well there   s 100 questions on the test, let   s say. So I found out  later that there was more than one answer to a question and you should  mark all the right answers. I was just marking one answer to a question.  So I found out the next time I could mark more answers. Actually I think  15  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  on the back page it told you how many questions there were and how  many right answers. But I hadn   t learned to look there.  So you were learning a lot of additional things about how to succeed in  college, then.  And of course, chemistry from the school I came from   chemistry was  really a new subject.  Did you date much while you were in college?  I really didn   t. I don   t think I ever dated here.  How did you meet your wife?  Well, she was in my grade at school and moved to our neighbor farm  around 1944. So I   ve known her since 1944.  And when did you get married?  In    57. So we   ve been married 50 years this year.  Oh, this is a special year, then.  Yes it is, yes.  Does she enjoy coming back to Stillwater?  Oh, she enjoys it. Yes. We, for years, had season football tickets when  our boys were in high school and we   d come to OSU for a lot of ball  games.  So did you have any other family members that came here?  Well we have two sons that have come here and one of our daughter-in-laws  graduated from here.  And any grandchildren?  We have three boys for grandchildren and they are probably 13, 11 and  we have one in Montana that is 6 years old, starting school this year.  Do you expect any of your grandchildren will go to school here?  I think we may have a couple that will go to school here.  16  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  That will be fun for you won   t it?  Yes, yes. I   d like to see that.  What did you think about when the name changed?  Oh      From OAMC to OSU?  I didn   t understand why. Of course, I understand now and I   m real proud  the change was made. The year we first heard it, I just assumed it  wouldn   t change. I didn   t see a reason to change. But, it was a necessary  change to make.  Do you remember who was president here at the college when you were  in school here? Was it someone that you would see around campus at  all?  Yes, I believe Oliver Willham is the one I remember the most. Bennett  had just finished his term whenever I came here. His term was a fairly  long term. He was president for quite a while.  Yes and quite a few wonderful accomplishments during his time.  Yes, the Point Four Program was a big deal doing different things.  Willham then Kamm were the two I think I remember when I was here.  So you would see them around campus occasionally?  Yes.  Did you ever talk to them at all?  I think I talked to Willham a time or two.  I think it   s great when the presidents are out and the students do see  them.  Oh yes, yes. It really is.  Okay, are you in the Alumni Association?  I have been in the past, I am not right now. I wished I   d taken the  opportunity when I was getting out of here   out of OSU to join the  Alumni Association. Your lifetime fee wouldn   t have been very much  17  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  then.  Oh, yes.  I wished I would have taken the opportunity then.  Well what do you think it is about Oklahoma State that just sparks the  loyalty of alumni and how people feel about it? What is it about OSU  that is maybe a little different than some of the other colleges?  Well, of course, it   s my university. It   s the university I chose and I   m  really proud of it. So it   s the one I would always support.  Did you have opportunities to go to other college campuses?  Didn   t really consider any other college campuses.  Through extension, did you visit other campuses for conferences or  things like that?  Yes. But this is still the one I would always choose again.  Well that   s great. Why is that you would choose OSU again?  Oh, let   s see. I think it   s some of the friendliest people you will ever  meet, here on the OSU campus. OSU gave a lot of farm boys back in the     40   s and    50   s an opportunity in life that they wouldn   t have had any  other way. It   s opened a lot of doors for people. So I appreciate that.  And you think it still continues to do so?  Oh, I   m sure it does.  Yes.  I thought we had some of the greatest teachers that were available and  they were such upright people that are good to be associated with.  You mentioned Totusek. And I   ve heard several people mention  Professor Totusek and so tell me a little bit about him.  Well, he was, I think, a very caring professor. I think he really knew his  subject and I think he could teach the subject very well. So he was one  of my great teachers.  Do you remember if your professors were involved in research very  18  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  much or did it seem like they were involved more in teaching? How was  it back then?  I think maybe then they were probably more into teaching. And I   m sure  now they   re doing more research along with their teaching. But I was  more aware of their teaching than I was research at the time I was here.  Do you remember if they had offices and could the students go see them  in their offices?  Yes, I   m sure they did. I think my feeling was that maybe if you could  stay out of there you might be better off. But it might have been better if  I had gone to their offices a little more.  Well it sounds like you   ve done very well and able to go on and get your  master   s degree and have a career in   sounds like an area and field that  you really have loved.  I have enjoyed it all, I sure did. I would even do it again.  What advice would you give to current or future students?  Have fun but really do try to apply yourself. Make friends and you   ll  have these friends for the rest of your life.  What was graduation like? What was commencement like   the class of     57? Were you at the stadium? Did you go through the commencement  exercise? Some people remember that and some don   t have a strong  memory of that.  I think that we were in the Gallagher-Iba at that time. I believe that   s  where our graduation was. Yes, I went through the graduation. My folks  had only been on campus once or twice and they came to pick me up and  I went home with them. And on the way home, I remember it had rained  a lot, and we had to detour around a few places to get home. So we had a  large rain that weekend.  What was Homecoming like? Compared to now? Do you remember  much about Homecoming?  I sure do. We had some good Homecomings. I remember some of the  parades. It seemed like we had more floats and homemade floats in the  parade at that time. But we had a beautiful Homecoming parade here  today. I had a roommate named Elgin Frye and Danny Williams had a  TV program in Oklahoma City and he wore a spacesuit. And when he  came to campus to be in the parade, he asked for someone to wear his  19  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  spacesuit. My roommate volunteered to do that. He walked about three  or four miles with the heavy boots on and a space suit that was hot inside  and it liked to have done him in. It took him about a week or two to  recover from that. But he wore the spacesuit in the parade and  everybody thought it was Danny Williams.  (Laughs) No one knew except for you then?  No, a few guys mentioned it today that knew Elgin Frye. They said,    Do  you remember that?    And I said,    Yeah, I remember, he was my  roommate.     I wonder if there are any pictures of that.  Could be. That would have been in    53 or    54, maybe    55. He had a  space program, a TV program, on in Oklahoma City.  I   ve never heard of that. That   s interesting. Did Cordell have a float in  the parade?  Yes, and we would find a place to work on it the night before and punch  the crepe paper in the wire. That was the first time I had done anything  like that.  Did you think that was fun?  Yes it was.  Did you skip class to do that at all?  No, the best I can remember we did it at night.  Well do you have pictures of when you were in school here? Did you  keep yearbooks and things like that?  I have two or three yearbooks, yes.  It   s probably fun to go back and look through those, isn   t it?  Yes it is, yes it is. I   m glad I   ve got them now.  Did you look through them before you came back for this weekend?  I haven   t looked at them this weekend. I wished I had because there   s  some people I might have recognized a little quicker.  20  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Neurohr  Allison  Do you keep in touch with any of your classmates?  Through extension I have because I know several people I went to  school with that went into extension so it was easy to keep up with them.  Okay, what about roommates that you had?  I had a number of roommates. I had one from Tulsa  Oklahoma  and of  course I came out of a small school, which I told you closed in a couple  of years. I told him one time that I   d gone with all the girls in my class.  And he said,    You can   t do that.    And I said,    Oh well, I did.    He said,     No, that   s impossible.    I said,    No, it wasn   t.    There were three girls in  our class and I married a third of them.  (Laughs) That   s a good story. Well, I think this has been a great  interview. You shared some     Thank you very much.     good memories and some good stories and we   re very appreciative of  your participation.  I would do it all over again.  Well thank you very much.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
