 Ahrberg  Today is February 8, 2007, and my name is Janet Ahrberg, and we   re  conducting an interview for the O-STATE Stories, an oral history project  of the OSU library, and today we are interviewing Harold Field, an  OSU graduate with a B.S. in Electrical Engineering. He graduated in  1950 with a B.S., and earned a M.S. in Electrical Engineering in 1952.  So welcome, Mr. Field. We   re glad to have you here today.  Glad to be here.  And also accompanying him is his daughter, Sally. We   re glad to have  her. She   s an OSU graduate, too. Okay. Can you tell us when you  attended OAMC, the years that you attended?  I enrolled in the first semester of the 1946-47 year and then graduated in  the spring of 1950.  And how did you choose OAMC?  Well, I was in the service during World War II and I was a radar  technician. MIT was the leading school in electronics in those days, and  so I decided I wanted to go to MIT. After coming home, I found out that  I really couldn   t afford MIT (Laughs) so I wanted to go to one of the  land grant colleges and, surprisingly, MIT is also a land grant college. I  decided that the place to go was Oklahoma A M.  Did they have a Homecoming tradition back then or did they host  Homecoming back then?  Yes. Yes.  Did you attend any of the ceremonies or participate?  5  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Since graduating or before?  Before, while you were in school.  Yes. There was always something. That was a big day and a fun day for  everyone.  Did they have a parade?  Yes.  Okay.  And most of the schools had some sort of display or something. I  worked in the engineering displays several times to get things ready for  Homecoming.  Did we play a certain school or did they rotate it like they do now?  I think every school had something for the people coming back for  homecoming.  What other traditions do you remember from your time as a student  here?  Well (Laughs) those were peculiar years. When most of the veterans  showed up the first day on the campus, there were a group of  sophomores, juniors and seniors that were gonna welcome all of the new  freshmen on board, and they were looking forward to that, and they  found the new freshmen to be a completely different breed of student,  and they very quickly found out that they were the pledges and  (Laughter) that kind of put a damper on the activities for those years. It  was not the same kind of school that it had been in the previous years.  Students were a lot more serious, and most everyone had been off  somewhere fighting a war and came home, and that was not their style.  Okay.  So, I   m sure the students that attended the school prior to 1946 that were  still in school were very disappointed (Laughter) that they had to go  through all of this as a freshman and then they didn   t get to play their  role in later years. (Laughs)  Do you remember some of the things they used to do to the freshmen?  Well, I remember that when we enrolled, they set up tables in Gallagher  6  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  S. Field  Ahrberg  Field  S. Field  Ahrberg  Hall. You   d go find a table and it was according to what school you  wanted, were enrolling in and so forth, and the line of people waiting to  get in to register was about four blocks long down Knoblock. (Laughs)  Oh my.  And the students, upperclassmen, came by and tried to get somebody to  wear a beanie (Laughs) or they were gonna paddle people that didn   t do  this and that and the other. That lasted about twenty minutes and it was  all over. (Laughter) Everybody stayed in line, went in, registered and  didn   t worry about the festivities of the school. (Laughs)  Any other traditions that you remember?  Oh, they had encouraged people into the pep clubs and that sort of thing.  They were apparently a large part of things in 1946   or    45 prior to  1946, and the school enjoyed a lot of success in football particularly.  Then in 1946, none of the incoming freshmen wanted any part of any of  it, and so it died, and I don   t remember the names of some of them, but  there were several pep clubs.  Okay.  I don   t remember their names.  Where were some of the popular gathering places on campus that the  students used to hang out? Do you recall?  Well, the corner across from the fire station was the number one corner,  and there were two or three spots around there. In those days, any place  that had a jukebox had a place to dance also, and so those were very  popular spots. I don   t recall the name of the intersection that   what is  the name of the street where they had the upstairs dance hall and beer       Sally, Harold Field   s daughter joins the interview   Oh, in the Old Fox? Yes, on Elm Street.  On Elm Street?  But there was no beer in those days in most of those places. There was  one bar over there that served 3.2 beer. (Laughs)  It was across from the Seretean.  Oh, okay.  7  S. Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  You know where the Old Fox was?  Yes.  But those were the popular places. Out on Highway 51 east of town was  a popular dance hall and     What was the dating like? Did you, you know, have to call a girl in  advance? Did girls call the guys back then? What were kind of the  guidelines for dating back then?  Well, not a lot different than they are today, (Laughs) I suppose. Dating  on the campus was not normal, I   m sure, at least during 1946 and 1947  because there were four male students to every female student. There  were a lot at most of the dorms and a good many of the sorority houses  had parties and dances and invited people in, but it was an awkward  situation.  Did they have curfews?  Not that I knew about. (Laughs)  Where did you live while you were here at OAMC?  Well, the first place I lived was a place way out on Washington, almost  to Highway 64, and I only stayed there for three or four weeks. Then I  moved into a tent complex that they had out west of the campus, and  lived in a tent for a year and a half and then moved to Cordell Hall.  Was there a student union here or Theta Pond? Did they have those  places?  Well, the Theta Pond has been here forever.  Okay.  The Student Union construction, I believe, was started in 1947 and up  until that time there was really no place for the students to gather. They  used the gymnasium and there was a building that   I don   t know if it   s  still here or not, that was over next door to the old gym, I believe   that  was used as a place for people to gather.  Did you have a car?  Yes, I had    the    car. (Laughter)  8  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  So you were pretty popular then, huh?  Well, I had a 1937 Buick and everybody always wanted to borrow it. I  guess maybe one student in ten had a car.  Okay.  And so I broke the key off in the lock and left it on the parking lot, and  everybody drove it. I should   ve kept a log book on that car. (Laughter)  There were probably ten or twelve honeymoons that it was used for, and  if I wanted to use the car, I   d have to make a note on the (Laughter)  steering wheel, and it would always be there if I left a note. It was  amazing that people treated the car as well as they did, and they   d take  good care of it, and if it needed some gas, somebody would put some  gas in it.  Do you remember what the price of gas was back then?  Well, in Stillwater it was high. It was twelve cents a gallon, and in Tulsa  it was nine cents a gallon. So, big price spread. (Laughs)  Did the students go home a lot or did most of them stay on campus?  I   d say it was about fifty, fifty. There were a good many students   and I  would do this quite often   go somewhere to work during the weekend.  There were not enough jobs in Stillwater to keep everybody busy so my  roommate, Bob Kirby, that was supposed to be here today, he held a job  in Tulsa on weekends during all of his years in school, and traveled back  and forth and it was a carpooling deal. Somebody would say,    I   m going  to Oklahoma City or Tulsa,    or somewhere and the first thing you know  you   d have a carpool.  What was the highway you traveled on, and was it paved?  Yes, it was Highway 51.  It was? Okay.  But Highway 51, before Lake Keystone was built, was considerably  different because in the part that   s now covered by the lake, there were a  lot of streams and bridges, curvy highway. There were a lot of wrecks  on the highway.  What do you remember about the library?  (Laughs) What do I want to know about the library?  9  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  What do you remember about it?  Well      Did you use the library while you were here?  Yes, but there wasn   t much of a library and it was very crowded and so  you   d go to the library to specifically look up various things, and the  general library, I really didn   t use all that much because we had an  engineering library and most of the things I wanted to know were there.  Okay, you talked about some of the activities that you participated in. It  says in your information sheet that you were on the bowling team and  the softball team.  These were not college-sponsored teams.  Oh, they weren   t?  Both were just put together by some   I don   t know who got the bowling  team together, but it was going with replacing people now and then, for  four years while I was here.  Did you play other students here on campus?  Yes.  And where was the bowling alley? Where   d you bowl?  Let me see   it was down Washington here on the east side of the street  before you get to   what   s the main street east and west?  Are you talking about Sixth Street?  Sixth Street. Somewhere this side of Sixth Street.  Okay. And it also mentions that you had some membership in the IEEE  and Sigma Tau and the Eta Kappa Nu. What were those?  IEEE is the electrical engineering society, Sigma Tau is the general  engineering honorary society, and Eta Kappa Nu is the electrical  engineering honorary society.  And you also mention that you had some good hunting and fishing  opportunities around here.  10  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  I spent most of my time (Laughs) going to school, hunting and fishing.  Is that right?  The fishing was kind of strange in that I kept a trout line on Stillwater  Creek and caught enough catfish to feed most of the veterans around.  (Laughs) And while we were living in tents, we did our own cooking  and there was really not a good cafeteria for students that didn   t live in  some kind of student housing, so we did a lot of cooking.  And you said you did hunting. Did you go on a farmer   s place to hunt or  was there     In those times, no one really cared a whole lot if you went on a place to  hunt. Now you   d better not go hunting without permission, but in those  days we really didn   t worry too much about it. No one cared, and so  most of the vacant places around close to Stillwater   I used to walk out  and hunt on the west edge of campus almost daily. When duck hunting,  we used to pond hop. Get in the car and drive up along behind the pond  dams and go over the dams, shoot a few ducks.  Did they require a license?  Yes.  They did? Okay. .  Yes. I   ve bought hunting and fishing license in Oklahoma forever, I  guess. (Laughs)  There was one place you mentioned   there was a Wendy Miller   s Bar. I  haven   t heard     That was over on Knoblock, just about the middle of the block between  the fire station and where this Fox place was.  Okay. You said,    Outlaw car and motorcycle races were regular  events.    Where did they race?  There were several farms that would let the kids come in and race on the  farms, and they had motorcycle hill climbs and races and drag races for  cars. Turned out to be one big dust storm (Laughter) at the end of the  day.  Wow, I hadn   t heard that.  11  S. Field  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  And did you enter yours? (Laughter)  Well, motorcycles were particularly important. I mean, it was cheap  transportation, and there were a lot of World War II surplus motorcycles.  In the tent city, there was always some kind of motorcycle contest out in  the middle of it, stirring up enough dust that you couldn   t breathe for a  week. (Laughter)  How many people lived in one tent?  Well they were set up for six, but most generally it would come down to  about four. We had four in our tent for a long time.  Were they heated and cooled or were they     They were heated and cooled according to what the temperature was.  (Laughs) There was a heater in the center of it that we used to cook on  top of also. It was pretty fundamental, not a lot of frills in that.  Can you talk a little bit about the student body? You said there were  more men than women, is that correct?  Yes.  And were there many minorities here at that time?  There were a few minorities, but nobody paid very much attention to  them. They just blended in with everybody else and nobody really  thought of them as minorities. The minorities got to be popular after that  (Laughs) for some reason.  When someone mentions OAMC and OSU, what crosses your mind first?  Well, when you mention both of those names in the same sentence, the  first thing I think of is a terrible mistake. (Laughs) I enrolled in the cow  college and I intended to stay in the cow college, and I don   t like the  idea that it changed to something else.  Well, that was my next question. At the time, there was a lot of  discussion surrounding the name change and here on campus when they  changed it from OAMC to OSU   what do you remember about how the  campus handled that change?  I was not here at that time.  Oh, you weren   t? Okay.  12  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  The name as I recall, the name change officially took place in 1957, and  my last courses were in    53, I guess. And all of my graduate courses  were taken off campus. That in itself was an interesting thing. Bob Kirby  and I, we were roommates here. When we got in Tulsa, we wanted to get  a master   s degree and so they waived the residency requirement and we  drove back and forth taking courses. There were two or three others that  decided that they wanted to take some courses also, and it was not long  before it became apparent that it made a lot more sense to get the  professor to drive to Tulsa than I guess a couple of carloads of people to  drive to Stillwater, so we made arrangements to get some of the  professors to come over to Tulsa and that was the start of the OSU at  Tulsa and, as I understand it, it   s still not a separate campus, and that   s  the way we arranged it originally. I   m amazed that it stayed that way  over the years that the Tulsa classes are really on Stillwater campus  classes, officially.  Where did you meet at?  We had a couple of research centers and the old Stanland Research  Center and the Carter Hall Research Center and the place that I had was  Geophysical Research Corporation. We had rooms and conference  rooms that were available, and then for the larger classes we conned the  University of Tulsa into letting us use their classrooms. So we had a  pretty good group of courses that were offered in Tulsa.  Your being here today is an indication of your fondness for the  university, and can you tell me what is it about the university that  generates such a connection do you think?  Well, as a youngster I really never thought I   d go to college   never  thought I   d be able to afford it. The land grant colleges are one of the  provisions in the land grant laws that they be colleges for the working     using that   I think it   s that language exactly, they   re colleges for the  working people. And I   ve had this conversation with Sally a time or two  that when you go to college, you have to make up your mind ahead of  time whether you want to go learn something or whether you want to go  learn how to do something, and land grant colleges were originally  thought up and organized to be places where you go learn how to do  something. They were all mechanical and agricultural colleges where  you come out, you know how to do a specific thing, and that is the thing  that attracted me, from an early age. And I still think it   s the way things  ought to be.  Do you have any other children? Or how many of your children have  gone to OSU?  13  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Just one. (Laughs) But we have five children, and they attended I think  every school in the southwest conference and a few others around the  country.  If you were to give advice to future or current students, what would it  be?  Well, I have given advice a number of times (Laughter) and my advice  has been that before you choose a college, that you ought to decide what  you want to do and that   s the most difficult thing is to decide what kind  of lifestyle you want, what type of work you want to do. The impact of  choosing a college is you   re choosing   probably gonna choose your  mate for life and the part of the country you   re gonna live in. I think it   s  a mistake for someone in Oklahoma to go off in the northeast to go to  college because they   re not gonna live there and all of their college  contacts are generally lost and they   re really formative years, the college  years.  Okay. I want to back up here just a little bit and ask you about the sports  here on OSU campus. What was the sporting events like and which ones  did you attend?  Well, I went to a lot of basketball games, wrestling matches and football  games, and the thing that I enjoyed about them more than anything else  is that we could always argue that we had the best team in the nation and  there wasn   t any bowl series or any big computerized determination of  who   s the best football team in the country. Before all that happened,  well every university or college could   the students could sit around  and argue about who   s got the best football team. (Laughs) They   re  trying to take the sport out of it.  How much was tuition back in those days?  I think the general fee in 1946 was 12 dollars and I   m not sure of that,  but I think that   s right, and I think an in-state student would spend  almost a hundred dollars if they took twenty hours.  And you had to live on campus? You said there was a residency  requirement so you had to, well, live in Stillwater I guess?  Well, the residency requirements were for the graduate degrees and that  got to be a problem. Several of us were planning and had taken courses  toward a doctorate, but they wouldn   t waive the residency requirement  for the doctorate so you had to come and live in Stillwater, and I  couldn   t afford that.  14  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  How did you pay for tuition, like for your freshman year? Did your  parents help or did you have to work?  No, in 1943, right in the middle of World War II, they started talking  about a GI Bill of Rights which would pay college expenses for overseas  veterans, and when I heard that I rushed to the recruiting office and said,     I want to go now.    (Laughs) I went in a little before the regular age  requirement and went overseas as quickly as I could, and got enough  time before the war ended to go through on the GI Bill of Rights.  Can you give us a little background about yourself? Where did you grow  up at?  (Laughs) Sorry to laugh at that question, but when the war ended I was  on a battleship and everybody says,    Let   s go home.    And I had lived on  that battleship longer than I had lived any other place in my life.  (Laughter) I was born in North Carolina, lived in Maryland and Virginia,  Georgia, Mississippi, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and I guess that was all. My  dad was a dry-kiln engineer designing dry-kilns for lumber mills and  typically those jobs would last four or five months, so there were a  couple of times that I went to school in the same school for a full year,  but not more than a couple of years.  What was it like    the times that you grew up and the family  circumstances? As you said, going to college was   not everyone got to  go.  Well, this was kind of a big deal in my family. Both my parents were  born in Indian territory and they were in small communities where the  highest grade taught in the school system was the eighth grade, and so  they had little or no chance to go to college. My mother went to what is  now Arkansas State and her father made her take the eighth grade twice  because he didn   t want her out of school. Then she went when she was  only thirteen or fourteen years old to Arkan   I   ve forgotten what they  called that then, but it   s now Arkansas State, and got a teacher   s  certificate and started teaching when she was seventeen and she was  always disappointed that she didn   t get to go to a full four-year college.  My dad started working early, and he lived to be ninety-nine years old     Wow.     almost made it to a hundred.  Wow.  I don   t remember a year in his life that he wasn   t enrolled in college  15  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  S. Field  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  somewhere. He was taking a course when he died, at the University of  California, and living out there. It was always a big deal just to   when  we   d travel around, well he   d find some school to go to school.  Did any other of your family members go to OSU beside yourself?  No.  No? Okay. Can you kind of tell us or maybe summarize in some way     tell us what by attending OAMC, how did that impact your life, your  career path and possibly your support network?  Well, as I said earlier, I went to school to learn how to do something and  during the Navy years, I was an electronics radar technician and that led  me to electrical engineering. I wanted to become a well-trained electrical  engineer and my ambition was to be a research engineer and I did,  except they kept promoting me (Laughs) to the point where I was not  using my engineering as much as I wanted to, and it was always a  disappointment. But the fact that I went to school and learned how to do  something, I think governed most of my life. The impact has been full  impact, I think.  Including your hobbies.  Yes.  You talked about Mr. Kirby, your roommate. How did you all become  roommates?  Well, we knew each other casually, and in our freshman year in physics  lab, you had to choose a partner to do the lab work, and we ended up  being partners in the physics lab. Then practically every course during  the four years we were in the same classes, we   ve been partners in all  kinds of projects, ever since.  That   s really neat. Well, is there a particular professor that sticks out in  your mind while you were here that influenced you the most or that you  remember for some reason that had an impact on you or someone that  you   ll just never forget?  (Laughs) There are several of them I   ll never forget. (Laughs) There are  a couple of them but one I guess was Cyclone Jones. (Laughs)  I   ve never heard that.  Jones was a professor in the electrical engineering department, and he  16  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  did a lot of research in identifying tornadoes. He was the first one to  discover that there were spherics discharges within a tornado, and so he  got a bunch of the students, and I was one of them, to work on various  kinds of devices to detect these spherics and track a tornado. He was a  brilliant guy, but he had tunnel vision. The only thing he could see was a  tornado so we dubbed him Cyclone Jones. We did a lot of work with  him and got Kirby involved later on, after we   d moved to Tulsa, and  built it right   the first radar station over there, to track tornadoes and  developed most of the language that is used now to identify the  tornadoes and to get on the news stations and tell people what to do and  to get in the bathtub and open all the windows    (Laughs) So Jones had  a big impact on things that I did, and that was hobby work after we got  out of school, but we kept in touch with him and did a lot of his  experimentation for him, and he deserves a lot of credit because he   as  far as tornado identification is concerned, he   s the man.  Were there very many women professors on campus?  Yes. I had taken a course in golf in my last semester of my senior year,  and my golf instructor was a woman. (Laughs)  Is there anything else you   d like to tell us about your time at OSU?  Anything memorable? Something that you would like to tell us about that  we haven   t covered?  Well, the main thing I believe that would be of interest to people is how  much different those years, particularly the four years from 1946 to  1950, have been at every school, not just Oklahoma A M. Every school  went through some of the same things, but Oklahoma A M was a  popular school for the veterans, and everything turned out to be  different.  One of the things that I think of every now and then is before I went into  the service, I used to love to dance, enjoyed music and, as I said earlier,  every place had a jukebox. When I got back from the service, I didn   t  enjoy dancing anymore, my music appreciation went to zero, and then it  took me about thirty years to realize that that had happened to millions  of people, and it was particularly evident around the campus here in  Stillwater. There were not many dances. Dancing was not popular with  any of the veterans, and what had happened is that we all went off to war  and we got hearing damage with all of the loud guns and training. There  was no hearing protection in those days, and it develops intermodulation  distortion where you get a lot of, you hear a lot of harmonics of the  music that you hear and instead of getting one drum roll, you get three  (Laughs) and it   s practically impossible for people with that degree of  hearing damage to have any rhythm or keep up with the rhythm in  17  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  S. Field  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  anything.  Stillwater was a place where there were a lot of dance locations and after  the first year they all disappeared. Then after, in the mid-50   s, all of  these people that were missing out on dancing and thought they would  enjoy dancing, there were all sorts of dance academies sprung up all  over the country to teach people how to dance, and everybody   I went  to one of them (Laughter) and they couldn   t teach me anything.  (Laughter) And none of the students that went to them, ever learned how  to dance because they couldn   t.  That   s real interesting.  That   s one of the things that changed this campus and a good many other  campuses without anyone ever knowing it   that changed the social life  on the campus all, entirely.  That   s interesting. So what did you do for fun then if you didn   t dance?  Oh, a lot of parlor games and     Cards.     more outdoor activities. Still had a lot of parties, but there were a lot  of wallflowers (Laughs)   all the girls would get mad at everybody, all  the boys because they wouldn   t dance.  Is there anything else you want to add about your time here at  Oklahoma A M?  Pretty good four years I spent.  Good ride, huh?  Yes.  We have one more story that Mr. Field would like to tell us. Go ahead,  Mr. Field.  Well, I   m not sure how interesting it is, but I went into the Navy a little  early and I didn   t finish high school, and most of the larger ships   they  would bring study materials on board for people that would order them  in, and I ordered in all of the material for a high school course that they  had so I could finish up high school when I was in the Navy. I  completed all that and ended up teaching a few of those courses to others  (Laughs) on the ship, and so I thought I was in good shape.  18  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  I came over to Oklahoma A M and got all enrolled, took all of the  entrance exams and in those days, they gave you an entrance exam. It  wasn   t any pre-examination such as SATs and those things, and you had  to take them on the day that you came over to enroll. I took those and  didn   t have any problem with them, and they went up to finalize my  registration. I had started early in the morning and it was about 11:00  and the testing was the day before, and the gal looked through all of my  records and says,    Well, you don   t have a high school degree.    And I  tried to explain to her that I did, and she says,    We   ve got to have a  diploma from an Oklahoma high school.    So I said,    Well, okay.     (Laughs) I got in the car and I drove to Central High School in Tulsa  where I had started high school, and they were closed. The principal was  there, a gentleman named D. E. Temple, (Laughs) and I went in and  said,    I need a high school diploma.    (Laughs) He said,    What am I  supposed to do about it?    And I said,    Well, I   m here to get one and I   ve  got to have it today and I   ve got to take it back to Stillwater.    And he  was very amused at all that and I kept talking to him and he says,    Well,  we do have a provision that we can give testing, but the people that do  the testing are not here today. I   m the only one here.    And I said,    Well,  do you have the test? I   ll just take it right now.    And it was one of those  tests that you use a carbon pencil, you know, to check off things, so I  rushed through the test and gave it back to him and it took me about an  hour, I guess, to take the test, and he says,    Well, I don   t have any way  to grade this.    I said,    Well, let   s sit down and grade it.    And he looked  around and he found the template that would go over the test and he  graded the test and gave me a letter telling them that I was a high school  graduate of Central High School in Tulsa. (Laughs) I got in the car and I  came back to Stillwater and finished my enrollment.  Oh, that must have been fate. You were destined to come to OAMC.  Well, what do you call the school now?  Oklahoma State University.  Well, we used to call it the cow college.  The cow college, I   ve never heard that.  That was the universal name for this school was the cow college.  Really?  And I was telling Sally on the way over that we were in Osh Kosh,  Wisconsin one time sitting around the table with a bunch of engineers at  a fly-in up there, and one of them had on an OSU hat and I said,    Well,  19  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  what   s going on over at the cow college now?    And he says,    We don   t  call it the cow college anymore.    He says,    That   s now Moo U.     (Laughs)  Well, I do have one last question. What was it like   was there still a big  rivalry at that time against OU, the University of Oklahoma, when you  were here?  There was still the thing that everybody would run around full-time and  say,    Beat OU,    but we didn   t call it OU. It was    Zero U.    (Laughter)  I   ve not heard that. (Laughter) That   s pretty good. So there was a sense  of bedlam back then even?  Yes.  Okay. All right.  I   m sure it was not as strong as it is today because of the different type  of students during those years, but it was there.  So did you do anything before the games, before you would play the  University of Oklahoma to get ready for them on campus to kind of fire  everybody up? You talked about the pep teams and things.  Oh, we did a few things. But the big rivalry at Oklahoma A M was  between the engineering students and the agricultural students. On  Engineering Day, they   d come in and tear up everything we had and on  Ag Day, well they got their dose of it then. (Laughter)  Well, was there a lot more agriculture students here then at that time?  This was an A M school.  I know, but was there a balance? Was there more than the other do you  think?  Difficult to say that   engineering was probably about forty percent of  the enrollment, I   d say, just a guess. It was tough to figure out what  percentage the agricultural students were because they took a lot of  things. Their interest was in agriculture, but that was not their major. I  had several friends that were in accounting and finance, and they were  really agriculture students but that wasn   t their major and so there were a  lot of ag students.  Well, since you graduated and left OSU, you   ve mentioned Mr. Kirby as  20  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  Ahrberg  Field  one of your good friends. Have you been able to stay in contact with  some other OSU or OAMC graduates, too?  I   m run over with them. (Laughter) I don   t know why, but the people  that I hunt and fish with, we didn   t get together with any kind of college-related  activities, but all of them are from OSU. They enjoyed all of  them most of the time.  That   s great.  And then some of the ag students I   ve kept in touch with and know  where they are. It would have been real easy for me back in those years  to switch from engineering to get to be something in the agricultural  field.  Well, have you been able to come back to OSU much since you  graduated?  Been to a few ball games. When we were in Tulsa, I would go to several  games a year, but since we   ve moved from there, a couple or three visits.  That   s been about it.  Well, it   s hard to get back, especially when you live, well    you   re in  Texas now, right?  Well, yes.  Well, you   re a bit further south, so anyway. We are so pleased that  you   ve joined us today and brought Sally and again I want to thank you  for coming and participating in our O-STATE Stories.  Glad to do it.  -------  -------   
