 Neurohr. I   m a librarian for the Oklahoma State  University Library, and today is January 4, 2007. We are at the  Oklahoma State University Library, and I am here with Dr. Mac, Mr.  Albert Grant McCormick, and he is going to tell us a little bit about     when were you a student at Oklahoma State University and the year that  you graduated?  Okay, I was a student here from 1963 to 1966.  And what was your degree in?  Counseling psychology. My advisor was Harry Brobst, Professor of  Psychology and Director of the Bureau of Tests and Measurements. I  was a graduate assistant under him.  And I understand that you have a ghost story to tell us about one of the  buildings here at the university.  I do. This is an authentic ghost story. The building was Old Central and  one might say,    It was a dark and stormy night.    I was upstairs in what  was known as the psychology bullpen where all the graduate students in  psych worked on their papers or whatever and it was a very dark, cold  night. I had a key to the building and I had let myself in   nobody else in  the building   and walked up the stairs. They were wooden stairs, so you  could hear the footsteps reverberating through the building   and walked  down the hall to my desk, which was just across the hall from Dr.  Brobst   s desk   and began to work on my dissertation. And as I sat  there, I heard the door open downstairs and I thought,    Well, some other  graduate student had a key also,    because I had locked the door behind  me. Then I heard steps coming up the wooden stairs, quite distinctive,  and at the end of the hallway up there, there   s a batwing door which had  a characteristic    squeak, squeak, squeak    when anybody walked through  it. I heard that, and then I hear steps coming down the hall   all the way  5  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  down the hall. I left my desk and went out to peer to see who it was, and  there was nobody there   and I went to look immediately after I heard  the steps   and so I sat there some time and I got up and I looked again,  and then I got up and went through the entire building, all the rooms,  down in the basement. There was an animal lab in the basement. They  were doing some work with chimpanzees and discrimination studies. I  couldn   t find anybody, so I locked up and went home   and locked the  door.  As I said, it was a dark and stormy night. It was bitterly cold, so I was  flitting from building to building to get to my home on West Admiral.  So, I left Old Central and went into the Student Union and there was a  huge sign. They were having a reunion of the Class of 1926, and I think  in 1926 about the only building on the campus might have been Old  Central   I don   t know. I said,    Well, okay, that makes sense. A ghost  has appeared at the old building.     I went on home and the next day, I told Dr. Brobst about it, laughing of  course. I don   t want him to think he   s turning out a crack-pot, and he  said, well, he had heard the building was haunted but he had never seen  any evidence of it. And that essentially is it.  Well, that   s a good story. I would have been frightened if that had been  me.  What do they say? Bravery is the better part of judgment, or something  like that. (Laughter) It occurred to me the building was entirely empty,  and I thought about it considerably, and years later I thought,    Well,  being bitterly cold, maybe when I walked up the stairs then the building  readjusted immediately back of me, those wooden steps,    but I couldn   t  explain the batwing door squeaking. Anyway, that   s it. That   s the whole  story.  Some things that you said about Old Central kind of interested me and it  sounds like that you probably spent a lot of time in that building.  Like any graduate student, your nose is to the grindstone. Another  interesting thing about the old building   as I say, the Psychology  Department   the graduate students were on the third floor. I   m sitting at  my desk one day and a fella who graduated, I think, a year ahead of me,  Tom Cunningham, who is a PhD and professor of psychology at St.  Lawrence University of Canton, New York   he stopped by my desk and  said,    Mac, let   s go get a coffee.    And I don   t particularly like coffee,  but I love the conviviality of it. So we left the building and went over     there was a coffee shop where Hideaway is now   and while we were  there, the ceiling collapsed on the third floor right in the bullpen.  6  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  Oh my.  There were dead pigeons and dead rats and feathers and pigeon  droppings and the whole thing. So we were saved.  That   s good.  Then the other story I was mentioning was about tests and  measurements. One was testing students to determine if they should stay  in college. If students didn   t make a certain level on this test, they would  probably be drafted for the Vietnamese War     And this was an activity that you were involved in when you were a  graduate student?  Yeah, in the Bureau of Tests and Measurements, my job was to  administer tests and counsel with widows and war orphans. Part of my  tuition was paid by the VA  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs , and I  was probably one of the last people that graduated with a doctorate paid  for partially by the VA. As we met in the testing room, there was a  minor riot outside with students marching around the building chanting  and throwing rocks through the window   and we had to fingerprint each  student that came in to take the test.  Now were these tests conducted in Old Central also?  No, Old Central wasn   t big enough. There was a building immediately  north of Old Central that has an auditorium in it. I don   t remember the  name of the building.  Did you have a testing room in the building?  Yes, we had a huge room and as the students came in the door, we took  their thumbprint and their name and address and their classification,  freshman or senior.  And were all of the male students required to take this test?  All these were male students fighting the draft   and then outside there   s  this minor riot protest, people marching with placards and incidentally,  Dr. Brobst, my advisor, was in Greece at the time and so I was in charge  of administering the test. When he came home, I told him about  the  minor riot protest . He said,    Damn, I miss everything.    (Laughter)  Do you know how they notified the students about how they did on the  test?  7  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  I don   t know who scored the test or who notified them whether or not  they were eligible for the draft, or whether they would stay in college.  And one other experience with the testing bureau was   part of my job  was administering the ACT, the A-C-T, and a group of students came  and I screwed up royally. I failed to administer the English part of the  ACT, which Dr. Brobst advised me in no uncertain terms with spit  flying and the jugular vein sticking out and questioning,    Where did you  get your master   s degree?      that I had screwed royally, that that was the  most important part of the test because that was the way they determined  the freshman   s standing in English. As luck would have it, an ice storm  blew in. The students couldn   t leave the campus and they were housed in  one or two dorms, so I hot-footed over there and got on the PA system  and said,    The testing is not complete. Everybody report to the,      where  we were testing   and lo and behold, everybody showed up because  nobody could leave.  Oh.  The whole campus was a sheet of ice and so they showed up and I gave  them the English portion. I took it in to Dr. B, whose name was Harry     and I would never have called him Harry      Dr. B, here is the English  portion,    I said. He said,    Well, okay,    and that was it. (Laughter)  I   d like to ask you some more questions about your time here at OSU.  You mentioned that you were a doctoral candidate when you came, and I  was wondering how you came to OSU. Why did you pick OSU?  Okay, I was working in Tulsa as a school psychologist, laughingly  known as a    testing lady    because there were about fifteen school  psychologists and only two men   and so people would say,    Here  comes the testing lady.    It became obvious to me I wasn   t gonna go  anywhere without a doctorate. You can starve to death with an M.A. in  Psychology. So I went to OU  University of Oklahoma  and talked to  them about the program,    Could I get a degree in Counseling  Psychology?      and they said,    Yes.    They offered me a position of  counseling   in the Student Counseling Bureau   and then I said,    You  know, I   m almost forty. When will I graduate? And I   ve got two little  kids to feed.    They said,    Don   t worry about that. We   ll take care of  that. You just go to work.    That didn   t sound very stable, so I came up  here  Stillwater, OK  and the Student Bureau sent me to Dr. Brobst over  in testing and he sat down with me and went over my transcript and said,     I think we could get you out of here in two and a half to three years,     and that sounded very attractive. Then he said,    Incidentally, you   re a  veteran so we   re looking for a veterans    counselor. I just sort of fell into  the job, which was graduate assistant, tests and measurement   and  8  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  counseling widows, war orphans and veterans. And that   s where I  stayed.  Well, it sounds like it was a perfect fit for you at the time.  It fell right. It was like the gods were kind. It just fell right in. So, I came  over and rented a house on   I think on West Admiral. Is that correct?  There   s a street immediately south of the Vet Med school. Oh, as an  aside, Dr. Brobst had me doing   there   s a psychological test called the  MMPI, Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory   and he was  giving that to first-year vet med students trying to predict their success  or failure based on personality variables rather than intelligence. So we  did that. My job was testing vet med students and in general, testing.  Well, so many of the staff wanted their children   s IQ run. I would do  that, too.  Do you remember what his findings were on the veterinary medicine  students?  He, to my knowledge, he didn   t finish that while I was here, but in the  meantime, I was looking for a dissertation topic and my first topic had  been    shot out of the saddle    which was painful. He said that he thought  that the National League for Nurses was looking for somebody to come  up with a psychological test for the personality of first-year nurses. So  they had a stipend, and I got that. My job was to test 225 first-year  nurses and predict whether they would fail or succeed the first year  based on personality rather than IQ, high school grade point average, or  reading ability. So I did a psychological work-up on 224 nurses     Oklahoma City, Muskogee, a couple of other towns that had nursing  schools and then using a   isn   t this fascinating?  It is.  Using a multiple discriminate function analysis, I predicted who would  fail and who would succeed, and at the end of the year, we checked, and  I had a correct hit of seven out of ten.  Oh.  The nurses were   the kids were bright, but they didn   t have the  personality necessary.  Did you use that MMPI instrument for that?  Yes, used the MMPI and a couple of other psychological tests.  9  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  That sounds interesting.  And, by the way, that   s where the library comes in. I thought,    There   s  no way in hell I can take 224 nurses, each of whom had nine scores   so  that   s nine times 224   to run some kind of statistical measure   and  somebody said,    Why don   t you go over to the library? There   s a new  machine called a computer and maybe they can help you.    So I came  over here. There was, I think the computers were in the basement. There  is a basement, isn   t there?  There is a basement, yes.  And I talked to one of the library ladies and she said,    No.    However,  she heard that San Diego State University had such a program, so this  university library phoned them and asked them and they said,    They had  the program and they would be glad to loan it to you.    They sent it here,  and the library showed me how to   in those days, you filled out cards,  punch cards. So my dear wife punched cards and graded MMPI tests till  she was bleary, and the library ran it for me, which was beautiful. I   d  never heard of a computer.  Well, that   s marvelous. What a great story.  Oh, it saved my neck. And Dr. Brobst had never heard of one, but he  was impressed with it. I mean, you know, it was run in thirty minutes.  Wow. Well, did that spur the university to look at buying a computer to  be able to do that?  Well, the library had a computer, but I think it was severely limited by  the skills of the day. After all, it was 1965 and the only computer I was  familiar with was a Monroe desk calculator, one of these horribly big  things   bigger than a suitcase   and I didn   t know how to run that.  One of the guys with me was getting a doctorate in statistics, and he was  helping me   but the library was the saving grace. I loved the library.  During World War II, I flew with the Chinese Air Force. So I knew a  little bit of Chinese, and so I would come up here in my compulsion to  stay in the library, don   t go home, go to the library because you all  subscribed to a Chinese newspaper and it was along about that time the  riot at Tiananmen Square, which was interesting. I couldn   t read  Chinese, but I could poke at it.  Really?  I had a Chinese dictionary and I could look up words, which is very hard  10  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  to do but I can do it.  We   ve talked a little bit about some of the things that you were involved  in during your time here in the university. Were there any other things,  any clubs or organizations for graduate students such as yourself that  you were able to participate in at all?  For a very brief time, and I found I didn   t have the time. I was involved  in Psi Chi which is really an undergraduate fraternity for psych majors.  I was not a psych major as an undergraduate.  Where was your undergraduate work?  The University of Tulsa. I graduated there with a B.S. in essentially  general science with Zoology major and psych minor.  Another thing I   d like to ask you about is how do you feel about  Oklahoma State University and how did it impact your life?  Well, the most significant thing I think was a change in self concept. A  change in the way one perceived oneself because being a graduate  student for a number of years which is probably the lowest person on  the   the only person I   ve seen lower than a doctoral graduate student  are second or third year med students. I taught in med school for a while,  and those kids are treated like dirt. Anyway, you   re treated that way and  then, one day, you have a cap and a gown and the very next day, I   m  working in a hospital and people are calling me doctor and deferring to  me as though I knew something, and I didn   t know squat. And so it   s a  life changing experience. Plus, we were so poor that we had a family of  four living on less than  300 a month. We played a lot of badminton.  But my children were very understanding and my wife worked a little  while at the Presbyterian church as a secretary.  Oh.  She was great. She typed my dissertation five times before we gave it to  a typist, a lady who made her living typing dissertations. I think it was  an experience that pushed us closer together.  How old were your children when you were in the program?  My son was probably 12 and my daughter was 10 and a half, there about  that.  So they were old enough to be aware of the studying?  11  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  They were unhappy about leaving Tulsa and coming to Stillwater and  then even more so leaving Stillwater when they   d become acclimated,  and moving to another town.  Did any other family members come to Oklahoma State University?  No I   m the only one of my brothers and sister who   s ever finished high  school, for that matter. OSU hired me. I was teaching at Central State  University and took an early retirement. Some gentlemen here on the  faculty got wind of that and had talked to some doctoral candidates who  had me as an undergraduate and said,    You gotta hire this guy he, he  knows this or that.    So OSU recruited me and I moved here and taught  five years as an adjunct, which was quite pleasurable   no duties, just  teaching.  Oh.  No committees.  Do you have any advice that you would give to current or future  students?  The principal advice is to learn that behaviors have consequences. When  I was counseling at the OSU Counseling Center, which I did as a fill-in  counselor   it was astonishing how many kids got out of high school and  were thinking like,    Oh, this class only meets on Monday, Wednesday  and Friday. Gee.    It never occurs to them that they   re supposed to study  two hours out for every hour in class. So the advice would be, be aware  that things are chained together and behaviors have consequences.  Is there anything else that you would like to say for our interview today?  Other than the fact that I think oral history is excellent. From what I read  in popular things like Newsweek, etc., it   s a coming discipline. I just  finished a book, The American Plague, the History of Yellow Fever in  the United States, and a lot of it is based on personal oral history     people writing, people talking, making speeches.  Well, thank you. We appreciate that. One more thing that I want to go  back to has to do with Old Central and the building. For me to have an  understanding, you said that there were animals kept in the basement?  Yes.  Could you sort of take me through that building and tell me what was  occurring on each floor and what they were used for?  12  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  Yes. The basement   OSU at that time had a good reputation for animal  conditioning, if you will, because NASA was using apes to fly in  rockets. I wasn   t involved in that and as I understand it, in the basement,  there were some animal cages in there. The main floor essentially was  administrative, and the third floor was   we had some one-way screens  where we were being taught how to see a patient, how to talk to a  patient, and the psych bullpen. Then there was a rather large, not  necessarily a classroom, but sort of a small room, maybe 8 X 10 or  smaller, where I did personal testing on anybody who needed a  psychological work-up. As I understand it, it   s the oldest building on  campus.  Yes. Yes it is, and there are plans to renovate it, too, underway.  Oh.  Yes. That   s still a very attractive, unique building.  It   s just a creaky old building. As I said, the steps from the main entry  upstairs were wood      clunk, clunk, clunk      and that   s about all     except the ceiling falling on the third floor. That was something.  Well, you got out of there just in time that day.  Oh, yes. I owe Tom for that, I guess.  And you mentioned a term,    the bullpen.     Yeah, it was just a large room with a series of desks and a fiberglass  screen separating each desk.  And was there a way to lock materials up in the desks at all or were they  just open desks?  Just open desks. Almost anybody could come. I was assigned a desk  because I was with the Bureau of Tests and Measures just across the  hall, but the other tests were just first come-first served. They had a lamp  and an ashtray, back when people smoked. And the graduate assistants,  teaching assistants, did a lot of their work there.  You said that you had a key to access the building?  I had a key to the building.  And could you access it anytime, night or day?  13  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  Anytime. There   s a compulsiveness about getting a doctorate, and  sometimes you either go to the   I discovered the library could reduce  my anxiety. It became an object that said,    Okay, you   re in the library.  You   re reading journals or even Playboy, I don   t know, but you   re in the  library,    and there was a tension reduction there, especially up     somewhere up here there   s some easy chairs that look out the big oval  window on the tower     Yes, on the fourth floor.  That   s very   almost sedating you up there.  Yes.  And occasionally sleeping   but the library, and just being in my office  and hearing Dr. Brobst across the hall, was sort of comforting. Going to  a movie then you began to feel antsy, guilty   or doing anything other  than studying.  Well, you really did accomplish a lot it sounds like and used your time  well when you were here and then afterwards.  I really, in retrospect, enjoyed it. When we left Edmond and   I live on  Lake Keystone   we moved to Keystone Lake, I was in the attic at  Edmond and I stumbled over a box and thought,    What the hell is that?     I got into it and it was my old dissertation. My stomach had a little  redintegrative response there. (Laughter) Now I like this university. My  son is a systems engineer here in the computer center. If you   ve got a  computer question, call him.  Okay.  He knows all there is to know about computers and my daughter-in-law,  his wife, worked here for a while as a librarian.  Oh, she did?  Her name is Beverly. She quit to go get an MLS  Master   s degree in  Library Science  at Denton.  Oh. I went to University of North Texas for my MLS.  That   s where she got hers.  Well, that   s a coincidence. I thank you very much for coming today.  14  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  McCormick  Neurohr  Well, it   s my pleasure. My son-in-law, somehow he got word of this oral  history thing and he told somebody that,    My father-in-law had seen a  ghost here,    and somebody called me and said,    If you want to talk  about it       But, gee, that was almost a year ago or six, seven months  ago. How long have you been in business here with this?  We started this project in October, so     Okay, maybe it was then.     about three months.  Yeah.  Well, you know, we   ve had such a good response to it that we   re just  slowly trying to work through all of the calls that we   ve had and the  requests   and we really appreciate the interest in the project.  Well, thank you for inviting me over.  Thank you for coming.  -------  -------   
