 Gill. Today is October 18, 2008. I   m visiting with Bill  Smith in the Alumni Center on the Oklahoma State University Campus.  This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project for the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Bill, it   s good to have you with us this  morning.  Thank you, it   s nice to be here.  You just got off the float for the Homecoming Parade?  Great parade.  Can you tell me what that   s all about this year?  Well, this is the fiftieth anniversary of Pistol Pete. The University is  celebrating Pistol Petes during Homecoming. We brought in as many of  the Pistol Petes as we could find. I think there   s about fifty or maybe  more here. Of course, in the later years they   ve had two Pistol Petes a  year so we had some duplicates for the year. I think I   m the oldest living  Pistol Pete as far as Pistol Pete time. I was Pistol Pete in 1959.     59. In 1958, Bill, that was the first year     In 1958 is when we first got it started. A guy named Charlie Lester was  the first guy to wear the head, and myself, a man named Chuck Marshall  who lived in Shawnee Mission, Kansas and another fellow named Don  Yandell who lived in Ardmore Oklahoma, and there were some others.  Those are just the names I remember, got together with the idea of  celebrating Frank Eaton as Pistol Pete who had passed away in 1958. Oh  and Don Yandell helped design what the Pistol Pete head would look  like. We sent it off and had it made. There were a lot of delays on  getting it and we didn   t get it back until late in the year. I think Charlie  5  Gill  Smith  wore the head during Homecoming that year and then I think he wore it  later at one of the bowl games.  But as a result, it was a pretty big hit. So the next year we decided to  have a committee to pick out the Pistol Pete. We advertised in the  O   Colly to have the men show up that would like to be Pistol Pete. But  what most people don   t remember is that it was not that well accepted at  the first by the students because at that time most of the school mascots  were either a cow or a dog or a goat or something. They didn   t have  people running around with a papier-m  ch   head on. The only other  school that I know of that had such a thing was the Kansas Jayhawker.  So the students either didn   t know or a little reluctant to come.  So at our selection committee, there were only about two guys that  showed up who really didn   t qualify for Pistol Pete. Since I knew Frank  Eaton personally, they just turned around and said,    Bill, I guess you   re  it.    So that   s how I got to be Pistol Pete. In those days, what I basically  did was I went to all the football games, the home games and the away  games, but I only went to the home basketball games. In those days you  couldn   t wear boots or spurs on the gym floor so I ended up going in just  my stocking feet and firing the guns off in the old Gallagher Arena. It  really was stirring the first time it happened because it had never  happened before, and the guns were much louder. So they took my  boots, my spurs, and then they took my gun. (Laughs) I did some  baseball games. Didn   t do any of the wrestling matches in those days. I  rode in the    49   ers     89ers  parade over in Guthrie, and the Homecoming  parade. That was about the extent of what Pistol Pete did in those days.  Of course it   s grown today to where we have to have two Pistol Petes,  and the Pistol Pete is actually a representative of the University. A much  broader scope and a much more important scope than it was back in my  time.  Bill, let me ask you this. You bring up a point that I   d like to follow up  on. Is it special to you that Pete represents a living legend, a person as  opposed to an animal or another mascot?  Yeah. It   s really special to me because I knew Frank. I met him first in  1956 and then spent some time with him in 1957 and saw him just a few  months before he died in 1958. I think he died in April as I recall. But I  got to know him, and he told me all of his stories. Really it was fun to  listen to him, but you didn   t know how much of it was truth and how  much of it was legend. But his story was typical of most paperback  westerns. Daddy gets killed and he goes after the bad guys and gets them  all before it   s over. So I enjoyed it whether it was true or not, and just  enjoyed being with him and hearing that. And really that   s how I got  involved in that, because I knew him. But it is important because I think  6  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  the period of time that Frank represented was a true independent,  frontier type of spirit and you hate to see that spirit go away. He was  responsible for his own self. He took credit when he did good, and he  took responsibility when he did bad. You don   t see that much in these  days. Today, it seems like decisions are made by committees so if it goes  wrong you can say, well I was just one person on the committee and I  was against it anyway. (Laughter) It seems to me that Frank represented  a time and Pistol Pete represents that time for him where a man stood on  his feet and did his own thing. And I think that   s important for  Oklahoma State University.  I like where you   re going   how do you think he represents the spirit of  Oklahoma State and the spirit of the state of Oklahoma?  Well, just like I was saying, what I   ve noticed is people here at  Homecoming who are not OSU graduates are not OSU fans. One of the  things I   ve always been proud of is that an OSU fan is an OSU fan.  They   re not an OSU Cowboy fan. Or OSU football fan. They   re a fan of  the whole University. Most of us are supportive of all the athletic  endeavors plus the educational process which we never want to forget  because that   s first and foremost that you come to Oklahoma State  University for, because you get the finest education. The others are  extracurricular and you don   t want to forget that. I just think what I   ve  noticed that the people that come here for the first time, they   re amazed  at the brother and sisterhood of Oklahoma State University. Last night as  we went on the Walk Around, people would say,    Where did all these  people come from? What are they doing here?    I mean, you couldn   t  walk up and down the streets. They were amazed that that many fans     and I think the OSU Alumni and supporters are true blue to the heart.  They   re not just during football season.  In addition, Oklahoma State has a lot of the frontier and little bit of the  west.  That   s right.  Rugged, hearty individualism. Pete represented those things, didn   t he?  Yes he did. He represented the difficulty   right after I got here, of  course it was Oklahoma A M. And of course I still like to wear the    A     on my   and I was always proud of that. But because of that Aggie  connection, we had to be better and we were.  Do you remember the time when they made that change from Oklahoma  A M to Oklahoma State University     7  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  That   s right.  And from Oklahoma A M Aggies to Oklahoma State Cowboys? How  did the students, in your era and yourself, how did you like the change  from A M College to Oklahoma State University?  Well I liked it. I welcomed the change. But my brother who graduated  before me didn   t because he was an Aggie and he was proud of that. I  think that change was what in    56 or    57?     57.  And so those graduates before    57 or    57, the last graduates of  Oklahoma A M, of course they didn   t want to see the name change.  But I think Oklahoma State University really fits the school better now.  This is a dynamic university. All you have to do is be gone off this  campus for a couple of years and come back and it   s all new. I had a  hard time finding my way around. I   d finally have to find a point that I  knew and have to go from there because it is a dynamic university and it  changes yearly. I think the Oklahoma State University, The State  University, is more represented than Oklahoma A M College. A  university is made up of a lot of colleges, so I think it should have the  university name attached to it.  Now the name changed from Aggies to Cowboys, how did that     Well, before it was the Aggies, it was the Tigers. You go back far  enough and it was the Tigers. But I think the  name  Cowboys was  accepted well. I certainly did and I think some of the older people  accepted the Cowboys. They liked that spirit of the cowboy. I think the  true life cowboy was a hard life   a hard and lonely life. But thanks to  modern movie westerns, they   ve made it into the free spirit and that   s  how I like to think about it. We   re thinking ahead and we   re responsible  for ourselves.  Bill, I was fascinated with your description of the selection. Can we go  back and have you tell us a little bit more about the selection process? I  understand that in    57 it changed from Aggies to Cowboys and joined  the Big Eight conference  That   s right.  Was that exciting for everybody?  Oh, it was exciting. The students were excited about the name change.  We were excited about becoming a part of the Big Eight because that  8  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  was a premier conference to be in. And it lent a lot of excitement in  filling the stadiums back in those   the stadium was a lot smaller. But we  filled those stadiums in those days.  We changed our name to Cowboys and moved into the Big Eight, so  obviously we needed a mascot?  That   s right. Of course, Frank     Can you share a little bit about what you recall about the process? Do  you remember how we got to select a mascot?  Well, Frank Eaton, of course, he just kind of showed up. In my opinion,  I could be wrong, the University did not officially say that Pistol Pete  was the mascot.  Didn   t trademark it.  We didn   t trademark it and we didn   t have it as a mascot. I   m not sure  that it wasn   t until I was elected as Pistol Pete by the committee that the  school came back and said,    This will be the mascot.    I think when  Charlie did it, we were just on groundwork and I think a lot of the  officials of school just thought it was a bunch of students getting  together and doing something, more than officially adopting it. Of  course at that time, we were under what was called the Spirit Committee  and not part of the Athletic Department.  Were you part of that Spirit Committee?  Yeah.  And that   s the group that actually the University let     Yeah, we were pretty much operating independently. We would just  meet somewhere. We would call a meeting and everyone would by word  of mouth to show up and it was made up of the cheerleaders, I think  there was a couple of the band people there, some pom-pom girls. But  usually at a meeting we   d have 5 or 6 people show up.  Do you remember some of the names of people who would     Chuck Marshall.  Chuck?  Chuck was a student then and I think he was a veteran, so he was a little  9  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  older. He came back and he was active in starting it. And Charlie Lester  was a part of it. I was there. Another guy named Don Yandell who was  an art student was there. Don was   I don   t think Don Yandell was part  of the committee, but he did a lot of work on the custom and trying to  get with the Art Department.  Now sort of backing up a little before there. I recall and visited with a  couple  former Pistol Petes  that talked about a contest with the  O   Collegian.  Yeah, the O   Colly.  And it asked people for ideas if they thought of it and to sketch  something if anybody wanted.  Yeah.  Can you explain that a little bit? How it first got to the decision of Frank  Eaton, Pistol Pete.  Yeah. Well, after Frank died, they did a lot of trying to get some ideas of  what they wanted. I think that   s mainly where Don Yandell got involved  in it, in coming up with the Pistol Pete mascot logo. Then from there, it  went to the Pistol Pete head. The original Pistol Pete head looked more  like the Pistol Pete caricature that you see today. I don   t know how  many new heads we   ve seen then because the one that I wore, I forgot  how much it weighed but it was terribly heavy. The new ones look more  like a real person, the head I wore looked like a caricature. So that   s just,  I guess, progress doing that.  Do we still have the original head, Bill?  The original head is over in the Hall of Fame. And they were     Heritage Hall?  Yeah, uh-huh. And different people have contributed different parts to it.  The head is the original head, the chaps are not, and different people  have brought different things in. Things wear and get dirty, and instead  of just throwing them away, they   re trying to keep them. They   ve got a  Pistol Pete mannequin over there with the head on which is the original  head.  Bill, was there a decision made to officially use Pistol Pete or was there  something else, I mean like that O   Colly? Were they asking for other  suggestions other than just Pistol Pete?  10  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Oh, well they asked for other suggestions. But I think by the time I got  involved in it, and of course I wanted Pistol Pete. So there were more  suggestions sent in but I really don   t know what all they were.  So the Spirit Committee was the one that put the ad in the Daily  O   Collegian?  Yeah, and then after Charlie wore the head, then we advertised that we  were going to have a Pistol Pete and most of the students had seen the  head from Charlie wearing it so we advertised then for people to come  try out for Pistol Pete.  I liked your story. When we started to try to get that first papier-m  ch    head to come from over in Heritage Hall, the first time was the  Homecoming game in    58?  I think Charlie wore it in the first Homecoming game. I know then he  wore it   that year we went to a bowl game and he wore it at the bowl  game. Now this was in the end of 1958. No, this was the end of 1959.  No,    58. What happened then was they had just started televising  football games. The cameras were very large and stationary and they had  to have a whole lot of light to get the cameras to work, so when the  football teams got down to the end zone or away from the cameras, the  cameras really couldn   t pick it up so they did a lot of side line stuff. The  football players on the bench, and the band, and the cheerleaders, and  Pistol Pete. So it was a big hit with the cameraman to be able to do that,  so that   s really what I think put the Pistol Pete mascot   by that I mean  the guy dressed up in the orange chaps and the dark vest and the Pistol  Pete head   that   s what put it as the accepted thing because it was a hit  with the TV people. You   d have to go back and look and see who we  played then.   Bluegrass Bowl was played on December 13, 1958 in Louisville,  Kentucky. Oklahoma State beat the Florida State Seminoles 15 to 6.   Bluegrass Bowl, but I forget who our opponent was right now.  I think it was the first bowl game and the last bowl game they ever had.  That   s right. It was cold, cold, cold.  I   m not sure, but I think we might have played Army. But we might  have played Army in the Homecoming game. There was an OSU-Army  game somewhere in that time. You   re asking me to go back a long way.  I know. You brought up a good point earlier in your conversation about  11  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  the popularizing of Pete.  Yeah.  When they unveiled it at Homecoming, how did it go over with the  student body?  Well, I think they were divided on it. I think some people thought,    Oh,  that   s neat.    And some people thought   it was because it was new.  People don   t accept things being new. They thought that was strange to  see a guy walking around with big papier-m  ch   head on. I think if other  schools had already done it, then it would have been more accepted. But  because they hadn   t seen anything like that before, it was kind of a,       I  don   t know about that,    you know. I think that   s why we didn   t get a lot  of people to come out when we advertised to come out for Pistol Pete.  This wasn   t known. A lot of people said,    Well, what do they mean  come out for Pistol Pete?    They didn   t know what that was. We  communicated it the best we could, but we were a very loose  organization and it didn   t get the publicity that it should have. Now, if  you say you   re going to interview for Pistol Pete, you   re liable to have a  hundred people show up.  Back to the early conversation about   I   ve interviewed Petes who ten  years later, twenty years later did 200 events a year. How many events  did you say you probably did in your first year?  Oh, I did the football games. I did the home game basketball, no away  games on basketball, and a couple of events off campus, Homecoming  Parade and they had    89ers Day over in Guthrie that I remember I rode  in a parade over there for that. That was about it compared to what they  do today.  Did you make any appearances other than, the    89er parade but other  than OSU Athletic appearances? Now Pete makes a lot of personal  appearances.  No. In fact in those days, I was not allowed to be seen without the head  on. You never had your picture made without the head. They didn   t want  me to take the head off, but I don   t know why we decided that. It was  supposed to be like nobody knew who Pistol Pete really was. I think it  was because we wanted to put the emphasis on Pistol Pete, not on the  student that was Pistol Pete. I think that caused a problem later because  nobody knew who the old Pistol Petes were. In fact, I think we just  found the 1973 Pistol Pete about two months ago, just located him  finally. So you know, there are a lot of blanks where we don   t know who  the Pistol Petes were in those years. I think there   s three or four years yet  12  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  that we have no record.  You knew Frank Eaton a little bit, are there some characteristics of  Frank Eaton that you try to portray in your mind when you were Pete,  some of his mannerisms?  You know, the thing about Pistol Pete that I didn   t know when I started  but later realized is Pistol Pete never changes his expression, he always  looks the same. So if you   re going to give any kind of emotion to him,  you have to do it with your arms and your legs. We used to stomp  around when we would walk, we would stomp and bowl walk. We   d  wave our arms and turn around and do anything to add emotion to a  static figure. So the new guys do much better. I think they have mascot  schools and everything now that they can go to and do much better. We  were just pioneers on it, you know. We didn   t know what to do. We just  shot the guns off a lot and jumped up and down and tried to be as  animated as possible.  Did the early Petes have a shotgun as well?  No. I cannot remember Charlie Lester carrying a shotgun. Now I know  that over in Heritage Hall, there is a shotgun over there that it says he  carried. But I never carried a shotgun, I carried two pistols and that was  it. One funny story that I usually tell is that when I went to Kansas State  in Manhattan, they decided that they didn   t want me carrying the guns  across the state lines and so they said they would bring them to me. But  when they got up there they forgot them. I was concerned about the  animation things so I said without the guns, Pistol Pete is going to be  pretty ineffective. So they said, don   t worry about it we   ll get you some.  They came back with two guns. One of them was a little .22 starters  pistol that went,    pop, pop      well you wouldn   t have even been able to  hear it above the crowd. And the other one was a big ole .45. This .45  had some blanks for it that had been in a fire, so when you load them  up   the vision out of the Pistol Pete head is limited so loading the gun  was difficult. Then when I would squeeze the trigger it used to go,     click, click, click and then bang     One of them would go off, you  know. So one time when I was down   I   d get right into Kansas States     fans face. So OSU made a touchdown and I picked my pistol up and  went,    click, click, click   bang     I stuck it back in the holster and I turn  around and while it was in the holster it goes    bang     I had on the  orange chaps. And it was a surprise to me and I was trying to look down  and couldn   t see that much with the head on. But I could see that the  chaps   those orange chaps had a big old black streak right down the  side.  13  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Well, the Kansas State fans thought that was about the funniest thing  they ever saw. And of course I go like I   m on fire and I   m dusting off. It  was funny. It was a big hit when it happened. But oh, hangfire .45, I  would never get them. I was glad to get rid of those pistols.  That   s great. Well over the years you   ve watched, and I   m sure with a  lot of pride, how the tradition of Pistol Pete has grown. What are some  things that have evolved about Pete over the years?  The important thing about the evolvement of Pistol Pete is that although  he is the school mascot, he   s also a representative for the University and  he makes a lot of appearances without the head. Which I think is real  good. I think the Pistol Pete head is good for football games, basketball  games, and sporting events. It   s good for riding in a parade. But I think  it   s great that the young men that we have recruited now for Pistol Pete  represent the college. They can go to a Rotary meeting. They can go to  any organization and represent Oklahoma State University more than  just shooting off guns and marching around a football stadium. So it   s  much more than just a mascot. He is a representative of the University,  which is, I think, very important. He carries himself and he has that  respect that he is a representative of the University. So really, how you  feel towards him is how you feel towards your university. He is the  University just as an ambassador for the United States of America is the  United States, and should be treated with equal respect. That   s the most  important thing in my opinion.  How people feel, alumni, fans about Pistol Pete?  As I mentioned previously when I started this interview how the students  and fans were reluctant on whether they were going to accept Pistol Pete  or not or whether they think maybe that that was not such a good idea.  But now, all the fans love Pistol Pete. The kids love to be up with Pistol  Pete. The little children are sometimes frightened by the big head. But if  you just stand around for a couple of minutes, they warm up to him. Of  course children have the best imagination in the world. To them, that   s  real. That   s not a papier-m  ch   head or fiber glass head now, that   s  really a person. To win the hearts of the children I think is so important.  Everybody now that I know, and I   ve traveled all over the United States  and everybody knows who Pistol Pete is. In fact, I would venture to say  that he is one of the most well known school mascots of any school. You  can take some of the other universities in this state and ask most people  what is their mascot and they don   t know. But everybody knows Pistol  Pete.  That   s great. It seems from the sparkle in your eye and the conversation  that you take a lot of pride in Pistol Pete.  14  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Oh, yeah.  Can you take a personal stance and tell us what it meant for you to be  Pistol Pete?  Well, you know, when I was first Pistol Pete I never gave it that big of  thought. I just thought it was something I was doing as an extracurricular  activity. I was always energetic, I loved the athletics, I loved to be a part  of   I   m the one that they   d always have to say    sit down    at a football  stadium. I was always up cheering and hollering. So that   s basically  what I thought about it. When I graduated, I left that behind me. Then  people would come up and say something to say about Pistol Pete and I  say,    Well, I was Pistol Pete in 1959       They   d say,    Oh, you were      You know and I   d go why are they so excited about that? I was just  Pistol Pete. But I get the benefit of the Pistol Petes today. You know I  didn   t do near what they do, but I get the benefits now of what they do.  Now all of a sudden my whole bathroom is Pistol Pete stuff. There   s  Pistol Petes on the walls. Half of the stuff I own says Pistol Pete  in  one  way or other. Charlie   s gone so I   m the oldest now. Not by age, but as  far as servants are concerned. 1959 is as far as they go back. So I get  treated with some extra respect. It   s just pretty nice. You know, getting  old may not be as bad as I thought. (Laughter)  Well, you talked about the Petes through the years. The neat thing today  that you alluded to earlier is the Petes collectively were Parade  Marshall.  Oh, yeah.  It was the fifty year anniversary of the first Pete on the field for  Homecoming. What about the camaraderie, the bond between all the  Petes?  Oh, it   s a brotherhood. It   s a real brotherhood. I just think that that   s a  common denominator that we all have. We   ve all shared that same  experience. I   ve found as I   ve grown older even on some very sad things  or very happy things, if you share that experience with someone else, it   s  an attraction. Someone else may think they know how you feel. But only  that other person knows how you feel. And that common thread that runs  through so many diverse guys. I mean you have people   you have the  young kids, you have the old timers like me. You have people who  became professionals, people who have stayed on the farm. You have all  of us but we all have the common thread running between us and it   s a  brotherhood that I think makes Pistol Pete special. Like today on the  parade, the people who were watching it just stood up, cameras were  going, and people were taking pictures of all the old Pistol Petes.  15  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Sometimes I look at it and think, well why are they doing all that? I   m  amazed at the celebrity statue that Pistol Pete has become.  Well, you picked on something that was in another interview I had he  talked about how when you put on the Pete hat, you become somebody  else.  That   s right.  Like you said, sort of that statue you took on.  That   s right.  Another persona.  You put on that head, and you can be anybody you want to be. I mean,  because you   re covered up. So that gives you an excuse to do whatever.  And you can act wilder than you would do naturally. Because people are  looking at Pistol Pete and not at Bill Smith, so that does make a  difference when you can do that.  Adding to that, did you feel a special sense of responsibility representing  your University?  Yes, and I think it   s even more so now that you   re wearing the orange  and black. You   re actions reflect upon the University so I think you have  to be more careful, especially as I said, the Pistol Pete head is not  animated so some people when you would do something for fun,  because you can   t do the expression you can   t laugh and say,    Oh, I   m  just joking.    It   s just that same face. They could take that differently.  I   m not a big email sender, but I know that when email became popular  and you started sending email on the computer, you could very easily  say something in jest in an email that someone would take offense to.  And you   d be surprise they took offense because you cannot put   now  they put little smiley faces on it and things like that to make sure. But  Pistol Pete has that same problem. That   s why he has to animate so  much. You have to be careful what you do because it reflects back up on  the University.  Bill, are there lessons and disciplines you learned from being Pete that  you carried over to your own life?  Well, just that when you put the Pistol Pete head on, you   re responsible  back to the University. If you do something, it does not reflect upon you,  it reflects upon the whole University. And you would never want to  tarnish the image of Pistol Pete. Then when I was no longer Pistol Pete I  16  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  realized that my actions reflected on my family. If I did something, it  would not only hurt me but it would hurt my wife and children and then  later my grandchildren. And so, I learned that you should be aware of  what you do. Take responsibility for what you do, and that other people  are affected by your action. That is what I learned on Pistol Pete, that no  one could see that inside that head was Bill Smith, all they saw was  Oklahoma State University. And that reflected back on it. But not only  the bad but also it did the good. If you did something as worthwhile as  Pistol Pete, it reflected back on the University as something worthwhile.  I   m a grandfather now, and I like to think that the good things I   ve done  in life reflect back to my children. I often use the saying that getting is  making a living, but giving is making a life. I think that people need to  be more concerned with making a life than making a living, and I kind  of learned that from Pistol Pete.  Great lesson. If a young man came to you and said I am a student at  Oklahoma State and said I   m considering trying out for Pistol Pete,  what would you tell him about it and would you recommend that he do  it?  For Pistol Pete? Oh yeah. I   d tell him that he   d have a lot of competition  today. But I think it builds a man   s character. And you know someday  we might have a female Pistol Pete. I had a daughter that graduated from  OSU and I   d hate to think that she couldn   t be   Pistol Pete is the Pistol  Pete, not the person inside the custom. So I don   t think that it   s  necessary that the person inside has to be a certain thing. I think the  person inside has to have that understanding that they represent the  University no matter what. I think that someday they may have a female  Pistol Pete and the old hard male chauvinistic pig that I   ve always been  would now today accept that with no problem.  We have a woman Spirit Rider now.  Yeah, isn   t she great? I think that   s fantastic.  What is your favorite memory or memories of being Pete? Can you tell  us that?  That   s easy for me. My favorite   I have a couple. Well, I can   t pick one  favorite. But my favorite has always been the children. The children that  would come up to Pistol Pete and you   d get down on one knee to talk to  the children. They   d always want to feel the mustache. It was made out  of rope in those days, just an old grass rope was the mustache. And  they   d always ask me how you see out. I remember one time when the  Kilgore Rangerettes came to Stillwater and their costume you   d be able  to wear to church today. But because their belt line was cut low, the  17  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  University thought that was a little too suggestive for them to go out on  the field with. I remember thinking, well you know, those are sexy  outfits. In 1958 it was a sexy outfit. But today, nobody would ever     they   d think that was not at all. That was a funny time that we had. I   m  not sure they did get to march at the halftime. I can   t remember but I  know there was a problem with their costumes.  You said you had a couple.  Well, the children coming up. I always remember that. I remember the  gun going off. I remember the first basketball game that I went to.  Tell us about that.  I wore boots and spurs and in 1958, the only kind of shoes you could  have on a basketball court were tennis shoes, you weren   t even allowed  to wear street shoes because they didn   t have the finish they have today  and they were trying to keep the finish right. So they stopped me at the  door and they said,    You know the spurs are not going to go.    I said,     Well, that   s no problem.    So I took the spurs off. And they said,    Wait  a minute, those cowboy boots aren   t going to go either.    I said,    Well,  that   s the only shoes I have.    They said,    Well, you can   t get on the  floor with those cowboy boots.    So I took my cowboy boots off and I  had my spurs and my cowboy boots off and I was just out in my  stocking feet. The first time OSU made two points, I whipped out those  guns and fired them inside the old   then Gallagher Arena. That thing  echoed and they stopped the game. Then they came over and took my  guns away from me. I said,    Wait a minute, you took my boots, my  spurs, and now you   re taking my guns?     But later on, I think because guns had not been fired in there before   it  was the first time. That was back before they had the horn; they just  blew the whistle. When there was a foul, they just blew the whistle.  Like they do on the football referees just had a whistle. So the guns were  the loudest thing in there. And in those days, the basketball score may be  21 or 25 at the end of the game. So it was a sleeper type sport, and I  woke everybody else up with the guns.  It reminds me when Frank Eaton said,    I   d rather have a pocketful of  rocks than an unloaded pistol.     That   s right  An unloaded pistol is like having a car with no gasoline in  it. Or a fire extinguisher that doesn   t work.  I know you take a lot of pride in being Pete. What do you think the  legacy of Bill Smith as Pistol Pete is? And what do you hope that other  18  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  people remember?  Well of course, I hope people remember that I was there at the start. At  the very first. That we left the foundation for the Pistol Pete structure to  be built upon today. And that although we may have been stumbling in  the dark, we at least put down the cornerstone that they can build the  building with, and that gives me so much pride to see the Pistol Petes  today, what it   s become. I   m just glad that I was a part of it and that  people that know me know that I was a Pistol Pete in 1959, and the first  one that was appointed by the committee. I don   t tell them that I was  appointed because they couldn   t get anybody else, but I think I was the  official one   the first official one. And it gives me   my grandchildren  have been ball boys at the basketball game under Eddie Sutton. They   re  always telling,    My Granddad was Pistol Pete.    And that   s a big thing to  them.  Can you tell us about your life after you left Oklahoma State?  Well, I was hired right out of college by the Johns Manville Corporation  and spent about six weeks traveling with Johns Manville working. I  stayed in New Orleans for awhile and then in Houston for awhile. And  then I was given a territory out of Tulsa and I worked for that same  company for 45 years. Then I retired this past December with 45 years  of service.  Are you currently living in Tulsa then?  I still live in Tulsa. I   ve lived there since November of 1963.  And where did you grow up?  I grew up in Ardmore Oklahoma. Actually, we lived on the outside of  town, but I went to Ardmore High School. Went to the grade schools in  Ardmore and Junior High and High School and graduated from high  school in 1958.  Was there an influence that brought you to Oklahoma State?  Well, my brother was still at Oklahoma State. He graduated I think in     59. I was an architecture student and OSU has the best architecture  school in the nation. That was brought me here, was the education that I  could get here more than anything else. In Ardmore, everybody goes to  OU. But the architecture school at OU did not compare to what we had  at Oklahoma State University.  Did you get your degree in architecture?  19  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  Gill  Smith  No, I ended up getting a business degree in marketing. But I went far  enough   I got married while I was in school, and architecture school  was a five to six year school. When I got married I sold floor brush door  to door and my wife worked in the infirmary over there with Dr. Cooper,  so I needed to get out. I changed from the architecture school to the  business school, but I had enough credit hours to have what in those  days they called a minor degree in architecture and a minor degree in  physics. But the Johns Manville people   what I did I designed  commercial roofing. The first roof I helped on was the Astrodome in  Houston Texas in 1963. The last roof I did was the BOK Building Arena  in Tulsa which they just completed. But I did a lot of roofs at this  University, too. Including the new Gallagher-Iba arena. I worked on  that.  Did you get special pride?  I did the inspection on that, and it was one of the hardest inspections you  could make because as you may recall they built that over the old  Gallagher Hall. So when you are up on that roof, you look down to  another roof. But I took a great deal of pride in that. A lot of the  dormitories here, I worked on also.  Is there anything we left out, anything we want to talk about?  No, except I did want to say that my two children are both graduates of  OSU. My granddaughter has her BS degree and her master   s degree  from OSU. My oldest grandson is a student here now and I have three  more coming.  Keep them coming.  Keep them coming. I want to thank you and the University for doing  this. I think it   s important that we get a record because we   ve already  lost Charlie and we   ve lost four or five other Petes. I was the last one  that was involved in the creation and the putting together of Pistol Pete.  As loose knit as it was, and as unorganized as we were, I look back and  say,    Hey, at least we took the first step. And then we turned it over to  some people who took giant steps after that.    That   s what I take a great  deal of pride in. But I think I have more pride in that than being Pistol  Pete is in being a part of the start.  Well, we   re proud of you Bill.  Well, thank you very much. I   m proud of this University.  -------  -------  20   
