 Finchum Today is April 14, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today, I am in the library on campus to speak with Barbara Miller, who will be retiring July 1, 2016, after twenty-some years with the library. Thank you for talking with me today.  Miller Okay.  Finchum Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Miller I was born in Chicago, Illinois, October 17, 1947. The story behind that was when I was just learning to talk, my parents drove to Canada. As they passed the gate, the person at the gate leaned into the backseat and said,    Where were you born?    I said,    Mercy Hospital.    Everybody had a good time with that. Anyway, that hospital is no longer there so I guess I   m, back in the dark ages I was born. (Laughs)  Finchum And did you have brothers and sisters?  Miller I had a sister and a brother, both younger than I am. My sister is passed away. My brother is out in Pittsburg or Northern Pennsylvania now.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Miller They   my mother was a musician, but after the war. They were both Marines. Both my parents were Marines in the war, and after the war they came back to Chicago. She was Italian and he was Irish, and the families did not know each other because they grew up in different neighborhoods. So they got together with family, and my mother worked at Marshall Fields for a while. My father was an executive with the phone company. My mother stopped working when I was born, and she didn   t really go back to work until we were older, the children were older.  5  Finchum With that mix of a background, did she have traditional foods that she would make?  Miller She did, and if you know, Chicago is a city of neighborhoods. My parents actually were born a mile away from each other  They grew up a mile away from each other. We   d go to the Italian side and have Italian food, and then we   d go to the Irish side and have Irish food. In spring, Saint Patrick   s Day and Saint Joseph   s Day are two days apart. Those are big holidays, so that was a big time where you would go one place and then the other, for the holidays. My mother cooked spaghetti and made spaghetti sauce, but she didn   t do a lot of Italian dishes, although my father liked spaghetti. I think it was more my grandparents that were really hardcore Italian.  Finchum Did they speak Italian?  Miller They did. My mother would always speak English to them, but when we   d go to their family gatherings, everybody would be speaking Italian. So my father didn   t understand it, and we didn   t understand it. My mother would speak English back. About thirty years later, she always said she could speak Italian if she had to, they went to Europe. They went to Rome and they got there but their luggage didn   t. My mother opened her mouth and spoke Italian. Got the whole thing straightened out in an hour and a half. My father was just astounded. Then he said,    And she hasn   t spoken it since.    (Laughs) So she could speak it. I learned a little as an adult.  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school?  Miller Well, for a couple of years I went in the city. Ironically, since I was born in Mercy Hospital, we lived across from a Mercy High School in the city. It was kind of an Irish neighborhood. Then, about, when I was about six or seven, we moved to the suburbs to Flossmoor, which is a southern suburb of Chicago. I lived there until I was about fourteen. Went through freshman year in high school and then we moved to Springfield, Illinois, which was the center of the state. I went through a couple of years of high school, and then we moved down to Alton, which is actually a suburb of Saint Louis even though it   s on the Illinois side of the river. I lived there until I went to college.  Finchum What year did you graduate from high school?  Miller Sixty-five.  Finchum What was the name of the high school?  Miller (Laughs) Let me think. Marquette, that was the last. It was a Catholic high school. Not a very good one at the time. In fact, it was to the point where, 6  when my brother started, my father sent him to the public high school. I think my parents were still of that generation that it was more important for the boys to get a really good education, to get set for college, than it was for the girls. I was just shocked that he would send anyone away from a Catholic school. I didn   t really care about it, but my sister was mad about it. (Laughs) He got to go to the better high school.  Finchum Well, did you have a favorite subject in high school?  Miller I liked languages, and I always liked music. That was separate, you know, piano lessons and things. I liked history. I still like, probably still like those things. Literature     Finchum Well, in high school were you making plans to go to college? Was that expected?  Miller Yes, it really was. I think my parents had said to us,    There will be money for you to go to college, but we expect you to work and help out.    That kind of thing. I worked a couple of summers. Of course, back then you didn   t make very much money, you still don   t relatively. I worked a couple of summers. Actually, my parents didn   t have to pay anything my freshman year because I had a national merit scholarship, and I had money earned. Then, after that, they had to help out. College was a lot cheaper then.  Finchum Where did you go, and how did you decide to go there?  Miller I don   t really think   I think my father just sort of said,    You know, you need to go to the University of Illinois. That   s a good place.    I was clueless, so I went there, and I changed my major several times. I started out as an art major. I had drawing, and design, and drafting the first year. I had an A in drafting, and B in design, and a D in drawing. (Laughs) I said,    I probably wasn   t meant to be an artist.    I switched around, and I finally wound up, after a year, in anthropology, and I stayed there.  Finchum And graduated when?  Miller In    69.  Finchum The Vietnam War was going on.  Miller I think my parents were really worried that we wouldn   t finish because that was when all these colleges were going on strike. Like the law school went on strike or the teachers would go on strike. There were all those kind of things happening on campus. Anthropology was sort of a left wing type department, you know. They were worried. I remember thinking at the time, 7     What happens if the department votes to stop classes? I won   t be able to finish.    I thought my parents would kill me, but we got through.  Finchum Were you the first one in the family to go to college? Well, if you were the oldest, you would be the first in your     Miller In my family, but my parents both have college degrees. That was unusual at the time for them. They both graduated right before the war. In fact, my dad only got through college. He had signed up for the Marines, for officers training, on the condition that they would let him graduate.  Then  1941, Pearl Harbor, December, and he needed to get to June to graduate. They agreed, but in April they called everybody up. And Loyola, he went to Loyola, they gave them all their degrees, all the men that had to be called up. They waived their final exams. That was what people did then to get the men in. He barely made it. My mother was actually a little older than he was and she finished. I think she did a year of master   s work too.  Finchum And hers was music-oriented?  Miller Uh-huh. She was a pianist.  Finchum Did you take classes from her or from someone else?  Miller No, she was always very careful to give us lessons from somebody else, although she taught other kids you know. They would trade, because you can   t teach your own kids. They don   t think Mom knows anything. She, I think, what I got from her was more of an appreciation for piano because she would play, and I liked her pieces. I liked, I still, that is my favorite    Chopin, Beethoven, and things she played are still my favorites. I like to relax with a book and piano music at home.  Finchum Well, once you finished with your bachelor   s, what did you do?  Miller Well, I got married after my junior year. My husband was a microbiologist, so after we married   he was a graduate student. We finished, I finished and then I had a year of graduate work towards my master   s in anthropology. His professor, of course they worked in a lab, and his lab advisor moved to UC-Irvine  University of California  and took all his graduate students with him. So I had to leave, but I had gotten all my classwork done toward the master   s, so I had to finish the thesis. So we moved to Irvine and that was my first library job. I got a job in the library, and I think I finessed my way into it by the fact that I knew my way around the University of Illinois library from being in anthropology. You probably had to use fifteen of the branch libraries to get all the anthropology stuff. It was spread all over, and so I had a knowledge. The anthropology department really pushed their students to learn how to use a library. That was always   probably the best 8  thing I got out of anthropology was learning to use that library, and learning how to use, well we didn   t have databases, but how to use the catalog, and how to find things in the stacks, and how to use journal articles and so on.  So when we went out there, I applied for work in the library. I worked, we were there two years, and I worked on my master   s part-time. They didn   t have anthropology. That was a brand new university. So I had to get the books from Texas because the books at Illinois, even though I was still a student at Illinois, they wouldn   t loan out. The things I needed were old manuscripts and stuff, so I got them from Texas, and about forty years later, I actually got to that library in Texas and talked to those people. Obviously they were different people then, but they wanted to know what I used and what my thesis was. They were excited that somebody used this material.  I finished it. I was working as a catalog assistant. My advisor was in Peru, doing research. I knew I had gotten most of my research done, and then he came back and he said,    I   m only going to be here two weeks.    He said,    You have to get that thesis turned in.    So I took a week of vacation, and I wrote eight to five, and I revised seven to ten. In five days, I finished it and I sent it off. I thought,    Well.    They accepted it. They said I   d only made two mistakes. I messed up hieratical and hierarchical during the discussion. I couldn   t believe they accepted it. I think the training I had, which kids don   t get now, in writing papers as an undergraduate and graduate at Illinois got me in the groove. When you have three or four papers due every semester, you plan your life around those papers, and you know that    I can get this paper done in four days.    You get out there, do the research, write it, and revise it, and send it in. I think that training really helped me get that in.  Finchum And those were the days when you used a typewriter.  Miller Oh yeah  You had to type everything, and I think I was a pretty good typist from that. That probably helped me in cataloging, I guess. (Laughs)  Finchum Was this the university where they were filming Planet of the Apes, or was that later?  Miller That   s right. Irvine was where they filmed Planet of the Apes. Should I tell the funny story?  Finchum Yes   Miller We had   that was the early    70s. Everybody in the library was in hot pants and boots that came up to your hip, embroidered, and crazy clothes and everything. The people had come to film the Planet of the Apes, because the library was very modern. They had one side that was a wall of windows. Outside they had these very modern looking architecture steps and things. 9  They wanted to use that. It was, I think it was the second movie. People would come in to use the restrooms and stuff in full ape makeup. Of course, everybody was plastered to the windows for the first week or two, then after that, everybody got bored. If you   ve ever watched them make a movie, it   s mostly standing around and waiting for the cues and stuff. Everybody got bored with it and wasn   t paying attention.  Then, this man came to interview for an associate, he was, I think it was head of technical services. I can   t remember. Anyway, he was from somewhere in the Midwest. He came and what got him the most flabbergasted were the hot pants and the crazy clothes. Of course, we were in the Catalog department, we didn   t see the public, and we could wear anything we wanted. He said,    Boy, I guess when it comes to clothing around here, anything goes     Right when he said it, a guy came in in full  ape  makeup, walked up to the secretary, and said,    Where   s the restroom?    She just pointed and nobody even looked up. We all just stood there and he waited, and he waited. (Laughs) It was really funny, and he finally just said,    Okay.    (Laughs) But that was really funny. They finished the movie. I   ve seen it since. I hadn   t seen it for a long time. My kids weren   t impressed when I said I was there. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, those two years working in the library, did that spur you to go on to get a library degree?  Miller At that point I was still in the anthropology mode, and I was also taking violin. I was taking violin lessons. I had a violin of my uncle   s. I had taken piano from students at Illinois and then I had acquired this violin. I had always wanted to take lessons, so I was doing that. It was a question of pursuing music or pursing anthropology. The job was just to bring in a paycheck. When we moved to Berkeley, where my husband was doing a post-doc, ironically, my violin teacher moved up there to go to graduate school. I was still taking that, and I was taking voice lessons in the city. I had thought about trying to see if I could do the PhD there at Berkeley. I almost did, but I just didn   t think I   d have enough time, because Bob was only going to be there for two years. That   s just not enough time to get a doctorate, even to get the coursework done. I   ve often wondered if my life would have been different if I had finished.  I worked, again, two years there in Acquisitions and Cataloging, because I had the experience from Irvine so I was able to get a job pretty easily. In the course of that job   I had worked in Acquisitions for about six months, and then they switched me to Cataloging because they knew that I   d been in Cataloging before. I had noticed that, of course that was pre-computers, people would do certain searches in Acquisitions, and when the books got to Cataloging, they would repeat everything. I mentioned that to the head of Cataloging. I said,    You know, we   re duplicating efforts here. There ought 10  to be a way we can       And he said,    You need to go down and talk to the head of technical services.    Later, it turned out the reason he told me to do that was because the head of Acquisitions and the head of Cataloging were kind of in adversarial relations, and he figured it   d be better to go up to the top and come down. That    where I met Joe Rosenthal, who became a mentor of mine. I told him about this. I said,    Maybe there   s a way we can improve workflow.    When he found out we were going to move to Tennessee, that   s where Bob got a job, he gave my name. He knew the librarian down there, the director. He said,    You need to contact him, because I told him. He   ll find you a job down there.    So at that point, it was still just getting a library job.  We moved down there. I was still singing. I had stopped the violin. I was still taking voice. So I had an audition with the voice professor down there, Ed Zimbara. I did get a job as head of the non-print, microfilms basically. They called it non-print then. It was kind of a strange situation. They had me, as a non-professional, as head of the microfilms in the main library which was all the research material. They had a librarian in charge of the microfilms in the undergraduate library, which was mostly just journals that were on microfilm. It seemed like that was a contradiction. When I was at Tennessee, after I   d been there awhile, I decided maybe I should go to library school. They didn   t have what amounted to much of an anthropology department, and since I had all this experience I thought maybe I should do that.  Finchum Was it in Temple Court? Do you remember if your classes were in Temple Court at UT  University of Tennessee ?  Miller That sounds familiar. It was a specific building.  Finchum Close to the student union?  Miller Yeah. Kind of. I think that   s probably what it was. I forgot, you were there too.  Finchum When did you start at UT?  Miller Well, we moved there in    74. I was    70 to    72 at Irvine, then    72 to    74 at Berkeley, and then we moved there in    74. That   s when I started working. I don   t think I started working on my library degree for a year or two. A lot of people there    there were a lot of library science students that worked in the library, but there were also a lot of staff that were getting library degrees because it was right there and it was easy to do. I worked on it for a couple of years.  Finchum What year did you graduate from there? 11  Miller I think it was    78. My daughter was born, Kate was born in    77. I was taking two classes at a time while I was working, because you could get tuition kickbacks there. After Kate was born, I took one. I didn   t have too much left. She was born in    77. I think she was like one or so when I graduated, a little over a year old.  Finchum Where was the library then? It   s not the current one, was it?  Miller They were building the new library  John C. Hodges Library , or they were going to build a new library when I left. This was the old library  James D. Hoskins Library . I don   t know what the old library is now. It might still be a library.  Finchum It is, special collections.  Miller Oh, the whole thing?  Finchum A good part of it   Miller Wow   Finchum Or it was in    90? I don   t know about now.  Miller Well, we had to go down. The microfilm, which they would never do now, was down in the basement. When you went down, it was stone steps with brick walls. It was like going down in a castle or something. You go down, you could feel the temperature drop and get clammier as you walked down the stairs. You literally could. When I came, the first thing I had to do, they hired me for that job, was they were moving all the microfilm from wherever it was to this place. This was now going to be the microfilm room. It was pretty good size.  You had to double-shelve the film. Of course, it   s the same way now. Nothing improves with time, you know. The shelves, the book trucks weren   t the same width as the shelves, so you had to make sure everything stayed in order, which of course it never was with the double-shelving. That was the first thing I did, the first day I started. We did that for about two days and got it all down there.  We had the Andrew Johnson Project. These were presidential papers, series that people were doing. They worked a lot with the microfilm because there were old newspapers and things like that that they used for their work. They were right next door to us down there. They had an office. There were about six of them.  12  Finchum So you liked library better than anthropology?  Miller I think I just got away from it, you know, and it was more convenient to do that. I think a lot of people get into library work that way. Especially after Kate was born, there just wasn   t an easy way for me to work on a doctorate, and I think I just got away from it. I finished the library degree and then     Finchum What had you planned to do with it? Go into a certain area?  Miller Right, that was part of the problem. The fact that you could do a library master   s in anthropology, but you could not do a library doctorate in cultural anthropology, which is what I was in. I was in Latin American anthropology with a specialty in Peru. I would have had to go to Peru for six months or a year to do research, and that just wasn   t convenient, particularly after I had a child. It just looked like it was just going to be too difficult to try to do. That   s why I thought the library work would be easier.  Finchum When you were going through the library program, where you focusing on archives or management or anything in particular?  Miller You know, back then, I don   t think we really focused. I don   t remember there being a focus. I took classes that I was interested in. There were some that were more interesting than others. The management class, the instructor was just dreadful, but we read a lot. Everybody just sort of figured in there we can read and learn information because we   re not going to get it from this one. You know, he was a nice guy, but he just didn   t know how to teach. I took that. I took, well you had to take you know, the basics.  Finchum Cataloging?  Miller Cataloging and I took Children   s Lit.  Finchum And General Reference?  Miller Yeah, Reference work. You had a comprehensive exam back then, I think. All these kids were complaining about it and I said,    You would not complain about this if you   d had to write a thesis.    (Laughs) Which I had to do for my other master   s. That was nothing. Everybody said,    You worked in libraries for six, seven years by now.    They said,    You   re not going to have any trouble with the comprehensive exams,    and I didn   t  It was written, all written.  I had really not thought about it, what type of library. I didn   t think I could work in special collections. That was an interesting thing because at the time and maybe it   s gotten easier, you really had to know Latin and a lot of languages, and I had smatterings of languages. I had a lot of French, and 13  Spanish, and some Italian, Dutch and things like that, but you really had to know a lot to look at some of the old manuscripts. Tennessee had a lot of old things even, well, they had seventeenth century things. They had a lot of old manuscripts. They didn   t just collect for the southeast. They collected a lot of European manuscripts and things like that. I just didn   t think I would qualify to do that.  Plus, I was thinking in terms of,    I   m probably going to be here, because my husband has a job here, and I   m not thinking I   m going to be moving, and I have to look and see what jobs would be open here.    I think that   s why I just waited to see what came open and the first thing that came open was a reference job. That   s what I interviewed for.  Finchum From UT-Knoxville, you went where?  Miller We were there seven years, something like that. No, even more than that. About ten years I guess. No, that   s not right either. Let me think. We moved there in    74 and we moved in    80. Six years I guess. Bob, my husband, took a job at Loyola in Chicago. We were going back to the Chicago area. At that time, I stopped work. I mean, I was pregnant with my second child. I decided I was not going to work for a while, until I got the kids older, because I would have had to pay daycare and so on. Kate was about three and a half.  I had worked about a year and a half I think in Reference. It was general, it was pretty general. There were a lot of documents there, although a lot of the documents were down in the microform room. There was a lot of microform stuff. When I was down there, the head of Reference used to take his librarians down there for me to give them a lecture on what we had down there so they   d know, to help people. That helped me when I went to General Reference. I was able to learn that. Then, I just kind of stopped cold turkey for ten years. The whole time we were in Illinois, I stopped. I raised, partially raised four kids in suburban Chicago.  Finchum That brings us up to, when did you come to Stillwater?  Miller Ninety-one, 1991. I started   I wasn   t working when we moved in, but when my youngest child was in first grade, and I had another one in fourth. I had two at Sangre grade school. I remember when we went, the librarian had said,    Any volunteers, please come and help.    So I volunteered. I said,    I am a librarian, card-carrying librarian, so I could help you with some things.    She was just so excited. She had me doing things she knew I could do that somebody that hadn   t had any training couldn   t do. I worked there, oh two, three afternoons a week. Then, the person that was the library assistant, they wanted her to do another job two days a week. I wound up being a 14  permanent part-time employee for a year or two. By that time, my oldest daughter was college-age.  We sort of said I have to go back to work when they start college, to cover the bills. I wrote a letter to Dr. Johnson, Ed Johnson. I told him what my background was and I said,    I haven   t worked in libraries for,    by that time it would   ve been about thirteen years or something like that. I said,    Except for working in the school library,    so I had picked up some computer literacy from working in the school library. Although, at Tennessee, they had started doing Medline searches when I left. I had some experience with that, but that was it. I told them,    I   ve worked in Public Service, Technical Service. I   ve worked with Government Documents, but I haven   t worked in an academic setting for about eleven years.    I gave them my education.  He called Sheila Johnson, and said,    You want to call this person and see if they can help out?    She called and interviewed me over the phone, brought John and Connie up. John Phillips and Connie Kirby, and said,    Do you think you could use her as a visiting faculty member?    Of course, everybody was glad to get another live body. I think they already had Nancy, can   t remember her last name. Nancy  Wikel  was already working as an adjunct, so they hired me for Government Documents, and I remembered a lot of it. Of course, you remember parts of it. I think they were most interested in the fact that I had some government documents, but I   d also had a lot of cataloging. It was going to be part cataloging. You remember back then, they would make sure you understood that this job had a lot of cataloging, and I said,    That   s fine. I don   t mind. I enjoy cataloging, as long as I know that I can   t press a button and erase the whole catalog accidentally on the computer, I   m fine.    So that   s how I came here.  Finchum Remember your first day?  Miller Yeah, actually it was kind of a weird first day, because at the same time I came, Elaine  Watson  was interviewing for another job in the department, for a permanent position. They had already done all of that search when I came, and so I was just kind of there, but they just gave me a few things to read because they were running around with Elaine, interviewing. That was kind of funny, so for about a day or two, I had that going on.  Finchum Elaine? What was her last name? I   ve heard it mentioned. I can   t think of it either.  Miller I just can   t think of her last name.  Finchum We   ll look it up.  15  Miller She started a few weeks, maybe a month later, but by that time, I had enough. Connie  Kirby  sat down with me and started showing me how the computer cataloging worked. Sheila  Johnson  had suggested,    Maybe you should      when John  Phillips  and Connie were there interviewing, Sheila had suggested,    Would you be willing to go down to the library school at OU and take a cataloging class, just to update you?    I said,    I really don   t mind,    but I said,    I can tell you what happens in cataloging classes. They give you rules and then you get a job, and they tell you why they don   t follow this, that, and the next rule because of the peculiarities of the library.    I said,    I don   t know that it would be really helpful to the job.    Connie looked at me. She said,    You   re absolutely right. It wouldn   t help at all,    with the amount of things you have so I kind of plunged in.  Finchum That was the Jackson system, too. It was different.  Miller Well, yeah. The Jackson system, but you know, I didn   t really classify in California because they already had LC Numbers so we didn   t classify. I mean the librarians probably did for original cataloging, but of course we didn   t do original cataloging. They did, at Irvine, you, every   they did it here, too, in the main cataloging. Every librarian had a full-time staff person, and they would supervise that full-time staff. For a while, it was just an open pool, but after a year they split everybody up by subject, because they figured that way you could get real familiar with a certain subject area, and you could move faster in your cataloging. I had social sciences. I almost picked music, and they let the staff people pick who they wanted to work for. They figured that was the best way to do it. I picked social sciences because that was my background. I felt I would probably be better off. Ironically, I did get government information because there was a lot of political science stuff and so on. I   d had a lot of that type of cataloging before, so that helped.  Finchum Was gov docs on  the fifth floor at that point? Or were you somewhere else?  Miller Um, yes, they were already up there. They had recently moved back up there, I think. You know, you probably remember. We had the t-shirts that had all the books, that listed all the moves, that they had zigzagged up and down. I just started right in cataloging, and then John would take me out on the reference desk and talk about some things. Get started that way. Then Elaine started, and once he had Elaine there, then he was just giving us classes in different things and talking about things, because he could do two at a time. Elaine   s background I think was English, English Lit, so she had a different background. She probably had more makeup to do than I did, in the subject areas.  Finchum John knows his government documents, doesn   t he?  16  Miller He knows the documents.  Finchum Very good teacher.  Miller You know, we learned a little bit about everything. I probably felt, of course, you always feel more comfortable cataloging because you   re putting things in slots, and you   re matching things. When you   re out on the reference desk, it   s just every question   s from another planet for a while until you learn all the different agencies, so that made it more difficult.  Finchum You were a visiting professor for a couple of years?  Miller Yeah, I think from    well, I started two days after my birthday, October 19th, and that was    95. The new job started almost two years later. It was July of    97. I had about twenty months.  Finchum They created a position or     Miller No, somebody, I can   t remember. I can   t remember. It may have been a vacant position when I was visiting. It took them that long to get organized. They tend to take a lot of time here to get organized, to open a position. There were, at the time, a couple of positions open. Brian  Rossmann  had interviewed, and who else? Julia  Crawford , I think for the patents. The patents, which was not in the department at the time, it was over at that Wes Watkins building. That job was open also, although everybody was ostensibly interviewing for this one positon in Docs. They ended up hiring Brian and I. I don   t remember how that worked, and then Julia for the patents. I think that happened all at once.  Finchum Ed Johnson was still dean at that point?  Miller He was still dean.  Finchum Sheila   s role? Was she an associate dean?  Miller She was an associate dean, head of Public Services. That   s why he turned that over   when I sent him that letter, he turned it over to Sheila. He figured it was probably a Public Service position. Yeah, Sheila was doing a lot of going to conferences, I think, for Ed because he didn   t have time. It seems to me I remember that vaguely.  Finchum Well, looking back over fifteen to twenty years, some changes that have happened here?  Miller Well, not too long after I started, we    well, first of all, they had taught me. Part of my job was instruction. They had me doing a couple of the 17  bibliographic instruction classes. Once John figured out that I could teach a class, you know, he went to a couple. He said,    Well, you   re fine. We   ll give you on this.    They had the Notice system which was, in our minds now, a very primitive system. They were switching to Voyager pretty quickly. We got training for that. I felt that Voyager was pretty straight forward, compared to Notice. It was easier. It looked cleaner. It was just a better system. We had the training for that.  In the course of, somewhere along in those lines, they needed somebody else to teach the credit class. That was Peggy Wolf, and then it was David Oberhelman had taken it over. John said,    Well, you could probably do that.    I said,    Well okay. I   ll volunteer for that.    So then I was teaching that class, and I taught that for several years, a one-hour credit class. That took up a lot of time with grading and things like that. Once they started, once they got a few more people, I dropped it. Then they started the online version, then more kids were taking the online version. You   d have a class of six, or seven, or eight kids instead of fifteen or twenty kids, so they didn   t need as many people. So I stopped that.  That probably aimed my research areas, you know, into instruction more. I did it with the government documents angle, instruction for government documents. I did some work with OLA, Oklahoma Library Association, and ALA, American Library Association, the Depository Library Council, which ran the program, the depository program. I did several presentations and things on how I would teach government documents, because we also had bibliographic instruction for documents classes, as you know. That   s probably where I put my research areas, and my outreach and things, was in how to teach documents.  Finchum And information literacy was     Miller Yeah, information literacy, sort of information literacy for government documents but also for that credit class. I probably leaned more toward instruction than anything else at that point.  Finchum You were always very good when a patron would come up with a question, very patient and as thorough as you could be.  Miller Well, John taught us that, (laughs) because if we weren   t, he   d come up and take over. We had to be  (Laughs) I think that was okay. You learned very quickly that what a student asks is not really what they want. They   ll ask a question, but that   s not remotely what they need, so you have to spend some time. We worked nights then too. We were on our own at night for four hours. We had to know the collection pretty well, because we didn   t have anybody to call. Nobody in main reference knew the answers so we had to find it. 18  Finchum We had a reference desk up on five, but no longer.  Miller No longer, no longer. Although we have patrons come in, but we don   t get as many. I   m not really sure why. I know that people find things online. I know that a lot of government information is online, but if you are doing historical work, that   s when you need the paper collection. It   s just not all online anymore, or still, I guess I should stay. It   s still not all online. We get questions every week that are, you know, will take you a few hours to try and dig something up, information they need. We had one this week that wanted testimonials from, what   s the name of that ship? Tuscania, which was the sister ship of the Lusitania that was also sunk by the Germans in World War I. They had found some testimonials, and they wanted to find more. We had to dig around with that. That took a few hours.  We had one about a week ago. They called me, I think it was Monday. I spent the better part of the day on this one. Curriculum lists, the curriculum committee in Oklahoma that had lists of textbooks, back in the    30s. They needed it for some project they were working on. This woman called me. A graduate student had borrowed what we had, from Loyola in Chicago, but she was in library school at Northwestern or something. I don   t know how that worked out. I got a call from Northwestern, from a historian who was asking me about this because the things they sent them, our materials from inter-library loan, they were afraid they weren   t complete, or there were things missing. They needed to have it to stand up in court for whatever they were doing. We worked on that for a long time because the set was kind of not very well put together. The holdings were missing things.  That kind of thing comes up. You can say we don   t get a lot of questions, but when we get the questions, they   re always longer. You have to   we have a couple of professors. Well, Dr. Henderson   s class in public policy. They come in and you know you   re going to spend a few hours with them. The legal classes, there   s two or three different faculty that do legal classes and bring them up, you know, we introduce ourselves. They both get the instruction from their professors now. They give them the instruction, but they have us meet them, and show them rules in and out of the department, and then we   re there for questions.  Finchum Well, in your time period, too, Gov Docs has gone from paper to electronic.  Miller And you know we have a huge backlog that   s not cataloged. When I started work twenty years ago, John told me,    It   s only 20 percent cataloged.    He was still saying that when he retired a year ago,    It   s 20 percent cataloged.    I said,    Wait a minute  I have done thousands and thousands of titles. (Laughs) We have to have made some progress     I know there   s over a million titles that are probably not cataloged. A few years back, they moved 19  a lot of those to the Annex, to make room for the math lab. The problem was they weren   t cataloged. When Connie retired a year and a half ago, she started working half-time. She came back under that University program where you could come back half-time and work. She spent half her time at the Annex and half her time in our department. She   s getting the Annex cataloged.  Now, we have Michele Seikel. Theoretically, she   s half-time Documents but in reality, it   s more because she brings cataloging over to the Annex with her in the afternoon where she   s in with Acquisitions. Paper Acquisitions doesn   t have as much work anymore, so she brings cataloging with her. She   s probably close to full-time cataloger. Now, Misty Long is over there full-time. We have a lot of people over there that can get that material cataloged, which is very important because we can look in the shelf list, but we spend a lot of time   everyday there   s piles of books that go back to the Annex, and come back and forth, that people have borrowed or the courier service, going back and forth. That takes a lot of our time. We   re trying to catch up. It was nice of them to give us those people because that   ll make a big difference.  Because we are having to coordinate all this   we depend on Connie a lot. I depend on her for suggestions on,    What do you think would be,    based on what you know what   s left. She knows more than I do because I would do things as I was handed them.    What do you think the agency is that would be better for beginning catalogers or copy catalogers to handle?    We also have half-time of another Tanya  Powell , who   s in Main  Library  who works under Ellen Ross. Connie found some things that she thought would be suitable for Tanya to do and showed Ellen how to do it. She   s handling, this is in the main collection, a lot of areas. Connie, of course, is doing main, she   s been doing Navy. Initially, we were just going to start at the A   s and move forward. We said,    That   s not going to work,    because then you don   t know who   s done what. You have flags that get misplaced. Now, I think what we   re doing, we have a list of agencies online and sub-agencies, and we   re just going to mark them off as somebody finishes the sub-agency or whatever it is.  We   re going to go to things that we think need to be cataloged. Connie identified National Parks, especially since it   s the hundredth anniversary this year. We try to look for things like that, that there   s going to be a need for those, because people are looking at anniversaries. I was originally going to do Agriculture. I pulled some things. What I   ve really been doing the last, well, we had    we had about twenty-five or thirty book boxes from the state library that they had given us, that they were weeding that were duplicates and stuff. We had to go through all those boxes and find out if we had the materials. It was mostly the Department of Education, state department. Find out if we had it. Find out if,    Yes, we have it but theirs is a better 20  copy,    and we   re going to switch those. We did that for over a year. It took a long time to go through that and had students helping us.  After that, I started working on piles that John had left around the department. He was going to get to this, you know. He   s working part-time in maps. He   s been going through things that were piles left in the map department, not by him, because he wasn   t down there at that point. It turns out that Michele  Seikel  is also a maps cataloger. That   s a specific kind of cataloger. You have to have experience. She   s splitting her time between doing some of these piles of maps, and it was a lot of Oklahoma Geological Survey stuff. I did some, and then I did these other piles that were left. A lot of them were things that you don   t write down any statistics because you   re comparing or you   re saying,    Okay, we   re going to substitute this for the other one and change the barcodes.    But you don   t write down that you did any new items. (Laughs) My statistics look ridiculous every month. Twenty-five added copies, and that   s all I did. Well, that   s not all I did. That   s kind of, we feel that we   ve finally gotten caught up with all the piles. We don   t have any more piles. I think I have eight rolls of microfilm setting on my truck that I have to do. That   s it.  Then, now, I can go back and do, start with an agency and go forward. The thing is, it   s important for me to do it, as it   s important for Connie, because we know the problems. At the same time, since we started this new software, Alma, everybody had to learn a new cataloging software which is not intuitive. It   s quite different than Voyager. It   s more tedious to get something cataloged. It seems to be, and I keep waiting for it to become second nature and I can get through it. Because the stuff that was left un-cataloged is not as straightforward as the other stuff that we   d already done, it makes it more difficult. I   ll pull a truck, and it   ll take a week or two to go through that truck because I   m pulling things.    Well, this was not cataloged. It has a barcode, but it was just given provisional cataloging    Now we have to go look for catalog copy, and if there   s no copy, we have to give it to Michele for original.    While this was put together as a series, but it   s not really a series. Somebody goofed,    and we have to separate it. It   s a lot of problem, un-knotting of problems, and it doesn   t go real fast. I   m hoping, my goal is, well one of my goals is to get rid of all the piles, the extra things that were left over. The next thing was to get, at least start getting through an agency so I can get a handle for what   s there and know who to give it to.  The other thing we have to start doing is there   s a 583 field in the MARC record, in the cataloging formatting, that is for describing condition of materials. Maybe you   re going to either rebind, or digitize, or something of that effect. You can list the condition. The Government Publishing Office (GPO) wants to identify these materials because now they have gotten permission from the Joint Committee on Printing to allow Regionals to get rid of some of their paper materials if there is a good electronic copy, and if 21  there are at least a certain number of copies across the country, for preservation. It   s important for GPO to know,    Yes, Oklahoma State has this, but we looked at the 583 field and it   s falling apart. Or there are maps in there that are going to disintegrate when you open them. Or it   s very faded, and it   s on onion skin paper, and you can read both the print on one side and on the other. You can   t digitize this and make it legible.    They need to know that. That way, we would be more likely to get permission to get rid of ours, and let somebody who has a better copy keep it. So we   re starting that. We   re just going to move forward, but since we   re doing all this retrospective cataloging, it   s a good time to start.  Finchum Well, with your end date in sight, are there certain things you want to get done before June 30?  Miller That   s kind of where I am. Some days   you know there   s a lot of other stuff going on. There are some ALA stuff I   m trying to finish. I   m still editing Oklahoma Librarian for OLA. We   re trying to find a successor, because I only have one more issue, so that   s going on. I   m not going to ALA this summer. I had my last one. They   re doing kind of like an oral history, but it   s not as extensive, a Fireside Chat, they call them. It started out with about six people that were retiring, that have been around for quite a while, to talk about where Government Documents Roundtable is, where we have been, where we need to go, and wisdom of the ages kind of thing. Now that our Superintendent of Documents is also retiring, Mary Alice Baish, she   s on there too. We   re trying to organize that. That   s coming up next month.  Finchum Are they going to record it?  Miller Oh yeah  I   m sure they   re going to record it. People can   t all listen. The Fireside Chats, they have recorded and made available.  Finchum You   ve been very active in ALA, and GODORT  Government Documents Round Table , and OLA. I mean, very active. Any highlights come to mind?  Miller Well, I was chair for a year of ALA-GODORT. I think that was very instructive. I decided to run for chair after I had served on ALA Council for four years. I felt that would be a good use of my time. We had quite a few government documents people on Council at the time. They were very    they   d been on there awhile. We knew how to get things done on Council. What Council shows you is how you get things done in your roundtable or division, because people would throw out a resolution, but they hadn   t taken it by other people, and they didn   t know how to write it, and they didn   t know how to get it passed, and so on. You knew who the mover-and-shaker committees were on the ALA committee level. With that knowledge, I felt that would be very helpful to go to GODORT.  22  I enjoyed working on the State and Local Taskforce in GODORT, because every state does things differently. Their governments are all different. They give you ideas when you go there and network.    Well we could try this in our state,    or    Here   s something we tried that didn   t work,    that kind of thing. You learned what doesn   t work, which is probably more important than what works, so you avoid pitfalls. I really enjoyed that. When I first started at GODORT, they would have agencies come and talk. I couldn   t keep up. There were too many people. They knew all this stuff inside out and I didn   t, so it   s a really high growth record. I think that when I was chair, I was able to contribute better. That was one of the things that I focused on was liaising with other parts of ALA, because many hands make short work of things. The federal libraries have a roundtable, the maps librarians have a roundtable. They all work really closely with GODORT. The business librarians are always interested in it. RUSA, the Reference  and User Services Association , they love knowing what   s going on. Then, there are other, there   s a committee on legislation for big ALA. All these groups need to work together.  This is one of the problems with ALA. Being a voice to the government or whoever you want, is because people have so many different opinions, they can   t speak as one voice. I think we really need to work more on that. That   s what I worked for. I think a lot of people agree, but there are still some people that want to get their way of doing things, staying. I said,    Wisdom does not come from having to have your own way. Wisdom comes from listening to different points of view, listening and appreciating different points of view.    I think that is what you have to say, appreciating. We teach it. We teach it, when we teach critical thinking and information literacy. You have to appreciate bias, and you have to appreciate different points of view, but when push comes to shove, we   re not practicing it. I try to, especially in my later years, really listen to how things are going to affect somebody else. That works in the library too. What   s their issue and what   s our issue?  Finchum Traveling to and from ALA can be a challenge sometime too?  Miller We have had that haven   t we? You and I had that. We had what? Two extra nights in Washington, DC because of weather? That was quite interesting.  Finchum It was summertime too, wasn   t it?  Miller It was bad storms, I think, not in DC, but    my favorite part of that was that the last night, the third day we were going to fly out, they told us that we probably weren   t going to fly out because they didn   t have a crew. Remember that? We said,    How could you not have a crew if nobody has left this airport for three days? How could you not have a crew?    (Laughs) That was quite interesting. I had another one that we spent two nights in 23  Houston, Helen Clements and I. We had deliberately chosen a southern way back from a mid-winter meeting. That was not a good idea. If you   ve been in northern airports, you know they get them cleaned very fast. In Houston, they closed the airport because they were predicting that it might snow. Never did, but they still didn   t open the airport for two days. We spent one night in a fleabag hotel, and another night with one of our colleagues who was at Rice. She had said,    If you guys get stuck, call me. You can come out to my place.    We called her the next day. We had a great day visiting her, and got back. Yeah, travel has its ups and downs. As long as I have a book with me, I don   t care. (Laughs)  Finchum It   s nice to have connections across the country too. I mean, you do get that from being active in ALA.  Miller I think you do. You know where people are. I always think that   s helpful too, when people call. Like when they called from Chicago that one time. I said,    Well, you   re at Northwestern.    I said,    Here   s three names. I know these three people. They can help you up there.    Now, they couldn   t help her with the Oklahoma stuff, but I have called    I had a student one time that was trying to get information on    it had to do with baseball stadiums, and I   m trying to think what they called those   an impact plan, how it was going to, he wanted environmental impact statements for ballparks. I don   t know how he ever got that topic, but I called up to Chicago, because it was the hundredth anniversary of Wrigley Field. I knew they would be doing stuff. I got ahold of two or three colleagues up there, and they had all kinds of stuff for this guy, city council meetings for when it was built a hundred years ago, and all that kind of stuff. That really helps when you can call and you know someone. That   s very helpful.  Finchum And you win points for the library image   Miller Yeah, that   s right. Yeah, I never did hear back from that guy. He said,    I   ll let you know. I know this is going to be a great report because I got all this information     This was for some very basic class. It was like freshman comp or something. It wasn   t    kids pick topics and they have no idea how complex, what their resources are going to have to be, what sounds like a simple statement to them. It   s kind of funny.  Finchum Well, hooking people up with the information is one of the perks of being a librarian. You feel good when you have accomplished that.  Miller You do  And I never know, how far should I go? Like, I was telling this historian. I gave her the name of Jeff Wilhite at OU and Steve Beleu at the state library for those curriculum guides and lists of textbooks. I said,    I don   t know what their holdings are, but you could ask them. They may be able to fill in.    But I also said,    You can call the State Department of 24  Education and see if they have a collection. There is an archive at the state library.    I don   t think it   s necessary for me to call. She was going to fly down here. I said,    Don   t fly down here. You have a lot of information. You have very specific information on titles. You call first because that   s a lot of money to fly down here, before you know what   s what.    She wanted to know how far it was from the airport in Oklahoma City to here. I said,    Well, an hour and twenty minutes to each airport, but if you wait until August, there   ll be an airport here.    I guess it won   t go to Oklahoma City. You have to go to Dallas first. (Laughs) So anyway, that   s helpful I think.  Finchum Well we talked about ALA, a little bit of OLA. Then within the library you have also served on various committees and had important roles.  Miller I have. I   ve done promotion and tenure. I did that on your, had you up for something on promotion and tenure. Promotion, I think. Those committees were interesting. Again, you have to look outward, and I felt that a lot of librarians don   t look outward to the University. There   s been a lot of movement under the previous provost to equalize promotion and tenure procedures throughout all the colleges. The Library is a college. I worked on faculty committee. I know that the professors are given dossiers for things that the provost would like another set of eyes to look at, when there   s been a dispute, and it   s gone up to the provost. I   ve listened to other people in our RPT  Reappointment, Promotion, and Tenure  say,    Well, the provost isn   t going to look at this,    and I said,    The heck they aren   t  They   re going to look at everyone, and I know because of being on faculty committee.     I think it   s very helpful, and again, it was helpful when we found out in Faculty Council and things, changes in the program that were going to affect us, and that really significantly affected. Like the college-level review committee is completely different now, it   s elected. That made a big difference. Trying to explain that to people, trying to get them to understand we   re part of a larger group here if we   re doing promotion and tenure. It   s not just the Library. It   s the whole University. It   s kind of hard. But I enjoy that. I think it   s interesting to work on. I enjoy writing and editing things, so I guess I enjoy that.  Finchum That   s where Oklahoma Librarian comes in, I guess.  Miller Yeah  I think I really enjoy editing. I still edit my kids    papers, you know. My son just sent me the abstract for his dissertation, and said,    It has to be down to three hundred and fifty words, and I   ve got four and a quarter.    (Laughs) I said,    I can get it down.    I enjoy that kind of work.  Finchum You also played a role in the noon music concert.  25  Miller We did. I think that   s very valuable. The music department is so grateful for that. Michael, see I can never, Michael Kim, who used to be a cataloger here. He had the idea for that. He said,    I think we should do this.    I said,    Well, we need to go to the dean     We went to the dean. She had some other ideas, too. I started it, but then I had already had a promotion to full professor. David Oberhelman hadn   t. I said,    Why don   t you take this over?    He had the music department as his liaison anyway. I said    It   s one more thing you can put on there.    He was glad to do it. He   s taken it over and done it since. It gives the undergraduates and graduate students another venue to perform, particularly if they   re planning on going to a national contest or something. Or if they have juries coming up, that they have to perform for juries, or they have a recital coming up. It   s another venue to perform to get that experience because they don   t really have many chances in the department.  I   m still on the Friends of Music Board here. That was kind of an outgrowth of that. I was chair, I chaired it for three or four years. Now, we get a new, finally, performing arts center. Somebody just gave us twenty-five million dollars. I   m looking forward to that. I hope I   ll still be in Stillwater. It   ll probably take three years to build it, but at least it   s coming. I feel that we   ve helped them. Particularly their brass groups, trombones, and horns, and saxophones, which I guess is wind instruments. They repeatedly win national performance contests. They   ve done another one. The trumpets this year pulled in with two individual winners and a group winner, you know, the overall ensemble. That just never happened before. The music department here is really growing, and I think that   s helpful to them. They can perform here.  Finchum It gets them into the library and     Miller Yeah, in theory, it gets them into the library. They do come in here for sheet music.  Finchum Well, and people come in to hear them.  Miller Yes  People do come in to hear them or for the free cookies. I   m never sure which one it is.  Finchum Aww, both  And then you did    Soul of the People.     Miller We did. That was a grant that David Oberhelman and I had that was to discuss primary resources for the Dust Bowl. We did it, we had several venues. We used the Sheerar Museum here, and we used the public library. We had a lot of programming and a lot of speakers for various things connected with the Dust Bowl. They were marvelous. Some of them were oral histories that we had, collected and heard. We did, we talked about 26  slave interviews from the Depression. There were a lot of people that   that was very well attended. I think there were just a lot of people that came to those. They were very good. We did it in conjunction with the Let   s Talk About series of books, of reading at the public library. Which is a program, National Endowment for the Humanities puts that on. They have people read books on a certain theme, and then they have discussions and programming on it. We worked it out around that. It was quite interesting. There weren   t a lot of grants that had been given in the Library at that time. We had a high learning curve for things to put in, and certain boiler plate things that you can transfer in that you have to fill out. We suggested at the time, we were hoping to get a grants person, and now we finally have a grants person in the Library. I am very excited that that finally happened. That was a, we gave a lot of presentations on it, too. That was helpful.  Now, we have a World War I series, David and I, that   s going on for five years. We have two or three speakers a semester on different topics of how World War I affected life in general. In fact, last night, I saw one that I think needs to go on there. It   s a documentary on German cinema during the Weimar Republic, from World War I. Basically from The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari in 1919, all the way to Hitler, until the Third Reich came in. I was just astounded at how they commented on society. These were mostly silent films. They were just so well done. As an art form, it was a new means of expression because music and art at the time also reacted to the World War, the First World War. That would be a wonderful thing to show here. I think people that didn   t understand anything about film, or particularly silent film, would appreciate it. That would be another topic. We   ve done piano music. I think we should do an art, I   m sure we   ll do an art lecture. I think that would be important, too.  Finchum Always thinking ahead, Barbara.  Miller Well, yeah. David said,    You   ll have to come back and do this.    Well, this one, David has an endowed chair. He wanted to use the money to bring in speakers. I had brought it up to John earlier, and it just kind of didn   t get picked up. I told David about it. He came back and said,    Now I   ve got this money. Let   s just do it     So we   re doing it. We haven   t brought in Oklahoma State collections yet, because that would be next year, when the U.S. entered the war. The hundredth anniversary will be 2017. We have things lined up that are   although they   ve talked about the U.S., but most of the talks have been about Europe. I think Mary Jane Ward is going to come talk. She   s doing a book now on World War I and locals in World War I. I think if she could bring it local, to Payne County like that   that   s why she wanted those testimonies from that ship, because there were Payne County soldiers on that ship. These kind of things, this will highlight Special Collections, and Documents, and everything. We want to get some programming done. I guess I should work on that before I go. (Laughs) 27  Finchum Or come back part-time?  Miller Yeah. Well, I thought about it, but I really don   t think   I think with the budget the way it is, I don   t think they   re going to be able to bring back people part-time right now. They   re trying to make it so that people don   t lose any key positions across the University. I think those half-time positions are the ones that are going to go because they   re not    Although they   re really necessary for us. We really have benefited from John and Connie coming back half-time. I think from the University point of view, they   re not as essential as some other things. I have a feeling that that wouldn   t happen. I guess I have enough to do with all my other     Finchum We should probably ask, what are your plans after you retire? Do you have any set already?  Miller I have my niece   s wedding in Tahoe in July. I have to get to that. That   s my first thing that I do when I retire. I have a new grandchild coming in two weeks. I hope it   s two weeks, because I need to get out there to help her out. My youngest son wants, they want me to go to Germany and visit there, because my daughter-in-law   s from Germany. I don   t imagine they   ll go for a while with the new baby. They   ll probably wait several months. At some point, I   ll do that. I can help Kate, my daughter, out in Tulsa, because her daughter needs babysitters often. She has a boss who requires evenings and weekends, and things. She still needs two or maybe three more years, then she   ll be old enough that she can drag her into the office and say,    Do your homework here.    That   s part of it. I think the travel, I would like to do that. I don   t see myself leaving Stillwater for a period of time. I don   t know where my older son is going to wind up. I don   t know   they would like me to move to Denver, Cory, my younger son. They think that would be great. They   re just kind of   I   m just going to try and relax into it I think.  Finchum You   ll still be active in some aspect of libraries? Public library, maybe?  Miller I am the chair of the Trustees    Board. I   ve done that for about four years. Before that, I was on the Friends    Board, and I   m going to keep that up for a while. I am still on the Friends of Music Board, so I   ll keep that up. I don   t know if they   re going to put me in charge of the fall dinner again. We do have a new music department head coming, so there   ll be an education curve. We   ll have to meet with him several times. I have those things that I   m already doing. Plus the house, keep up on the house. There are things I want to get done to the house that require me to be home, while you have somebody working on it. I put that all aside until I retire.  Finchum There was a time when you had a goal of reading a hundred books a year  Do you still do that? 28  Miller I read a lot of books. I think that I have, I   ve often gotten past ninety. I hardly ever get to a hundred. This year, I   ve spent less because I   ve had so many needlework projects. I finished   I had a niece born, or a great-niece. I had to finish a baby blanket. Before that, I had something else   oh, a Christmas stocking  I do needlepoint Christmas stockings. I had to do that for my grandson. Now, I   ve got another grandson coming, but in-between, I had my nephew   s little girl. They wanted a Christmas stocking. I have a huge list of projects. I just finished the baby blanket for the new baby. Actually, I have to sew it together, but I finished it for the new baby. Then, I   ve got to start Christmas stockings, and I have a growth chart that I   m doing. That takes away from reading time. I still devote a lot of time to reading. I don   t think I   ll ever give that up. I have music too. I   d like to spend more time with the piano. Gee, I just can   t even imagine a life where I don   t have to go to work, and I don   t have kids at home, and I can do these things, you know.  Finchum You   re going to be busy anyway.  Miller I know  (Laughs)  Finchum At least for the first year. Well, looking back, what would you like people to see as your legacy within the Library?  Miller I don   t know what people will see. I know that there are librarians in RLS  Research   Learning Services  that say,    What are we going to do when you leave?    We   re down to two librarians, and Suzanne  Reinman  has so much on her plate, because she still does patents, and she still does all this other stuff. She   ll take over Dr. Henderson   s classes, and she   ll be the only person left that knows legal. That   s it. They depend on us to do the legal research. There   s not a lot, but there   s a significant amount. I think they   ll miss that. I think that several of them have said,    If you guys aren   t there, we depend on you to do that work.    I think they will appreciate that. I   m hoping they will appreciate that I volunteer. While I don   t always have people that appreciate things I do, or they don   t get along with me, or they don   t like the way I work, I hope they   ll say that I tried to do things with the Library in mind, what I think will help the library. I took two interim department head positions in the last year, and it wasn   t on my plate. I knew I had to get stuff done in Docs, but I felt it was important for the Library.  I feel that I gave to the Library because it gave me a perspective from that point of view. And there were things I saw that could be fixed, as we were reorganizing the Library, that I think it was helpful. That   s probably what I really want to push is saying,    We   re all in this together, in this big period of change. Think about the other person   s point of view. Don   t just think about your department.    We know we   re drowning here with not enough people, 29  but we   ve gotten some people back. Every other department is the same way, and people don   t realize that. I want everybody to work together. Move forward and try to see the other point of view. I also hope that they   ll think I did enough work on the University-level, Women   s Faculty Council, things like that. I worked hard for those scholarship and research awards. I hope they   ll continue that work and feel that that   s important, because I do think that   s important. I think that making the Library faculty recognized as University faculty is really important to keep us interacting with other faculty, particularly the Public Service librarians. I hope they   ll say that I worked towards that and want that to continue.  Finchum You   re a champion for libraries all the way around  You always have been.  Miller I have been, and I appreciate electronics, but I still think there are people that come in everyday that give me reasons why they have to have the paper copy. They   re legitimate reasons that we just haven   t gotten that far yet in computer copies of certain kinds of materials. Particularly government materials, as an example. Manuscript collections, and things like that. There   s still a need for that, and there   s still a huge need for personnel for processing in the Library. It   s not just our library, but we have to remember that we need live bodies to move this forward. The workflow has changed, but there   s still a need for that paper material to move through. I hope that they keep that in their mind.  Finchum There   s also the personal, human interaction level, too, that you   ve always been very good at. You can   t have a library without that.  Miller No, you can   t. I think most of the people that work in the Library are pretty good at that. There   s a few that it   s hard to get on with. Most of the people you can work on a one-to-one level with and they   re very helpful. I   m always amazed when there   s new people in big departments, like Access Services or something, that I haven   t met just because we don   t interact. Try to get to know them.  Finchum Well in 2011, you  received Honorable Mention  for the  OSU  Library Faculty Outstanding Award.  Miller Yeah, that was nice. That was very nice.  Finchum You were recognized by     Miller Someone  Yeah.  Finchum    for your efforts and were applauded for that.  30  Miller I appreciated it. They gave us a, Michele Seikel actually wrote three memorial resolutions. I guess you call them    memorial,    for retirees. She had one for myself, and there were three Barbaras. (Laughs) That was kind of funny. For that, and that was really nice. I saved that.  Finchum For OLA?  Miller For OLA, yeah. There, I would say that more than the Library, the professional institutions, are really cognizant of institutional memory. That   s why ALA is doing those talks. That   s why OLA wanted that memory. They know that these people are leaving, and they want that encyclopedic memory to be preserved. You   ve done oral histories at ALA and things, and we have those down. We lost an ALA, we lost Larry Romans this year. I know you did one with him. His ability to get along with people and know when you   ve lost a battle so let   s move on. Or is it not worth it to win your point if it   s going to mean that we have meet for another six weeks, and we can   t move forward with this idea. He was so good at that. I think when I talk at the ALA, that program we   re doing, I think that   s what I   m going to bring up. I think that   s the most important thing. Sometimes, I worry about the Library. They feel they   re reaching out, but it   s not being reached the right way, but maybe it   s our fault. Maybe we have a chip on our shoulder. If the administration wants to do something one way, and we want to do it the other, but we feel that they   re not listening. You try to get along as much as you can, but you   re hoping that everybody   s listening to everybody else. Anyway     Finchum You have been a good team player through all of it.  Miller Oh well, thanks. Hope so   Finchum And my mentor, you know. You welcomed me   Miller I always appreciated, like reading, when you would do an annual review of yourself, and I would do one. We did basically the same things, but you organized it totally different than I did. I felt that was really valuable for me to read that. It gave me ideas. That   s why I kept pushing to every new librarian, please read the other A Ds of other librarians. Even if you   re not in the same department, you can learn things from that on how to organize and everything. A lot of people still don   t do it. I think that was very eye-opening.  Finchum Cumulative reviews should be encouraged to read others, too.  Miller Yes.  Finchum I   ve been told anyway. 31  Miller That was, you know, I think those are important. I still feel that we need to work on RPT  Reappointment, Promotion,   Tenure . I still think that   and we   ve had a lot of department heads retire. There   s a lot of new people in. They   re learning on the job, but I think, I think there   s a disconnect when a new person comes. They should, they obviously have their job assignment. They should be able to talk to the department head and say,    For you to reach tenure, you have these options. What road do you want to take? If you take that road, you   re going to get tenure if you do A, B, and C.    Period. Then, that   s in your discussion, in your A D, so that when you get to the point where you   re up for reappointment or whatever, the committee reads it, and they have no problem with it. It has been my experience that, particularly from working on faculty committee, and other things like this, people will read a dossier, even if it   s not your college:    Yes, this is tenurable    or    No, it   s not.    Everybody will be in agreement because an average academic will recognize tenurable dossiers. I don   t think we   re there yet. I have had so many times where they   d say,    Just write down what you want, and we   ll see. It depends on who   s on the committee.    It shouldn   t be that way. It should not be that way. I   m hoping that we can restructure. I would love to see that restructured as we move forward.  Finchum We   ll have to keep you posted.  Miller Yes  Keep me posted.  Finchum We   ll close with having you tell us one or two highlights. Can you think about     Miller You mean from here?  Finchum Yes, from here. Anything that just sticks out as a cherished memory.  Miller I remember one of the most exciting things was with you. (Laughs) The day I had to go through my divorce, you called me and said the provost promoted you. I was so excited for that. That just made my day because it was such a horrible day  That was, because it was right. I just felt that it, I get so tired of some of these promotion and tenure things that you just don   t feel went well, and you don   t have any control over moving it. That really justified it for me. I just felt so good about that. Sometimes those things happen.  I was excited when I got elected to ALA Council. I was very excited. I felt I couldn   t move forward with Government Documents Roundtable  GODORT  at that point, but I needed to get on a higher level and work. I really enjoyed that time of getting along with other people. That was kind of a highlight. I think the year that I did, the year that I was chair of GODORT. 32  Finchum ALA GODORT?  Miller ALA GODORT. They, we have our receptions, we have our award receptions in June. They had really done it up that year. They did it at Northwestern. I got up to just thank everybody for being there and thank everybody for the year that they helped. Everybody gave me a huge ovation. I just couldn   t believe it. (Laughs) I was, that was really nice. It meant that they appreciated what I had done. I think that was very helpful, very helpful for me. I felt that well, the work I did was important. So, you want to feel that the work you do is important. I don   t necessarily feel that I have to be thanked for it. I just want it, it   s more of the fact that they did that, so I know they felt it was important. That   s what you want to feel. If you work hard on something that it is important, it   s going to make a difference. I think you want to make a difference. I think that   s the most important thing.  Finchum I think you   ve made a difference in a lot of people   s lives here in the Library.  Miller Thank you, I appreciate it.  Finchum Certainly mine.  Miller Well, thank you. I appreciate your work. I appreciate your   I remember when you decided you wanted to do the oral history. I said,    Go talk to the dean. See what they   ll do. They   ll give you money to go to that oral history.    I was glad that you did. I think that really opened up.  Finchum I miss Gov Docs, too, though.  Miller Yeah, yeah   Finchum I was never going to be as good as John, no matter how hard I tried.  Miller No, but on the other hand, he worked with the research and the reference, but he didn   t want to do, say presentations. When you have to splinter your work, it just takes time. You can only do so much.  Finchum Plus, he had grown with the collection. I think that   s     Miller Oh yeah   Finchum    a huge advantage, of course   Miller It certainly was. It certainly was. He didn   t do cataloging. We were doing it maybe, a quarter of our time was reference. That made it harder to get 33  everything done. I learned, I felt I learned as much by cataloging different things as I did by trying to study them on my own. You   re looking at the pieces, and you see how that agency works.  Finchum Government Documents was a good fit?  Miller Uh-huh.  Finchum From anthropology?  Miller It was  It was a huge, as I say, huge growth curve. A lot of times, I just felt like it was knowing what   s going on with the federal government. You know, you would hear about some person, or this or that happened, and I just didn   t know. This is kind of after the fact, but I felt that it was important. When I did, after 9/11, when I did a paper for, I think I did it for State and Local  Task Force , but I might have done it for the Federal Task Force. We were talking about the disappearing of all the information, because they were just taking down stuff from the federal websites. They were worried about terrorists. I did a study on it. I worked with several websites, free information websites. It was about a thirty-page document of all these websites that had been closed, and libraries that had been closed, and different things. This was like six months later and they hadn   t been reopened, the problem with open access to government information.  The greatest thing about that was that that really helped me learn all the players in Washington. Who were the players, who were the key agencies, and that in turn helped my job. That, you know, those kind of things, and if you could just get students to know, boy, if you write a paper, that   s how you learn. You write a paper. I hope that they, I think with the freshman research push now, finally, the kids are being forced to do that. We noticed it with Women   s Faculty Council scholarship applications. The undergraduate research has grown tremendously, and it   s more professional. There were some there that would have been in the top ten, even if we had pushed them into the same group with graduate students. It is improving here. I think that it, I hope we   re part of it. I think the whole undergraduate push is important.  Finchum You mentioned 9/11. Do you remember where you were? I remember where I was.  Miller Uh-huh.  Finchum We were having a Library of Congress speaker     Miller That   s right.  34  Finchum    over in the business building.  Miller That   s right.  Finchum Her site went down   Miller Her site went down, and the most amazing thing was she had everything in the can. She had all kinds of things with moving pictures and things like that online, not just websites. She was working with American Memory. She had it all in a can. I thought,    Will I ever get to that point?    I didn   t think I   d ever make it. That is, I think that was a learning skill for everybody, and it helped, well the Government Documents Roundtable and all the government documents librarians, because it put them in the spotlight. They had to highlight things. People would come in asking for this or that or the next thing. You met people from agencies on what they were trying to do. It was really a spark.  Finchum Kind of a shift in the road, wasn   t it?  Miller Yeah. I hope that this, as we continue this World War I, and December is the seventy-fifth anniversary of Pearl Harbor. I was thinking about, of course I won   t be here, but I was thinking that we should push for that. We just don   t have anybody left in Docs. Suzanne  Reinman  can   t do everything. She   s the only librarian left, I mean, except for the catalogers. She just can   t do everything. It makes it really tough, so I hope we can keep that in the forefront. We are, now, the only Regional in Oklahoma.  Finchum That   s a big change.  Miller Yeah. We are trying to look at the materials that ODL, the Oklahoma  Department of Libraries , the state library is getting rid of. We   re trying to, we have finished all the Oklahoma cataloging for Hathi Trust, in case they need any of it. We   re looking at duplicates and trying to keep the collection small, trying not to add to paper collections unless it   s absolutely necessary. As a Regional, that   s going to put more onus on us. That   s more Selectives that report to us. I just really think that Suzanne is not going to be able to handle it and one staff member left, even though Gwyn  Dominick  does a lot. It   s just, it   s overwhelming to get all that done. I know at one time they said they would replace me, but I think that was before the problem with the budget. It   s so bad, you know. They   re not being able to hire a lot of people right now. I would hope that maybe down the line they could do that because it   s just   if you look at all the people that work in Special Collections, we should have at least that many people.  Finchum You should.  35  Miller I   m hoping that they will   I don   t think people have realized how much time it takes to, well, they know in general how much time it takes to run a department. When I was made interim head, they said,    Well, it   ll just take half of your time, then half in Docs.    But I was reporting to a different associate dean. I, all of a sudden, I had to go to library leadership meetings. We had four candidates coming in, and I was automatically on that. I had so many more meetings, and I had to keep meetings up for other things I was doing for Docs. I bet I didn   t have more than 10 percent of my time left for Docs. Trying to do those, both of them. I had weeks where I had twenty-five hours out of the week I was gone, at meetings or something or other. I know that administrators have that all the time, but you still got to get everything else done.  I worry about the department. I think it   s so important, the materials we have there. It   s so important to the history of the U.S. It   s not online. It   s just not there. It   s not going to be online for a long time, a lot of the small agency things. It   s not usable online. The Federal Register, we have it in fiche, some only in fiche, some in paper, and they   re digitizing that to go online all the way back this year. That was the GPO  Government Publishing Office  project. Well that   s great, but you can   t search easily by topic online. If you have a citation, you can go to it and get it online. If you want to see the Department of Education hit this particular rule in the Federal Register, it   s just very difficult to do that. Unless they change the way, put more metadata in for keyword searching or something, it   s just not working. We need the paper. That   s a typical thing that people use in a couple of the classes we teach.  Finchum I think you   re going to have to take back your retirement. You can   t leave, Barbara   Miller It   s a question of you leave, and then things don   t get done. People don   t notice what things don   t get done. I mean like administration. They don   t realize that there were things that were getting done or services that we can offer. That   s kind of an invisible entry. I would hope that   that   s one of the things that Suzanne and I should do. Put a bullet point thing on here. Like I was saying, I   m supposed to be half-time cataloger, but there   s hardly any cataloging that is physically getting done because of all these other side duties, which are sort of cataloging also. Well, Suzanne   s going to have to do that. What is she going to give up? She   s not available either. Anyway     Finchum It   s been a good career, huh?  Miller I think so, I think so. I feel that I gave as much as I could.  Finchum I do too.  36  Miller I really enjoy working for the University. I really enjoyed getting on the committees and working on those things, sometimes bringing things back. I don   t think that as many people are into the University, as opposed to into Library politics. I think they need to be. I don   t know   for example, I know Cinthya  Ippoliti  is on some committees. I know she   s on a committee with research, with the vice president for research. I found that out inadvertently. I know that Mary  Larson  is on some committees, but I don   t know what they are. We don   t know. If I find something out in a Faculty Council meeting or something like that and I bring it back, I don   t know if somebody already has that information. I think, it   s because there aren   t enough people, faculty in the Library that are pursuing that. You know,    Here   s some more information that is going to affect us.    I think it   s important for us to know that.  I wish that we could take faculty meetings, and we   ve talked about it in the past. At a faculty meeting, I think we should hear about all the committee work that everybody does, including the dean and including the associate deans, because they   re all on different committees. I think that would be a good way to go. I obviously, I   m more interested in it than an average person. I think more people need to be interested in the University as a whole. It would be very helpful to the Library.  Finchum I agree.  Miller Good  Are you on a committee right now?  Finchum I am.  Miller Good.  Finchum Two actually.  Miller That   s good. And I   ve passed on committees to new librarians. I   ve done that. People say,    Can you be on this committee?    I say,    No.    The last year and a half, I   ve just said,    I can   t do another committee. I am already on XYZ. But here are some people that need to get on committees, and that would be good.    We   ve gotten more people on committees that way. They need to know that whoever the president of Faculty Council is, doesn   t necessarily know all the people in the Library. Or if it   s a University committee, the president will ask the chair of Faculty Council to recommend somebody. A lot of times, the president will say,    I don   t want that person. I don   t want that person     They don   t know everybody. They have to have somebody to call to say,    Can you recommend a librarian to work on this?    I   ve done that. You need to, we need to get that connection going, I think. David  Oberhelman  can do that right now. He   s our councilor. He can do that. I think that   s important. I am so pleased that he   s sending out 37  summaries of what happened in Faculty Council, which I was after councilors to do all the time.  Finchum More information is good.  Miller Yes.  Finchum Sharing is good.  Miller And getting everybody to read it. (Laughs)  Finchum Sharing is good.  Miller Yes, anyway.  Finchum I think we   ve covered a lot.  Miller I think we have.  Finchum Anything else you want to say before we close?  Miller No. I appreciate it. I appreciate your department. I know you have trouble, oral history has trouble getting reference librarians to remember to suggest oral histories to people. Just like they forget     Finchum Gov Docs   Miller Gov Docs and Special Collections. I think that   s our push that we have to do to get out there, because we   re not liaisons to departments. We have to make ourselves known in other ways.  Finchum Well, I am very thankful my path crossed yours.  Miller I am grateful my path crossed yours.  Finchum And we   re two UT-K  University of Tennessee-Knoxville  alums.  Miller That   s right   Finchum Thank you for sharing your morning with me  It   s been great.  Miller Thank you. I appreciate it.  -------  -------  
