 Gill. Today is September 18, 2009. I   m visiting with  Aubra Wilson at the First United Methodist Church in Stillwater,  Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Aubra, I appreciate you  being with us this morning.  Thank you, I   m honored.  We   ll begin with the beginning if that   s okay. Can you tell me a little  about your early life, where you grew up, a little bit about your family?  Well, I was born and raised in Clinton, Oklahoma. My father and mother  farmed on 160 acres on the Washita River. That was before they had  flood control and that was one of the things we had to deal with was  frequent floods. But my dad also rented some Indian land and we  probably had to farm about 360-400 acres. But I was the last of seven  children and I always admired my father and mother because they raised  a family back during the times when times were really hard. We were  poor but we didn   t know it. Everybody else in that period of time was  also having a pretty tough time. But everybody worked together and it  was a great, great time. And it taught you a lot about life.  Aubra, what year were you born?  1929.  So you fell right in the Depression time.  Yeah, they tell me that was a great year. (Laughter)  And then the next what, ten were not so good, huh?  5  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Right. So I had the opportunity to grow up during some pretty tough  times.  And you said you were the youngest of the seven kids?  Yes, there were seven of us.  So you went to high school then at Clinton High School?  Yes, I went to Clinton schools for twelve years.  Well, of course, certainly the Depression influenced you in your life I   m  sure, but were there events, were there values you learned from your  family that influenced your life later?  Well yes, I think probably one of the biggest things that I can remember  that really had an influence on my life was that I always admired my dad  because when something bad happened he always looked at the good  side of it, you know. And there was always a reason for it and he just  rolled with the punches. Also, when I was in high school, the person  that   s had probably one of the greatest impacts on my life was my Vo  Ag teacher, Harold Hutton. Harold was the Vo Ag teacher there and he  also later became the Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture.  He probably had as much influence on my life as any one person I ever  had. For one thing, whenever we were in Vo Ag class, it was never  brought up that we weren   t going to college. I happened to be the only  one of my family that did go to college. And Mr. Hutton always said,     Whenever you get in college,    never did ask us if we were going, he  always said,    When you get in college, you have to do this and this and  this.    So he was an inspirational person in my life and he   s one of the  reasons that I became an extension agent, because of the training that I  received under him.  So he later became Secretary of Agriculture of the state?  Yes, he was State Board of Agriculture President under Roy J. Turner.  And I think he served as President of the State Board of Agriculture  under three different governors, which is almost unheard of because it is  a political position.  So moving again, what was life like growing up on the farm? What are  some of the things you remember about that?  Well, you know, probably one of the things, we farmed with horses. I  think probably I was in high school before my dad ever got his first  tractor. So it was quite an experience to work with those horses and  6  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  mules and you know you did. So I started handling farming equipment at  a very early age as far as driving a team and driving a cultivator or what  we called a go-devil and all these kinds of things, my dad was  diversified. We had dairy cattle. We usually milked around twenty-five  head of cattle and we raised cotton, we raised oats. My dad also had  Milo. And my mother was a gardener and so we almost lived out of the  home garden. So that   s a carry over for me because I still love to garden.  At what age did you start working in the field?  Oh, probably eight or nine is whenever we started. My first job, of  course, was driving a team and doing cultivator work or with the go-devil.  That   s my first job that I remember.  And did you get up early and milk?  Yes, we milked about twenty-five head of cows all the time and we did  it all by hand. I always kidded my dad after I left home. The next year he  quit milking and bought a beef bull. And he started buying two or three  calves to go on the dairy cows and that way he didn   t have to do his own  milking. So he changed over because he didn   t have me to help do the  chores. (Laughter)  Lost his help, huh?  Yeah.  So a typical day, you   d get up at what, probably five o   clock in the  morning and milk?  Oh, five o   clock every morning.  And then do breakfast and then out in the field all day?  Well, yeah, we   d go do milking and then Mom would have breakfast for  us when we came in. Then we   d eat breakfast and then we   d hit the  field.  Wow. Well what year did you enroll at Oklahoma State University? Was  that right out of high school?  Yes, in 1947. I graduated in May of    47 and enrolled at Oklahoma A M  in 1947, in the fall. I planned on getting a major in Vo Ag and also one  in Ag H. But when I got in school I found out that I was better suited  and wanted to pursue an Animal Husbandry degree. So that   s what I  changed to. Glen Bratcher was my first advisor and he also was my first  7  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  teacher in Animal Husbandry. He and Dr. Alan Heidelbreg, those were  my two first instructors first year in college.  Who was department head at that time?  The department head, I believe at that time, was Dean Blizzard.  Oh, before he became dean?  Yes. The old Animal Husbandry Building, as I remember, Dean Blizzard  wasn   t very tall and they always kidded him about the doorknobs being  placed a little bit lower in the Animal Husbandry Building because you  know, it was handier for him to reach down. The old Animal Husbandry  Building had a lot of fond memories about it.  So he was your dean then when you were at Oklahoma State?  Yes.  In addition to being short, are there other things you remember about  Dean Blizzard? He   s sort of a legend at Oklahoma State.  Oh yeah, you know back during the days whenever he was judging (he  judged internationally and nationally) that was back in a time whenever  we wanted cattle short and wide and thick so Dean Blizzard was one of  them that judged a lot of those shows and one of the reasons that we  selected cattle that were short and dumpy. But I remember from the time  that I was in Extension until I got out, we had short ones, tall ones, and  we   re now back to the middle of the road kind of. But a lot of that was  from a result of us getting them too small.  Before Blizzard became dean, didn   t he head up the livestock judging  teams for many years and win national competitions?  When I was in college, I didn   t go out for the livestock judging team  because I had to work in order for me to stay in school and that was  going to take up too much time. So I had to work. And Dr. Bratcher  asked me to come out (I said Dr., he never was a Dr.) he said he wanted  me to come up for the team but I had to decline because I had to work.  What were some of the jobs you had as a student?  I didn   t ever work for the college. I had a brother here that was living in  Stillwater at that time and he did work painting and finishing houses and  whatnot and I helped him on the weekends. Plus the fact that during the  summer I had an older brother that had a hay baler that we did custom  8  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  work and that   s where I earned some of my money to go to school.  In addition to Bratcher and some of them you worked with directly, were  there other professors on the faculty at that time that you remember?  Oh, definitely. I always tell people some of the greatest teachers I had  that I can remember back in college were Dr. Bill Pope, he was Animal  Science; Dr. Frank Davies, who was an Agronomist and Dr. Davies  didn   t just lecture you, it was a sermon every time you met with him. He  was a great teacher. Then Dr. Whatley, who taught Genetics and Animal  Breeding, was another one of them. And then along when I was working  on my master   s I had an advanced nutrition course under Dr. Bob  Totusek and he became a very, very good friend and was an excellent  teacher. And he   s probably one of the people that has had a great  influence on my life, he and Dr. Taggart.  Do you remember some of the buildings where your classes were held  when you were a student there?  Well, I had English in Old Central. In fact that   s where all of the English  classes were held at that particular time. And then, of course, Animal  Science Building and the little chemistry building, I remember it. We  didn   t have a student union at that particular time. And really Swim   s  Drug Store, or Swim   s Corner they called it, which is just about three  blocks south of Gallagher-Iba was really probably the student union of  the early A M College.  The student hangout there.  Yeah, everybody. There were two brothers who owned that, Les and  Bustie. They eventually split up. Les kept the downstairs and all the  student supplies and everything and it was a regular drugstore. They had  a regular fountain, Cokes for a dime, and it was a great place for  students to hang out. And then Bustie had the upstairs and I guess it was  in my junior year I worked for Bustie Swim upstairs, he had a pool hall.  And so I racked balls and me and a friend of mine would run that place  from 6 till when. It was a good experience and I thought a lot of the  Swims.  Did you become a pretty good pool player?  Yeah. You know, I was alright. (Laughter) One of the guys that I  remember that was exceptionally good and I had a hard time beating him  was Don Haskins. Don was a very good pool player and he even  mentioned that, I think, in his autobiography.  9  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Did he mention your name?  No, he didn   t mention my name.  In addition to Swim   s, what were some of the favorite student  activities   this would be in the late    40s we   re talking about?  Yeah. The Block and Bridle was one of the main activities I participated  in. And, of course, all the athletic events. I was an athletic fan, always  have been and always will be, I guess. But I remember Gallagher-Iba  Arena and I remember Dr. Iba. I used to go early and sit behind him at  all the basketball games just to watch Dr. Iba coach. Back in those days  coaches could be more animated than they are now and it was fun  watching him.  He liked to holler occasionally at his players, didn   t he?  Yeah, sometimes a towel would go ten feet in the air and he always  jerked the jerseys off of players to go push them in and whatnot. He was  fun to watch back in the early days.  What do you remember primarily about your undergraduate  experience? Are there some highlights for you as a student at Oklahoma  State?  Well, not really. I just remember that when I first got up here, we lived  on the corner of McElroy and Knoblock, which is just north of the  baseball field. And it was a really rainy season. Didn   t have any  pavement then. And I remember if it hadn   t been for my ROTC  Boondockers, I would have had a rough time getting to class because it  was so muddy. But anyway, that was one of the things that I remember.  And ROTC was one of the required courses at that particular time. You  had to take two years.  What were some of the buildings that you remember on campus? What  was the campus like at that time?  Well, there weren   t any cars then. And Washington Street went straight  through the campus. You had to cross that street in order to go to the  Animal Science Building and any of the agronomy courses that you  might have. So you always had to go across Washington Street. And that  was just west of the Student Union. Whenever they built the Student  Union, why, they closed it.  It was a county line road at that time too, wasn   t it?  10  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Right.  Is there anything that you recall in terms of student organizations that  you were active with at that time?  No, just the Block and Bridle primarily because I didn   t have a lot of  time to spend outside of going to school.  Let   s see, so you graduated in what year?  I graduated in 1952. I was supposed to graduate in the spring of    51 but  at the end of my junior year in July I got a notice from the draft board  that I needed to go and take my physical. So I went to Oklahoma City,  took my physical, of course passed, and they gave me an induction date  of December the 4th. Well, at that particular time, OSU   s semester ended  in January, the last of January. And so I decided that there wasn   t any  need in me coming up and enrolling in school because I wouldn   t finish  out the semester. So I decided I   d go to the service and then come back  and finish up my one year of college.  Well about four or five days after school started, I got a call from Dr.  Willham. Dr. Willham at that time was the Dean of Agriculture and he  wanted to know why I wasn   t in school. So I told him I had to go to the  service and was supposed to be inducted on December the 4th. He said,     Oh just a minute,    he said,    Let me check something.    And he pulled  my file and he said,    They can   t take you this early.    He said,    Your  grades are alright and you   re a senior.    He said,    They can   t take you to  the service.    He said,    Get on up here and get enrolled.    And I said,     Well, what about the draft board?    He said,    I   ll take care of them.    So  I have a lot of respect for Dr. Willham for that particular time. And now  how many people would take that much interest in one individual to get  them back in school? If you knew Dr. Willham, all you had to do was  meet him one time. From then on he knew who you were, it didn   t  matter if it was ten years later, he still remembered you.  I heard he also could usually remember your hometown, is that right?  Right. Yeah.  Bob Totusek was telling some stories about him.  Yeah. He had a fabulous memory.  He was well-liked and respected, wasn   t he?  Oh yes, very much so. And then later, of course, became President of the  11  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  college.  You were talking about the buildings and facilities. When you came back  that last year the Student Union had been built, hadn   t it? Maybe it was  your senior year?  Well, it just opened, I think, in 1952. That was the first year for the  Student Union, if I remember right. Oh, it was a great place.  Was that kind of like hog heaven for you?  Oh yeah. (Laughs) A lot of student activity took place in that place back  in that period of time.  I guess there was a lot of construction during your junior and senior  years, with finishing up the plan?  The only thing that I remember real well about construction and those  kinds of things that happen, one of those years, I think it was probably  1950, we had a hail storm in Stillwater. The big buildings all had slate  roofs on them and all of those buildings had a big pile around them  where the hail had broke the slates and shingles fell off and was on the  ground around the school.  Do you remember the barracks and Quonset huts they had on campus?  Very well. I didn   t live in any of those. I   ve looked at Oretoopa  whenever I came up which was kind of out I think around where the  hospital is now.  Sixth Street.  And then they had Vet Village. Of course, you had to be married and be  a veteran. But the last year I was here, the end of it should have been my  senior year, I needed six hours that I couldn   t get because I was late  enrolling. I had six hours that I couldn   t get and it wasn   t offered until  the next fall. So I lacked six hours getting my degree in    51. So that  summer, I went in and told them I was ready to go to the service. The  lady wanted to know if I graduated and I said,    No, I just lack six  hours.    And she said,    Well I can   t take you into the service if you just  lack six hours.    So that summer, in July, the last of July I got married  and my wife and I lived in Vet Village at that particular time because  most of the veterans had started to school in    45 and most of them were  graduated and gone. And I will say this about the veterans, they made it  tough on a lot of us kids coming out of high school because they had  gone through a war, they had responsibilities, they   d had all the fun they  12  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  wanted to have and they were intent on getting an education. Whereas  some of the boys like myself coming out of high school, we wanted to  have an education but some fun, too. So they made it real tough on us as  far as in classes.  Competing with them?  Yeah, competition.  So you graduated and then you went into the military?  Yes, I spent two years in the Marine Corps.  From    52 -   54, is that right?     52-   54, yes. I graduated or got out of school in the last of January. First  of March I was on my way to be in the Marine Corps.  After basic, where were you stationed?  I was stationed at El Toro Marine Air Base in Santa Ana, California.  And I tell people it was probably one of the easiest years I ever had, the  two years that I had in the Marine Corps because I was at a Marine Air  Base and I was one of the ground persons. My job was packing  parachutes, taking care of CO2 and oxygen on the planes. So it was a  real good experience and it was one that I didn   t have to put out a lot of  physical labor, and I didn   t have to march and do some of the things that  the infantry had to do.  So now when you got out of the Marines, then you got your first  assignment in Extension. Could you tell me about that?  Well, I got out in March and I started to work for Soil Conservation  Service. I took my test to go ahead and go to work full-time for Soil  Conservation Service. I went to Oklahoma City and took the test and on  the way back I thought, well I   ll drop in and visit with my Vo Ag  teacher who was second to the President of the State Board of  Agriculture by then. And while I was visiting with him he said,    I think  you would like Extension a lot better.    And I said,    Well, I made an  application with them when I graduated and haven   t heard from them.     And he said,    Just a minute,    he said,    Shawnee Brown is a good friend  of mine.    So he calls Shawnee Brown and the rest of it is history. I  started to work for Extension in about ten days. My first assignment  was   I started the first day of Round-Up. And Ted Smith and I, who  was the Extension Director out at Boise City for many years, we started  to work the same day. He was assigned to Washita County and I was in  13  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Tillman County. Our first assignment was at 4-H Round-Up and I  remember that a lot of the older agents at that particular time had never  seen us, and so they thought we were just older 4-H members.  (Laughter) And so they would tell us what to do and why weren   t we in  bed and all this kind of stuff, you know. So we were real young at that  particular time or young-looking, anyway.  So Shawnee Brown, now he was Associate Dean for Extension, the one  that gave you your first job?  Yeah, he was in charge of Extension at that particular time.  So you had really not necessarily intended to have a career in Extension,  you   d been interested, but you got your job in Extension. How did the  reality of the job meet your expectations? Were there some surprises for  you?  Well I was hired as Assistant County Agent at that particular time. My  primary duty was with the 4-H clubs and in Tillman County at that  particular time, we had twenty-three 4-H clubs and were expected to  meet every one of them and give a program every month. This we did  and sometimes we   d have three and four or five a day, you know. So we  might go to one of the schools and meet the third grade, fourth grade,  and fifth grade and on up through the eighth. Some of those, of course,  would be combined and maybe all the junior high in one. But we did  have twenty-three of them and me and an Assistant Home Economist  met all of them. At that particular time they were called Home  Demonstration Agents. We met with them and that was our primary  responsibility was the 4-H Club. Not being a 4-H member back early,  really I had to learn the 4-H program.  Because you were active in FFA, isn   t that right?  Yes, I was four years in Vo Ag and FFA. I had the opportunity of being  president of our Vo Ag chapter in Clinton in 1947.  So who was your Director that you worked under? You were Assistant  Extension Director, who was your Director?  Laxton Malcom was the County Agent at that particular time. Laxton  was an agronomy major and I probably got my taste of horticulture from  Laxton Malcom. He was a great teacher and I learned a lot about  horticulture. Later in my career, had I known as much about horticulture  when I was a kid growing up, I would have probably majored in  horticulture because I loved it and still do.  14  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  What were the major responsibilities of the County Extension office at  that time? You had the 4-H clubs you talked about, what else?  Well, 4-H clubs and then we were all expected to be active in the  community. So we had to belong to the civic clubs and then when the  junior livestock show and the county fair came off, you were expected to  be very active in those areas. But like I said, primarily 4-H club work.  That was our main responsibility.  Can you share some highlights of your professional career? You were  Assistant County Agent there in Tillman County and then could you tell  us about the rest of your career and some of the highlights?  Well, probably some of the highlights that I had, we had several. We had  a home demonstration agent, Miss Kitty Johnson. Back in those days,  the home demonstration agents weren   t allowed to be married. And so  she was our home demonstration agent and she was a very good teacher  as far as the record books were concerned. So we did have several  national winners from Tillman County and it was primarily because of  Kitty Johnson and her ability to help us with record books. So that was  one of the main experiences we had. We also had the State 4-H  President at that particular time.  When you left Tillman County then, what were your assignments after  that and the rest of your career?  Well, you asked me about what were my primary responsibilities in  Tillman County. One of the things is we had 150,000 acres allotment of  cotton and, of course, one of the things we had to do was during the  summer months we had to inspect cotton fields for insects. If you   ve  ever lived in areas like Tillman County where it gets 105 degrees and  you   re expected to check a cotton field, some of those were irrigated and  it made it really a problem in order   I tell people when I transferred up  to Beaver County (we didn   t have any cotton in Beaver County) I told  them one thing I really missed when I moved to Beaver was the cotton.  But I never enjoyed missing anything in my life as much as I did cotton.  (Laughter) Most of it wasn   t machine harvested at that particular time.  So then you were assigned to Beaver County. What years were you in  Beaver County?  I started in Beaver County in 1963 to 1978, around fifteen years. We  loved Beaver County. When they asked me about how far east I wanted  to go as far as being an agent in Extension, I told them,    Well I was  about as far east as I wanted to be when I was in Frederick,    so that  didn   t leave me a large area. But we moved to Beaver and really enjoyed  15  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  it. I never hated leaving any place that I can remember as bad as I did  leaving Beaver County.  Were there some special families up there that you remember?  Oh, yes. You know there wasn   t but 7,000 people in Beaver County,  about a little over 2,000 of them lived in Beaver at Balko, Forgan and  Gate and then of course Slapout, Oklahoma. And I always tell people  that you take a fifty mile radius around Slapout, Oklahoma, the greatest  people in the world. That   s what made the Panhandle such a great  experience was the people. Like I said, there was just 7,000 of them in  that county. If you spent fifteen years there you   d come in contact with  most of them.  What were the names of some of the families that were traditional ranch  families?  Well, the Jets, which was down at Slapout. Milton Messler at Slapout,  and then, of course, all the people there in Beaver were excellent friends  of mine. But you know after we retired and moved to Stillwater, I have  seen a lot of the former 4-Hers that I had. I have had their children in my  home. So when they come to Stillwater, they always look me up.  Are there some highlights in your professional career that you could  share with us?  Well, probably one of the greatest is when I was elected president of the  Oklahoma County Agents Association in 1985. That was just before I  retired. And then also I was given the Distinguished Service Award in  1984. The reason I say that   s a highlight is because in order to get that,  you had to be nominated by your peers. And so that was a great  experience for me to have my peers give me that award.  You also were president of the State Association of Extension Directors  at one time?  Yes.  What year was that?     84-   85.  Was that your last year?  Yes, my last year.  16  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  And by the way, we might ought to mention that. When you left Beaver  County, you went to Woodward?  Yes, I went to Woodward in 1978, January 1978.  1978 thru    85 then in Woodward. So you never did get very far east, did  you, Aubra?  No. (Laughter) No, I loved western Oklahoma.  You were talking about the people that you knew and the relationships.  Why are county extension agents so important to the people they serve?  Well you know, I tell people we worked during the best times as far as  Extension was concerned. We had a closer contact with people. We  made farm and home visits. I visited 4-H projects and I visited farmers  and ranchers out on their particular places. Nowadays you do it by  computer, they don   t have the personal contact with people that we had  back then. And that is I think what really made Extension great in that  period of time was your personal contact with people.  Is the county extension agent, or I guess the county extension director as  we call them now, still as important to the people in these counties now  as they used to be early in your career?  Yes, I think so, and not in a capacity that we served. They now have  computers. Back when I was in Extension, if I didn   t know the answer to  a problem, I had the specialist at the state office and all I had to do was  call them and they   d give me the answer. These county agents now, or  county extension workers, they have a computer and all they   ve got to  do is ask that computer about that particular problem and they have a  printout in maybe ten minutes. So it   s a different     Not quite as personal but yet still funneling knowledge and information  to them. Well how has the role of a county extension agent changed  since early in your career to the end of your career to today?  I started to work in 1954. My salary at that particular time was  3,900 a  year. And I thought if I ever made  10,000 a year I wouldn   t know how  to spend it. (Laughter) But that   s one of the biggest changes that we   ve  seen over the years is in the salary. Also, I think probably the personal  contact with people is one of the big things that has changed. They still,  I think, are involved in the fairs and livestock shows probably as much  as ever, but it   s personal contact with people is one of the biggest things.  You mentioned earlier in our conversation that you were active in civic  17  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  organizations and groups in the community. Are they still expected to do  that?  Yes, it wasn   t required, but it was suggested that you belong to a civic  club and I was a Rotarian for 25 years and had the privilege of being an  officer at Frederick and Beaver. Then when I moved to Woodward, it  met on a Friday and a Friday didn   t suit my schedule so I was in  Kiwanis Club. Also something that was kind of interesting was that  when I moved to Frederick, the county agent did business at one bank  and I was expected to do business at the other bank, so it was kind of a  trade-off situation. Oh, it was just kind of an unwritten rule as far as  civic clubs was the same way, he belonged to the Lions and I belonged  to the Rotary. So it was just an unwritten rule that you be involved with  the Chamber of Commerce and the civic clubs and anything else that  was really important in the community.  Did you work in your roles, particularly in 4-H, with the person out of  what is now called Human Environmental Sciences, but College of  Home Economics it used to be, with their County Extension Home  Demonstration Agents?  Yes.  Did you work closely in a lot of your activities with them?  Oh yes, definitely. The assistant home demonstration agent, they had the  same responsibility I did. We were the ones that took care of the 4-H  programs. In Tillman County we had four agents; we had two assistants.  When I went to Beaver County, it was me and the home economist. So I  had the full responsibility of the 4-H program and the adult program  when I was at Beaver. And that was quite an experience. It was quite a  change for me because not only did I have programs for 4-H club  members, but I was required to have the adult program and have those  programs.  Can you remember over the years some of the people you worked with,  other county extension agents, people you worked with maybe in your  county or across the state that stand out in your mind?  Well, Bill Taggart, I consider Bill Taggart the best friend I have. And he  was one of them that had a great influence on me and my life. Also, Dr.  Totusek is a real close friend and person that I enjoyed working with.  Wayne Miller, Wayne was a good friend of mine and I miss him to this  day.  Wayne was in county extension work then he moved over to OSU-  18  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Okmulgee, is that the Wayne Miller we   re talking about?  Yeah. When I first started in Extension, Wayne Miller was the livestock  specialist here at Oklahoma A M before he went to  OSU-  Okmulgee  as President. I suppose you   d say Luther Brannon, probably. He was the  Director of Extension at that particular time, after Shawnee Brown. He  insisted or encouraged us to get an advanced degree. Consequently, he  made it possible for us to take three-week educational leave every  summer and attend school. There were several of us that enrolled at  Colorado State University for more than one reason. Not just to study  but also to visit Colorado in the summer and learn to trout fish and enjoy  Colorado. In fact, that was the starting of five families of us went to  Colorado from then on until 2008, we went to Colorado every summer  and trout fished. After we received all the credits we could from Fort  Collins then we went to South Fork and we met up there every year, five  families of us. Herman Seymour out at Sayre, Ted Smith at Boise City,  Doc  Wilbur  Tripp who was down at Guymon at that particular time  and then Bud Nelson who I followed at Woodward.  Did you get your master   s degree from Colorado State?  No.  Transfer them back to OSU?  Yeah, we got all the hours we could at Colorado State then I finished up  here at OSU. I tell people I got two degrees, one from OSU and one  from Oklahoma A M. (Laughter)  Well Aubra, looking back on your career, some highlights that stand out  we were talking about earlier, but what are some special  accomplishments, achievements, recognition maybe you achieved with  some of your students?  Well you know, probably I served with Dr. Totusek on the State Junior  Livestock Show committee to make recommendations for any changes  that we might have. That was quite an accomplishment I thought  because he had four people from the state that he had assisting with that.  But just being a part of Extension meant a lot to me.  What about your family, Aubra? Can you tell me a little bit about your  family?  Yes, we had two children. Of course, growing up I told them they could  go to any college they wanted to as far as I was concerned, but I would  pay their way to OSU. So my son started college here in 1974 and I  19  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  don   t know if you remember, 1977 those three boys at the AGR house  that we were getting ready for Homecoming and got a scaffolding into a  power line and he was electrocuted at that particular time.  He was your son?  Yes, that was my son, Kevin. 1977, that was a real hard time. If it hadn   t  have been for our faith in Christ, it would have been a very, very hard  time. Then our daughter started here in    77 and she went ahead and got  her master   s degree. She worked for Extension for probably a couple of  years and then became a specialist here on campus and then the Vo-Tech  system approached her for a position in Vo-Tech so she was in charge of  a testing program for Vo-Tech. And now she   s worked up and she   s  Associate Director of State Vo-Tech here in Stillwater.  What   s her name?  Her name is Kimberly. She married Dr. Saddler who is a dentist here in  Stillwater. They don   t have any children so I   m not blessed with any  grandkids.  But you had a lot of kids as Extension Director you probably think of as  your kids and grandkids.  Right, that   s right. A lot of them I enjoy their grandkids.  Aubra, you mentioned your religious faith that kind of stood to you in  your tough times and I know that   s always been important to you. In  what way has your personal faith influenced your life?  My wife and I both have been used to going to church. I tell some  people I was kind of a druggie as far as church was concerned because  my mother drug me to church on Sunday morning, Sunday night, and  Wednesday night. That was just part of my bringing up. We attended  church regularly. And then my wife was of the same family   or not the  same religion, but her parents felt the same way. So we have always  been active in church. She was a Lutheran and, of course, there wasn   t  always a Lutheran church where we were working, so we became  Methodist.  Looking back, you had a long and certainly distinguished career in  Extension work, worked with a lot of kids. What has given you the most  satisfaction in your work through the years?  Well just knowing the kids (I call them kids) and some of the  accomplishments they   ve made. I watched them mature and become  20  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  active citizens, good citizens. That has been, you know, you felt like you  had a little bit to do with them and some of the things that they achieved.  If they were good ranchers, good farmers, why you still deal with those  people. And it   s always nice to look back on some of their  accomplishments.  Speaking about looking back, when you look back on your life, how do  you hope people will remember Aubra Wilson?  Well, I just hope they remember me as a person that always wanted to  do the right thing. That   s one thing I   ve always tried to do is to be honest  and do the right thing. And, of course, to be an example of the kind of  person they might want to be.  I know we could talk all day long of your experiences, but is there  anything we   ve left out? Any comments you   d like to make or something  you   d like to say?  No, not particularly. Like I said in the beginning, one of the things I  really became interested in was horticulture. I spent probably a lot of  time when I was in Woodward in that particular field. And, of course,  today I still love to garden.  That   s your hobby now, gardening?  Gardening is my hobby. I have a lot of customers. Not paying  customers, but a lot of customers that I grow     What kind of gardening do you do, Aubra?  I have tomatoes primarily and of course all vegetables. I guess I get that  from my mother because she was always growing a lot of vegetables and  always shared. So I enjoy doing that. And, of course, the wife is also a  big help. She   s been a big influence in my life as far as all the right  things that I   ve done.  Aubra, I appreciate it very much, and you taking the time to visit. It   s  been a great interview.  Jerry, I enjoyed doing it and thanks a million.  You bet.  -------  -------   
