 Finchum Today is April the 8, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum; I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today, I am in Burlington, Oklahoma, Alfalfa County, and this is part of our Cowboy in Every County project, and I am here with Marlene and Keith Kisling?  K. Kisling It   s Kisling.  Finchum Kisling. Thank you for having me today.  K. Kisling Thank you for coming.  Finchum Let   s start with Marlene. When and where were you born?  M. Kisling I was born in Kansas, Hardtner, Kansas. Actually, I should say Keith was born there also in 1948. So I grew up in Kansas before we moved to Oklahoma.  Finchum And what did your parents do for a living?  M. Kisling They farmed in the area, and then my dad was a banker for a short time (but mostly they farmed).  Finchum What did they farm?  M. Kisling They farmed wheat. They had wheat, and they always had cattle too.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  M. Kisling Yes, I had four younger brothers, so I was the     Finchum A house full of boys   M. Kisling    the oldest. Yeah, right, right. Finchum Did you play rough and play sports with them?  M. Kisling No, not so much. No, I really didn   t. When I   when they got big enough to beat up on me, I decided,    I   ll leave that alone.    Anyway, they   yeah, they were all younger than me.  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school?  M. Kisling Right there in Kiowa, Kansas, and   .  Finchum High school?  M. Kisling In high school, in Kiowa also.  Finchum And what year did you graduate from high school?  M. Kisling I graduated from high school in    66. In fact, this year we   re going to have our fiftieth class reunion, which I   m really, really looking forward to.  Finchum How big of a class was it?  M. Kisling It was thirty-three (which for Kiowa that was probably about the average at that time), and Kiowa, Kansas, is just across the state line, so I grew up just a few miles from Oklahoma.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject?  M. Kisling Math. When I went to college, that was my degree was in math education, so that   s what I enjoyed the most.  Finchum Were you in FFA  Future Farmers of America  or anything like that?  M. Kisling No. Back then   I was in 4-H, but they didn   t have an FFA program for women, for girls, so I just did the 4-H program.  Finchum So 4-H would not have gone to Stillwater for Roundup then if you were in Kansas.  M. Kisling No. We did go to a camp though in Oklahoma, for some 4-H camp I thought I remembered going to. No, I didn   t go to Stillwater, I remember that.  Finchum Your turn, Keith  When and where were you born?  K. Kisling I was also born in Hardtner, Kansas, June 21 of    47 (so now you know how old I am), but I actually grew up a mile east of where we are at now. I   ve been an Okie all my life, as soon as I got out of the hospital as a baby. Went to school here, went to grade school, went to high school in Burlington. Had a class of twelve, graduating class of twelve. I think there was 150 in the whole school, grade school through high school. We   ve had a lot of very well-educated people coming out of Burlington, Oklahoma. They have a really nice school there, a class B school. A lot of the kids have been top ten freshman or sophomores at OSU, so we   re real proud of our school.  Finchum What year would you have graduated from high school?  K. Kisling Graduated from high school in    65, then I went two years to Alva to college, Northwestern, and then I finished up at Stillwater with an ag ed degree. Then I came back to Burlington, and the ag teacher that had been there for twenty-one years, he stayed an extra year so he could help me get the job. Then I taught here at Burlington for four years before starting our livelihood and just farming, and that   s all we   ve done is farm. We haven   t had an outside job, we just made that work. We both have teaching degrees, but we decided that this is what we were going to do.  Finchum What year did you graduate from OSU?  K. Kisling Seventy.  Finchum And did you go to OSU too?  M. Kisling Yes, I started out at Northwestern, also, for a couple of years. I was going to go to K-State, and I was going with Keith at the time and decided,    I   ll go to an Oklahoma school, where he is.    So I went to Northwestern, and then I went to Stillwater (after we got married I joined him at Stillwater). I went there until he graduated (and I still lacked a few more classes to graduate since I was a year behind him in school), so I actually finished at Northwestern, but I did get a degree in math education.  Finchum Well then we should back up and ask how you two met?  M. Kisling Well, since our towns are so close together (I mean we only lived ten miles apart), we actually met at church. I knew   I saw him at church, and we got to know each other through that, and dated in high school then. Of course, he went off to college, and I still had another year in school. Anyway, when I got out of school, then I joined him at Northwestern, and then of course, he went on to Oklahoma State while I was still at Northwestern for a year. Then after we got married, we both went down there until he graduated.  Finchum Why OSU from Alva? What took you to OSU?  K. Kisling Alva was only a two   Northwestern was just a two-year ag college, so I couldn   t get a degree in ag education over there. Plus, I   d always wanted to go to OSU. Dad kind of needed help on the farm, and it was close, and she was going to school there too, for a little bit (so we both went to school there for one year at the same time). I wanted to end up in OSU and get my degree down there.  Finchum Had you been to campus before?  K. Kisling Oh yes. In 4-H Roundup and a lot of FFA activities. At that time, they had the state convention (a FFA convention) there at Stillwater, so spent time down there for that. I still remember when I went down there. My folks didn   t go with me, and neither one of them had been in college, so I hadn   t been to Stillwater a lot. That was quite an experience: going, loading the car up with what clothes I needed, and going to OSU, and finding out how to get enrolled, and finding a place to live. Quite an experience for me because I hadn   t been out of Alfalfa County very much.  Finchum Well did you live in a dorm?  K. Kisling No, I lived with different individuals. We had a close friend that had a trailer house down there. I lived with him for about a semester. Then I moved in with a couple of buddies because he got married, so I had to move (he made me move out, believe it or not), and I went and lived with them then for one semester before we, before school was out.  Finchum Then when you two got married, where did you live in Stillwater?  M. Kisling We lived in the student housing there on the north side of campus, and   yes, we lived there for I guess about a year and a half. We   d come home in the summers to help with the farming of his folks, and then we   d go back again in the fall. The second year we were down there (and that   s when he also did his student teaching one semester), so I took off from school that semester to go with him to do student teaching. Then when he was through   I guess he still had one semester at college, and then course, we moved back to Stillwater again for his last semester, and then I finished up at Northwestern.  Finchum Back and forth.  M. Kisling Back and forth, yes. A couple of times.  K. Kisling I had a job at the   Oh excuse me, go ahead.  Finchum Oh no, go ahead.  K. Kisling I had a job at the meat lab at the time. The old meat lab was down close to the old animal science building, which is now, is about where the food tech center   s at (it   s kind of in that area). During that time, they moved it out west of town on Western, I think it is. Now, I don   t even know if that one   s, and they do any meat work out there. Anyway, I spent any hour that I didn   t have class, they had me down scheduled to work, so I worked at the meat lab. That   s how we survived, ate a lot of Beanie Weenies. (Laughter)  M. Kisling I worked just a little bit, I didn   t really work that much. I worked actually in the Student Union, kind of as a temp. They had   they needed temporary help off and on, and so I would do some of that, but I really didn   t work a lot while I was down there.  Finchum Well when you would come home for the summer to work, what would you be doing on the farm?  K. Kisling Well it   s harvest (wheat harvest) in June, so we would be here a little bit ahead of time to help get machinery ready, but mostly just help Dad. That   our folks both paid for our education, so we didn   t have that after we got out of school to pay for. So what we did was help them on the farm when we   d come back in the summertime to help pay for that.  Finchum I should back up, how many brothers and sisters did you have?  K. Kisling Just one.  Finchum Just one.  K. Kisling I had one younger brother.  Finchum One brother. How young were you when they put you on the tractor for the first time?  K. Kisling I think I was nine, and (they didn   t have power-steering or a foot clutch) it was pretty risky. I look back on that and   well, I mean I was a lot younger than that when I was just driving it around the yard, but in the field by myself, I was nine.  Finchum Did they check on you? Your mother?  K. Kisling Oh some, yeah. We didn   t have two-ways, we didn   t have cellphones. They   d drive by, and wave, and be sure I was okay.  Finchum Make sure you weren   t doing donuts or wheelies?  K. Kisling Yeah. (Laughter) M. Kisling Even though I grew up on a farm, my dad never had me on the tractor, so I was always the one that, you know, brought out the meals or did something else. He didn   t   with four younger brothers, I guess he didn   t think he needed me to drive the tractor. So I actually never drove the tractor. My job was more the go-to person,    Go get the part,    or    Take the meals to the field,    or the sandwiches, or something like that.  Finchum Spent more time in the kitchen.  M. Kisling Right, I spent a lot more time in the kitchen.  Finchum Did your mother can, and you helped with that?  M. Kisling Yes, some. She really wasn   t a big canner, really. She made wonderful meals, so she was quite the cook back then.  Finchum Did you have chickens?  M. Kisling No, we didn   t.  Finchum Did you have chickens?  K. Kisling Yes, we did.  Finchum Did you?  K. Kisling We raised chickens.  M. Kisling We had rabbits for some reason for a short time, and I remember having the rabbits, but anyway    (Laughs)  Finchum And chickens they would, you would have for   who would be the one to harvest them, if that   s the right word?  K. Kisling Oh I remember that distinctly  Mother pretty well did that because I only remember that as being younger because the rest of the time I was in the field all day long. I remember that happening, yeah, on the clothesline a lot.  Finchum That   s a question colleague always asks, so I asked that for her.    Whose job was it?    and it   s, typically, has been the mother. Did you have to milk?  K. Kisling Oh  Don   t get me started on that one  Yeah, that was every morning. My younger brother, he did it some, but not as much as I had to. Course I was really involved in FFA, ag, and sports, but every morning and every night after ball practice, it was,    Milk that cow.    We only had one, but she was difficult to milk, and she kicked, and she   . Yeah, I   d milk a five-gallon bucket of milk from her when she   d fresh. It was a project that I didn   t appreciate   and go to school smelly. I told my dad, whenever I left home and got married, I said,    I appreciate everything you did for me, raising me, and paying for my college education, but the one thing I won   t do to my kids is make them milk a cow.     Finchum Did you have to milk?  M. Kisling No, I did not have to milk. In fact, I   m trying to think what kind of chores I had. Mine were just mostly around the house, cleaning house and doing the yardwork, and all that kind of stuff.  Finchum Milking the cow. Oh well. Wait, and you didn   t make your kids?  K. Kisling No, ma   am   Finchum Did you even have a cow?  K. Kisling No.  Finchum Okay.  K. Kisling Well, we had one. It was a nurse cow for the show calves at one point early on, but that kind of dried up, so we quit doing that (bought the calves older so we didn   t have to do that). Yeah, we had a cow for a while, and I don   t ever remember milking her though. The calves   we had plenty of calves for that.  Finchum When you were having to milk, you couldn   t   buy   bought milk at that point?  K. Kisling What was that?  Finchum You couldn   t buy bought milk? I mean you couldn   t buy milk     K. Kisling I don   t think   no.  Finchum    so you had to milk.  K. Kisling No, I don   t think we could buy bulk milk. We sold some bulk milk to the neighbors, mainly for the cream. The cow we had would have a lot of cream on top of the milk so we sold that.  Finchum Did your mother make homemade butter?  K. Kisling No, but we had a lot of homemade ice cream.  Finchum Oh that   s great  Yeah, that would be better. Was she a member of the homemaker club, home demonstration club?  K. Kisling Yes, she was  My mother was. There was a few of those ladies that were friends all through life. She died at eighty-nine, and there   s a couple, there   s one of them still alive in the community. I think she   s almost 100. They were always had that club, and they   d meet once a month, I think. I   d remember going from school on somebody else   s school bus to that house after school, so I could meet up with Mom and go home, instead of sending me home.  Finchum Do you remember the name of the club?  K. Kisling Happy Day Club.  M. Kisling Right.  K. Kisling Happy Day Club.  Finchum Was your mother a member     M. Kisling No, I get to thinking, no. Mother wasn   t in a lot of clubs because there was five of us kids, so she was very busy. Yeah, so she really wasn   t in a lot of clubs.  Finchum What was Burlington like during your childhood, I guess, for you?  K. Kisling I think you   d call it a very conservative community. It consisted of a pretty large co-op (as you saw coming into town with the big elevators), so it   s a wheat area. The school, the co-op, and churches (I think we had two or three churches in town), but it was a conservative town, and we didn   t have a lot of migrant people coming and going. We do have that now some, with the oil play, oil and gas. The people you grew up   the people you started first grade with are the kids that you graduated with (the twelfth grade) because they just stayed around.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  K. Kisling (Laughs). You know, I don   t   sports and FFA is what, that   s pretty well what we did. We were pretty good (especially in ag in FFA), won a lot of rewards as a group.  Finchum Compete at the county fair?  K. Kisling Well, nationally and county fairs. We had an extremely good ag teacher, Elliot Castle, was one of the best in the state at the time. He   d start taking us as 4-H members to all the activities, and then by the time we got in FFA, why, we had a head start on some of the larger schools that only had those kids for four years. He   d have us for eight.  Finchum I think Kansas City is where some of the national things would be.  K. Kisling Yeah, we won   . The livestock judging team that I was on won both state contests in livestock judging, and then we won both national contests at Denver National Western and Kansas City. I don   t think that   s ever happened before with the same four boys, same four kids. We did well and pretty good in sports, too.  Finchum Of those four, did they   did any of the other ones go to OSU?  K. Kisling Yes, he did. He was my age. The other two were a year younger (neither one of them did), but one of them did. He was on the team at OSU with me too, at the same time, livestock judging team.  Finchum So you were on that team too.  K. Kisling Yeah, and both of us won national contests there. I was on the team that won Fort Worth, he   s on the team won Denver.  Finchum Who was the faculty member that worked with the team?  K. Kisling That worked with?  Finchum With the team. Wasn   t there   ?  K. Kisling Oh, Per   Dr. Penny, and he passed away a couple years later. Dr. Penny.  Finchum Not Tola, Tolacheck or whatever?  K. Kisling Tylaczech? Yeah, Tylaczech. No, he was before that time.  Finchum So what kind of sports?  K. Kisling We didn   t have football. She did at Kiowa, but Burlington had basketball, track, volleyball, tennis   big in basketball and tennis, went to state every year in volleyball. Not real good in track, but     Finchum Baseball?  K. Kisling We had baseball in grade school, but we didn   t have baseball in high school. Finchum Basketball, was it girls and boys, both?  K. Kisling Uh-huh.  Finchum And track was both?  K. Kisling Yes.  Finchum And volleyball?  K. Kisling Yes. It was the time of the year before basketball started. You could only, you couldn   t practice basketball all year long, so you had to have either tennis   so they had tennis in the spring and volleyball in the fall. Those were our sports away from basketball. Basketball was the big sport that drew the people into the ballgames in the winter time.  Finchum What was the mascot?  K. Kisling A deer   an elk. We were the Elks.  Finchum Burlington Elks.  M. Kisling And basketball   s still very popular for Burlington. It   s the sport of Burlington.  Finchum How many is in a class here now, roughly?  K. Kisling A little bit more than that (than my twelve) but close to the same. In fact, this year they   ve got one of the largest numbers of students that they   ve had in a long time. As good a school system as we have, we draw from   surrounding areas will come in. I suppose   we   ve got an extremely good ag program right now. And so we   ll draw from Alva, and Cherokee, and the surrounding areas of parents that want their kids to come in, and get some education, and giving public speaking, and parliamentary procedure, and some of the areas that they wouldn   t get at their hometown.  Finchum Well, was music and art part of the curriculum too?  M. Kisling Well, in Kiowa   it was big in Kiowa, it really was. The sports, you know, there just wasn   t that much girl sports. It seemed like it was mostly the boys that did the basketball. If there was a girl   s team, I was not on it, but anyway....  K. Kisling Well, tell them about jacks  Jack champion, Barber County jack champion. (Laughter) M. Kisling In grade school, we had jacks. The kids would play jacks, and I won the   just the local jack   he loves to mention that, but anyway   .  K. Kisling County champion, that   s a big deal.  Finchum That   s a pretty big deal, yeah.  M. Kisling Music was big. I played the piano all through school. I entered a lot of contests with piano solos and vocal solos also, actually. As far as the sports, I really wasn   t into the sports so much but...Kiowa   s a little bit bigger than Burlington (so they did have a little bit more going on), but yeah, we did have the football, and it was big in Kiowa.  Finchum Would they have to play Burlington? Or since it was across state lines     M. Kisling In basketball, I didn   t think they ever did.  K. Kisling We did in basketball.  M. Kisling We did back then?  K. Kisling Yeah. Yeah.  Finchum So your paths may have crossed earlier.  M. Kisling Yeah   K. Kisling Oh yeah, we knew each other a long time.  Finchum So the biggest town closest to Burlington would be?  K. Kisling Kiowa.  M. Kisling Well, Alva in Oklahoma, probably. Alva or Cherokee, they   re both actually about the same distance from Burlington.  Finchum Okay, and you had your own car when you went to OSU?  K. Kisling Uh-huh. My dad told me if I didn   t smoke, drink, or chase wild women until I was eighteen, he   d buy me a car, and so I didn   t, and he did. At eighteen, I got a car and had it for a year or two. It was a beautiful car (a piece of junk), and he warned me, but I didn   t listen. Before I went to Stillwater I   d changed   bought a different car.  Finchum And when you packed it up to go to Stillwater, do you remember what you put in it? I mean refrigerator, microwave   no, probably not.  K. Kisling No. The boy I lived with was a year older than I was, and this trailer house was smaller than this room. It was little, and so there wasn   t room for anything except a few clothes. He had everything else.  Finchum One or two suitcases.  K. Kisling I didn   t take very much with me.  Finchum Campus changed much since then?  K. Kisling You know, I knew the campus really well because I did deliveries with the meat lab. Drove a truck   van around all day long, every day, so I knew campus well. It is so different now than it was then, you know. Stout and Murray, we delivered there all the time. They don   t even house that anymore for dormitories. They   ve torn down dormitories that were built new after I left. They   ve already torn them down and built new apartments, west of campus, you know, over in that area. So we   ve got a house there now, and we   re there some, so we kind of get around, and we know it a little bit.  Finchum When you were there, did the Student Union have a bowling alley in the basement, or had they already taken it out? It was still there?  K. Kisling No, it was still there.  Finchum Make use of it any?  K. Kisling We didn   t. I don   t know if you and I ever did.  M. Kisling I was going to say, I don   t remember ever     K. Kisling It was down in the basement, wasn   t it? I knew it was there, but we didn   t have time to.  Finchum Didn   t have time. Do you visit   spend any time in the library?  K. Kisling I was just in there yesterday, by the way.  Finchum Back then though?  K. Kisling Kyle Ray, I went in to see Kyle Ray. He   s on the second floor on the south end of the Student Union, so while I was there I walked around, I walked around inside the Student Union and looked things over. I don   t know my way around in there at all, but I   ve been in there   I   m on this   the OSU Foundation Board. We   ve had some meetings in there, and so we   ve been in there together a time or two, but not a lot.  Finchum And what about the library? Did you spend any time in there?  K. Kisling I didn   t spend a lot of time in the library. (Laughs) Now my kids did, I think, but I didn   t spend a lot of time in there.  Finchum How about you?  M. Kisling Actually, I don   t remember going there that much either. I guess we just pretty well studied on our own or studied with friends. He had some friends he studied with at times on some classes, and I did the same.  Finchum They say it   s changed a lot too since that time period.  K. Kisling I   ve had some meetings in there also and seen it. It   s about the same as it was   I don   t think it   s changed very much.  Finchum The main part is they moved the card catalogs from the second floor entrance, that area.  M. Kisling Oh Lord. I do remember that   Finchum Old card catalogs. That was a sad day.  M. Kisling Well, yeah. Now it   s probably just all on computer anyways, so you don   t even     Finchum A good chunk of it is.  M. Kisling    need it. Yeah.  Finchum When you were there by your, with, before Marlene joined you, who would do your laundry?  K. Kisling Oh I did it   well no     M. Kisling You probably took it home.  K. Kisling    I didn   t do very much laundry. I do remember maybe a few times, but you know, you don   t ever change the sheets or the pillowcase. That   s just common knowledge (guys don   t ever change that), so just clothes and when I   d come home, I   d just have Mother do it.  M. Kisling Yeah, he   d come home about every weekend, so I would see him then. K. Kisling Yeah, I spent a lot of time back here.  Finchum Weren   t you doing things on the farm with your dad?  K. Kisling I   d come back to see a certain lady, and yeah, work on the farm too some.  Finchum What were some of the other things you would do on the farm growing up, besides milking the cow? Driving the tractor?  K. Kisling We did a lot of hunting, you know, like typical farm guy would do. When I was smaller, we rode our bicycles everywhere. I had a motor scooter   a couple of us had motor scooters, and we   d trip all over the place on our motor scooters. But I was outside   I didn   t like school very well. I liked to be outside. I don   t care how cold or hot it was; I was outside if I could be outside. You know, when I   d rather do that as to study, kind of took a toll on me until I learned to study in college. I really had to study.  Finchum Well, describe the house that you grew up in.  K. Kisling It   s two-story with a basement, and it just a mile from where we   re at right now. We   ve got a renter that lives in it now. It   s old, farmhouse, no air-conditioning or heating in the upstairs. I remember the first time after we were married (it was in the wintertime), we went back to see the folks, spend the weekend. When we woke up in the morning, you could blow steam. Marlene thought she was really living in the ancient ages     M. Kisling Yes. (Laughter)  K. Kisling    and that was the last time we stayed at my house in the wintertime  In summer (it was on the west side of the house), and it had a big, two windows. The heat would just bake in there on those covers, you know, during the day, and I   d be out in it all day with no cab, course, on my tractor. That heat, and then the heat from the mattress, and the covers, is just a   my dad was so conservative. He would let me run a fan, but we didn   t have any kind of air-conditioning upstairs. So it was pretty warm up there and cold in the winter, so I learned   I grew up learning to be conservative.  Finchum Didn   t sleep out on the porch?  K. Kisling Nope.  Finchum In the summer?  K. Kisling No. I was so tired, I   d go to sleep no matter how hot or cold it was.  Finchum Well I   m assuming it had electricity.  K. Kisling Oh yeah. Indoor plumbing but we also had an outdoor bathroom and used that a lot growing up.  M. Kisling We weren   t quite so primitive in Kiowa. I said I was a farm girl, but actually we lived just on the edge of town. Grew up in an older house, but when I was about ten or twelve, my folks bought a   built a new home, and so I really had a nice place to   had my own room (course, with four brothers you just have your own room). Yeah, I didn   t have quite the primitive things that he had.  Finchum Yeah, modern conveniences.  M. Kisling Right, and then course, after we were married and we   d come home in the summer, we had a house that we rented (so we didn   t live with his parents or mine when we did come home from college). For just a short time, we had a house on the farm, actually. A small house on the farm that we rented from a family that did   actually, we ended up having to rent it all year so we could have that in the summer available  Then course, when we finished at Stillwater, we came back and lived in that rent house for, I guess, couple years. Well, three or four years, actually...  K. Kisling I was teaching.  M. Kisling    before we bought this house that we   re living in now.  Finchum You   ve been here ever since.  M. Kisling Yes, we   ve been here for over forty years, actually.  Finchum Was it ever even discussed that you would do anything but come back here? Or was that always the plan?  K. Kisling I really didn   t   when I got my ag ed. degree, I really didn   t expect to use it; I thought I would probably farm. But when that come available over here, and they asked me to apply and I got it (there was a lot of applications and so I was pretty shocked that I did), but I thought I   d take advantage of that. Then Dad   s not a   he wasn   t a very big farmer. He really couldn   t take us in farming at the time, so what it did it allowed me to look around and watch to see if something would come available.  I happened to know this gentleman that lived here. He had three daughters, no sons, and I just come out one day and said,    If you ever dec   I think he was getting kind of decrepit (his back bothered him really bad). I said,    If you ever decide to quit farming, I   d like to have a chance to rent your ground.    It wasn   t very long after that he decided to quit, so it worked out really good for us.  Finchum So how many acres do you farm today?  K. Kisling Zero. (Laughter)  Finchum You   ve officially retired?  K. Kisling We   re retired   M. Kisling We   re supposedly retired.  K. Kisling We   re officially retired.  M. Kisling Farmers don   t retire though. Anyway, we did let our son farm our ground, and then we had a hired man back then, and he   s farming part of our ground too, so they   re sharing in the     Finchum In the heavy work?  M. Kisling    the farm acres.  Finchum Well, at your peak how many did you     K. Kisling I figured that was coming, and I usually don   t tell that because I don   t want to upset my neighbors, and my friends, and by explaining all that     M. Kisling Plenty, we farm plenty. Just keep us very, very basic.  K. Kisling Well here   s how I usually explain it. We had three hired men and myself at one time, and then this area that   s a considerably large farm. We were big enough when our son come back   I promised my hired man a thousand acres if he   d get me to sixty-six. It   s hard to get good help and he was excellent (he was my mechanic all the time for a while). When Chad asked to come back, we said,    Yeah, you can come back, but here   s what you   re not going to get. We   ve already promised it to the hired man,    which is quite a bit more than what the hired man was getting anyway (and he   s got all they can handle). That   s how I explain how many acres we have.  Finchum Is it mostly wheat?  K. Kisling Wheat, alfalfa, we have an irrigation system where we raise corn (kind of an interesting subject if you want to talk about it later), and some sorghum. And   Oh we were diversified because we got a feedlot, got a little feedlot so we were raising corn silage, sorghum silage for a feed lot. We   d bring our cattle in, and you probably want to talk about that at a later point.  Finchum I passed some field with yellow, what is that?  K. Kisling That   s canola.  Finchum It   s so pretty.  K. Kisling Blooming right now, so it really is pretty.  Finchum Really pretty. So at some point you decided to purchase instead of just lease land.  K. Kisling This home place. Yeah, they wanted to move to Enid, and so to do that they had to sell this home place, so 108 acres. The creek, and the house, and all the buildings, and about 40 acres around here. They sold us with the option to rent the rest, but he was farming (which was about 600 acres, 500 acres, something like that). Then he   well it   d been less than that, but then he helped us get the ground that he was renting, which one of them was my uncle and another one we didn   t know, but it worked out really well and so we started out with about 1,000 acres. Then Dad   I   d been renting eighty acres all the time I was teaching from Dad, so we had that.  Finchum How many did he have? One sixty, like most start with?  K. Kisling Dad? No, he had a little more than that. He probably had 500 acres.  Finchum Now some of that   s still in the family?  K. Kisling That   s all in the family.  Finchum Oh good  Okay.  K. Kisling Kent got part of it, I got part of it.  Finchum Well had he come, or his family come with, through the run or some   one of the runs?  K. Kisling No, I don   t   I   m not real sure how Grandpa Kisling got it. I   m just not real sure. Dad bought it from   there was nine kids in Dad   s family, and so he bought the home place from Grandpa   well no, he bought it from the Aires. When the estate was settled, he bought it from them. I   m not real sure how Grandpa Kisling   he bought it I think before, he didn   t get it in the run. I do know that.  Finchum Has it been in the family a hundred years? That   s what I   m trying to do, do the math. Has it been in that   the same family for that length of time?  K. Kisling Eighteen hundred. Yeah, I   d, I think it has probably.  Finchum It could be a centennial farm.  K. Kisling We don   t have a centennial sign, but I   m sure it   s been in the family.  M. Kisling Because we haven   t always had fam   well, now that we have a hired man living there, family hasn   t always lived in it. I guess up until the last few years though, family lived in it.  Finchum I don   t think the family has to, it just has to be owned by the same family and producing a certain amount of income during that time.  M. Kisling Oh okay   K. Kisling Oh I   m sure it has been that.  M. Kisling Right, it would be that.  K. Kisling I   m sure it has been that.  Finchum We   ll have to work on that.  M. Kisling Yeah  Okay.  Finchum Okay. You finished OSU, you come back here, then take me through what   s happened since you returned to Burlington.  M. Kisling He taught school for four years, and I had a degree in math education, but course, Burlington didn   t need a math teacher at the time. So I did substituting, actually here (and around close by schools) and Kiowa. I   d substitute up there a lot, and then after we   d been married, what? Four years or so we started our family, and then I didn   t do as much substituting. Anyway, we started our family and had two boys and a girl. Course, they grew up on the farm (actually here), and then they all went to OSU.  Finchum All three?  M. Kisling All three went to OSU.  K. Kisling Two of them at a time.  M. Kisling Yeah, yeah. One year we had a senior and a freshman, well, and then the middle one and the younger went (they were both at OSU at the same time). We   yeah, for a few years though, we had two at the same time in Stillwater. We should   ve had a house over there then, but we didn   t. Anyway, they were very active at OSU too, so they thoroughly enjoyed the experience of OSU.  Finchum Did they have a choice of where they went or did they     M. Kisling I think they did, they just always wanted to go there.  K. Kisling They all had choices because Brent was in the Farmhouse   our oldest was a Farmhouse guy, and Chad was AGR  Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity . I don   t know if you know the competition between those two ag houses, but it   s pretty competitive, and to have one in one and one in the other was kind of fun. They were   in fact, both houses were here, recruiting Chad at the same time, same day.  Finchum Did you send them with a car since you got sent with one?  K. Kisling Oh yeah, yeah. The pickups, they both had pickups. Kim had a car.  M. Kisling Then our daughter was in a sorority house (she was a Chi-O), so yeah, they all got to experience that life. They made really good friends because of it, too, that they   re still friends with today that they met at college and in their fraternities and sororities. It was a good experience for all three of them.  Finchum Would you go down and visit very often?  M. Kisling Well we went down for special occasion, like Spring Sing, and just the different events, that Mom   s Day and Dad   s Day. Course, back then I think it was just considered Parent   s Day, and now I think it   s Mom   s Day and a Dad   s Day. I   m not sure if they had that distinction back then, but anyway, yeah, we visited quite a bit.  Finchum Well if your background was math, were you responsible for keeping the books?  M. Kisling Yes  (Laughs) In fact, he still touched the books, but anyway, yeah, I always had to do the bookwork.  K. Kisling She did, that   s part of the reason for our success, really. I didn   t have to do the books, I didn   t have to send out the bills at the end of the month. We were pretty hooked up trying to make a living at the time.  M. Kisling I took the tax course (the H R Block tax course) so I could know for sure what, how to do the books, you know, for tax time. So anyway, yeah, I   ve always been doing that. I thought now that we   re retired, we could share that job, but so far he hasn   t wanted to share and take part of it.  K. Kisling We   re not real techy, we   re not techy like these young guys are, or these young families because they do everything on a computer. Well, she   s pretty techy, she   s taken some classes   we took some classes together, but she uses it a lot more than I do. Most of our stuff, most of our business is on computer now.  Finchum When you were actually at your peak, was it on the computer or was it all by hand and    give me your receipt?     K. Kisling No.  M. Kisling We had, I guess     K. Kisling Had some, but   .  M. Kisling    yeah, I did the books on the computer when those came along through the extension clubs. They came out with a class on that, how to use Quicken on the computer, and so, yeah, I learned that through extension classes. So yes, I used that one when it was available.  Finchum Were you a member of a home demonstration club?  M. Kisling Yes I was; in fact, I still am. I don   t go quite as often as I used to, but yeah, we still do community activities, and it   s good for the community to have our group. We   ve grown, we   ve got some young people in it, too. It isn   t just an old woman   s group right now (it   s got a lot of young people in it), and we   re thrilled over that. We try and do a lot for the community. In fact, this year we   re actually having a senior tea for the senior girls. We used to always do that way back when, and then we kind of got away from it. The senior girls were too busy doing other things, and so this year   senior class is not that big in Burlington this year. In fact, there   s gonna only be six seniors (and they   re all girls), so we thought,    Well, we ought to have a senior tea for those girls,    so I   m excited about that event that we   re having before too long.  Finchum Is it still the Happy Day?  M. Kisling No, ours is   I was in a different group, or I   m in a different group than he was   his mom was in. It   s called just Wheathearts, we   re called the Wheathearts. For years, it was the Burlington Extension Club, course, then they thought we needed to upgrade our name, and so we became the Wheathearts.  Finchum So extension has   at least makes it this far then, and they   re supposed to be in every county, aren   t they?  K. Kisling They are in every county.  M. Kisling Yeah, but there   s not as many in the county as there used to be. There used to be quite a few. Actually, his group was not really an extension group. I didn   t think Happy Day wasn   t   it was just a women   s group. Yeah, they   re used to be, oh I wanna say, seven or eight clubs in the county, and now we   re down to like three or four is all we have extension groups because...but they   re still fun because the group of ladies that I get together with are not people I see every day because some of them go to different churches than we do and are just involved in different things. So we only see them at club meetings, so that makes it fun.  Finchum You mentioned corn earlier.  K. Kisling We probably have one of the two irrigation systems in this whole end of the county, north end of the county. There just aren   t any, we don   t have   can   t drill a well and have an irrigation system, so we live on the creek, and we   ve got the rights through the Water Resources Board to draw water out of the creek for irrigation. For about seven years, we had enough water in the creek to irrigate with out of that. We started planting corn for silage and decided that   for the cattle in the feedlot, we decided we   d plant two acres of sweet corn, see how that would go. It was amazing. I mean, it grew well.  We fertilized it, then we sprayed it, and it was quite a bit of expense and quite a bit of work, but the people after   they got to knowing that July 4 was the time to start picking, and they   d just come in and just clean us out on corn. We were planting thirty three berries per acre. On two acres, that   s 66,000 plants   33,000 berries per acre, 66,000 plants, and in sweet corn, most of those plants would have two ears to the plant. We had a lot of ears of corn out there. They   d back up to the field and ask,    How much can we pick?    and we   d just tell them,    As much as you   till it   s gone. Pick what you want to.     M. Kisling We   d put signs around town that says,    Our corn is ready, come pick     and course, it really went over well here.  K. Kisling It got to be a big deal for the community. They   d want to know,    Did you plant the corn this year? When   s it going to be ready?     M. Kisling They wanted to come pick. K. Kisling We loved it because after that we kind of had to schedule them in the field. They   d run from seven to seven. By the time they were done   we were done doing maintenance on the tractors and machinery, we   d be back at the house around eight (and that   s about when it started cooling off), and the people from town would start coming out. We   d go over on a gator and sit there (it   s a little four-wheel buggy), and sit there and watch them pick, and it was the neatest deal. We had   one night I had five vehicles with five different states out there picking (that had come visiting their relatives), and they   d bring grandkids out and shuck corn.  M. Kisling Well we were surprised. Some of them had never picked corn before (or even knew anything about picking corn), so that was pretty neat too, to be able to educate them on the corn crop.  K. Kisling It was kind of fun. At the time, I was chairman of U.S. Wheat, and we were really promoting Roundup Ready wheat at the time (trying to get that started), and we were having some kickback on it because GMOs. We went several years and we didn   t plant GMO corn (sweet corn), we just planted regular corn. The earworms would eat it down about that far from the top or maybe even half the ear. You could not spray it at the right time. We tried   several times we   d spray.  Couldn   t get the earworms out of it, so we were giving away a nasty product (and we didn   t really like it), so they had a really expensive sweet corn that was GM sweet corn, but it would keep the earworms from getting in it. So for 600 dollars, a fifty-pound bag, you could get a bag of that, and so we started planting that. It was   I mean the ears were that big around, they were that long, they were corn from one end to the other. Beautiful corn, and the people would come,    Well what did you do differently? The corn is       and they   d eat it there, some of them just shuck it and eat it.  Finchum Eat it raw?  K. Kisling Yes.  M. Kisling Some of them.  K. Kisling I   d ask them   I said,    What do you think of GMO   s?       Oh, we   re not for GMO   s   cause cancer, it   s make you grow eleven fingers and toes, you know.    I said,    Well, how   d you like the corn?       Oh, it   s good corn.       Well, it   s GMO corn, and the reason you don   t have earworms is because it   s got the gene in it to keep the earworms out. Won   t kill you, won   t hurt you, won   t harm you. If you don   t want it, leave it here, I   ll give it to somebody else.       No, we   ll take it  It   s fine.    I was able to promote a product that I knew about that was scientifically safe, but kind of hear how they felt about new technology in agriculture.  Finchum Using some of your teacher skills.  M. Kisling Uh-huh. Right.  Finchum How long did you do that or are you still doing that?  K. Kisling Well, I   m not on the wheat commission anymore, but when   I was chairman of U.S. Wheat for a year, but I was on the state, on the national board for four.  Finchum What would you do for that type of position? I haven   t have a clue.  K. Kisling I was promoting wheat around the world, so I was in seventeen different countries. I was   I sat across from Fidel Castro for two and a half hours twice, in his presidential palace, selling him wheat   trying to sell him wheat. A lot of sheiks and I got to do a lot of traveling, while Marlene stayed here, mending the farm, minding the farm, and couldn   t have done it without that. You know, I couldn   t have done it because a certain   one time, particular, I got home from Philippines, and she had the combines ready to go, and couldn   t of done it   couldn   t of gone on that trip (and that was about a ten-day trip).  Finchum A long way from Burlington   M. Kisling Right.  K. Kisling Yeah. Got out of Alfalfa County when I got on the wheat commission.  Finchum How did you get on the commission to begin with? I mean, is it appointed, or volunteer, or what?  K. Kisling Yeah, appointed by the governor. It   s a five-man board, and they collect the wheat checkoff money. They have that money and then some of that goes to the national organization, which is the U.S. Wheat Associates, and that organization promotes and maintains wheat business around the world. We   ve got offices in seventeen countries, and so they   d send the chairman, and   well, as an officer, you   re in the officer rotation for four years (chairman one year), so those four years I did quite a bit of traveling overseas to promote wheat.  Finchum So some of the wheat that   s produced in this county could end up in one of those seventeen countries?  K. Kisling Yeah, and one of them was Cuba. We   one of the trips that I went down there on, we sold them a million bushel of wheat (that   s one cargo   one shipload of wheat is a million bushel). It went out of Enid, which the wheat here at Burlington (these elevators), most of that goes to the Enid terminal, and then it goes to the Gulf. It was put in an elevator by itself (so it wasn   t contaminated with other wheats), so it all come from this area. Castro said,    I want to buy your wheat, Keith,    and I said,    I don   t have enough, but I can get enough wheat from my area,    and that   s what he wanted to do. Kind of a neat deal.  Finchum He called you Keith?  K. Kisling He did call me Keith. Or his interpreter, yes. He had a really good interpreter. Everything you said, you had to say through that, but that   s what he said. He had actually looked at my resume before I went in to visit with him, and he said,    I see where you   ve been a teacher of agriculture. You should be able to answer all my questions.     Finchum Put you on the spot for sure.  K. Kisling He did.  Finchum So the wheat goes from here to Enid?  K. Kisling Some of it, yeah.  Finchum How? By truck or   .  K. Kisling Truck. Rail   s gone, so we have to truck it all. Now   used to have rails, could do both, now it   s just truck.  Finchum It   s usually twice a year? Spring and   .  K. Kisling Oh it trucks it all winter long. Yeah, they   re in and out of there a lot. In fact, we   re part of Equity Marketing Association, which controls about forty percent of wheat now in Oklahoma, and they   ll   they have control of these bushels of wheat over here. They know the quality, and the test weight, and the moisture content, and it goes in the elevator, and they test it. So if they need a certain quality of wheat, and they know it   s over here at Burlington, they   ll call on that wheat for some contract to fill, and then it   ll go to the Gulf, or the Port of Catoosa, or somewhere like that.  Finchum So it   s divided over   those elevators are separate?  K. Kisling Yeah, they   re a tube.  Finchum I   m learning as we go. (Laughs)  K. Kisling You   ll see it kind of indents like that. Well, that indent is a tube inside of there, and every one of those are a separate tube.  Finchum And one of the tubes could be several farmers    wheat?  K. Kisling Oh yeah, it   d be a lot of farmers    wheat. You know, as it comes in (in the summertime), there   s semis sitting out there to unload, and so you   ve got   and a lot of it goes in the same tube, so you   ve got my wheat, and his wheat, everybody   s wheat in the same tube.  Finchum But has to be similar quality?  K. Kisling It does, and they test it for test weight and moisture, and they   ll put it in different tubes if the moisture and test weight is different, so that they can blend it in the end, and get a higher price.  Finchum Are those usually full? I mean, on a good year they   re full to the   .  K. Kisling Yeah, they full. We   re not going get that this year.  Finchum It   s not a good     K. Kisling Too dry, yeah. We got to have some rain.  Finchum It looked pretty green, but it looks short.  K. Kisling It is short.  M. Kisling And that   s wh   back on the corn, that   s why we haven   t had corn the last several years. It   s just been way to dry in this area to produce the corn, so the neighbors are really looking forward to a good year so we can have our corn again.  Finchum Would you pick some for your own gard   for your own freezer?  M. Kisling Oh yeah  Oh yes, our freezer was full of corn. Yeah, learned to fix it all different kind of ways.  Finchum Next time, you   ll have to have someone that   s there roasting it. You see those beside the road at other places.  M. Kisling Right.  K. Kisling They came (one time Farm Bureau did) with a pickup with a seven-foot water tank on the back of it; they   re about that tall and as big around as the flatbed on a pickup. And we   several of us picked, and we picked that thing full of corn (I don   t how many ears that was but it was a lot), and they took it down to Oklahoma City, and distributed it out to Feed the Children or something in Oklahoma.  Finchum That   s pretty good too.  M. Kisling That was a good project.  Finchum Yeah. Would you shuck it too or just     K. Kisling No.  M. Kisling No.  Finchum    put the whole thing in.  K. Kisling Just pick it.  Finchum Stays fresher that way too?  K. Kisling Yeah.  M. Kisling And it stays longer better that way.  Finchum Being a female, were there other roles that you would participate in, especially when he was out of the country? I mean, I don   t know that there other women like you   M. Kisling Well course, the state meeting they did go to all of us women would go too. Then course when they had a national meeting, we would go too, but as far as going out of the country, I   d   only a few times was the wives or the spouses invited to those. But we did get to go to the national meetings, and had good bonding, and you learned about how other people are doing on their farm, and what they   re doing. And so I really got close with a lot of women across the U.S. that their husbands was on the wheat commission.  Finchum Well do you just discuss what other products you might be able to do? I mean like, I don   t know, recipes or whatever?  M. Kisling Well we do a lot of recipes, and how   what we did different on the farm, taking meals to the field, or you know. Even on the bookwork too, we   d talk about some of that kind of stuff too.  K. Kisling Most of the time, it   s    What tour are you going on?     M. Kisling We did a lot of touring and a lot of shopping. (Laughter) We had some really good   in fact, we   re still good friends with some of those that we knew through the wheat commission. We just still really enjoy hanging out with them or calling, you know, if we can   t get together. We   ve actually taken some trips then, since we   ve been off of it with some of the other couples that we knew back then when they were on the wheat commission also. So it   s been a really wonderful experience that we had with those people.  Finchum Any of those OSU grads?  M. Kisling No, because they were from other states. But we do have some   .  K. Kisling At the state level on the state wheat commission. See, you had to be on the state wheat commission to go to the national, to be on the National U.S. Wheat Association.  M. Kisling I guess a few others on the state level would   ve gone to OSU or A M, at that time (I guess the long-time ones would   ve been A M). They were OSU grads, but not sure the rest of them were. I don   t know that we     K. Kisling Most of them, I think, were probably   .  M. Kisling    probably went there some, anyway.  Finchum Well farming now sure has changed a lot since your dad   s days. What   s the biggest change, do you think, just from your wheat   the wheat aspect?  K. Kisling Technology   s made a huge difference. Machinery   s unbelievable.  Finchum Pricewise?  K. Kisling Well that and then the technology and machinery now that we have   .You know, we had three four-wheel drives, and they had GPS on them. I was so busy keeping everybody going that I didn   t drive a tractor very much (because I was too busy keeping them running), but when I retired then last year, I spent some time on the tractor. I did the job that our hired men did for Chad (so he could learn to run the operation), and I was noticing behind the seat a lot of golf magazines, and I wondered,    How do they have time to read golf magazines?    I found out you turn the corner, and you push the button for automatic, and it drives itself for a mile (half a mile) across the field. You got a lot of time to talk on the phone, call people on the phone, do business on the phone, or read golf magazines.  Finchum And it   s air-conditioned, I suppose.  K. Kisling I just set the thermostat at sixty-eight degrees, and if you don   t ever breakdown, that   s where you   re at. It   s the easiest job on the farm  They should   ve been paying me.  Finchum And it took you to be retired to figure that out  (Laughter) Well when you were doing it back for your dad, you didn   t have even a canopy, probably.  K. Kisling Well he tried to have an umbrella for us, but the wind would take care of that (usually the first windy day). Then we wanted to get tan, so we didn   t wear a shirt.  Finchum Weren   t worried about skin cancer back then, huh?  K. Kisling No, you really didn   t, and this   and we had radios on the fender, and I took a radio out of an old pickup and mounted it on the fender (and you had to get your ear right up to it so you could hear the music), but that   s what we did for radios back then.  Finchum When you were   became into a teenager, what would you do for   would you have dances for fun when you weren   t working?  K. Kisling Oh I don   t remember dancing much. Go to the movies   finally, we get to do something once a week, so Saturday night Dad would usually let us off early Saturday night.  M. Kisling In Kiowa, you either went to the movies or you drug Main. That was a big deal (to drag Main), and I don   t know that kids do that anymore.  Finchum There has to be a Main to drive in.  M. Kisling Yeah, we drug Main and hung out with our friends.  Finchum So when you went to the movie for   it wouldn   t be in Burlington.  K. Kisling No, we   d go to Alva. They had a drive in movie at Alva.  M. Kisling Or Kiowa. Actually, Kiowa had a movie theater too.  K. Kisling Cherokee, you know, they had a movie theater.  Finchum Not the drive in? Actually     K. Kisling Just the one at Alva was a drive in. The others were just regular theaters.  M. Kisling Actually, the Kiowa theater in the summer, I would work in the concession stand. That was one of my jobs I had in the summer on the farm. I got to do the concession stand at the movies, and which was kind of neat. I got to kind of see the movies then because there was always a lull in the concession stand so you got to watch the movies, and then I worked at the wheat elevator, the elevator and tested wheat during harvest, growing up.  That was fun because I didn   t really have a job on the farm really during harvest growing up, and so I helped. In high school years, I helped at the elevator and helped them test the wheat, and bag it up (at that time you had to bag it all separately), and put it in a room, and get it ready to be send off to be tested. They didn   t do as much of the technology that they do now, and so that was one of my jobs at the elevator.  K. Kisling That way she got to see all the custom harvesting hands   all the hands that come through it.  M. Kisling All the truck drivers. (Laughs)  K. Kisling Truck drivers, yeah.  M. Kisling I probably did that three   at least three or four years in the summer during harvest.  Finchum It was a good experience too     M. Kisling Oh it was   Finchum    learning the trade, so to speak, and earned a little spending money. Did you get an allowance when you were nine years old, when you were doing the tractor work or     K. Kisling I don   t think so.  Finchum    any payment?  M. Kisling I don   t think I ever got an allowance either. That was just part of your job. You just helped out the family any way you could. Never got to sleep late on Saturday  I have to laugh at these kids nowadays. They look forward to sleeping late on Saturday, and my mom always had something for me to do on Saturday, probably in charge of laundry. I don   t even remember what I was doing, but with four younger brothers, I   m sure there was always something I needed to help with.  Finchum Ironing. Back in those days they ironed a lot, didn   t they?  M. Kisling Yeah, we did. We had one of those old iron   ironettes? I   m not sure what they   re called, but had the roller, and we used that a lot to iron. In fact, it was really kind of a neat thing to use to iron with, but course no one uses   I guess they use them in the laundry business, maybe, but as far as each person and family having one, I don   t think they   anybody has those nowadays, but they were a neat piece of equipment to have, actually.  Finchum The question I   ve been asking some of our farmers lately, too, is do you have a pocketknife? Do you carry a pocketknife?  K. Kisling If you call that a pocketknife.  Finchum Yes. I do, and it   s OSU   M. Kisling Yes   K. Kisling Oh yeah, it   s OSU on both sides. I always carry a pocketknife except when I got to D.C. We   re going to D.C. next week, Sunday. You don   t take a pocketknife with you there.  Finchum Not on the plane, no.  K. Kisling Plane or those House or Senate buildings. You can   t get in them.  Finchum Did you carry one when you were younger, too? I mean as far back     K. Kisling Just part of what you carry   I   ve got something for every pocket. That   s why I like two pockets on my shirt because I   ve always got something going in them. I   ve got a place for everything.  Finchum But not a pocket protector? (Laughter)  M. Kisling No.  Finchum So do you collect pocketknives? Do you have the ones from when you were little? Do you keep up with a few?  K. Kisling Oh no.  Finchum No?  K. Kisling No. You lose those, and   .  Finchum Well what would you   .  K. Kisling I   m pretty careful about this one. Finchum What would use that for today?  K. Kisling Today, it   s extremely good pocketknife. I use it to split open wheat stems today to see if it   s frozen, to check the size of the head, see if the head   s healthy. I mean, you can see wheat sticky stuff on the blade right there from the wheat stem because it   s wet on the inside and sticky, and it slices it open (you got to be able to slice it open). Yeah, I carry a pocketknife all the time.  M. Kisling Farmers always need a pocketknife for something.  K. Kisling Scraping. I don   t use that one for that. In the summertime, when I used to do a lot of scraping on stuff, why I   d have a pocketknife that I didn   t care about too much.  Finchum Scraping as in rust off of a tractor or something? Or what?  K. Kisling No. Scraping bearings and races that don   t come out. A lot of rusted stuff that you want to scrape down and get smooth, I   d use it for that. Just handy to have a pocketknife, handier than a pocket on a shirt.  Finchum Does your son carry one too?  K. Kisling You know, they   .I had trouble getting him to carry a pair of pliers in a holder. I always had   every farmer has a holder with a pair of pliers in it, everybody does. Kind of like a concealed carry weapon, you know, on your side? Everybody has one of them because you use a pair of pliers (as much as you do) more than a pocketknife. He didn   t want that stigma of having a carrier on the side of his pants. He finally does now though. He saw that you got to have that.  Finchum Pocketknives   it may be a generational thing then.  M. Kisling Right.  K. Kisling Could be.  Finchum So when did you officially retire?  K. Kisling May the 9 of last year.  Finchum So coming up on a year.  M. Kisling We had a farm sale, and sold some of our     K. Kisling A machinery sale. M. Kisling    a machinery sale, and sold some of our machinery. Course, some of it Clint bought, our hired man, and then our son bought some too, but anyway, the rest of it we sold at an auction.  Finchum Was that a hard day?  M. Kisling You know, it wasn   t as bad as I thought it would. At times, I thought,    Oh my,    and    This gonna be   you know, looking back I thought,    Gosh, will we ever want to do something like that? I don   t know.    Every age we   ve been through, it   s been a good experience, and we were ready to move on to the next chapter in our lives, I guess I should say. We   ve just enjoyed every chapter of it.  K. Kisling We sold the stuff that the boys weren   t going to use (the extra equipment, the extra things in the shop, we sold that), but the machinery we worked for all our life, we   re letting Chad at   we   re leasing to Chad, a lease purchase so that he can use that.  Finchum Is the other son interested in farming?  K. Kisling No, he   s not. He won   t be back. Well, he was Mr. OSU, he was the king   he was king down there. You know, he was one of the top ten graduating seniors, top ten freshman.  M. Kisling And he married an OSU girl, our oldest son did, and now their son is a senior this year (and we   re so excited), he   s planning to go to OSU this fall, so we   ll actually have a grandson going to OSU   Finchum Three generations, okay.  K. Kisling Can I get up just a minute?  Finchum Sure   M. Kisling Want something to drink?  Finchum No, I   m good. Something was beeping, so I   m hoping   .  M. Kisling Oh, it   s the coffee that   s turning off, I   m sure. Well, are you getting a little bit from   I am not good at this at all. (Laughs)  Finchum We were stopped, and we just got to retirement. Since last May, what have you been doing?  M. Kisling Well we do a lot of grandkid events, and church events, and Farm Bureau events, and OSU events, so we   ve tried to do it all. We think if we just want to sit at home, we can do that when we aren   t able to get around. Right now, we   re busy just taking it all in and going to as many things as we can.  Finchum And being here to answer questions from somebody who   s taking over the business?  K. Kisling When we   re asked. Stillwater   s about halfway between here and Oklahoma City (well it   s actually a little closer to Oklahoma City), but it   s an hour. We can be at the airport in an hour from Stillwater house.  M. Kisling It   s so centrally located (Stillwater) and course, we   ve gots good friends over there that   s kind of retired too, and so it makes it fun to go over there. We just     Finchum The house sit empty during the, when you   re not there?  M. Kisling Yes, unless we have some friends that need to be in Stillwater for activities or something, we say,    Hey, you   re welcome to use our house.    Then course, our kids if they   re   need to be over there for some event, they stay there too.  Finchum Will the grandchild live there?  M. Kisling No, he won   t live there, but hopefully we   ll see him a little bit more then   since we   ll be over there at times when he   s going to school there.  K. Kisling There   s somebody in that about every week. It   s hard to find a place to stay (just spur of the moment) in Stillwater, and especially for a ballgame. It   s four bedrooms and three bathes, and if the kids aren   t going to be there, we want somebody else to be there. One girl got her doctorate degree a year   couple of years ago and she had a Thursday class, Friday class so she   d stay there Thursday night, every Thursday night, all winter. I like that   M. Kisling We like that they can keep an eye on everything, and we   re in a quiet neighborhood, and it   s just been a really nice experience for us.  Finchum Do you anticipate moving from here to there permanently?  M. Kisling I really don   t. We still like our farmhouse.  K. Kisling About three days, I   m ready to come home.  M. Kisling Yeah  Now I can stay a little longer than that. We have a pond behind our house so he goes fishing, and course the grandkids we   ve taken fishing. That   s been fun.  Finchum There   s not a pond here?  K. Kisling Well we got the creek. I used to fish the creek all the time, when I lived at home.  Finchum What   s the name of the creek is that the     K. Kisling Driftwood.  Finchum Driftwood. Yeah, that was   that   s a neat name.  K. Kisling Because the town of Driftwood   s just   you come through it on the way. When you come north of Cherokee, that little town where the church is at, on the east side.  M. Kisling Actually, that   s the church we go to: Driftwood Christian.  Finchum A lot of little small towns around up in here,  K. Kisling A lot of small towns.  Finchum A lot.  K. Kisling And they   re sur   some of them are surviving. They   re not as big as they used to be, but there are still people living in them.  Finchum I saw a sign for a fish hatchery?  K. Kisling Yes. That is a fish hatchery (it   s not a town, it   s a fish hatchery), and they just raise fish to turn out in these different areas around. Sell it to people, actually, for ponds and stuff.  Finchum And your property doesn   t have ponds? No, just the creek?  K. Kisling No.  M. Kisling Just the creek.  Finchum And you can   t drill   you said you couldn   t drill water?  K. Kisling You can, but there   s not an excess of amount of water, and it   s not good water. It   s pretty gippy, and it   ll even give calves (weaning calves on it over here at the feedlot) diarrhea, so we have to run rural water when we   re weaning calves. It works okay for the yearlings off wheat, but it   s   you don   t want to drink it, I can tell you that.  Finchum I think you can just pitch your witch in and try to find it. Is that what they call it?  M. Kisling Yes.  K. Kisling Yes, witching. Yeah, I don   t   I   m not very good at it, but I know some peo   her dad was a pretty good.  M. Kisling My dad was really good at it. He could witch for water and witch for oil. Course he witched one time and said,    There   s a place right back behind   just west of our house, he thinks is a good place for an oil well. They never drilled there, but anyway, he had   he said that   s where they could drill to find oil, but   .  Finchum Well don   t tell them. There   s enough of that going around in there. There   s a lot of activity in oil.  K. Kisling Used to be here, yeah. Kind of dried up.  Finchum Any on your dad   s property?  K. Kisling Yeah, we used to   could stand out here at night, and look three different directions, and see ten wells being drilled at one time. There was a lot of activity five years ago, but in that length of time, the horizontal wells   they   ve gone bad and not much activity around here anymore. It   s all moved south.  Finchum You having any quakes?  K. Kisling Oh yeah.  Finchum Imaginary quakes, I guess?  M. Kisling Oh you know, we   ve felt a few of them, but you ha   for this area (to me anyway), you have to be sitting perfectly still, not moving, and then you might feel the tremor. But we really haven   t felt that many, but I guess there   s been quite a few in this area, actually.  Finchum We   ve had a few in the library. You could just feel   you   d be sitting at your desk, and you can just feel the wave. That   s a little scary.  K. Kisling Yeah, we felt a really heavy one in Stillwater one time. I didn   t know what it   I   d never felt anything like it before.  M. Kisling Well I have a California friend that we were in town at the   our little QuikTrip we have in there, and we felt one one day when we were sitting in there, and she says,    Oh, that   s nothing     She said,    You don   t have any idea what an earthquake   s like,    because she was from California (and she says they   re so much more intense out there), so we just think we have earthquakes compared to people like that.  Finchum It   s not normal. It   s becoming more normal. So when you were at OSU as a married couple, did you go to sporting activities, or what would you do for fun while you were living in student housing?  M. Kisling Actually, I guess we did a few, but we didn   t have a lot of money so we didn   t do a lot of extra things.  Finchum Didn   t go to basketball games or football games?  K. Kisling Oh yeah, but I remem   I used to do a lot of team roping, and so I had my team roping dummy down there, and I   d practice on it. Then the little kids got to coming out (we had a lot of little kids in our area there where we were living, married student housing), and they   d come out there and they   d line up ten, fifteen deep out there, and they   d run by, and I   d try to heel or grab their feet. You know, play with them in the evenings after I got off work, even into the dark, I remember doing that several nights. Just   those little kids just loved it, but it was kind of fun.  M. Kisling Back then, if we ever ate out, it was A W Root Beer. It was the only place to go get any   that we remembered hardly to eat (and course we didn   t eat out very often at all), and we went to the A W     Finchum Where was it?  M. Kisling It was on the north end of town, and   .  K. Kisling Main Street. I don   t think Perkins was even a     M. Kisling Right, I don   t think so either.  K. Kisling    street yet.  M. Kisling But it was a drive in A W, and you   d park, and   .  Finchum Well, was the   the Hideaway might not have been there until after you.  K. Kisling I think it was because that one set of apartments was called North   .  M. Kisling Forty North.  K. Kisling Forty North Apartments and that was the farthest north, and now that   s just kind of main part of town.  M. Kisling And I think there was only one motel in town, that Circle D. We were just talking about that the other day. We drove by it, and Circle D   s still there, but that was one of the very few motels there were in town.  K. Kisling Her folks come down, I think, maybe a time or two.  M. Kisling A couple of times.  K. Kisling I don   t think mine ever did.  M. Kisling They always got to stay there, I don   t   you would   ve thought it   d been full, but back then, I don   t think a lot of parents came down to see their students or their kids as much as they do now.  Finchum Did they come for graduation?  M. Kisling Actually, he graduated at Stillwater the very same day my graduation was at Alva. So his parents went with him to graduation at Stillwater, and my parents went with me to Northwestern, so we didn   t get to enjoy each other   s graduation at all.  K. Kisling I graduated in the middle of the year, and she graduated at the end of the year.  M. Kisling So that   s why it turned out to be the same day.  K. Kisling She took some summer classes and online classes to catch up. She only ended up a half a year behind me.  Finchum So where was your graduation?  K. Kisling It was in Gallagher   no, it was in the football field.  Finchum It was outside.  K. Kisling Yeah. Yeah, football field. They didn   t have you go across the stage or anything. They just set you out there in a group.  Finchum Everybody stand up and then you   re done. K. Kisling Yeah, throw your hat in the air.  M. Kisling I think we had to go across the stage, but it was on a football field at Northwestern too, also.  Finchum You   re still very loyal to OSU   a lot of people are. Do you know any explanation as to why that is? What is it about OSU that gets people to be so loyal?  M. Kisling Well it   s just such a friendly place, and course, all the people are   most of the ones we know came from farm families, or you know, small communities (or I would say quite a few of them probably do), and so we   ve just enjoyed the interaction with the other families that we know and meeting new people. I don   t know, they   re just all very friendly (I guess that   s part of it), and course the activities  We love the sports, and so we   ve always wanted to go back for that, and all the other activities they have there. And of course the alumni things   those are so much fun to see people that you graduated with, and went through school with, and so that makes it fun, too.  K. Kisling We   re on a lot of boards and committees there at OSU, and there   s something about OSU. The movers and shakers in your community are usually OSU grads. Now that   s really the truth (not all of them, but a lot of them are), and then so being on the different committees and boards that I   m on at OSU lets me be involved with that bunch of people. Not always from this community, but across the state. We saw that happening to us, and that   s why we were so excited that the kids would go to OSU because now (especially Brent in the position that he   s in) is getting that result. He   s getting to be in with the movers and shakers and make a difference, and that   s why we   ve been so loyal to OSU. I can see what it   s done for us, and could do for the kids, and has done for the kids.  M. Kisling Well they   ve made   our kids made so many friends with, you know, a lot of people down there, and then when they get out into the workforce   I mean, like our son, Chad. He sees some of his friends from across the state in other ag events, so he   s learned   .And if you have a problem, you know what person to call because they were involved in that field at OSU, and you just keep those ties going, then of course, like I said, our oldest son has the same situation too. You just know which ones to call if you need an answer for something or need some information, you just   .  Finchum Build a network and keep it going.  K. Kisling Got them all three jobs when they graduated   that was a big deal. That doesn   t happen all the time. Finchum No, and you had good   after you graduated too, you didn   t have any trouble back then either finding work.  K. Kisling No, I didn   t. Got a job that I probably   I didn   t expect (I   ll just put it that way), didn   t expect, so   but it was good for us, really was.  Finchum So you   ve retired from farm work. Are you going to retire from OSU work?  K. Kisling Well, its opened up the door to be on more OSU things, so we   re still awfully involved. And that   you know, there   ll be some of those that   ll go away   to kind of term out of some of them, and you never know.  Finchum No, I don   t.  K. Kisling I   ve got other aspirations for OSU. Maybe it   ll come about, maybe it won   t, so we   ll see.  Finchum Any you wish to share?  K. Kisling Eventually, I want to be on the board of regents at some point.  Finchum I don   t know what it takes to get on there, do you know?  K. Kisling Uh-huh.  Finchum Okay, you got a plan then.  K. Kisling I was up for it, but I had to be off the wheat commission for two years, and I didn   t know that (because I was considered an officer of the state), so I had to be off of that for two years, and then there just has to be an opening. So they   re waiting, you know, for that opening to happen so they can appoint me. They say,    We   ll see.     Finchum Okay.  M. Kisling But there are some top-notch people from this area, I mean, you just never know what   s going to happen because   .  K. Kisling That   s always been a dream though   to get on the board of regents. We   ll see if it happens. If it doesn   t, I   m on the State Farm Bureau Board until that happens, and I get to make a difference there. Hopefully make a difference.  M. Kisling Usually when you mention Burlington, people from OSU   there   s a lot of people who say,    Oh  I   d had a friend that went to school at Burlington.    Burlington is such a small town, but it reached across the state because there   s a lot of people from Burlington that went to OSU and made a difference.  Finchum Mostly connected with wheat?  K. Kisling Agriculture. Most of them in agriculture or communications   quite a few of them in communications. I mean there   s several young girls now that   s in communications with the Coop Council, Farm Bureau, AFR, American Farmers and Ranchers (that   s just the ag groups), but yeah, they hire those girls pretty quick.  Finchum Do you have a favorite memory from OSU back when you were students there?  M. Kisling Oh my goodness.  K. Kisling Mine would have to be the   course being married, and being there was pretty special, but being on the livestock judging team was a very special thing at the time.  M. Kisling I guess I really don   t have one other than just being   getting to be involved in some of the other activities down there.  Finchum Do you know the school song?(Laughter)  K. Kisling I   m not going to sing it, but we can sing it.  M. Kisling Especially when they put the words up there at the ballgames.  K. Kisling If you sing with us, and lead us, we   ll sing it.  Finchum I can   t carry a tune. I have to read it up there too. I know parts of it, but I don   t know all of it. I should know all of it since I graduated from there too, but I don   t. Well anything else you want to add before we close off?  K. Kisling Go Pokes.  Finchum I usually end with when history   s written, what do you want it to say about you and how do you want to be remembered?  M. Kisling Just that we tried to make a difference and make it a better life for everybody.  Finchum And sweet corn.  M. Kisling And sweet corn, right. (Laughs) K. Kisling We just hope that some of the things we   ve given back (here in our older years) make a difference later on for some kids back there. We   ve got some scholarships and things that we   re helping out with. We just donated one the other day to one that is going to give money for an intern to go to D.C., (which you know Brent got to do that when Boren was there) and that   s a pretty good experience to send somebody back to D.C. for a summer internship.  Finchum Expose them to the world.  K. Kisling Uh-huh.  M. Kisling Right, yes.  Finchum Well giving back   OSU   s lucky to have the two of you.  K. Kisling Thank you.  Finchum I appreciate you talking to me today. It   s been fun.  K. Kisling Thank you.  M. Kisling Enjoyed it, thank you.  -------  -------  
