 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Saturday, April 18, 2009 and we   re in Stillwater,  Oklahoma interviewing Tim Smalley. Tim Smalley played on the 1959  NCAA Championship Baseball team here at OSU and we   re so glad that  you could join us today. Thank you very much for joining us. We   d like  to start out with where you grew up and if you could give us just a little  glimpse into your early life.  I grew up about 16 miles south of Stillwater. I went to Progress country  school for elementary school. I went to Coyle High School for two years  and then I transferred to Stillwater High School and graduated here. I  went to OSU for four years. I didn   t play baseball my senior year. I  actually played freshman basketball and baseball. I graduated here  and   went to OU Medical School. Graduated there in 1964.  What were your first impressions of Mr. Iba?  Mr. Iba was a great man. I was his physician for probably the last 10-15  years of his life. When I was a freshman, I was on a baseball scholarship  but I played freshman basketball. He called me in at the end of the year  and said,    Tim, you can stay out here and play for four years and you   ll  get to play the last five minutes of your senior year.    But he said,    I  know you want to go to medical school. If you want to just play  baseball, that   s fine too.    It was work to play basketball for Mr. Iba.  I bet.  Our practices were 4-5 hours. Weekends or holidays we had two-a-days.  I was never in such good physical condition in my life as the year I spent  playing basketball as well as baseball.  What was your major when you started here as a freshman?  5  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  I was in Zoology when I was a freshman. My degree was called Natural  Science, pre-med basically. I lacked one course (to have a zoology  degree) in vertebrae zoology, which I never took. Of course, that degree  wasn   t important to me at the time.  Did you play sports during high school?  Yes, of course. As far back as I can remember I played   kids don   t do  that these days but we played whatever sport was in the season: baseball,  basketball. I never played football, just basically baseball and basketball.  And how did you first meet Coach Greene?  I actually don   t remember that. As far as I know it was just the first day  of practice. Coach Greene coached football   freshman football. He  coached baseball, of course.  And what did you think of Coach?  Coach was something else. I was second string catcher so I got to catch a  lot at batting practice. He   d sit right behind us and give me a lot of  trouble. But he was one of a kind. Tough individual. I know that when I  came back to Stillwater to practice medicine in 1972 his health was  really bad, but I did not take care of him.  I heard he was a man of few words, but every now and again you   d hear  a couple more.  Yes, that   s very true.  Do you have any fond memories of Coach Greene giving you some good  coaching?  He used to make me tape my bats, when they were brand new because I  broke so many bats. I would always turn my hands over and break the  bat. I had real small hands and I had to use a real small handled bat. I   d  break a bat and he   d really holler at me. He was a man of few words.  Why did you decide to come to Oklahoma State as opposed to another  college in the area?  Well, partially because I could get a scholarship, partially because I  lived here.  Do you have any special memories from your time as a student outside  your time as an athlete?  6  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Oh, I guess   my toughest course probably was organic chemistry. I  remember I was glad the athletic department had tutors. We were gone a  lot on Fridays and we had tests every Friday. The teacher was really  known to be a tough teacher on campus. She was very good to me as a  baseball player. I   d get an oral test to replace the one I missed on Friday  when we   d be out of town playing. She called me in I think on  Tuesdays. I really got some breaks, I felt like anyway.  Yeah that   s a tough class. In what year did you start playing with the  team?  1956.  1956, and you were a catcher. What was your batting average?  Oh, it was terrible. I was second string catcher, actually. Ray Bond was  the first string catcher and Ray was sick. I caught probably the first  seven or eight games. I had a problem hitting it right at somebody. My  batting average was like .077. It was terrible. I spent the rest of time  catching batting practice and bullpen.  Did you like being catcher, or did you play other positions?  Oh yeah. Well I played   the year before,    58, I was playing second  string shortstop, too.  That    59 year, we weren   t supposed to be that good of a team.  No, I don   t think so.  So what were the expectations for that team when that season started?  I don   t know if we had any expectations. I think that to win that kind of  championship we had to be a team and you have to be lucky. You have  to have some breaks along the road, and we got some. The last Arizona  game that we won, the third baseman commits his first error of the year.  That is pretty lucky. I think we had some real good players and we had a  lot of luck.  Did you think that it would even be possible to compete for a national  title?  Oh yeah. We didn   t have intentions of losing any ballgames.  Well, that   s a good way to look at it.  7  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  That was pretty much the attitude. We didn   t figure on losing anything.  Well in your opinion, what were some of the team   s strengths?  Well, we had good pitching. Again, I think that we weren   t playing as  individuals. We were all   everything was done for the team. You know  there wasn   t anybody who was trying to be a hero or trying to show off  themselves for their later professional career. It was more that the team  got tough. Joel Horlen was a great pitcher. Dick Soergel was the hardest  worker. When we got in trouble, you could count on Dick to come  through. Usually Horlen pitched first game in the series and Roy  Peterson second. Roy had a lot of different pitches, curve balls, etc. He  threw what we considered a lot of junk up there. He got away with it.  Dick would come along the third day and he   d be set up. Dick was just a  competitor. He played football, basketball, and baseball. I played against  him all the way through American Legion ball in high school. He was a  fierce competitor.  Was there a significant game or series during the regular season that  you thought this was the turning point?  I don   t recall such   I know we felt pretty lucky to beat Cincinnati at  Cincinnati. Playing on the road and they obviously were favorites  because they had us at home. I think we won two in a row and came  home.  And how would you guys travel to away games?  Oh private cars. That was kind of scary some times. You know,   57 I  think it was, there was a wreck. Only wreck I know of. And nobody got  hurt, that   s what was wonderful. We   d go to Texas first part of every  year and play at Rice and Houston. We had good weather down there. I  always was in   Ray Bond   s car. That was pretty exciting. Ray was a  good driver. He got us right home after the game. It was scary  sometimes. I remember one time we left Dick Soergel in St. Louis. He  actually beat us home. He called Mr. Iba and Mr. Iba got him on a plane.  He was kind of startled I think when he got up and found out everybody  had gone.  I bet travel was definitely interesting back then.  Yes, it was.  It   s a lot different than it is today.  Yes it is.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  So for you personally, what was the most memorable game of the  regular season in    59 for you?  Well, I think the championship game was most memorable. I remember  that as the bullpen catcher, Toby would call me and ask me what we had  left down there. We were getting pretty thin that last game. I think Toby  Bensinger pitched five and a half innings or something like that. He  hadn   t pitched all year. He was a great pitcher. He wasn   t in Toby   s line  up. Then Soergel came in and relieved him. I think it must have been  fifth or sixth inning. But pretty outstanding, he hadn   t pitched all year.  He was pitching a shutout. He finally had gotten a little frazzled and was  tiring out obviously. Dick had pitched I think the day before, maybe two  days before. He came in and finished it and we won.  So you would get them warmed up in the bullpen?  Right.  And what was that like for you? Because you   re in Omaha, you   re in this  great atmosphere.  It was all business as far as we were concerned. It was a great  atmosphere. It was a lot of fun. But also, as a team, I think we pretty  much stayed focused.  You mentioned a little bit about the last game with Arizona, do you have  any special memories of your time in Omaha with the team?  The only special memory is the third baseman missed that slow roller. It  jumped over his glove. That was the difference in the ballgame.  Oh, I bet. Definitely opened the door. Well, how special is it for you to  be part of the 1959 National Championship team? The only team so far  in OSU history to win such a title.  Well, the special thing about it is the team  itself . I think it   s fortunate  that there   s so many of us still around. Of the 18 traveling squad, 12 of  them are here today. That   s pretty remarkable in itself. As far as I know  there   s only two deceased. I   m not sure about a couple of them. But I  felt like the team was pretty well bonded together and stayed focused.  But we had fun.  And have you stayed in touch with your teammates throughout the  years?  Actually, I   ve had lots of contact with Dick Soergel. Dick lived here for  9  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  several years before he moved back to Oklahoma City. Tim Green has  stayed in touch with me. I   ve practiced medicine for 34 years in  Stillwater and was the doctor for their kids when they came to OSU. But  I recall I saw a lot of players    kids.  I know you seem  like you were  very focused on going to medical  school and becoming a doctor. Did you ever think about playing in the  minor leagues or professionally?  Actually out of high school I was offered to play professionally. But my  family were all basically teachers, so I focused on education. My mother  taught school for fifty years and she would not have heard of my not  going on to college.  How do you think the 1959 club ranks in relation to some of the other  outstanding teams in OSU Cowboy baseball history?  We weren   t the best team OSU ever had. I don   t recall which years.    54-     55, when I was in high school, they had some awfully good ball clubs.  Probably eight or nine of those guys went right to pros. I think Joel  Horlen is the only one who ever played in the major league off our team.  We had several in the minor league. Tom Borland and that bunch were  really good. I don   t think we could have stayed with their team. But  again I think our team worked. Everything was about the team basically.  Yeah, it seems like a very cohesive, tight-knit group of guys.  Yeah, I think we were.  How special is this reunion for you this weekend? It   s the big 50th year.  Well, I think it   s fun. It   s really fun to see everybody again. Personalities  haven   t changed that much. Unfortunately a couple guys are in poor  health right now.  Going back to your time on the team, tell me about practice in  Gallagher Hall.  The worst part of that was you had to run stairs. In the old Gallagher  Hall, they were really steep. At the end of practice, after practicing three,  four, or five hours Mr. Iba would make us run stairs at the end and that  was tough. I recall going down to the basement to play our early  baseball that year. My conditioning was such I could run 25 miles and  not even get short of breath. I   ve never been in that good of physical  condition. Never had been and never will again. It was pretty tough. We  didn   t have all the limitations that they have now days on how many  10  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  hours they can practice and that sort of thing. Mr. Iba was not ever  unreasonable, but he was tough on us.  Toby wasn   t that tough on us. He tried to be, but the players could  always figure out a way to get the practice over. We could make him  mad somehow. I think I was probably a sophomore and Jerry Adair was  so talented. We would get Joel Horlen to throw right down the center of  the plate in batting practice. Where the girls    softball diamond is now,  there was water that used to stand out there. Jerry would hit about five  over in the water, that would make Toby mad and he   d end practice.  You could really upset Toby Greene. We did our best.  Understandable. What was your on-campus job because you were on  scholarship right?  Actually, I was on half-scholarship so I didn   t have to have a job.  Oh, okay. Did you work at all during your time?  My family had a farm about 16-18 miles from here. I worked on the  farm. But I didn   t have an outside job.  And where did you live on campus? On the farm?  Actually my mother and I lived right down the street on Knoblock  across from the Seretean Center today. Then, I lived in the Beta  Theta  Pi  house my last two years.  And outside of your freshman year of baseball and basketball, you  joined a fraternity?  Yes.  Did you do other things on campus as well? Other groups?  Oh, not really. Baseball and the fraternity took up most the time I had to  spare. The rest of it was study time.  How   d you get any studying done?  We had plenty of time.  Oh yeah?  We were able to get plenty of time to study. The only time I had a tutor  was in organic chemistry. I can   t think of any time we really had any  11  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  problems getting plenty of study hall in though.  And did you have any favorite on-campus hangouts? Off campus  hangouts?  No, not really. We didn   t have as many choices as they   ve got  nowadays. Off campus, there weren   t that many hangouts.  In your opinion, how has college baseball changed throughout the  years?  Well, I think the metal bats made a big difference. I   m told the kids  aren   t near as tough. I think that   s probably true from watching the  games. You know, people in my age group started playing when they  were in kindergarten. We played sports every free moment we had. Kids  today I don   t think do that. There was an article in the local paper here  recently stating some of the smaller high schools don   t have enough kids  come out to have a baseball team. That   s really kind of sad as far as I   m  concerned because kids are sitting on a couch watching TV and playing  games on the computers instead of exercising.  Describe for me the stadium when you were playing.  It   s pretty much as it is today. They obviously improved it some. Our  dressing rooms were over in Gallagher. The stadium per se is not a  whole lot different. They added the seats down to the left field line. But  basically the stadium is about the same.  How do you feel about the proposed new facilities for baseball?  Well, I   m not quite sure I understand why OSU is building a baseball  diamond, except that I know they   ve got a little trouble getting post-season  tournaments here because of the seating capacity. I assume that is  why they   re going to build it. I   ve heard that maybe they want 10,000  seats available, which makes it easier to get a post-season tournament. I  don   t like to see a whole bunch of empty seats on the early games like  we   re seeing today. I think if you have that many seats, you   re bound to  have a bunch of empty seats. The athletes are affected by that. I just  hope they can get the students to come out if they build that big of a  stadium.  After you left OSU with your bachelor   s degree, you went on to medical  school. Could you share some of your highlights and tell me about your  career after you left college?  Every year you get through medical school is a real triumph. In the    60s,  12  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  there was a lot of hazing going on with medical students. That doesn   t  occur nowadays. I don   t know that there are many highlights, but you  get through it every year. I had some very difficult times on pediatric  service when I was a medical student. I had one time I didn   t get any  sleep for five days. Then I stayed in Oklahoma as an intern. I did an  internship at Oklahoma City Veteran   s Hospital which is all part of the  university complex. Even though it   s an OU Medical School, I was only  on the OU Campus one time my entire medical school  duration , and  that was graduation day.  Then after my internship I got drafted and spent two years in the Army,  one year in Vietnam. Then, I came back to Oklahoma City and did my  residency and fellowship in Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology. I  went to Enid two years and was missing too many ballgames. I   d get  speeding tickets for trying to make the game over here in Stillwater. So I  decided to return to Stillwater.  And how long did you practice in Stillwater?  34 years.  And that   s great that you   ve taken care of so many teammates and  coaches.  Yeah, I took care of Mr. Iba. I took care of Sam Aubrey. Sam and I  actually played golf together about three times a week. Took care of lots  of football coaches. Leonard Hamilton, the old basketball coach; he   s  still around in Florida. Pat Jones. They were all patients of mine.  And what year did you retire?  I actually am not retired. I work part time. I work three days a week for  the Kickapoo Indian tribe. I quit private practice January 1, 2005. I have  it pretty easy nowadays.  Do you ever miss a game?  Oh yeah. I try to make most of them, but I do miss a few. I never miss a  basketball game or a home football game. I do miss daytime baseball.  When I was practicing I missed a whole lot of baseball. I just didn   t have  the time.  I appreciate you sharing some of your memories from your baseball  days and of course life after Oklahoma State. Is there anything else that  you   d like to mention that we haven   t spoken about?  13  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  Nykolaiszyn  Smalley  No, not really.  Well, Dr. Smalley I appreciate your time today and welcome back to  your 50th reunion. I hope you come back for many, many more.  I want to come back for our 75th.  That sounds great. Thank you very much.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
