 Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Welcome to the O-STATE Stories oral history project. It   s April 30,  2010. Today we   re interviewing Mary O   Donnell. She is a cataloger  here at the OSU Library and she   s retiring and we   re thankful that  you   re here to visit with us. My name is Janet Ahrberg. So let   s just start  off with some basic questions. Mary, can you tell us a little bit about  where you grew up?  I grew up in a very small town in Iowa called Slater. It has never been  much more than 8,000 people; I think it   s probably even less than that  now. So it was very quiet. Everybody knew everybody; everybody was  related to everybody. It was just what you would expect of a small town  back in the    50s and    60s, especially. Everything that was kind of  clich  d about small towns was kind of typical of that.  Well you talked a little bit about what it was like. Can you tell us a little  bit about your family and the times when you grew up? What was the  era and what did your folks do?  My dad was a carpenter. He had been in the Army Air Force in the  Second World War. He really wanted to be a pilot, but then he met my  mother and they got married not long after that. So he went ahead and  got some GI courses at Iowa State and became a carpenter. My mom  was a homemaker for most of her life and then later on when my dad got  Parkinson   s disease, she went ahead and became a postal clerk and was a  postal clerk for about fifteen, twenty years.  I know you come from a large family. Can you tell us how large and how  many brothers and sisters you have?  Yes. I have five sisters and eight brothers. (Laughs) So we had our own  baseball teams, football teams, you name it.  5  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  What was that like growing up and where were you in the family?  I am the second one, so I like to tell people that I   ve been through all the  pains of parenthood except actually having the babies. Each of us, as we  got older, the older kids always adopted at least one of the younger  children to take care of and that kind of helped things out. We came  along fairly close together, so I don   t know how my mom did it the first  ten years. But by the time we were nine or ten, we were ready to help  take care of the little kids. We had chores from the very beginning.  What was your school like when you went there? Did you attend school  in Slater?  Yes. The grade school in Slater was, I think, built back in the twenties,  and it was a big brick building. They added on a gym later on. We  basically had just one class of each grade because it wasn   t that big.  Later on, when I was in sixth grade, they decided to consolidate with  three other towns and build a high school in Huxley, which is about  seven miles away. So by the time I got to junior high, we actually went  over to Huxley and that kind of enlarged the circle of people that we  knew. Even then, it wasn   t that big a school. There were eighty-three  people in my graduating class, which seemed like a fairly large class to  us, but it was not.  So where did you attend college?  Undergraduate college, I went to the University of Northern Iowa. I got  my degree in teaching art education, grade school. I liked UNI very  much. It was a small college, very pretty. I lived in the dorm and that  was a lot of fun, except some of my roommates were rather strange, but  I had a good time with that.  So where did you get your library degree, then?  Before I got my library degree, I actually went back to the University of  Iowa and got a master   s degree in Art History. I actually taught at Iowa  Wesleyan College for four years and worked in the library there, as well.  I decided I liked library better than I liked teaching the art history. So  then I went to the University of Iowa in    79 and got my library degree  and then I came here in 1980 and I   ve been here ever since.  When and why did you decide to become a cataloger?  There again, as we were taking the classes, I discovered that I liked  doing the cataloging better than I liked doing the other stuff that we did;  the reserve and the reference and all the other things. I just liked the  6  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  organizing of things and looking things up. By cataloging different  books, you actually learn an awful lot about different topics because you  have to understand what the topics are in order to assign the call  numbers and the subject headings and I just liked that. (Laughs) Some of  my classmates called me a misanthrope, because catalogers just become  catalogers because they can stay back there and not interact with people.  I said okay, well that   s what I   ll do.  So there wasn   t really a person that influenced you the most?  Yes, actually there was. Dr. Jean Osborne taught the cataloging class  and she was a very enthusiastic person and she made it a lot of fun as  well. Well, some of them didn   t think it was fun, but I thought it was  hilarious and I just really enjoyed her demeanor and her class and there  again, she was one of these, and I think a cataloger has to be this, that is  interested in a lot of things. She was always finding different things for  us to catalog for us to practice on in such a variety of topics and she was  able to tell us something about each one of them.  That   s interesting. Is she still alive, do you know?  As far as I know, she   s not. She was in her seventies at the time and that  was almost thirty years ago, so I don   t think she is alive anymore.  So when did you start at the OSU Library?  1980, September first, which happened to be Labor Day.  So was the OSU job your first library professional job?  Yes, it was. I did work at Iowa Wesleyan as a paraprofessional in the  catalog department, which is another reason I decided I liked cataloging.  I also worked in the audio/visual department and in the circulation  department.  What factors interested you in taking the position here at OSU?  Well, this is kind of incidental, but one of the things was my brother was  moving to Bartlesville, so there was going to be family close at hand. It  just sounded like the kind of thing I wanted to do and the library is large,  but not so large that it would be difficult to do things. I worked as a  student at University of Iowa at one of the university libraries, because  they have the main library and then they have several branches and  people get so specialized. They only catalog one thing, which I didn   t  really want to do that, whereas here you got to catalog a variety of  things. Some of them you didn   t particularly want to catalog, but there  7  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  were a lot that you did. And I think that   s one reason that catalogers are  the best Trivial Pursuit players because they pick up this information as  they go along and that was one of the things that appealed to me.  How many years have you devoted to the library?  If I were to stay until September first it would be thirty years complete.  Tell us a little bit about what the campus was like back then, when you  came.  I don   t think it was that much different. The Noble  Research  Center  wasn   t built yet, so there was a big parking lot. A lot of the buildings  that are up now, especially along Hall of Fame  Avenue , were not there.  There were some Quonset huts still up. There were some apartments  along there. Where the Noble Center is used to be a parking lot, and  where the International Trade Center is used to be a parking lot. I think  that there were probably a lot more trees, although they   ve planted some  since then, but it didn   t stretch nearly as much as it does now. So they  have put up a lot of buildings since then.  What was your impression of the campus when you came?  I thought it was pretty. I thought that it was nice that the architecture is  all pretty much the same style, the Georgian style. I didn   t think that  campus was as pretty as Iowa State, which is the one I had been at when  I was working at the library there. I didn   t think it was quite as varied as  University of Iowa, but I did like it. It   s a lot flatter than either of those  campuses are, which I kind of like because I don   t like to climb up and  down hills.  What was the town of Stillwater like?  It was pretty much like Ames and Iowa City in many ways, so I felt  pretty comfortable here from the very beginning. I think Oklahoma  itself, except that it   s hotter in the summertime and the winters are not as  severe, has a lot in common with Iowa because it   s kind of rural. People  are very friendly. People will help you out quite a bit the way they do in  Iowa. Except for the fact that the dirt is red and not black, some of the  countryside reminded me of Iowa a lot.  What adjustments did you need to make for an Iowan to be on a campus  populated with Okies?  Getting used to the accents. (Laughs) I couldn   t always understand if  there was a particularly strong Oklahoma accent. I sometimes had  8  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  trouble figuring out just exactly what it was that they were trying to tell  me or what they were asking for. That was one of the adjustments. I  think that one thing that startled me a lot in the beginning, and still kind  of is different than Iowa, is the fact that    One of my friends had been  out on a date and she asked her date for some Kleenex. He said to look  in the glove compartment and when she pulled it open, there was a gun.  You see a lot more guns in Oklahoma or know of people who have them  than you do in Iowa. That was something that startled me and it still is  something that I have never quite gotten used to. Not that Oklahomans  go around shooting them off all the time, but it was just that there is a lot  more casual attitude toward guns down here than there is up in Iowa.  Can you describe what the cataloging department was like when you  first started?  It was about the same number of catalogers, but everything was done by  hand, not on computer. The only computers that were in the department  were, I think, two, maybe three OCLC computers and they were the big  beehive computers that had an attached keyboard. They did not do  anything else except bring up OCLC records. All the cards were typed,  anything that went into the card catalog. We could order sets of cards  from OCLC, but any authority cards, any other kinds of cards that we  needed to have for our card catalog and our authority catalog had to be  typed by hand.  The very first time when I got here, I think that there were some things  that we weren   t getting from OCLC and we had to Xerox them. Of  course, the cards were all filed in the card catalog. Each of us had a  section and we would take usually, depending on how many books had  been done the week before or how many cards we got in, it could take  anywhere from a couple hours to two or three days. Also the assistants  didn   t do what they do now. The assistants mostly did typing, they did  some checking of the records, but they did not do copy cataloging the  way the assistants do now. What we call copy cataloging that the  assistants do was the main job of the catalogers. We didn   t do as much  original cataloging as we do now.  What was the library like? When I say that, I remember it where we had  the different floors. Can you describe when you first came how the  library was set up?  Each floor, of course, was a different topic. I think in the basement there  was physical sciences, on the main floor there were agricultural  sciences, second floor was ready reference and the catalog and  acquisitions departments, third floor was humanities, fourth floor was  social sciences, and then government documents has always been on the  9  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  fifth. Each floor had an office for the librarians and there was what   s  called a main entry catalog or subject catalogs on each floor as well so  that people didn   t have to go down to the main card catalog on the  second floor to look things up. There was always somebody at each of  the reference desks and there was a reference area, a ready reference and  a reference desk on the second floor, but each topic, each subject area  had its own reference desk and a staff. So that was quite a bit different.  It   s actually changed a few times because at one point, they moved  everything to the second floor and then they broke it up again and now  there   s the present system where, again, it   s all on one floor except for  government documents, which has its own reference.  Where was the dean   s office?  The dean   s office was in a little area just off where the catalog  department is now. It   s what is now Special Collections. The dean   s  office was the big office that   s back there where the head of Special  Collections has her office and then the other rooms were secondary  offices for Mr.  Norman  Nelson  Assistant University Librarian . They  did not have the section that they have now that   s been built out even  before the new part was put in, the glassed-in part. They had another  room, they had a conference room and that   s where they had the faculty  meetings and so on. They also put out, after they moved the dean   s  office and Special Collections moved in, they took over part just by  putting up shelves and then later on they put up walls. But it was rather  small and the main entrance was often through the catalog department.  A lot of people came through the catalog department.  How many deans of libraries have you worked under?  Three.  Can you name them for us?  Roscoe Rouse was in charge of the library when I came and then Dean  Ed Johnson and now Dean Sheila Johnson.  Can you name some of the other department heads that you have  known?  Well of course Co-Ming  Chan . There was a department head down in  physical sciences, Calvin Brewer, who reminded me a bit of my dad. He  was kind of a tall person who liked to joke and was kind of soft spoken.  I think he, later on, had Parkinson   s disease. I can   t remember who was  head of agricultural sciences at the time, but I know up in humanities it  was Terry Basford, who was an Anglophile from way back. (Laughs) He  10  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  loved the Queen, he loved England, he loved all that stuff. Social  sciences was Ed Holman. I really liked Ed a lot, but he had a temper.  (Laughs) Sometimes he would come down, steaming mad because he  couldn   t find something, but as soon as you found it for him he was all  sweet and kind and very appreciative. And of course, Vicki Phillips used  to be head of documents, who is now down in sciences.  What about Vet Med and architecture?  Vet Med, the one I remember the best is of course Laverne Jones. She  used to be in the ag-sciences and when they actually built the library  over there, she moved over there and was the main librarian there for  several years. Architecture, we   ve had several different architecture  ones. We   ve had Teresa Fehlig. There were people before her, but she   s  the one that was the most memorable. Then Bill Harroff, who was a  good friend of my roommate   s.  Did you mention Guyla?  Guyla  Houston  was head of acquisitions. Guyla and I are very good  friends, even to this day. She could be rather intimidating, but she was  also a lot of fun. We were both Star Trek fanatics, so we would go to all  the Star Trek conventions and have a good time there.  Has the library building changed a lot since you arrived? Was the new  part already added on?  Yes, the new part was already added on. It hasn   t changed all that much  except that they   ve built in the new areas, like for Special Collections  and the Oral History Program. They   ve changed departments from place  to place, occasionally. They   ve taken out some offices and put in others.  The main thing, of course, has been the use of computers. This has made  a lot of difference in the way things are arranged and in the furniture that  they have bought because they had to buy a lot of new furniture, cubicle  panels, all this stuff. Just going from one computer in the department to  maybe three computers for OCLC, and now everybody has a computer.  Even when we first started out, the computers were fairly primitive. You  couldn   t do much word processing on them or anything like that. Now,  we can sit there and if we have a question about a book or cataloging we  can get on the web and find out information about the topic. We can  check for different people to find out what their names are. We can do  all kinds of things that we couldn   t do before. We   ve been able, the  catalogers at least have been able, to concentrate more on what are really  more professional parts of cataloging and leaving the copy cataloging.  What we used to do as professionals is now being done by assistants.  11  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Can you talk a little bit about how the staff and the librarians have  changed in how they dress at work?  It was a lot more formal when I first got here. Pant suits were allowed  because we had gotten over that thing. (Laughs) I think that the  assistants usually tried to dress casual, but not too casual. Certainly the  librarians all were professionally dressed. It has gotten a lot more casual  over the years. I think that the librarians who work with the public still  dress professionally. Maybe a little more casual than it was, but it  certainly is more professional. I think even the assistants, the full-time  assistants, it may be casual but it is good casual. Student assistants just  kind of wear whatever they want.  Tell us how the library   s    Read    Em Cowboy    slogan came about.  Well, we decided to make a logo to go with the library to put on buttons  and to put on stationery, whatever. They had taken the universal sign for  the reader, which was just kind of a body holding up a book with a  round head on it, and put a cowboy head on it. And we were trying to  come up with a saying, a cute saying that would go on there, and they  thought of several things. Then Sheila asked me if I could think of  anything. I was just getting ready for work the next day and    Read    Em  Cowboy    popped into my head. (Laughs)  Now you   re famous in the library department for two quotes.  Oh, yes.  Could you explain the cataloger   s motto?  The cataloger   s motto is, in Latin,    Is pendeo.    When we are cataloging  things, many times, especially since I get asked a lot of questions, there  are certain kinds of things that one day you might catalog them this way  because of certain conditions in the record, conferences especially.  Another day, you might catalog it totally different. And so when  somebody asks me a question,    Do we always do it this way?    I will  say,    It depends. Is pendeo.     The other one is coming out of our BIBCO meetings and for those that  don   t know the BIBCO meetings, this is a program by which we have  been trained to do Library of Congress level cataloging and we get  together to check each other   s work and to actually learn how to do it  better. We have discovered that the more lightweight or the smaller, the  fewer pages that it has, the most insignificant pieces are the most trouble  to catalog. The size of the piece is inversely proportional to the amount  of trouble it   ll take to catalog it.  12  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  That   s your theory of cataloging?  That   s my theory of cataloging.  Well, you   ve been in the department for quite awhile now, so can you  name some of the librarians that you have worked with in the  department, some that are now and those that are previously?  Yes, right now, well of course Co-Ming has been my mentor and has  really taught me almost everything I know. You pick things up in library  school of course, but it   s all theory there. It   s not until you actually get  to the job that you really start to learn. One of the librarians that I  remember, she was not a cataloger, but she made a huge impression on  me. I don   t think she meant to do it this way. Beth Struble from physical  sciences. I had been here less than a week and my desk at that time was  the first one you got to when you entered the department. She came in  with three enormous volumes, slammed them on my desk and said,     What is the meaning of this?    I just kind of sat there trembling.  (Laughs) We finally figured out that it was a serial, so I sent her over to  Mrs.  Barbara  Carol, who was the serial librarian at the time and by  then Elizabeth  Beth  had gotten over being mad and she was just as  sweet as pie and in the meantime I was sitting there like this. (Laughs)  Other catalogers that I   ve really gotten to know, one of course was Roop  Sandhu, who was here when I got here. She was fascinating. She would  tell us stories sometimes of her childhood or the way things were done in  India. She always wore the most beautiful clothes: saris, the trousers and  tunics that they wear always with the beautiful scarf, always with  matching shoes. It was wonderful. There just have been so many. The  present ones that we have, I   ve really gotten to be good friends with and  I   ve kind of gotten into the position of mentor, which is both fun and not  so fun.  Well there was Barbara Griever     Yes, Barbara Griever. She was from Idaho, and has actually gone back  to Idaho, and she was kind of a character. Deborah Ottsen, who was  married to an Episcopal minister. She always used to come around. She  would pick up the mail and she   d go around, distribute it, and she would  always imitate the siren from the Addam   s Family  television show ,     Woop, Woop  The mail   s in     (Laughs) She was a real character. It was  Barbara Griever that always used to say,    If I had a brain I   d be  dangerous.     There was Lisa Bodenheimer.  13  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Lisa Bodenheimer, very smart, but kind of nervous. She was so  meticulous and so concerned with getting things right that sometimes  she would get herself into a headache. She   s gotten over that. She   s now  at Clemson University and she   s head of the catalog department. We  used to go to the Star Trek conventions with her as well.  Steve Folsom?  Steve Folsom is the god of cataloging. (Laughs) Steve was one of these  who took to cataloging right away. He was very smart, who I think was  born knowing the rules, but it wasn   t just the rules, it was just being able  to figure out how to do things. When we   d get an item in that we   d never  seen the same type before or we didn   t know how to even begin, he  would figure out some way to do it. He was the one we would go to if  we had questions, especially about subjects  subject headings  because  he could always figure it out. He is now at the Library of Congress.  And Michael Kim?  I don   t know if Michael really wanted to be a cataloger. He wanted to be  a librarian very much, but I think what he wanted to be is what he is  now, which is the head of cataloging. I think he wanted to be in  administration from the very beginning. But he was always very nice.  He was always very concerned for people. I remember once that  somebody had had a bone density test and they had mentioned that to  him. He wanted to know all about it, what it was, what it was for, and he  went around to every female librarian and staff in the department urging  them to have a bone density test.  Barbara Carol?  Barbara Carol was here when I got here. She was the serials librarian     very quiet, very, very lady like, and somewhat passive-aggressive. We  got to be good friends with her. My best friend Debbie Shaw, who was  the acquisitions librarian under Guyla Houston, we decided to get a  house together. Barbara was moving to Pueblo, Colorado and she said  she would rent  her house  to us for a little more than her mortgage  payment. So we got a three bedroom, two bathroom house for about   450 per month, and a double car garage. I think at the time we moved  her out, she had six cats. So we took two cars. One of them had three  cats in it and the other had three cats in it and we drove all the way to  Pueblo, Colorado.  What about Linda Taylor?  Linda is one of the nicest people I know. She unfortunately is on a  14  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  disabled list at the moment, although we   re hoping she can get back  pretty soon. She is very quiet and nothing disturbs her much. She knows  a lot about serials, she is excellent with serials. We really are hoping  she   ll come back very soon. Of course, I won   t be here, but     When you came into the library, of course we had a card catalog back  then. Can you describe what you did when they talked about    shifting the  drawers?     One of the things that we were to keep track of as we filed cards was to  see that if there was a drawer that was too tight. If there were too many  cards in there, then people who were trying to find something would  have to pry them apart in order to read anything that was on the cards.  So we kept track of those. There were certain areas, of course the A   s  and the S   s come to mind, where there was always a lot of tight drawers.  We would kind of sit up together, measure several of the drawers around  the drawers that we wanted to shift and figure out where we could take  some out and where we could put some in. Then we would start, usually  at the beginning, shift some cards into your drawer, then we would write  down what we had changed because each drawer had a label. Then we  would go ahead and maybe the next drawer would be too tight, we might  shift cards forward into that drawer and some of the other one   s cards  back into the previous drawer. If there were several that were very tight,  we   d line them all up on the table and just work, being very careful to  keep them in order, but just work until everything had at least a maybe  three- or four-inch space in the back. If we could get more than that, it  was better. That way then, people could look at the cards without having  to pry them apart. Some of the changes that we had to make could be  quite extensive. I remember once we changed out three or four cabinets,  just at one time.  What kind of materials have you cataloged?  Just about everything. I like to catalog the stuff with pretty pictures, of  course. (Laughs) I don   t do too many of the international documents like  the Food and Agricultural Organization or some of those. Those are  usually going to be some kind of agricultural science. I   ve done art, I   ve  done mathematics, I   ve done physics, I   ve done astronomy, I   ve done  veterinary medicine, architecture. We do just about everything. About  the only thing I have not cataloged is serials, but I also have done a lot of  the audio/visual video tapes, video cassettes. It   s fascinating to watch  that change because when I first started out we did some video cassettes,  not a whole lot. We did film strips and we did slides and we did a lot of  posters and for awhile there, people would have calendars that would  have maybe famous artworks, or historical dates and we would catalog  those. When we started cataloging for CML  Curriculum Materials  15  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Library , especially, is when we started getting a lot of audio/visual  things because before that they were done down in the media room and  we didn   t really do much with them. Now the film strips have totally  disappeared. LPs, long playing records for those that don   t know what it  was, and there are some that will not know what it is, the vinyl records  we almost never see anymore. It   s almost all DVDs, CDs, and a few  video tapes, and whatever new stuff comes out.  I have to tell this story   I   m not going to say who it was. Somebody had  cataloged something they got from Special Collections and they brought  it over to me to check because they had to do an original. It was a disc  about maybe three inches in diameter and it had a hole in the middle and  it was about, oh maybe not even half an inch thick. It had shiny plastic  around the edge of the disc. They had it cataloged as some kind of  electronic resource, but they had a very short record because it was  impossible to tell what it was because we didn   t have the machinery. I  looked at it and I said,    This is an eight-millimeter film.    They said,     Film? What do you mean film?    I said,    You know, you go to the  movies, they show the film. See these little sprockets on the edges along  here?       That   s not a film,    said,    Yeah, it   s a film. Films are this wide      I said,    This is an eight-millimeter film; this is what my dad used to film  us when we were jumping around in the swimming pool.    She had no  idea what it was. Times have changed   Sure has. You   ve trained all the librarians and most of the staff that has  come through the department, correct?  For the last few years, yes.  Who trained you?  Co-Ming. Co-Ming did most of it and I had a little help from a librarian  that was here named Mary Brown, but mostly it was Co-Ming. She had a  lot of patience, especially since there were some things that I really  didn   t have a clue about because I had not been able to take advanced  cataloging. I just had basic cataloging, but she got me through. She  always was praising me even when I was convinced that I was going to  be fired because I obviously didn   t know anything. (Laughs) But yes, it  was mostly Co-Ming, I would say almost entirely Co-Ming.  Do you know how long that process took?  It was a couple years before I really felt like I knew something. The first  six months were terrible. I really thought I was going to be fired at any  minute because I was so stupid. But then after that we had a talk and she  said,    Oh no, you   re doing very well,    and then I felt better. I still think  16  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  there are a lot of things that I don   t know that she does. I think there are  some of the other catalogers, like you, who proudly know more things or  who are more particular or are more interested or precise than I am. I am  more of kind of a general    let   s figure out what it   s all about and get  something in there,    whereas I think that you and Michele  Seikel  and  Co-Ming really want it to be as thorough as possible. I think actually,  and I   m rather proud because I did train you and Michele, that you have  turned out to be the catalogers that you are.  Thank you very much. Where do you find the patience? You   ve trained  so many people and really that   s one of your real characteristics when  you   re training is that you have so much patience.  I think it comes from living with twelve younger brothers and sisters.  That   s where it started out. I didn   t have a lot of patience when I was  growing up, but you had to learn patience as we got older, especially  because we weren   t allowed to smack them anymore. I spent two years  teaching elementary art and there again, I had to learn more patience  there. I think another thing is, there were a lot of people who were  patient with me, who have made me feel that,    Oh I   ve made a mistake,  big deal, I   ll fix it next time. I   ll do better next time.    They taught me  how to do that and that   s what I try to keep in mind that these people are  not trying to make stupid mistakes, these people want to learn. They  don   t want to do a bad job. They want to be able to be proud of what  they   ve done. I think that   s why I have to keep the patience because I  want them to feel that    yes, I   ve done something wrong, but no, it   s not  the end of the world.     What changes do you think have impacted the department the most?  Automation, cataloging rules? What do you think has really changed the  department since you   ve been there?  Having computers at every desk. Absolutely. Before that, whenever we  wanted to do something on OCLC, we would get up, go over to the  OCLC terminals and on the way we might talk to somebody, ask  questions or so on and we did a lot of moving around. Also, if we  wanted to check any subject authorities, name authorities, we had to go  to the file and look it up there. We got up and moved around. If we had  to get something from the fifth floor or the fourth floor or the basement  or something, we got up and moved around. Now I would say that 95   of the time we   re at the desk and we   re looking at the computer. I think  we still interact quite a bit, but not nearly as much as we did and we  don   t move around a lot. If I want to talk to you, you   re on the other side  of the room and if I   m in a hurry about something, I don   t get up and go  over there, I send you an e-mail. So I think the major thing is not so  much automation as just having a computer on every desk.  17  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Why do you think people perceive that catalogers are weird?  Catalogers are weird. We   re very picky. We do kind of stay back in the  back, not talk to people. (Laughs) I think it   s mostly because we are  concerned with fine points of things. I think that sometimes it   s to the  point where it doesn   t need to be that fine, but we   re trying to create  something, formats and conventions that will be instantly recognizable  to somebody who is reading an English record and he   s French, let   s  say. He   ll know that this is the title, this is the author. He   ll know all this  stuff. By having standards, it   s like when you   re trying to put something  together and your screws are standard and you   re able to go get your  screwdriver and put it together. You know that your screwdriver will  work on those screws, whereas if everybody does their own thing,  you   re never going to be able to put anything together because you   ll  never have the tools. I think that   s why we   re weird, because we   re very  tool oriented.  How many assistants have you had?  I averaged about one a year and this is in spite of the fact that I   ve had  several that have been with me from anywhere from two to four years. A  lot of my assistants are quite young and the last thing they want to do is  stay there. (Laughs) I have taken over a few assistants from somebody  else, maybe another cataloger who left or wasn   t getting along with  somebody. There was one that was shaping up to be very good and then  all a sudden her boyfriend got drafted by the Toronto Blue Jays, so off  she went. I only had one that I fired. She had been here for only a few  weeks, but that was the only one. Everybody else, some of them were  very, very good and some of them were tolerable, where I knew that  there were certain things that they were never going to do right, but they  did enough right that I could deal with that. I figured it out and it   s been  anywhere from twenty-five to twenty-eight assistants.  Wow. Can you tell us some of the weird stuff you cataloged? Did you do  a rock?  I didn   t do a rock, but I did some maracas. I did some flutes, I did  some   it   s hard to think of it now. It   s just whatever they bring in to me.  If you have a natural object, and we   ve had some natural objects that  have come in, I think once I had a bunch of bugs that were in a kit that  somebody had made up for CML. I didn   t catalog this, but I did find a  record for it. It was a book on the Jewish Passover, the Seder, and  included in there was a Seder cracker  The note was,    include Seder  cracker,    and there was a note down below and it said,    Seder cracker  consumed by catalogers.    I haven   t had anything quite that weird, but I  have had musical instruments and I   ve had dolls and I   ve had the  18  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  occasional, not rock so much, but bugs. Sometimes they   ll have  programs over at CML where the little kids will make books and  sometimes we   ll catalog those.  What was the worst LC cataloging record that you   ve ever seen? It  seems that there   s a story about that.  There is a story about that. I got one once, the book was on avian  botulism, it was about how Canada geese, when hunters go hunting with  lead shot and they miss, of course it falls down to the bottom of the  pond. The geese and the ducks will go down there and as they   re  foraging they pick up this lead shot and it will poison them. The subject  heading was avian botulism. The call number that LC assigned to it was  619.2, which is cattle. The subject heading, avian botulism, was tagged  60010, which is a person. So it   s Mr. Botulism, Avian. (Laughter) I   ve  seen other ones that have been almost as bad, but that was the one that  took the prize.  What   s your favorite subject to catalog? Is it literature? Is it  agriculture? Is it children   s materials? Is it gardening books?  I think it is actually science. Some of the science books that I get,  particularly one of the ones that I was cataloging that I actually read was  on the person who discovered the coelacanth, that prehistoric fish that  was found around Cameroon that has been thought to have been extinct  for millions of years. There   s another one that was a biography of Gene  Shoemaker, who was an astronomer who saw the comet that crashed  into Jupiter. There have been biographies; one of my favorite  biographies was Mary Shelley. I think biography and some of the  sciences, if it   s not too dull, sciences. Literature is fun too, but I have to  be careful that I don   t read them at the station.  Are you going to miss writing and updating all those procedure manuals  that you have developed for the department?  Well, in a way I won   t, in another way that was one of the most fun  things that I did. I enjoy writing things like that because I like to make  things clear and I like to put in pictures for the examples so that  somebody can look at and say,    Yes, I know how to use that.    Actually,  I think since we got the monograph cataloging manual done it   s been a  lot easier to train people because the examples are there and they can  look at it and they don   t need to ask questions because some of them are  really shy about asking questions. I   ve noticed a lot of improvement in  the way that they have been learning, so I feel pretty proud of that.  What do you think is your legacy to the OSU Library and to the  19  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  cataloging department?  I think it probably will be the manuals, the fact that I tried to do manuals  and make them clear. I don   t know, my brilliant personality, the mottos.  (Laughter)  Do you have any poems you could recite to us? Any cataloging poems?  Oh, let   s see. I can   t think of anything off hand that I can recite without  making a lot of mistakes. (Laughs) But I did like to do, if I was going to  have some kind of little get-together to explain something, I would like  to do it in a fake advertisement or write a poem about it. It was just fun  to do, something to kind of add a little zest to something that   s really,  really dull. Oh, the weird Cutter   s slideshow. The weird Cutter   s   classification system  slide show is my favorite because I would put  little digs in there, like putting Paul Newman up as an example of The  Long Hot Summer and putting Dante   s Inferno as the place where all  catalogers go. (Laughs) Things like that. That was a lot of fun. I really  liked to do that.  If you were to give advice to any future or current students out there that  were considering library school, what would that be?  Don   t count on it being static. What you learn in library school will get  you started, but you have to be able to get into new rules, new ways of  doing things, new things that are going to come through to be cataloged,  new formats. Now over my thirty years, it was only within the last half,  maybe even the last third, that it really started to change and then it   s  been changing constantly. I think that   s what is going to happen. So if  they go to library school and they learn something, they should not be  surprised if a lot of that becomes obsolete fairly quickly. They just have  to be able to go with whatever is coming up, so that would be it.  Where does the phrase,    you betcha,    come from?     Oh, you betcha, yah,    that   s from when you come up to northern Iowa,  not so much in my area, but it   s right there on the Minnesota border and  not that far North Dakota and    you betcha.    We don   t use it so much  anymore and we don   t use    Ufda    so much anymore because the second  generation Norwegians don   t really use that as much as we used to.  Is there anything that you would like to add about your thirty years here  at the library that we haven   t touched upon?  Actually, I   m just going to really miss all of the people. I enjoyed a lot  of the aspects of the job. I think I really liked to do original cataloging  20  Ahrberg  O   Donnell  Ahrberg  and I really liked to do the manuals. It is a very real form of creativity, I  think, the original cataloging and all of the manuals and things like that,  but what I   m really going to miss is all my friends.  Well, on behalf of the OSU Library and the cataloging department and a  fellow cataloger, I want to thank you for all you   ve given to the library  and to all of us in the department. You   ve just been a wonderful resource  person and a great friend and a great mentor and we truly will miss you.  Thank you very much. And I   ll be back.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
