 Milligan Okay, so this is Sarah Milligan with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Today   s date is   I knew I should have looked at this before. It   s March 5?  Hickerson Eighth.  Milligan Eighth, gosh. (Laughter) March 8, 2016. I still want to say 2015. Two thousand sixteen. I   m in Granite, Oklahoma. I   m here with Brenda Hickerson. We are doing an interview for the Cowboy in Every County Oral History Project which is part of the O-State Stories collection. That   s out of the way. All right, so let   s start with telling me a little bit about yourself, where you   re from, who your family is, just a little bit about your background.  Hickerson Okay, actually our family started in Stillwater. My mom and dad met at OSU in 1946, and they were married. All of the children, my siblings and I, were born in Stillwater, so that was where we began.  Milligan Wow  I didn   t know that.  Hickerson Yes. Dad was a small-business entrepreneur there, so we all grew up around a small family business then. Actually, I didn   t spend a whole lot of time in Stillwater in the beginning. I was about two and a half when they decided to move here. We moved to Granite, so it   s been a big back-and-forth here, back and forth to Stillwater.  Milligan That   s a big shift.  Hickerson Yes.  Milligan Did you have siblings that were older than you?  Hickerson Yes, I had a sister that was a senior in high school. She moved from Stillwater, going into her senior year, moved to Granite, Oklahoma. Good 5  and bad in both. She was a little upset to begin with, but she made some lifelong friends here. It all turns out the way it   s supposed to in the end. We grew up literally across the street from this plant where we work now. Family is in the monument business. We have a quarry; we process granite for a lot of different projects. Like I said, this was just in our blood. We grew up running through the plant. We grew up working in the plant and processing monuments in some form or fashion. That was implanted at an early age. We would hear Mom and Dad working with families because we   d be hanging out around the office. It really does get ingrained in you, dealing with people.  That   s probably the biggest thing that we learned from watching our parents, was how to deal with people, especially in times of need or if it   s a civic project or anything like that. I was a shop rat. I was literally under everybody   s feet the whole time.  When I decided  to go away to college, I was fortunate to have a scholarship to Western  Oklahoma State College  over here at Altus for the first year. I   d planned on going to Stillwater immediately, but I had a scholarship for basketball and music. I went to Altus for one year and decided that I wanted to go to Stillwater the next. That took me back to Stillwater. Of course, we had family connections all along, so we were always going back and forth. Stillwater is where I had to go, myself. I wanted to go to Stillwater, OSU.  Milligan It was your choice, not necessarily pressure from   .  Hickerson Yes, no one else   s choice. Correct, no pressure there. I always knew that   s where I wanted to be.  Milligan I do want to come back to that, but I have a question. When you all, when you   tell me a little bit more about what your dad was doing in Stillwater and how that transition came from Stillwater to Granite.  Hickerson He and Mother were in school there; they went to OSU. Dad was in architecture, and Mother was studying physical education. She was the Queen of Murray Hall, and he was the sophomore class president. They crossed paths eventually. I don   t know how much you want to get into that. Mother had written her life story for her English class, and Dad had been after his friend to introduce him to Mother at Tiger Drug on the OSU campus. Finally the time came, and Mother happened to be carrying her life story with her whenever they met. They sat down in a booth, and Dad was wanting to know what she was carrying. She said,    It   s my life story,    so he sat there and read it. He goes,    Every girl needs to carry one of these     They were married three months later. (Laughter)  Milligan When did she get to read his life story?  6  Hickerson He just verbally did that with her, I   m sure. The campus has real special meaning for all of us. It was during the war. They actually had to keep that they were married silent because they would be kicked out of housing. Three couples eloped to Kansas, and Mom and Dad were one of the three couples. They attempted to live apart, married, on campus because of the housing issue during the war. They finally succumbed to admitting it, so they bought a little trailer that they moved in off campus that they lived in for the first. I forgot what question you asked. I   m just getting there, round-about   .  Milligan No, that   s totally fine.  Hickerson Okay.  Milligan That   s a good way to go, actually  (Laughs)  Hickerson Okay, good. Anyway, my grandfather owned the quarry down here. He had actually done WPA work as an engineer. He had seen the uses for the material. He was from Granite; he grew up here. Whenever the quarry was up for sale, and the processing plant, he purchased it. At that time, my dad had put in a little manufacturing shop in Stillwater. It was a little   we did a little bit of everything. He did all the awnings in Stillwater, my dad. You know those metal awnings and the metal fencing and everything? That was him. That was us, and also venetian blinds. That was the beginning of that. Well, when Grandpa bought the quarry and the processing plant, they started investigating different ways that the granite could be used, so Dad also put in a monument company in Stillwater at that time. Ta-da  As time went on, Grandpa needed more assistance down here, so that   s what transplanted us from there.  Milligan So he was already in the business there, as well.  Hickerson Yes, exactly. If it wasn   t for OSU, we wouldn   t be here today, (laughs) to say the least. Mom and Dad didn   t finish their degree there, but they were devout. Mom would know all the football players    names, what they did in each game, the basketball players. She was the all-encompassing fan, super fan  Yes   Milligan How far did they get in their education, then?  Hickerson Dad was a junior, and Mother was a sophomore. They went the two years. Once they got married, it was a little tougher to continue in school, so they decided they   d try their hand at being an entrepreneur. We   ve done that ever since. (Laughter)  Milligan Your dad grew up in Granite? 7  Hickerson Mangum and Granite, he actually graduated from Mangum, which is a few miles away from here. Mother was born in Dustin, Oklahoma. Granite   s on one end of Highway 9, and Dustin   s on the exact opposite end of Highway 9. She   s half Creek, and she went to boarding school in Chilocco whenever she was twelve. Her mother died when she was twelve, so Chilocco was a school that would take in orphans or half-orphans and everything. She had five brothers and sisters, and they were all living with their grandparents with other family members. There were seventeen people in a two-room house. She went to Chilocco, and she was valedictorian of her class. She had always wanted to go to OSU. That was her dream, to go to college.  Milligan Did she talk much about   was it difficult to get to OSU or was it     Hickerson You know, that   s really strange. She did work a year for the telephone company to earn money to be able to go to school. Back then, she probably didn   t have much direction in how to attain a way to go. In fact, I don   t know if they even had anything like scholarships or anything. I think you just paid your way, and that was it. She did work for the telephone company and basically put herself through those two years. It   s quite an accomplishment, in my eyes, even though they didn   t finish. That   s all right. They always instilled it in us that we needed to go to college. There was never any doubt about that, for me, anyway.  Milligan I wonder that, too, because you said she knew she wanted to go to OSU, and I hear people say that pretty often. I wonder if there was a reason behind that.  Hickerson Family. Her uncle was the most avid OSU fan. His name was Jim Fife, and he was a staunch OSU person. I don   t know. I never really asked that question. I just assumed we were in the area, and everybody else was OSU fans in the family. (Laughs) He played   I can   t tell you whether he attended or not. I should know. He played football and, I believe, did track. He was quite an influence. That was part of the family that raised her. Her daddy went to California to be an engineer, and that literally left all those children there. She was the oldest of the six. It just left all the children there to be taken care of by various family members. If you ever want to do another story, the Thlewarle Indian Church is where she grew up, the tribal town. That   s where the name came from. It   s remarkable family there. Most of her relatives have gone on to, a lot of them went to Santa Fe, the art training there, and they are very well known in the Native American art area and writing, also. Interesting side of the family.  Milligan Very interesting.  8  Hickerson Then Daddy, he was the exact opposite. Grandpa grew up dirt poor in Granite. He got his engineering degree by correspondence course. He only went through the  tenth  grade. Then he got his other certifications, but his engineering degree was correspondence, actually, from OU. (Laughter) He was number sixty-three. Dad grew up on the other end of that spectrum.  Milligan He was number sixty-three for what?  Hickerson Civil engineer of Oklahoma, number sixty-three. He was the sixty-third.  Milligan That   s pretty early  Yeah   Hickerson Isn   t that cool? I haven   t documented that, but that   s what I   ve always been told. Anyway, Dad had contracted osteomyelitis when he was twelve. They had been to the World   s Fair. Grandpa took them everywhere, World Fairs and everything. They   d get in the car, and they   d go, Red River. I mean, they were the opposite of Mother   s family, completely opposite. Dad got osteomyelitis, and he almost died when he was twelve. Grandpa had been reading in Reader   s Digest about sulfa drugs. It was the new thing. He and the doctor got in a plane and flew, I don   t know where, to pick up sulfa drugs to bring back because they   d amputated Dad   s leg three times and  the osteomyelitis  would still come back. The osteomyelitis wasn   t ceasing, but the sulfa drugs cured him, through Reader   s Digest.  That   s strange, but that   s the way it happened. Dad was president of his class. Grandpa was in ham radios, so he hooked up a ham radio for his room to where he could give his freshman class address because he was president of the freshman year but he couldn   t leave the house. He went through, like, ninety-six surgeries over his lifetime from the osteomyelitis. You got somebody that was flying all over the place, going to World   s Fairs, and you had Mother here who had literally scraped and everything. Mother appreciated my grandfather   s history and my dad. My dad is tenacious, very tenacious. He was a dreamer. He was always on Go. Wanted to be involved in everything. They were just a good pair to come together. Boy, I got off on a   . (Laughs)  Milligan No, it   s really interesting, though  Well, you even think about that because this was in the   40s (right?) when they met. That   s what you said.  Hickerson Yes, yes.  Milligan It   s interesting with your dad at that time point, he was down one limb, right?  Hickerson Right.  9  Milligan I wonder if that played a role in.     Hickerson His life, yeah.  Milligan Yeah.  Hickerson Oh, definitely. Grandpa always said, to give you an idea about Dad, Grandma had to tie him to the porch when he was two because he kept escaping. He would go to   it was all family around the area of town here. He had his little Our Gang, Spanky and the gang. I   ll show you a picture later. It   s all of them. They look just like Our Gang. They would go house to house to house, run all over the mountain. They rode all over town, cousins and friends and everything. Grandpa actually said if he hadn   t have lost his leg, there probably wouldn   t have been anybody able to stand him because he was just so wired. He was everywhere. It slowed him down just enough to where he could be tolerated by most human beings. (Laughs) That was interesting. One thing about Dad is, there was a young boy that lived down the street, and his mother was always after him to    go visit that Willis kid. He   d been in bed for two years, probably doesn   t have any friends.     Troy is his name. Troy goes,    I don   t want to go visit that snobby kid,    basically. She goes,    Oh, you get over that. You go up there, and you visit.    He went in, and Dad was laying in bed. Troy went upstairs and said,    Hey     Dad popped up and goes, (he   s twelve)    Want to play chess?    They grew closer than brothers from then on. Troy would actually pack his wounds, Dad   s wounds, and be kind of a nursemaid for him during that time. All those experiences, I mean, who would do that for you? He didn   t really know Troy. Troy was a few years older. To have someone come in and actually   . He said,    Once he asked me to play chess, we sat down, we talked about everything under the sun, about science, engineering, and aircrafts.    They were just inseparable until Troy went off to war. He moved back down here when they were older, and they had a little time together before Troy passed away.  So, yes, Dad definitely, his leg did play a role in how he thinks about things and his excitement for life. He would hit the door, and it would be,    Good morning  Isn   t it a wonderful day?     I don   t care what was going on. Some days you would want to go,    Cut it down a notch, please. It would be nice for you to just bring it down a little.    Anyway, he was always on the go, always looking for new projects. He was always trying to invent something, but the granite business was his heart, the idea of leaving something behind, the average person could see and read about something that happened to a person or a place or whatever. He and Mother both felt that way, so that   s what was passed on to us and how we all got back involved in the business here.  10  Milligan When they came back down here and brought you with them when you were two, you really grew up around this. Did your siblings have the same connection to the business here as you did?  Hickerson Yes.  Milligan Even though they all were older?  Hickerson Yes. Karen  Harrison  might not have as much, but we all worked in what we call the layout room. Karen and Linda  Morris  and my brother  Spogie  worked various jobs around the office. We also had cable TV systems. Dad and Mom had cable TV systems, and my grandfather, a family business. Grandpa ran a wire up on the mountain because his house was at the bottom of the mountain, so it gave him TV. Well, when people heard about that, they said,    Oh  Can you do that for us?    That was kind of the first cable TV in the area. Over time, they had purchased a small cable TV deal. There   s a little old building up north of here that looks like it   s fixing to fall in. It has a new roof on it because we   re trying to save it. That was the office for, like, twelve cable TV systems and Willis Granite Products Monument Company. We kind of exploded out of that and built this eventually so that we could all have some space to work.  Milligan That was the first one, was just up north of there?  Hickerson Yes, and it was probably put there in 1902, 1903. We have some pictures of it that   s pretty neat, when it was originally there.  Milligan Cool  I love the fact that you have all these pictures in here, too, of all sorts of things. (Laughter)  Hickerson Yes, behind you is the    Stillwater  Where Oklahoma Began      sign.  Milligan Oh   Hickerson One of the first projects we did when John  Hickerson  and I moved back was that.  Milligan That, yeah  That   s the big one on Perkins  Road    Hickerson The big one. There was a little one on Sixth Street, coming into town before you turned on Hall of Fame, but they put that in storage, supposedly, when they widened the road. That was one of the first projects we all got to work on. It was just a few years after I   d graduated. We   d actually bought into the business in 1983, all of us as a family, and I was still at school. That was probably the intrigue, to have your own business and come back and see if you could help build it. That was part of it. 11  Milligan The picture is all of you?  Hickerson Yeah, the people that own the newspaper,  James  Bellatti, there   s a gentleman that I can   t remember his name, my mother, my dad, Mr. Bellatti, a woman that was, I think, part of the Chamber, my sister Linda, the other two gentleman I can   t remember, then myself and Karen. Those are my  two  sisters.  Milligan That   s from left to right   .  Hickerson Yeah.  Milligan Cool   Hickerson Yeah, and you notice the dresses? That was   .  Milligan It was the   80s. (Laughter)  Hickerson Yeah, definitely, definitely. That was fun. One of the first projects that I got to be a part of was the Oklahoma entrance sign at Theta Pond. I was still in school then, so we all got to go to the dedication and take part in that, which was really cool. It was nice.  Milligan When I go over there now, I   m going to have to look at it, have some context. Well, so your family bought into this business in the   40s then?  Hickerson Yes, Grandpa bought his first quarry about 1945. This one he purchased, I think, probably    46,    47, something like that. The business itself has been here since 1890s, the quarry first opened up here. In fact, I just found a picture. I was sitting there   some people send us pictures. I pulled it up, I looked out my office window, and it was the same mountain range. There   s a boulder that   s still there, and it   s in this picture. This picture has to be in the 1890s. The ladies have long dresses with bustles on, type of thing. It   s in the quarry. We have a wall of the original plant that   s still up, and I   m thinking that this was part of this building that   s shown in the picture. It was out my window. That was a strange feeling.     Yeah, right there.  Milligan That   s pretty cool, though.  Hickerson Yeah, I   ll see if I can pull that up.  Milligan Yeah, that would be neat. I wonder, so you said that he bought his first quarry in 1945, then this one in 1946. What got him into the quarry business? Do you know?  12  Hickerson Well, he was working with WPA, my grandfather, yeah. He was working with WPA, and he was the engineer for, like, the schools that are made out of local material. He did our drainage ditch here in town, which is about, oh, I don   t know, five feet deep, granite-lined, and it comes off the mountain. There   s several canals of it throughout town that actually takes all the drainage out. He had worked on a number of projects in the area with the granite, and that   s what got him interested in purchasing the plant and doing projects.  Milligan Got comfortable with it.  Hickerson Oh, yes, most definitely.  Milligan That   s a big undertaking. That   s pretty neat.  Hickerson Yeah, yeah.  Milligan So I wonder that, too, with you growing up here, and then let   s get back to your decision to go to OSU. You said that was something you always knew. I mean, is that something   did your siblings go there? Was it a family thing, or was it a you thing?  Hickerson Well, Karen went to school there for a couple of years, for two years. She didn   t finish her degree, but she was there. Then Linda actually went to school. She was living in south central Oklahoma, so she went to school at Durant for a few years. She was in engineering, mechanical drawing type things. Karen, I don   t know if she ever declared a major or anything. Other life decisions came in, and so they didn   t finish. My brother, he really wasn   t the college type, I   d say. He liked working with his hands, welding, things like that, so he did his own thing, more or less. Me, I was the one that   . (Laughs) They had really put their mark on me going to school. I mean, I knew I was going to college. That just wasn   t a question, and OSU was my pick over everything. Like I said, if it hadn   t been for the scholarships at Altus, I would have gone up there first year.  Milligan What do you think that came from? Was it because of the academic programs you thought you would get, or was it because of the connection with the family, or other things?  Hickerson I knew the academic aspect of it would be a challenge for me because I was coming from a small school. That was another thing that took me to junior college to begin with. It was a daunting thing to think of going to Stillwater. I had thirty kids in my senior class. I think we finally graduated with twenty-eight. We started with thirty-two, graduated with twenty-eight. You know, there were always colleges that came down and gave a talk and everything, nothing like it is now, from what I understand. There   s a lot more individual 13  attention to,    What are you wanting? What are your needs? We have that. This is it.    I was kind of out there. I liked everything. I liked music. I liked art. I liked geology. I liked science. I had not pinpointed exactly what I wanted to pursue, except I started in music because I really thought that   s what I wanted to do, was be something in music.  When I went to OSU, it was a stretch for me in that regard because I   d taken piano lessons twelve years. That was about the basics of it. We had vocal music at school. When I went up there, that was a big, it was a culture shock for me, just in that venue, that music department. I enjoyed all of it. Scared me to death to get up in front of all those people and do anything, but that was a good thing. I took a geology class, and it just hit something. I just really thought,    I could get into this.    Plus, growing up here, it might surprise you I was a rock nut. I liked picking up rocks and minerals and things like that. That was always something. We were on these mountains. You   d see something and go,    Oh, my gosh, what is that?    It was really neat to see the differences of the granite, so I guess maybe that   s where I was trending all along. I switched to geology, and that   s what I finally got my degree in.  Milligan Well, yeah, it makes total sense. I think it   s hard, sitting in this office, it   s hard to understand, not having walked in the building, like if someone hadn   t walked in the building with me, to understand that. You were backed up against, it   s a mountain.  Hickerson Yes, it   s a hill, granite hill.  Milligan It   s a hill technically, but the interesting thing about this area of the state is you have super, super flat, and these just like juts up, pops up. This is what struck me as I came into town.  Hickerson Have you been here before?  Milligan No.  Hickerson Southwest Oklahoma at all?  Milligan Yes, I have, southwest Oklahoma     Hickerson Okay.  Milligan    not to Granite, though. What was interesting to me is you roll into town, and it is basically this hill. The town is clustered around this hill.  Hickerson Yes.  14  Milligan It seems to me it would be present, very present, in everything you do.  Hickerson Yes, it was, me. Another thing Mom and Dad did   Dad said this was the Garden of Eden. I think that   s a little, maybe, overstated. When you drive up and you see those mountains, that is an effect. That is home. Stillwater   s my other home. I feel the same way when I head back that way. The mountains are literally, like you said, it looks like it   s enveloping the town. It just kind of hugs it. That   s part of you if you grew up around here.  Milligan I wonder about that, too. Did the town grow around the quarry, or did the quarry come up where there was a town?  Hickerson The town was established in 1900, so before statehood. Actually, the first people that came through here were with cattle drives, and Quanah Parker. There was a man named George Briggs, who had the cattle outpost just up north of town here. That was actually the first thing that came in. The Pellow brothers that operated the quarry from the early 1900s until Grandpa bought it, they came over from England. They came from England to Vermont, up northeast area. They were working there, and they had heard that there was granite in Oklahoma. Those people from England got on a train or a wagon or whatever and ended up in Oklahoma and started quarrying and processing, which is their trade in England. It   s like all those wanting-a-better-life story, wanting their own something they could have and hold and work in. We still have contact with the Pellow family. There is still Pellows in Enid. There   s a monument company in Enid, the Pellow family. Pellows and Penhalls, they all lived here. Some of their heirs contact us every now and then, so that   s really kind of neat to keep that up, too.  Milligan Well, a little bit of cattle farming and a little bit of quarrying, and that   s what made the community.  Hickerson Right, and farming, of course. The community itself was probably heavily populated (I know it was) from people coming from Tennessee and Kentucky. The train came through here. They heard there was land, and they landed here. Grandpa came when he was four years old with his mother. That   s another different unusual story. They came, and her family had settled here to farm. One was a doctor. One had a store; John Willis is on top of city hall. He had the buggy, wagons, and implements store. You can still see the lettering on the building. When we were trying to redo our downtown, they decided they   d repaint that in, so on our city hall it   s got    John Willis, Buggies, Wagons, and Implements    on the front of our city hall. Anyway, long history.  Milligan That makes more sense to me now because I did drive a little bit around.  15  Hickerson Oh, you did? Okay. Yeah, the City Planning Commission was trying to come up with things to keep a little of the old because we   re losing a lot of our buildings. We   re trying to keep what we can.  Milligan Yeah, you can tell. You can tell that there   s been an effort for that.  Hickerson An effort, yes, big effort.  Milligan You have to be systematic about it.  Hickerson Right.  Milligan That   s very cool, actually. Your family has a deep connection to the   you said that they were here, but that   s a deeper connection than just   .  Hickerson Yes.  Milligan I guess   now I   m bouncing around everywhere. You were talking about that you ended up getting a degree in geology. Maybe let   s talk a little bit about what that process was like. Did you feel that that was challenging? Did you enjoy it once you started it?  Hickerson Very challenging. I enjoyed it. I really did. Very challenging. I was a little bashful. The whole college experience was pushing myself out there, and whenever you   re a music major for two years, not much transfers. My counselor, bless his heart, he tried to keep me in the music lane because everybody thinks    geology,    they think    oil.    Oil was taking a nosedive, like right now, at that point in time. He really, really, really, (I   ll give credit to him all through) he really tried to show me what possibilities I had versus the other. The grittiness of studying the earth and the geology and everything really overshadowed everything at that point. It was very challenging, very challenging. I had to make up a lot of the math, things you wouldn   t necessarily have to have in music. I had to do that. Still took me four years. I had to do that in a sped-up way. I was a member of Phi Mu when I first went up there. At that time, I   d already met my husband.  Milligan Another OSU connection.  Hickerson Well, he wasn   t an OSU connection, but I took him to OSU. How   s that?  Milligan Got it   Hickerson He had already graduated, actually, from Weatherford. When we met, we lasted a year and a half before we got married. I was married most of the time I was in college. Still searching whether I wanted to be a teacher or what aspect of geology I really wanted to pursue. I loved all of it, but I 16  didn   t want the specifics of a sand grain bouncing down the   . The minutiae of some of it, I wasn   t all that thrilled with. It was, like I said, a challenge. Geology camp was an eye-opening experience. We went to Canyon City for six weeks in the summer. That   s what they still do, I believe. They were given a donation. I believe the land   s been donated by now. We went there and mapped and got caught in hail storms. It was a mess.  Milligan What was eye-opening about it?  Hickerson Actually getting out and seeing things for real, and being able to attempt putting a story to it, laying that down, the historical story of the formations and stuff, and seeing how much you don   t know when you get out there and trying to really make it work. I don   t know. It was an eye-opening experience just being out in the environment like that and having a project that you were going to begin and finish during that timeframe. Working with other people, different personalities, pushing myself again. I had to really push myself to get involved in that. Everything that happened at Stillwater, I could see how it impacted where I am and the things I do now or have done since I   ve been back home.  Milligan Did you feel like because you had this history here that when you started doing geology, did you feel like you had a leg up or a curve? Did you feel a little confident?  Hickerson Not really a leg up or anything. Probably gave me more confidence than any other study I would   ve done just because I was familiar with the product. Whether that came through in the classroom, I don   t know, but it was a heart thing. I loved the granite. I loved studying the history, the geological history and things like that. I don   t know if it really gave me a leg up or not. They probably thought I was weird. (Laughs) I wasn   t oil. I wasn   t going for oil or anything like that, so it was a little different. It was like I was saying, I debated on teaching or doing something along those lines because I found out later, when we give tours and things through here, that   s one of the highlights is being able to tell them about it and why we do things the way we do, how the granite   s formed, things like that. I circled back around.  Milligan No, actually that   s one of the questions I had because mentioning that you thought you might teach or you might do something else, my assumption would be when you chose that that would be to come back here and put that knowledge to work here. It sounds like you   .  Hickerson The geology? Yeah, we toyed a little bit in the quarry with it. Some of OU and OSU   s geology departments would come down. We   d go up, and they   d do research and things like that on the area to better understand the Wichitas. That was exciting. I got off track from that because this is a specific business. You do use different granites, or what they call granites in 17  this industry, but it wasn   t the main focal point. I really got shot off into another world coming back here. I didn   t think I could work in a cubical. I really didn   t. It just didn   t seem like   I liked here because you were in the office, you were out in the plant, you were on the mountain. There was a lot going on, and it wasn   t just one thing on a computer screen. When I say I have a lot of interests, I guess this was the perfect place for me to end up because I wasn   t pigeonholed into one thing.  It   s really strange. All of us have different strengths that we brought back here, and of course you get all that from your previous life experiences. I know that going to OSU helped me to see dealing with people. I had to grow in that area. Boy, when you get shoved out and you   re bashful and you   re trying to stay afloat, you see and might not have handled some of those things real well. Now I can see that it   s helped me here. We work with cities. We work with communities and colleges and things like that on projects, but the majority of it   s in here, talking like this with people. It   s about something that they never wanted to talk about. I think that   s what drew us all back here. We might not have known it at the time, but hearing Mom and Dad visiting with these people and trying to help them, that was the most important part.  When someone   s in here looking for a monument, you   d think that   d just be horrible and that   d be the worst thing in the world to do, but the horrible thing   s already happened. This is something they can do. They come in here and nine times out of ten will leave here laughing because they   re telling stories and they   re reminiscing. Now we   re trying to come up with something that shows what that person was, and who they were, and they existed, and they had a family, they had a life. I think that   s the most important thing that drew us all back here, even though I never wanted to talk to people. (Laughter) I wanted to do the work; I didn   t want to talk to people. You get drawn into that because if you are working out there, working in here, you   re all after the same goal.  Milligan When I look at that, too, because   how far does your business reach out? I know you do local business, and you do things like memorials and personal monuments, but you also do for businesses and cities, like you mentioned. How far is the business draw for you?  Hickerson Most of the state of Oklahoma, usually about a three hundred  mile  radius of Granite because we do have all hands on right here. We do all the work here. That way we can control how things go out. We do a lot in the panhandle of Texas. We go into Texas. Sometimes we go up into the southern part of Kansas. We have pieces all over the world. We have a historical in Pfaffenhoffen, France. We used to go to the state fair. This gentleman came by, and he was part of the  US Army 103rd Infantry     Cactus    Division that liberated Pfaffenhoffen, France. He found out that we 18  could do the work here and ship it to France cheaper than having it done over there because of taxes. He thought it was cool that it would be Oklahoma granite. We were working on this project, and a little gentleman that lives a block over that way came in. He was looking at it, and he goes,    That   s my division     It was like,    Wow  This is a small world     That was cool. He came and watched as we were making it.      Anyway, he   d come, and he   d visit and watch as we were making this. The bronze came in to be placed on it, and he   d come over. They had a little mini-reunion as we were making it during that time. I don   t know. There   s different projects. Oklahomans are scattered all over. People have taken our work to Africa to celebrate Lord Baden-Powell. We did a portrait of him to be taken to Africa. He was the founder of Boy Scouts. A gentleman in Oklahoma City was very big into Boy Scouts, and he commissioned us to do that. Another gentleman had ties with the Aleutian Islands, and we commemorated a place in the Aleutian Islands for the services. Anyway, it   s interesting. You   re asking how far we go out? Well, typically we go Oklahoma, Texas, and a little bit of Kansas. We   ve done (I   m going to get the number wrong) fifty historicals in Tennessee commemorating Civilian Conservation Corps projects. We   d go set those. We   d make them and take them out.  Milligan You drive them out and set them up?  Hickerson Yeah, and set them up. That was in the   80s, so we   ve done a lot of that. Now with the internet, you never know where a request is coming from or where they need it to be installed. We  have  some projects in Colorado that are in process.  Milligan One of the things this leads to me not knowing anything about this industry, how   I guess I don   t even have an idea of how many granite quarries there are out there in this region or in the US. Is it something that   how does that work, I guess?  Hickerson The industry, there used to be a number of quarries in this area. There was ours. There   s one north of the mountain. One on the west side here, then south. There were probably, in my lifetime, five working quarries in this area. Then there are some scattered around the rest of Oklahoma, south central Oklahoma, Ada area, Snyder, Roosevelt area, so there are other quarries that were in process. It   s dwindled down to where there   s only one. We   re still a quarry; we   re not processing right now. There   s one processing north of the mountain which gets similar granite, so we   re utilizing them for right now. The granite industry was a lot bigger industry before China, India, and the world trade started coming in. Countertops, just to give you an idea, when  granite  countertops came in  style  we used to have three 19  colors. We had our red, we had a Georgia gray, and we had a black granite that was from Pennsylvania.  Well, about 1990, foreign granite started hitting the market. That was all fine and good. People kind of ignored them for a while, but then they really started bringing in economical materials. That pretty much changed our domestic granite industry, period. Our convention went from having one young girl from China, roaming the halls, trying to get people to buy China granite, to now. I bet it   s over 50 percent foreign granites in our conventions now. There   s a lot. There   s about four large companies that produce and put out the product for monument businesses. They   ve even closed plants because they can   t compete with the overseas market. The world has come into little Granite, Oklahoma. Now we offer all these colors, (laughs) and we try to offer unique things.  Milligan Do you all import, as well, what you quarry?  Hickerson Whenever we were quarrying, we were actually shipping to Canada. We   re not doing that now. It   s not feasible. What do you do? We offer our customers what they ask for. We still have some supply of our granite that we use for specialty projects and things like that. Like I said, we   ve got a block set up now. We   re actually doing the Wrestling Hall of Fame portraits, sawing the slabs. I think it   s down today.  Milligan For OSU?  Hickerson Yeah, for the national at OSU. Anyway, we had to be flexible with the market. If we had banked everything on our own granite and pulling it out of the mountain, processing it, and everything, we wouldn   t be here because things changed so much in the last twenty years, thirty years.  Milligan I was about to say, yeah, you mentioned twenty years. (Laughter) You all stopped quarrying     Hickerson About 2000, 2001, in there, and it doesn   t go bad. It   s still here. It   s just whenever, if the market turns around, that   s going to be the consideration to open it up again.  Milligan You keep touching the table. Is this quarried from your     Hickerson Yes, right back there.  Milligan Okay, it   s very red. You mentioned that, too.  Hickerson Oklahoma granite. It   s unusual. Red granites are kind of rare. All of them have their own tendencies. Usually you can look at it and say,    That comes 20  from Africa,    or,    That comes from India,    or,    That comes from Oklahoma.    The color of it changes from here to there just a little bit. Well, when you go through a quarry, you   ll have lighter, darker material. Just depends where you are in the quarry. I forgot what the question was.  Milligan Yeah, I was just curious about what comes from here and what the specifics and differences are, if that makes sense.  Hickerson This comes from Granite. Okay, that pink round piece there came from Snyder.  Milligan Oh, okay, they are different   Hickerson Yeah, as you go through a mountain complex, you   ll have changes. You can have a change from here to here. In one of the quarries over there, they have what they call the blue granite. It looked black, and it was right next to something similar to that. You can get some interesting geological formations around here. It   s pretty cool.  Milligan That is cool  Your family obviously, but you also have been around this business for a really long time. What are some of the   you mentioned these changes as far as the industry, but I wonder even as far as the processes and the technique. What   s changed over that period of time?  Hickerson It was so labor intensive if you wanted to cut a block. Blocks are   this is the quarry wall. We had a picture of our diamond saw, but anyway   . The quarry block comes out about the size of a car. Then you have to process it. Whenever we first came back here, we were using wire saws. You could do a lot of cuts real quick, but your surface was very irregular. Then my grandfather had actually come up with an automated polisher. They were using huge metal wheels with little felt pads on it. That was great, but whenever you had to get rid of all those ridges and everything, by the time you got it polished, you might have to start all over again because your polish didn   t come out quite right. It   s become much more automated now.  We have a ninety-inch diamond saw that does our cutting. We set it up; it   ll go all night, move from one slab to the other if we needed it to. Polishing, it   s all automated again. That part of it   s amazing. The biggest part that my sisters and I have taken part in, (and Micki  White , she was part of it) we used to have to do cookie-cutter letters. We had to cut and stencil with a stencil, every single design that came through. If you had the same flower, you were sitting there cutting around it in the stencil work. One of the biggest things is historicals and veterans monuments. Whenever we were doing these cookie-cutter, mash into the stencil letters, or hand-cutting them, there would have been no way to economically, or be able to do four-21  thousand-, ten-thousand-name veterans memorial. That would just be unheard of.  Computers. Now we sit there, and we can type in the lettering, the text, the design. We create designs in the computer. We can email them to our customers. They can email them back. Technology  Laser etching, that   s a sample there. Here   s another sample of laser etching where I hand tool portraits or scenes. That   s the way we had to do them whenever you wanted more of a photographic-quality look to it rather than a hard line, cut-out look. I would do the portraits and the scenes by hand, but we have a laser machine now. It has a photographic ability. It just doesn   t take as long. Mine look more like a painting, I think, and laser is more of a photograph on granite. Technology.  Milligan When you did that all by hand, it seems like you would have to have some artistic, at least, confidence?  Hickerson Yes, yeah. That   s what   s weird. I can   t paint. I have never really felt comfortable getting colors out and painting. You   d think that   d be easier. Once you take the polish off the granite, it is gone. I don   t know what it is. Dad taught us   in fact, one of my very first portraits were for the National Wrestling Hall of Fame when I was in school at OSU. We   d help with the work as we could. That was something I could do in school at Stillwater, do the drawings and everything, get them approved, and then they   d do them in granite here. Dad taught us how to put artwork on granite. Linda and I pretty much taught ourselves how to do the hand etchings on the granite. Over the years, you get better techniques as you go. I think we   ve done pretty good on what we   ve   . I   ll show you some pictures later.  Milligan Yeah.  Hickerson Hand etching, laser etching, the computers to do the text and the mammoth names and approvals. (Laughs) Everything is letter by letter, by period, by comma, backwards and forwards to make sure we get everything correct before we put it on the granite. Computers have really, really opened up our business in that we can offer a little more economically for historicals for these small towns out in the areas where we   ve commemorated a high school that no longer exists. People want others to know that it did exist and this was the community, and these are the people that lived here or went to school here.  Milligan How old were you when you did your first etch on granite?  Hickerson The portraits   we worked in the plant doing the stencil and everything, but as for actually taking the polish off with the tool, that was probably twenty years ago, twenty years ago. My first little thing I tried was   here, we have 22  little blocks of granite everywhere, so I took a little piece and tooled a pig. It was just a little silly thing that I did. I did that, and I thought,    Well, I can do that.    Then you move up, and you do a marker. It   s just a learned thing. You have to have a certain type personality, I guess, to stand there and take off flakes of granite all day long.  Milligan What happens if you messed up?  Hickerson You polish it over. You polish it and start over. On the portraits, if you go slow enough, you can make corrections as you go. You don   t want to drag all the polish off in one swift swoop. You go a little at a time so you   re able to make minute changes. I   m looking at a nickel-size area as I   m going. I look at the whole thing, but as you   re working you   re looking at a small area. By the time someone gets back and looks at the whole thing, it pulls together. That   s a learned thing.  Milligan That   s why I think it   s so interesting. It is a very specific skillset to have.  Hickerson I took some art classes at Stillwater. Our family is blessed with artists on both sides of the family, so I guess we have a little bit of it in our DNA.  Milligan Yeah, you mentioned your mom   s side of the family, specifically.  Hickerson And Dad   s too. Theirs was. Yeah, it   s on both sides. There are working artists on both sides of the family, painting, murals, and things of that nature. This is just really specific.  Milligan It   s interesting. I also think it   s interesting you were doing some of the original design work while you were in college.  Hickerson Yeah, that   s what I was saying. I don   t know if I ever really had an opportunity to go into another vein. I didn   t mind it. That was cool; that was the neat part of it. When I looked at my dad and my mom doing the work, I was like,    How do you do that?    I mean, literally, how do you sit there and talk to somebody and draw out what they   re telling you they want? (Laughs) That just seemed like you couldn   t do that. There was a purpose to all that, and it   s kind of coming to fruition here with all of us working back here.  Milligan Do you feel like you can do that now, sit there and listen and draw     Hickerson Oh, yes  Yes, yes, yes.  Milligan    be reactive and all that?  23  Hickerson It   s a learned trait, too. You just have to get in there and do it. Some people can   t. We have   where you just list things. Yeah, I   m happy to say that I did finally figure out how that was done.  Milligan That   s pretty neat. The biggest change is your technology (I can understand that) in what you   re able to provide.  Hickerson Technology and materials. You wouldn   t have seen that (Gesturing) for sure, thirty-some-odd years ago.  Milligan Your parents?  Hickerson Yeah, that was Mom and Dad. We didn   t do laser etching for a long time. We had other companies do it, so we had them do some samples for us. We had gotten to where that was something requested so often, we wanted to be able to turn around and be better, so eight years ago we bought our laser machine. I run that, too. It has a lot of intricacies in and of itself, which was a shock. (Laughs)  Milligan What were some of the learning curve with that?  Hickerson You can do Photoshop, Adobe Photoshop, put things together, and then run off on paper. They look great. Well, in granite, it   s not a white piece of paper you   re working with. A lot of the granites have grain structures that make it different, and you have to be able to spot what will be a good candidate for laser etching and what won   t be because you will be disappointed if   . This, I would not use for a portrait, this granite, because it has too big a grain structure. You might have a big black spot right where you want a nice delicate feature on a face or something. You can use it, (that   s fine) but I   ve gotten a little pickier on how I want portraits to turn out.  Milligan That   s the one with all the seals on it, that we   re talking about?  Hickerson The one with all the seals on it, yeah, you can see these black mineral grains on here. If you   re doing a real fine portrait or if they   re expecting a real fine portrait, you wouldn   t want to use this because those black spots won   t go away     Milligan I see what you   re saying.  Hickerson    when you   re tooling it and stuff, as opposed to that real fine grain. It just depends on what you   re looking for. Literally getting to where you know how the laser reacts to different granite types and how you can get it to do what you want it to do, I   ve sampled a lot. These are all samples of things. I try to run a sample before I do a monument just because I don   t want to have 24  to polish it and start over again, to say the least. The little buffalo back there, those are all different   .  Milligan I didn   t realize that was granite.  Hickerson Yeah. Well, it   s what this industry calls granite. They   re all igneous rock. The industry calls everything    granite    that   s an igneous rock. That   s when geology comes out on me sometimes, whenever they   re discussing materials, but that   s all right.  Milligan That   s probably not a bad thing. Knowledge is great.  Hickerson It   s good, yeah. It   s all right. It   s good.  Milligan You all still give tours, then, of the area? You mentioned that you all at one point sort of     Hickerson We used to give tours. There was a Girl Scout camp here. We   d have four hundred Girl Scouts, every summer, come through. They   d make little plaques, and we   d do all sorts of stuff with them. Liability issues has kind of cut back on that. Every now and then we will do a senior group, a tour. If they call and set it up ahead of time when we know we have people to cover everything, then we   ll do that. We watch where we take them and everything because the liability issues are the worst part of it. We   ll definitely bring them in here and show them what we do. I have the laser machine in here now, too, so that gives them a little bit of an idea of how things work.  Milligan Yeah, that   s interesting.  Hickerson Am I boring you to tears? (Laughs)  Milligan No, you   re not boring at all  My brain   s sort of trying to glom onto most of this. It   s really interesting. I think it   s also interesting, the point where it shifted from   I still think of the fact, my assumption is, or all my assumptions, is you   re still in Granite, that so much of that would be tied to the physical location. I think that is more of the historic association at this point, even though you   re still tied to the land, which is not because of the quarry as much anymore. It   s also such a physical space. I mean, your equipment is huge.  Hickerson Yes.  Milligan Your raw material is huge.  25  Hickerson There   s (I   m looking right at it) the saw and the saw block. That   s a ninety-inch blade. Our business never was set up for strictly, like, wholesale business, like a quarry and a processing plant. In the beginning, this place sold to families, whereas a lot of the quarry processing plants are wholesale. They make widgets; they turn out a thousand blah, blah, blah, markers. They turn out a thousand markers, one right after the other. It   s probably not a very romantic term. I call us a job shop because people come in and they tell us what they think they want. We work with them. From the ground up, we   ll work with them to design it and make it and have it installed for them. We   re just a little weird. Not everybody has a quarry and a processing plant. We   re a strange animal. I don   t know if some of the industry really cared for that much all these years, but that   s the way we were set up to begin with, and it   s the way it   s continued since the quarry was opened. It makes us a little different from other places.  Milligan Also, it   s like it   s allowed you to be nimble as a business model.  Hickerson Yes, yes, most definitely. We have to be nimble. People ask for things. You have to know where the trends are leading, but whenever the customers start coming in and asking for something, that   s a pretty good key. Things are changing, and you need to be able to offer what they want and need.  Milligan What were some of the shifts with that that you can recall?  Hickerson Say that again.  Milligan What were some of the shifts with those sorts of things, things that customers have come in, and you say,    Oh   .     Hickerson Granite colors. Remember we had three, and then all of a sudden   . The strangest thing happened. This should have been the big key. We had a taxicab sitting out here from Oklahoma City for a full day. It was full of people from Pakistan, and they wanted to sell us their granite that they were quarrying in Pakistan. They came in with all their samples; they spread them out. They said,    We heard that you might be someone that would help us get into the United States industry of granite.    They sat out there. They came in, and we talked to them and everything. That was just unheard of.  Milligan When was that?  Hickerson That was probably in 1989, 1988, somewhere in there. No, no, no, it had to be in the early   90s because we had this office, so in the early   90s. Just out of the blue, this yellow cab pulls up in Granite, Oklahoma, from Oklahoma City. That   s the only way they knew to get down here. The things at that time, quality issues, you didn   t know. People hadn   t been coming in here clamoring for granite from Pakistan, so we told them,    No thank you.    26  Within five years, things are changing big time. The countertop industry, I think, really kicked a lot of that off because people started seeing different materials that were used for countertops.    Why can   t I have a monument made out of that?    That   s just a little part of it. The industries from overseas flooded the markets.  Once people started seeing what you could do with China and India   . These are from China and India, the black granites that you use for the laser etchings. There   s supposedly one quarry in the Northeast that has the quality of granite you need to really get a good laser etching and everything, but I haven   t found that in the monument side of it. Most of it in our part of the Unites States comes from China and India for the laser etchings and stuff. There   s trends that we could have awakened to a little earlier, but it seemed so far-fetched. Why would we bring granite from Pakistan if we   ve got a quarry here, processing it? Our other granite comes from Georgia. Why in the world   . You   d think your transportation   you think everything would not allow you to do that.  Milligan Did you end up buying granite from Pakistan?  Hickerson Not through them. There are some companies that will go overseas and do the research and look at all the different companies. I personally think they probably all come from one vendor with many names, I think is what it is. Anyway, we just didn   t have the desire, I guess, to go search out our perfect supplier. The larger suppliers in the United States decided they were going to carry the other granites, so we picked out the ones that we thought were offering the best quality and would guarantee that granite. If you bring in a container-load of granite, and half of it was cracked or fractured, you have all the expense of getting everything back. If we work with a wholesaler that   s going overseas and buying and coming back, then that makes a big difference. We can go back to them and say,    Hey, this piece didn   t work,    instead of tracking   . It   s changed a lot over the years. We probably could go over there and do that now because it   s such a set-up entity now. You   re not going out and asking,    Hey, do you want to supply us with your stone?     Milligan You don   t have to fly to Pakistan and get a taxicab?  Hickerson Yeah, exactly. Yes, yes, yes  We found out how to make that work for us anyway, here.  Milligan Because it   s been mentioned a couple of times, do you all do a lot of business with countertops, or is that a different part of the industry?  Hickerson We used to. It   s a different production setup. Actually, in the   80s we did quite a few jobs.  27  Milligan All the counter tops in this room.  Hickerson Yes, the countertops in here. We did a fireplace for a doctor from Egypt. He had King Tut   s scene across the fireplace. A lot of them had to have something special that they wanted on there. We did a lot of countertops in this area during the   80s. When that countertop explosion hit in Oklahoma City, our person that services our diamond saw said there were 250 companies that did countertops in Oklahoma City. The bottom line there kept dropping. It just wasn   t feasible for us. I mean, we   re here. We have to go measure, come back   . It was just a lot of things. When they   re set up for countertops, they just spit them out. It   s a different mechanism, different shop setup. We decided we   d go back to our massive pieces and monuments and signs and things like that we   re a little more comfortable with.  Milligan You have generally on average a three-hundred-mile radius of people within three hundred miles who often drive here to talk with you or   .  Hickerson Yeah, a lot of internet now. People drive from Amarillo, Oklahoma City, and, of course, now we have a store in Oklahoma City and one in Stillwater. That kind of separates that out a little bit. We get a lot of people from the panhandle of Texas. You   d be surprised how much of our work is through the internet. It   s family, it   s children that have moved to California. Their mother or grandmother was buried in Erick or Mangum or wherever, and they need to get something for that. The internet has been amazing. There are some companies now that are just strictly internet, but they leave it up to the family to figure out how to get it installed usually and how to get it placed. We do all that unless the family has another situation how they can take care of it. We don   t do just internet sales. It   s more of a personal thing than clicking here and saying,    I want this name here.    They have the click-and-buy. The internet   s really helped tremendously. It   s amazing. We   ll get calls from all over. It always amazes me that probably 75 percent of the time it   s for something in Oklahoma, but they live off in Ohio. Things change.  Milligan When did you open the stores in Stillwater and Oklahoma City?  Hickerson Oklahoma City was in 2001, not good timing with 9/11 coming and everything. It was just kind of hard, but it   s really a strong store. Stillwater was actually fifty years from when we left Stillwater, when I came down here. That was two years ago. Well, this is the second year, so 2014. I   ve lost a year, 2014. September 2014 is when we put that in, and we didn   t even plan it that way. It   s just we had some family that really thought that they wanted to be a part of the family business, and they seemed to have the right personality to be able to run a sales office and everything. The perfect place came up, we thought, and it was on Sixth Street. It just seemed to fit. We   d looked for years, different towns and everything, but that just really seemed to fit. 28  Really thrilled my dad. He passed away in October 2014, but in June was his ninetieth birthday. We took him to Stillwater to have a family gathering up there. We took him in his wheelchair, and he got to see the site where we were going to have our office. It was exactly fifty years from the time we left Stillwater. That was really an emotional time. That was really cool. He had his ninetieth birthday. He got to see where we were going back to Stillwater, and he was excited. He didn   t get to come to the open house, which made us kind of sad, but he was wanting to. He was really up on it, let me tell you. Anyway, that was really cool. We were able to do that. It seems to be working out pretty well. We   re happy with it.  Milligan That   s good. Sixth and what?  Hickerson It   s at   I can tell you where. It   s before you cross the railroad tracks. It   s across from the  Pioneer  Tire. I forget the dang address all the time. It   s 306 East Sixth Street or something like that. Let   s see.  Milligan Yeah, east of Husband and all that.  Hickerson Yeah, and it   s across from the tire place, before you get to the railroad tracks. What was really cool is the people that had originally built that store were friends of my dad   s. We didn   t know that. When we had our open house, tons of people came.    Your dad did this,    or,    Your dad did that. Your mom did this. Your mom did that.    I had no clue that there would even still be people up there that would even remember the name. Some people never thought we   d left. That was the funny part. They   d come in and go,    Oh, you used to be over on   .    That was a few years ago  (Laughs) They used to come in and visit, like old home week. It   s really great. It really is the same feeling from here to there, the people. They are just so   who would do that, go into a monument place and go,    How   s your dad doing,    I mean, come on, after fifty years? Anyway, it   s really been a neat experience. The girls that are up there, they say,    Someone came in, and they were just talking about how they used to come over to Great-Grandma and -Grandpa   s house.    That   s how far removed it is. We   ve been really welcomed up there. It   s been nice.  Milligan That   s very cool. It sounds like your parents would have been there for twenty years.  Hickerson Yeah, go figure. The house that I was born in, I had wandered out in the street one day, so Dad put this aluminum fence up where you couldn   t climb out of it or anything. It looks like a stockade fence, but it   s aluminum. It   s six feet tall. It seems tall. It   s probably not that tall. It   s still there. (Laughs) I know why that fence is in the yard. (Laughter) I ended up out on   what 29  street was that? I can   t even think of the name of the street now. We lived on Ninth.  Milligan It sounds like he knew to watch out for that because it sounds like he was also that child. (Laughter)  Hickerson Yeah, (laughter) and he couldn   t tie me to the front porch without getting in trouble, I   m sure  It was definitely passed down through the generations. I hope this is something what you wanted. This has been fun. I hope you   re getting something you can use.  Milligan Oh, yeah, yes  What I   ve taken away from this, (there   s multiple threads that are interesting) as much about how you   ve come to university, and how you discovered what you want to do, and how that ties in with your background, and you   ve done really interesting things with it. You   ve obviously branched out from geology. You   ve mastered business. You   ve mastered communication. There   s a lot of things.  Hickerson Like I said, I couldn   t pinpoint one thing that I wanted to do. Down here, I wasn   t a concert pianist, but I play for church. I have for years and years, and then it evolved into now I kind of help lead the singing. There   s different things that have pushed me. One of the alumni from OSU suggested me to be a regent at WOSC, so I served as a regent. Who would have thought? My professors are probably going,    Who?    It was one of the best things I   ve ever done as a challenge. It was interesting to see the concepts of how things evolve in a college setting, how those decisions are made, how it affects the students, and how it affects the teachers and everything like that. It   s been a whirlwind. It   s been a pretty neat journey.  Milligan When were you a regent down there?  Hickerson In     Milligan Ninety-six.  Hickerson Ninety-six, thank you, yeah.     I should remember. It was really cool.  Milligan That is cool. That is, it   s a big shift, right?  Hickerson Yes, from being a little bashful girl from Granite. It really did. When we came back here, we had been involved in everything from one end to the other. Right now, I   m on the planning committee for town.  Milligan There   s a lot of granite memorials in town. A lot of memorials, I noticed that. (Laughter)  30  Hickerson I   m on the Educational Enrichment Foundation here at the school. That gets a little, makes me feel like we   re making contributions there, little things in a little town. There   s some good people here, and they work hard. We   ve had some bad, good, indifferent times, but all in all there   s just some really good people that work hard and try to keep things motivating for a small town.  Milligan What   s the population of Granite?  Hickerson Good question. On our board it says sixteen hundred, but the reformatory is included in that. We   re a little over a thousand probably. The county is about five thousand or under five thousand, actually. There   s a lot to do to keep things going. Then for fun, we ride bikes whenever I don   t have a broken foot and we don   t have other obligations. It   s kind of nice to do that out in the open spaces.  Milligan There is plenty of that.  Hickerson Yes.  Milligan Do you still go and climb around the quarry or around the mountain?  Hickerson We actually have a road that goes up there, and before this happened, I   d try to get up there for exercise, climb and play and look around. It   s just beautiful up there. If it hadn   t rained, I   d take you up there. The road   s a little iffy at the moment. It   s just a beautiful view. You can see to the Quartz Mountain area, and you can see south of town to the flat lands. It   s just a gorgeous place. I like going up. That is my calming place. I go up there and hang out.  Milligan Do you know what the elevation is up there? How high is it?  Hickerson Four hundred feet, the height of it. The elevation I don   t have.  Milligan That   s okay. I was just curious. Four hundred feet.  Hickerson I   m pretty   yeah.  Milligan Well, I think that was the bulk of what I wanted to talk about. Is there anything else that you wanted to share, that you wanted to comment on, ask, whatever?  Hickerson Not that I can think of at the moment. I think we have covered every   I   m surprised at the directions we went, which is fun. I like talking about how Mom and Dad met. I think that   s cool. OSU is just ingrained in our hearts from day one. Born in Stillwater, where else would you go? 31  Milligan Well, you know, that does lend some   . Actually, I do have one more question, bringing up your mom and your dad meeting. So if your mother was half Creek, you said, (correct?)     Hickerson Yes.  Milligan    are you close to that side of the family? Is there sort of a Creek legacy that you still feel part of? How does that go with your family?  Hickerson Yes, yeah, definitely. Mother has double cousins, and also some of her first cousins are my age and Karen   s age, my sisters    ages. We grew up like cousin-cousins. We grew up really close. We would go up there for the usuals, weddings and funerals and everything, but we   d go and have Thanksgiving together. In fact, her cousin, our down-the-road cousin, actually has Thanksgiving every year and invites everybody. Everybody   Milligan Over in  Washington, Oklahoma ?  Hickerson Yes, and just recently, it   s been really cool. All of us went our separate ways, and then we all came back. Distance-wise, we   re a little ways from there, (we   d always keep up with everybody) but here recently we all went back and went to the Native church, took part in that, and made a contribution in memory of Mom and Dad to the church. That   s been really cool, and we hope to be able to do more of that now. Obligations kind of kept us from being able to take part in everything, but it   s been a part of our life all along. Our cousins on that side of the family have always been like brothers and sisters instead of cousins. I guess that   s because Mother was the, they called her the bell cow. (Laughs) At least a guy that was trying to lease their property called her the bell cow. Whatever she did, everybody would follow. She was the one that would always have the big dinners for everybody, and we would all get together. We stayed close. That   s just the way it is. The Native ceremonies and everything, we try to incorporate that, a lot of it in Mom   s funeral and Dad   s funeral.  We had a cousin that   s now passed away, but he   d blow the horn and bring everybody in for the service. At Thlewarle, they   d have a wake, more or less. The Native church there would be set up and had an arbor. The body would be in state for three days, and for the whole three days you go in and out and have food there and everything. When Mother passed away, I asked our church if we could possibly have her at the church and have everything there, and not have to go to the funeral home and whatever. That allowed us to have that sendoff for her. She was at home there. She wasn   t in some strange room elsewhere. We were able to do that and decorate with things that meant something to her and the family. It was really important to me have her brothers and sisters equal with us in the church just because the 32  closeness of that family is unbelievable. In this day and age, there   s a lot of fragmented families, (they move off to Timbuktu) but this family has really stayed so close together.  Milligan Well, I think that   s interesting because ending up in a boarding school and siblings being scattered a little bit, they were able to regroup and   .  Hickerson Yeah, it was amazing, actually, I would think. That   s what they held onto. That was their   they   d come back. They all lived in the Stillwater region, one in Newkirk, Tulsa, and Stillwater. When they moved down here, they asked Mother if she was crazy because there wasn   t any trees. (Laughs)    What are you thinking?    Anyway, they held onto each other through some horrible times. That was family; that   s what they did. I   m so thankful that we still have the family campgrounds at the church, Thlewarle, and they have the Fife cabin, which was my grandmother   s name. Even though we never met her, we were able to be a part of her sisters    families and brothers    families. That kind of brought us a little idea of what she would   ve been like.  Milligan That   s cool.  Hickerson Yeah.  Milligan I was curious. I meant to ask that early on; we skipped to another part. That   s interesting. Did she carry any of the language with her?  Hickerson You know, she did for a long time. Her grandmother didn   t speak English. The grandmother that raised Mom and the kids, she would not speak English. They grew up in a bilingual environment. Now, whenever they all went their separate ways, now it   s becoming a desire to relearn. Some of our younger cousins are actually studying the language and actually using it more than the middle generations here. I had always thought Chilocco kind of kept them from pursuing their Native stuff, but I was corrected at Mother   s funeral. I guess it was a mix of stories. You hear things, how things are portrayed in history, but Chilocco was one of the only ones, at least in later years especially, to allow them to keep their heritage and to pursue learning, keeping the language and everything, which was something I learned. I forgot where I was going with that.  Milligan The language, that she was able to keep that.  Hickerson Yes, she knew words. Especially whenever she wanted us to hurry up, we heard words come out that seemed normal to us. They were actually Creek words that she was telling us to hurry up.    Do you understand? Hurry up,    and things like that. They are relearning it; the other cousins are relearning it. I forgot what I was going to tell you. It   ll come back. 33  Milligan Who corrected you about the school when you were at the funeral?  Hickerson An aunt   I had written a little bio. I know what it was. Mother, over the years, had been ridiculed. She had been talked down to; she had been ostracized for being an Indian. When she had her first three kids, she was at a PTA meeting, holding my brother, and had my other sister by the hand. Someone came up and asked her who she was a nanny for because they were white and she was Indian. She had run into that all her life. She definitely didn   t want to forget where she was from, but it was easier to become a little more Anglo than not, just to kind of survive. She would go back. She would send things to Thlewarle. We   d go back to Dustin and take part in everything. She had a hard time over the years, prejudices.  Milligan Do you think it was a problem whenever she and your dad started dating? Did they ever talk about that?  Hickerson Dad didn   t care. She was beautiful  Oh, he thought she was a beautiful lady, most beautiful woman on the face of the earth. There were some little quips that came from some family members as that happened. There was the other way, too: he was an amputee. He had his own. There were prejudices towards him even though you couldn   t tell he was an amputee when he had his prosthesis on. He operated fine. He had a cane that he used sometimes when was younger. I think that might   ve been something that drew them together, as well, because they both had undergone criticism and prejudices based on his disability, what some people would call it. His personality overcame all of that, and Mother, she was a tough lady.  She moved on and got away. She made a life that anybody would be proud of, especially coming from   . Her whole family, her whole family and all her alumni at Chilocco, they are very, very   I lost my word again. They   ve all made good things with their lives. Their lives have come to wonderful ends, fruition. It   s amazing when you think of everything those people went through all those years, how they ended up at Chilocco. They are close, so close, her Chilocco family. Some of them came to her funeral, as well. Mother was eighty-six, so that   s quite a statement. Some people that worked for Mom and Dad at Stillwater came to the service. It was just amazing.  Milligan They were just wondering what they were doing down here in Granite.  Hickerson Right   Milligan That   s fantastic. That really is everything I had, I swear, unless there   s anything else that came out of that that   s sort of going on in your brain.  34  Hickerson Oh, there   s lots going on in my brain. (Laughs) No, it   s been fun. I appreciate you all giving me the opportunity to tell our little story.  Milligan Oh, there   s nothing little about it.  Hickerson Well, it   s unusual. We always thought that if anyone could take Grandpa   s, (he came from Tennessee) his journey and all the way up, it would be an interesting docudrama (laughs) or soap opera, one of the two. I don   t know. We think it   s unique. I   m sure everybody has their unique stories that they like about their family.  Milligan Some like them; some don   t. (Laughter)  Hickerson That   s true. Some you have to wait awhile before you can tell them. (Laughs)  Milligan That   s true, too. Well, at that point, I   m going to go ahead and turn everything off.  -------  -------   
