 Neurohr  Behring  Today is October 15, 2009. My name is Karen Neurohr. I   m a librarian  at Oklahoma State University. I   m here at the White Barn Estates  in  Stillwater, Oklahoma  conducting interviews for O-STATE Stories, an  Oral History Project of the OSU Library. Today we   re interviewing a  group of very special women from Willard Hall. I   m interviewing Betty  Behring. We   re really glad that you   re participating in the interview  today, Betty. Thank you so much. Can you tell me a little bit about where  you came from and your parents?  I grew up in McCloud, Oklahoma which is outside of Oklahoma City  and we lived in town, but my father was a farmer and my mother was a  housekeeper. I had three older brothers that all were OSU graduates and  two of them were from the GI Bill after World War II. That pretty well  covers that.  What year did you start at OSU?  I started in 1955, but I started a year early. I skipped my senior year of  high school and went back and graduated from high school after I had a  year of college.  Was that unusual?  Yes, it was. It was unusual.  Was it your family   s influence, the reason you came to OSU?  Yes, when I was nine my brothers were in college there. However, when  I got told I was going to college a year early, I was enrolled at OU and at  East Central. Then I finally decided to go to OSU to major in English  and found out they had a really bad English department, so I quickly  went to Elementary Education.  5  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  What year did you graduate?  1959.  When you first came to OSU, where did you live?  I lived in Murray Hall for two years before I moved to Willard. I became  friends with the girls in Willard Hall through FarmHouse Fraternity.  They dated boys there and I was dating one there that one of my friends  married when I first came up here and then I met my husband at  FarmHouse.  How was Willard different from Murray?  Well I had a corner room at Murray and had two windows which made  for better ventilation and the desks were different. If I remember, we had  a double desk at one of the two, I can   t remember which one. And then  the corner room led out onto the terrace on two so my window was the  escape window where everybody went out to sunbathe. And then I had  that room my sophomore year for a year by myself. We took one bed  down and put up the ironing board there and all the people used my  room for ironing.  And that was at Murray?  That was at Murray, and then I moved to Willard my junior and senior  year.  And so, was it a different type of room at Willard?  Yes, it was one window and a much smaller room   a little adjustment. I  got spoiled.  Do you remember your room number?  I have no idea. They were both on the second floor.  Did you decorate your room?  Yes.  Do you remember anything about that in particular?  Well, I remember we had yellows and blues in Murray. In Willard I had  two different roommates and I think we just kind of had our own. I don   t  remember exactly.  6  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Can you tell me about the telephone situation?  There was one telephone down the hall and it was always busy. They   d  scream down the hall that you were wanted on the phone or somebody  would leave a note on your door that somebody called, which was  interesting.  What about the buzzer system?  Oh, I remember it, but I can   t remember exactly   they would buzz when  somebody was downstairs, I think. And one thing, we had a pool going,  once  when  I was dating my husband, of how late he would be and  people would put a dime in and bet on how late he would be for our  date.  To pick you up?  Yes. He was always late. When we got ready to get married, I sent my  sister-in-law across the street and told her that unless she saw him, I  wasn   t coming out. We got married in a little town. She came back and  told me she saw him, but she later told me that she didn   t see him, she  just told me that. (Laughter)  Did he propose to you while you were at OSU?  Yes, he gave me a drop there and then he gave me his pin. He was in  FarmHouse and then we got engaged right before he graduated from Vet  school.  What was the pinning like?  I remember FarmHouse came and sang to me, but I think we were  parked, to be very honest, out around Boomer Lake. (Laughter) And he  handed me the pin.  Was there diversity in Willard as far as ethnic or international students  that you remember?  I remember them in the Union sitting. We studied a lot because of Byron   her husband  being in Vet school and we   d go over there  to the  Library  and then we   d go over and take a Coke break at the Union and  they were always sitting outside the fourth floor and that   s really what I  remember. And it seemed that the group that I ran around with was more  from what I had grown up with, farmers and that type. I find it probably  conservative because we have had very few divorces in the group from  Willard and for a dorm group to stay together, I find it very unusual.  7  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  So you spent a lot of time in the Student Union?  Yes.  And that was a good place to study?  No, we studied at the Library. We took breaks at the Student Union.  Studied at the Library down on the first floor. I don   t even know what   s  on the first floor of the Library now, but there were study tables there  right to the left when you walked in the door. I haven   t been in the  Library in a long time.  Well I hope you get a chance to come back when you   re on campus.  We   d love to give you a tour. It   s changed quite a bit.  The last time I was in there it had changed quite a bit.  Do you have any special memories of the Library in particular?  Probably not except my husband had taken a cat   s eye out and I didn   t  know him very well at the time and he came in and threw it down in  front of a book, this cat   s eye that he had taken out surgically. So that  was kind of different. And I remember when I would roam around I was  always running into people that I knew because the same people studied  over there.  Was it a very quiet environment?  So-so.  Could you talk in there?  Yes, you could talk.  What about a dress code? Was there a dress code?  The group didn   t remember this, but I came the summer before. I came  in the summer of    55 and they talked about Dean Patchin and how she  didn   t like black patent shoes because they reflected and you weren   t  supposed to wear black patent shoes. Yeah, there was a dress code. We  couldn   t wear slacks and stuff on campus. I can remember that   except  Saturdays   I don   t remember exactly. It   s changed so. It   s too long ago,  I guess.  Do you have any other memories about Dean Patchin?  8  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  No, I just thought that was kind of strange. (Laughter)  What about your house mother? Did you know the house mother at  Murray or at Willard?  Vaguely. I knew the ones at FarmHouse better.  Oh you did?  Yeah, I can   t remember their names, but one of them was very nice and I  can remember her and probably my freshman and sophomore year, she  was there.  How were the house moms different at the fraternity houses than the  dormitories?  They interacted with them and they had manners and   well when they  had a sneak, they would be serving apricots for dessert, well they would  put a raw yoke in and someone would get it, but usually it wasn   t the  girls that got it. They would have dinner sneaks over there when they  wouldn   t bring a date. But she would take you back into her room and  she was very friendly and visited and I can   t remember any action. Now  the floor monitors   the girls and the one I was close to in Murray   she  was a really good friend and was somebody you felt comfortable going  to talk to. I went to college when I had just barely turned seventeen in  August, so I talked to her quite a bit that first year.  You said there were sneaks at FarmHouse. Can you explain that? I   m  not familiar with what that would be.  Well, I   m not sure that was even what they called it. But they would call  you up and it was just on the spur of the moment and you would go over  for dinner and that was about it. It wasn   t like a real date, they   d just  call.  How did their food compare to Willard   s cafeteria food?  Well, neither one was too great, I don   t think. (Laughs) Best thing that  happened to me was my last roommate. Marilyn worked in the Union  and I traded her tickets from Willard for the Student Union because she  had tickets for the Student Union and the food was better in the Student  Union, so I got to eat there part of the time and that was better.  What about public displays of affection on campus between the men and  the women?  9  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  There was some people would be dodging around the corner to kiss. I  can remember having an argument with my husband   he even  commented on it the other day. He said something about I threw a purse  as he was driving   we had an argument and I threw a purse and it hit his  car and he suddenly stopped and then we made up. (Laughter)  What do you remember hearing about the panty raids on campus?  We had them. They came and they took  They were interesting. They  were kind of funny. I only remember two or three. They   d run in and  grab and run.  Would the girls be screaming and laughing?  Our group, I think     Were they fearful?  I think it was just more laughter, just a comical thing. Nobody really  took it too serious, or I didn   t anyway.  What do you think the boys did with those undergarments later? No one  seems to know what they did with them.  I have no idea. Probably threw them away eventually. If they had any  sense, they did.  What activities were you involved in on campus, in particular?  What did I do? Well I was at the Wesley Foundation. I was active in  that. And, I don   t know, classes. I enjoyed photography under Doc  Pruitt. I had a special relationship with him. I owned a dairy farm, or my  dad did, and I did a dairy unit on it, how milk from cow to the   and he  really liked that. He always made it a point to visit with me and take  special pictures when we went to something at FarmHouse or at the Tri  dorm dances and stuff.  What did you major in?  Elementary Education. I started in English and had I been aware of FR    CD, Family Resource and Child Development, at the time, I would  have probably majored in that. But I was too far along. I added some  courses in and it got me in trouble with Dr. Marsden who was the  education  advisor . She and I didn   t see eye to eye. When I was  working on my master   s my last semester, I walked in the class and she  was there and I turned around and walked out and went and got a  10  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  withdrawal slip and walked in at the end of the class and had her sign it.  She never came to see me practice teaching, but gave me a C in it and I  had an A from the other instructors. But I mouthed off to her and I added  the FR   CD class and you didn   t do that in Elementary Ed. So I got in  trouble. After she signed it, I added the course.  Was photography an elective for you?  Yes, along with anything else that was very easy to take because I went  through a high school that I didn   t learn how to write a term paper until I  went to Shawnee to summer school. That   s the only way I knew how to  write a term paper.  So you took other interesting electives, too?  Oh, instead of taking algebra, I took something based on the number  system twelve and I took astronomy instead of geology. There were two  girls in there and the astrologer wanted to move on with the men that  were really interested in it, so he told us if we would just come to class,  we could get a C in the course. So we just came to class and I wrote  letters. So that was the sort of thing I did. I was hunting whatever was  easier to get through the classes.  Do any traditions at Willard stand out in your memory? Holiday  traditions, special events?  Oh, we played cards a lot at noon, I can remember doing that, and I can  remember a Christmas party where I had red pajamas and cowboy boots  and a sack. I was Santa Claus parading up and down the hall. So, you  know, we had a good time.  What about girls getting thrown in the shower, things like that?  I don   t really remember that.  Or water fights?  I think we did that. I think so. Vague, I think.  Do you have any other special memories about living in Willard or  about OSU?  No, I think I received a fairly good education there, coming from the  high school that I came from. I was not pleased with some of my  education classes, but other than that, when I went to teaching, I had  learned to sight read. I had a problem with sounds and I did not get that,  11  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  Neurohr  Behring  but as far as the work I did on my master   s, I enjoyed that.  Was that at OSU, too?  Yes, I had twelve or fourteen hours and then I kept going back for  recertification. I kept taking hours. I had a master   s and a half, but I  never finished my master   s. I just got the hours.  When Willard was changed from a dormitory to the College of  Education, what was the feeling about that change?  I thought it was a good move. And we had a friend who had died, so we  bought furniture  for a sitting area on the second floor . You probably  had heard that.  What was her name?  Francita.  How do you explain the special bond that the Willard women have with  each other?  I think a lot of it was that we came from the same backgrounds and a lot  of it was connections that we had. Everybody just kind of related.  Have you been to the different reunions?  Quite a few of them.  Do any stand out in your memory?  Well one of them at Western Hills, everybody brought their children and  we didn   t because I needed a break.  How many children do you have?  Two, a girl and a boy and they both went to OSU, but they didn   t  graduate from there.  Do you have grandchildren?  One little girl, three.  Do you have any other memories about OSU?  No. Met my husband there and it   s been fifty years we   ve been married,  12  Neurohr  Behring  so that   s been good.  That   s wonderful. Congratulations for that. Well thank you for  participating in the interview today. I hope you have a wonderful  Homecoming weekend and we appreciate your participation. Thank you  so much.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
