 Sherman  Webb  Today is December 15, 2009. My name is Jacob Sherman of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program, and I am here today in  Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, interviewing Dr. Billy Webb. This interview  is being conducted as part of the O-STATE Stories Project, and today  we   re going to interview Dr. Webb about his life and career at  Oklahoma State University and his work with the Magruder Plots. First  off, can you describe for me your background, growing up, and your  family life growing up?  Okay. Raised on the farm, born March 13, 1930, and spent my entire life  on that farm until I went to college at Cameron State University, and  was there two years. Graduated from high school in 1948 and then I  went to Cameron. I was from a farm family and farmed with my father.  Helped him farm until   well, even after I went to college, I   d come  back home and help him farm. Just decided that I was going to major in  some phase of agriculture. Initially, I thought that I would major in  animal science. When I went to Cameron, there was a gentleman by the  name of Don Prophet and he really took me under his wing as a student  and helped me along through school, and his major was agronomy. I  decided,    Well, I think that   s a good major, agronomy.    I majored in  agronomy there, and then when I went to Oklahoma State University in  1950, then I went into agronomy at that time. Then, graduated in 1952.  Then I went back to the farm. I was married at that time and we lived on  the farm for four years, four very difficult years because that was a  drought period. It was just difficult to make a living in drought years on  a farm. I don   t know just exactly how it happened. I was at a field day at  Oklahoma A M, at that time, and happened to run across a fellow by  the first name of Hugh, and he had been in Ethiopia. I had written a  letter to Dr. Pat Murphy who was one of my professors in school and  was just telling them that it was an interesting program that they were in,  if they had need for someone with my skills, I   d consider it. So Hugh  5  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Rouk interviewed me then, after the field day in Stillwater. Then they  came to the farm and interviewed us again, along with my wife and at  that time we had two children, and this was along in May 1956. They  eventually, within a month or so, offered us the opportunity to go to  Ethiopia and be on a research station there. We took that, even though it  was somewhat painful to leave the farm, but we went ahead and went to  Ethiopia. I told my dad,    Well, I   ll go over there a couple of years and  then I   ll come back and farm, and maybe the weather conditions will be  better.    We went over there and decided to go a second tour, and so we  did.  When we came back in December of 1960, then Dr. Murphy had sent  me a letter and he was back on campus at that time. He sent me a letter  and invited me to do a master   s program at Oklahoma A M. So, we  finished that in    62. Then we were appointed to a position, station  superintendent at Altus. They had two locations, Altus and Tipton, and  we were there about three years. And then went to K ansas  State to do  the PhD in 1967, and finished it in 1970. Had an opportunity to come  back to Oklahoma State University at that time and would be in charge  of the agronomy research stations over the state. There were thirteen  locations. Some of the fellows that were on those stations were  classmates, and so it turned out to be a very, very rewarding experience.  I was there for twenty-five years and then I retired.  Backing up a little bit, you grew up during an interesting time period in  the 1930s. What do you remember most about that era?  I remember that it was a pretty tough time. It was after another siege of  droughts, and I can remember that we   my parents were hard workers.  They had cattle and sheep and farm land, and at that time land was rather  cheap but no one had money to buy the land. So, we first lived on the  farm that belonged to my dad   s aunt and her husband. It was some of the  land that their forefathers had had for quite some time. My Granddad  Webb did not make the run into Oklahoma, but he bought the rights of  an individual that did. They provided him what they called a patent at  that time, and this patent had Theodore Roosevelt   s signature on it. I still  have that.  Oh, wow.  My wife and I inherited that quarter section and we still have it. But  back to your question, it was a tough, tough time growing up in the    30s,  but everybody had a tough time, so it was something that everybody  understood the problems that everyone else had. We were all in the same  boat. We went to school and when we got out of school we   d go home  and work on the farm and work on the weekends. It was sort of rare that  6  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  you   d be able to buy land, but my parents eventually did buy the quarter  section that I was born on. Along about the time I was graduating high  school, things had sort of turned around and my dad and mother built a  new house. It was a house that was made out of rock that they hauled  from Ada, Oklahoma. It was kind of a light greenish color rock. Still  there. Probably be there for who knows how long.  You were in Custer County, right?  Yes.  Was it affected by the Dust Bowl at all?  It was. It was. In fact, even after it was affected by the Dust Bowl in the  early    30s. Then when the wife and I, Jean, moved back to the farm in  1952, as I said earlier, there was a drought. I can remember even then  dust coming up, wind blowing, and it just looked like it was going to  turn night. I mean, it was that bad, blowing dust, in the 1950s. It was just  really an experience that I hope we don   t have again.  When these dust storms arose, what kind of precautions did you take, or  what did you do during them?  We   d get inside and then if we had to be outside, we   d cover our mouth.  I can remember visiting my dad   s uncle in Beaver County, and he said  that he had to literally take a scoop shovel and scoop the dust out of his  house after a dust storm. And that was in Beaver County. It wasn   t quite  that bad in the    50s that I experienced, but it was bad and, yes, you   d get  inside where you don   t inhale so much of that dust that was in the air.  Did you ever experience the electrical storms as part of the dust storms?  Not really. There were some electrical, some lightning, occasionally, but  there were areas where it did hit. It would damage very much, but we  didn   t experience it in our particular area.  You grew up in wheat country?  Wheat, barley, oats, primarily wheat. Livestock. At that time, livestock  was primarily cattle. There were quite a number of herds of sheep  around, and my dad would usually have somewhere in the neighborhood  of seventy-five to 150 head of sheep. Swine. We always had swine.  We   d take them when they   re ready to sell, we   d load them in the pickup  or truck, whatever we had at that time, and take them to the Oklahoma  City stockyard.  7  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Do you remember the first tractor that you drove?  Yes.  And what was that?  It was a Case C, C Case. It was a little low tractor and it would pull a  small plow, and one of the fields my dad was farming was close to a  hundred acres, and it would take us almost a whole week of plowing that  large block of land. It   s still in the family; we still have it. We still have  our home place. My brother and I both have interest in it. It was a pretty  small tractor; was a 1929 C Case. My dad, then, sometime later, I   d  guess mid-   40s, he had the opportunity to buy another C Case, and it  was a 1938 model. He bought that, so then we had two tractors. Then a  little while later (and everyone was getting either more tractors or larger  tractors at that time) he bought a Model L tractor. None of those tractors  had umbrellas on them, so I   ve never driven a tractor that has a cab or an  umbrella. I always put on a shirt and went out and drove the tractor in  the sun.  How old were you when you first drove a tractor?  Oh, I   d say ten or eleven.  What kind of daily chores did you have on the farm?  Well, it was my responsibility to get the milk cows up and milked every  evening and every morning before I went to school. My brother (I had  one brother) would help with the sheep and the swine and I   d take care  of the milking of the milk cows, milking and feeding them.  What time did you have to get up to milk those cows?  Oh, probably six o   clock and then catch the bus to school at eight or  8:30, something like that. School always started at nine o   clock and let  out at four o   clock. I think the school systems now have some different  schedules.  What kind of cows did you milk?  Jerseys and Shorthorns and occasionally we   d have a Holstein.  Is there any difference between Shorthorns    and Jerseys    milk  production than regular Holsteins?  Well, normally, the Shorthorns would provide more milk, more quantity,  8  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  but the Jerseys had higher content of cream. Regardless of what the  breed of cattle was, we   d separate, pour it into a bowl and have to crank  a separator to separate the cream out of the milk. Put the cream into a  ten-gallon cream can and either carry it to the produce in town or,  eventually, there was a truck route that would come by and pick up the  cream. This was for the Gold Spot in Enid, and of course, they used it to  make butter and other products.  Were you involved with 4-H at all, growing up?  No, not really. I did go on one 4-H trip with the county agricultural  agent, and I did take that one trip to Lake Carl Blackwell, there west of  Stillwater, and that was all the 4-H that I did. We had too much work to  do. We didn   t have time to spend with 4-H. 4-H was a wonderful  program and there were a lot of kids that did participate in the program,  but we never did.  Did you ever show at the county fair?  No. Never did.  Did the war affect your family farm at all?  Not really, except that we were limited for the gasoline for vehicles.  Well, I should state, for non-agricultural use. If you wanted to go to  Oklahoma City in a car, then you had to have a different kind of stamp  to buy fuel, but we didn   t have a car at that time. We had a pickup. So,  pickups and trucks, you could get about all the fuel that you needed for  them because they were agricultural equipment that served in agriculture  and production.  How often would you go to town?  About every Saturday night.  What did you do on Saturday nights, then?  Oh, we   d run up and down the street, and eventually when the movie  opened, well, we   d go to a movie. It was open, I think, on Friday night  and Saturday night only. We   d go to a movie and go to the drugstore and  get a soda. Mother and Dad would get groceries at the grocery store. If  you needed some hardware, you   d go to the hardware store. We didn   t  go to town very much during the week.  How big was your high school?  9  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  I think it had about 300 students, in all.  And what high school was this?  Custer City High School.  Custer City. Is that the county seat?  No, Arapaho is the county seat.  How far was Arapaho from your farm?  It was about eighteen miles, I guess, to Arapaho, the county seat.  How big was your graduating class there?  I think there were thirteen of us.  Now, you went to Cameron for two years?  Yes.  You got your associate   s in what?  As soon as I finished Cameron, I went to OSU then. I considered   that  was during the Korean     Conflict.  Yes. I considered volunteering to the Army and not go to OSU, but then  I decided,    Well, if they need me, they   ll draft me, and I   d be willing to  go.    But I did register and I had my draft card, but I was never called.  But in OSU, you did ROTC, I assume.  No.  What were your first impressions of Oklahoma State University? What  do you remember?  I was really amazed at the size of it. Of course, I was comparing it to the  size of Cameron. When I was at Cameron two years, both years, our  soils judging and crop judging team went to A M and competed there  in the contest. And then the second year, I couldn   t go and compete in  agronomy, so I went to enter into a contest in poultry. A friend of mine  had been on the poultry judging team in the previous year, so he was our  10  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  coach at Cameron and we went to Oklahoma State then for the poultry  judging contest. I sort of knew what OSU was and what it looked like  when I went up there and, of course, just took off and started my last two  years there. I was really impressed with the campus and with the  facilities and the opportunity I had.  Do you have any particular fond memories that stand out about your  time at Oklahoma State University from your undergraduate years?  Well, yes. One thing I talk about, back when we were there, you   d be  going to and from classes and they had an old dog named Sig. Sig, I  believe, was his name, and he would always be on campus, and people  would stop and pet him and that was kind of interesting because he was  just a docile old fellow that liked to be talked to and liked to be petted.  There were other things that were fascinating to me. The professors were  fellows that had been going to school not too many years prior to when I  was there and then some of them were there that was teaching when my  dad went to Oklahoma A M. So I made acquaintance with them and  those fellows, and it was amazing. You go to one of those fellows maybe  to visit, maybe you had a problem, and it was an experience that I really  appreciated. Everybody   d help you. As long as you behave yourself and  try, they would help you. I was really impressed with that. And the  facilities were quite nice. I went out for crops judging. I did not make  the team that went on, but there was a lot of good experience there and  some good fellows that I worked with.  Jean and I got married in December of 1950, and then she took classes  on campus as well, and I have a picture of her somewhere with Sig  standing behind her, and Sig came about up to here on her.  And this is the dog that was on campus?  Yes.  Was it like a mascot in a way?  It was kind of a mascot. Kind of a mascot, and everybody petted him. I  don   t know where he stayed at night, but he was always out on the  campus.  Getting back to your OAMC days, you participated in soil judging?  Crops judging.  Did you do any live animal judging?  11  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Never did.  When they put a beef cow up in the Union, were you there? (Laughter)  Have you heard that story?  I was there when the engineers   this is what I was told and I think it   s  correct. The engineers took the bull that was on the front of the animal  science building, stole that bull and cut the testicles off of it, and buried  it under a tree over somewhere east of the Union. I wasn   t there, I didn   t  witness it, but this is what I was told, and I really don   t doubt it because  almost everything went on mischievous there.  That   s what I heard from that time period, a bunch of pranks going on.  Oh, yes.  Did you do any pranks?  I was not involved in that. I can   t remember any particular prank like  that that I was involved in. I wasn   t any angel, I   ll have to admit that, but  I don   t recall being mischievous like that.  What did you do for fun when you were on campus in Stillwater?  Fun?  Yes, to relax.  Well, occasionally we   d go fishing. Some of us would go fishing out on  Lake Carl Blackwell. We would get together and play dominoes or play  cards at some of the other married couples    place. But basically we were  busy enough we didn   t have all that much time to get involved in too  much mischief.  You lived in married student housing?  No, never did live in married student housing. We rented a place just  across the street, east, from what then was called the auditorium, and I  think it has a name now. But it was just across the street, east, of the  auditorium, and there was an apartment in the back of the house back  there, and we lived in that. We didn   t have to walk very far to classes. It  was very convenient. Fact of the matter is, you   d go out the back door,  go to the alley and go north, and there was a grocery store there and it   s  now the restaurant     Eskimo Joe   s?  12  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Eskimo Joe   s. It   s now Eskimo Joe   s; there used to be a grocery store  there and we   d go buy groceries there.  I didn   t know that was a grocery store a long time ago.  He had about two or three places there and one of those was a grocery  store.  Did you witness any sporting events at that time, or did you partake in  any of that?  I didn   t participate in them, but I would go to the basketball games and  some of the football games. Never did go to any of the baseball games.  We saw the Harlem Globetrotters play one game while we were there.  Do you remember what Gallagher-Iba was like when you were a  student?  Oh, yes. Yes, it was a nice facility. It was my understanding that it was  built for 4-H programs to be in there. At the time it was a very nice  place. Very nice. I think they still have the same floor in that now that  was there when we were there.  Same old maple still on there.  Yes.  Do you remember Mr. Iba at all?  Yes, I remember him, and I had lunch with him one time. After I went to  Altus as the superintendent of the research station down there, a friend  of mine that I had made down there, Mr. Williams, Bill Williams, was  on the board of regents at that time. He was going to be coming to the  Oklahoma State campus for a board meeting, and they were sending a  plane down to pick up him up and take him. He invited me to go with  him if I had something I needed to do on campus. He didn   t invite me to  go to the board meeting, and I wouldn   t expect that and that wasn   t his  invitation. It was just to go and do whatever I needed to do if I had  something there, so I did. I met up with him at lunch and he said,    Well,  let   s go to lunch.    I said,    Okay.    So, we went over to the Union and we  had lunch over there, and Henry Iba was across the table. He was at that  table, and I had the opportunity to visit with him at that time. Of course,  I had seen him a lot, but that was the only time I had to visit with him.  What was your impression of him?  13  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  I was really impressed. I had that thought and feeling a long time ago.  After you graduated from OAMC, you went back to work on your family  farm.  Yes.  For me, I really don   t know much about the early 1950s drought. Can  you share a little bit more about what that was like?  Well, it   s still painful to me, but I remember. Normally, you would plant  wheat in the latter part of August or in September, and this particular  year, and I can   t remember which year it was that we didn   t have enough  moisture to plant wheat until the first of December. When you plant  wheat in the first of December, you don   t get much crop. Even though if  you had plenty of moisture at that time, it   s just too short of a period of  time for a wheat plant to emerge and develop and produce a good crop.  So, we didn   t have a good crop that year. If we would get six or eight,  ten bushels, that   s about all we could get during those drought years.  Sometimes you wouldn   t get anything. You   d just go plow it up and get  ready for another crop.  Were there soil conservation programs out in that area?  Oh, yes.  What were they like?  They were very helpful. They would give us guidance and help with  putting terraces in fields that had an erosion problem. That was one of  the primary assistance that was coming out of Soil Conservation Service  at that time. They would also suggest crops that would be on the surface  when the windstorm had come by. If someone was cultivating a piece of  land that had too much drought to it, then they would suggest putting it  back to pasture, which was a good thing to do. And some people did it,  but not enough. There was still quite a bit of erosion.  At that time, did they plant natural grasses back into the soils?  Yes, they would attempt to put grasses back into those areas that maybe  was native or that had proven that they would be productive, maybe,  coming in from outside. But yes, they would recommend some of the  old grasses, little and big blue stem and Indian grass and there was one  more. But, what they called the four primary grasses. Indian grass, little  and big blue stem, and I   ll think of it.  14  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  What was the relationship between farmers and county extension agents  at that time?  It was good. I think at that time, most of the county agents were very  helpful and would suggest approaches that would actually be very  helpful if they could get the crop planted in time or get the grass planted  in time. Try to stop the erosions. Yes, they were very helpful.  How would you compare the early    50s drought with the    30s droughts?  Is there a comparison that can be made?  Well, I was rather small in the    30s drought time, and I think maybe it  was perhaps a little bit more severe than the    50s, as I would evaluate it  at this point. They were both devastating, but I think the    30s probably  was the most devastation.  Did you have combines at that time? When did combines come into  play?  Combines? My dad had a combine, I guess, when I was probably seven  or eight years old. He bought a M M combine that was to be pulled by  a tractor. I was driving a tractor when I was probably ten years old for a  combine, and my dad would ride the combine and, of course, he   d have  to raise and lower the cutter bar, and that   s what he would do and I   d  drive the tractor and try to keep the combine combining a full swath of  wheat.  Those types of combines are sort of like hay balers in a way?  No, not really. There   s quite a bit of difference. I can remember the hay  balers that I first knew were stationary hay balers. So, we   d gather up the  crop in the field and take it to the baler, and then we had to throw it in  the baler and someone else would have to tie the bales. It was kind of a  complicated issue there, and it took a lot of help, a lot of labor. I can  remember the first pulled baler that I saw was one that was a stationary  baler and the neighbor had made some kind of a gathering operation so  he could pull that with a tractor. That   s the first one I ever saw. Then, of  course, they made balers for that purpose; I don   t know what year they  came out. I was probably eight or ten years old when this neighbor  perfected this baler.  You went back to Oklahoma State for your master   s.  Yes.  Was it in agronomy or was it in soil sciences?  15  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  It was agronomy, and at that time I was doing my master   s in crops.  Well, let   s see. I guess, really, maybe I was leaning a little more to soils  at that time because Dr. Pat Murphy was a soils professor and a  department head, and so he kind of encouraged me to go look at soils. I  was making the transition then and went into soils at that time. He went  back to Ethiopia during the time I was doing my master   s program and  Dr.  Billy  Tucker then was my advisor and helped me get through the  master   s program.  Dr. Tucker wasn   t that much older than you.  No. He was three or four years older than me. I attended his eightieth  birthday a couple of years ago, and I   ll have that same figure in the next  few months. (Laughs)  What was he like to work under? What kind of professor was he, what  were his traits?  Dr. Tucker? Oh, you couldn   t beat him. He was a western Oklahoma  farm boy also, and we thought alike. And he was extremely helpful. I  couldn   t have found a better advisor than Dr. Tucker.  He grew up in Sayre, right?  Yes, in the Sayre area. I think he was a little north of Sayre, but yes.  So, not too far from you?  Not too far from me. I didn   t know him until he was about ready to   he  graduated a year or so ahead of me. Then he went to the University of  Illinois. I had known him since probably    51 or    52. So, that   s been quite  a while ago.  What was your thesis on? What did you write about?  It was on nitrogen availability and nitrogen utilization and wheat  production.  Could you do your lab work with the Magruder Plots or did you work  elsewhere?  I did not do any lab work with the Magruder Plots at that time, although  I knew about the Magruder Plots. It hadn   t been too many years prior to  that when the Magruder Plots were moved from where now one of the  dormitories sits out onto the agronomy farm. That was a little bit  difficult for me to understand just how that worked, why it would work,  16  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  but it did. And I   m not trying to indicate that I had any opposition to it at  all, but I think that happened during Dr. Murphy   s era or it may have  been someone else that sort of led that program into moving the  Magruder Plots.  Your research, was that on the crop farms south by Perkins there?  No, I did not have any participation in the Perkins program until I came  back as superintendent of all the stations and that was one of the stations  that I did work with.  After you got your bachelor   s you took some time off in Ethiopia, which  hopefully we can discuss later. But you went up to Kansas State for your  PhD?  Yes.  Did you study a similar topic up there?  I did, and I also really worked on phosphorous more so than nitrogen up  there. The polyphosphates and so on in wheat production.  How did Kansas State rate as a soil sciences program, because both Dr.  Tucker and  Robert  Westerman went to the University of Illinois? Did  they rate as good, if not better, than Illinois?  Illinois probably had a little more prestigious feeling among people in  the graduate program. I think they were not better, but maybe  approached it in a little different way, and that was an older program up  there than Kansas State. Kansas State had a good program by the time I  went there, but they were still working in a lot of the basics at the  University of Illinois. This is my opinion, that the University of Illinois  perhaps had, in previous years but I really looked at it again and got an  extremely good advisor at K-State. At that time, we had six children and  I was busy. Every night I   d go back to the lab and study and work, and it  was a real good experience at K-State. That was a great, great  experience.  How does Manhattan , Kansas  relate to Stillwater?  I don   t think one of them could rate higher than the other one. I think  they   re both extremely quality locations. There were features that   we  really loved Manhattan, but we love Stillwater, too. I think their  facilities and their programs and their professors, they   re comparable.  After you got our PhD, then you moved back to Stillwater?  17  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Yes.  How were you offered a position at OSU?  I had stayed in contact with Dr. Tucker and I knew some of the other  faculty members, and one of them was getting ready to be, well I guess  he had already been appointed, head of the department, Dr.  Ralph   Matlock, and I had worked with Dr. Matlock some when I was there at  OSU. So, one time that I was leaving, went from Manhattan to Custer, I  stopped in Stillwater and visited with the fellows there. When that job  came open, I applied for it, and I was offered the job. Dr. Matlock was  the department head at that time.  Was this with the experiment station or was this teaching on campus?  It was the experiment station. I never did teach on campus except if  someone was gone and they needed someone to fill in. That didn   t occur  but maybe half a dozen times in twenty-five years. I might have  something to relate to the students, I   m thinking in regard to the research  station then, of course, I can do that anytime they need it, but to teach  the class, there was very, very little of that.  I   ve interviewed Dr. Tucker, Dr. Westerman and Dr.  William  Raun. Is  there anyone else that I should possibly interview?  I don   t think of anyone else.  I heard possibly Dr. Brett Carver?  Yes, he   s a wheat breeder there now. I guess he   s been there probably  twenty years, something like that, fifteen, twenty years.  Has he done work with the plots?  I really don   t know what his participation in the plots might be. He may  be recommending varieties of wheat to put on the plots or something  like that, but so far as the soil aspect, I doubt that he has put anything  into that. But you could check with him.  Can you define agronomy for me?  Agronomy is the science of crops and soils and it   s sort of the   it has  kind of run out. They wanted to be a little more specific in what it was,  so now that   s the reason that they   re calling it    crops and soils.    Not all  universities have done that, but Oklahoma State has. I don   t know which  other states have and have not. In some cases,  the study of  soils is in  18  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  some other department and crops is in another department, I do know  that. I think that   s the reason they made the change.  So, agronomy can be used sort of interchangeably with crop and soil  sciences?  Yes.  How does the Oklahoma Agriculture Experiment Station work within the  university structure?  Well, it is part of the land grant objective as outlined when the land grant  was developed. I can   t tell you how far back, but a long time ago. That  is, the primary research stations are part of the research that is included  in that land grant college.  How many experiment stations does the state of Oklahoma have?  From Oklahoma State University?  Yes.  I   m not sure. We had thirteen of them and I think there were probably  five, maybe five or six more. See, we didn   t have anything much to do  with the horticulture research stations, which there was one over at  Bixby. Seems like they had some other locations. Well, even their  research station there on campus, we didn   t have much involvement with  that. You know, we might do a little training or assistance to each other  if necessary, but that would be about the only    But we had thirteen in  the Department of Agronomy.  Where were they located?  Well, of course, Stillwater, Perkins, Muskogee County, Altus, Tipton,  Mangum, Chickasha, and then when I came back in 1970 they had just  purchased a tract of land west of Enid in Lahoma, and then the  involvement out at  Oklahoma  Panhandle  State University . Let   s see,  there was one down near Garvin County, had a peanut district station,  but it was abandoned back in the    80s. And Fort Cobb, a peanut station  at Fort Cobb.  There were crops grown on these? What kinds of crops are grown on  them? Is it just wheat, or is it soybeans, hay, cotton?  Most of the southwest stations were cotton. Altus, Mangum, Tipton,  primarily cotton. Although, we did have some small grains research on  19  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  those, and some alfalfa. Now, in Chickasha, during the time I was there,  they reduced the amount of cotton research and was going to forage  research. So, there was kind of a transition there, but they still have  cotton there, as far as I know. I haven   t been on the station for ten or  twelve years, but I   m satisfied they still have some cotton work there.  Has cotton fallen from the state, production-wise? Is there less emphasis  on cotton than there was in the past?  I think that the cotton acreage has reduced somewhat, but how much, I  can   t say.  And is that why the experiment stations are slowly dwindling with  cotton?  I guess it   s the economics of it, the reason they   re no longer producing  the number of acres they did back a number of years ago. Now, one  thing about cotton, they have done a lot of work on insect control. The  boll weevil was one reason the cotton acreage was decreased, because of  the boll weevil problem. Now, they   ve pretty well resolved that problem,  but I don   t know if the acreage of cotton has increased. I would guess  that it has, but I don   t know that. There may be some competition  associated with that, with Texas being such a cotton growing state in  some areas. I   m just not that familiar with     Speaking of acreage, how large are these experiment stations? Do they  vary in size or are they similar?  They vary in size. Yes, they do. At Tipton, for example, we have about  eighty acres, and in Altus we had 160 acres there. Mangum, we had 320  acres there. I think there   s been some decrease in operations in the  Mangum station. It was primarily developed back in the Dust Bowl  days, trying to determine how to control the dust coming. It was a real  light sandy soil, good productive soil. At Lahoma, we had almost 160. I  didn   t mention the  Marvin  Klemme  Range Research  Station, down at  Bessie, south of Clinton there. That was given to us by Mr. Klemme,  before he passed away. We had, I think, 300 or 400 acres there, and I  think they   ve bought some more since I was involved in it. That was  primarily a range program. It was almost all range program there. And,  let   s see, Lahoma was primarily wheat. The panhandle had, there near  Guymon, Goodwell, was primarily wheat. Chickasha is going to some of  the forage programs, a lot more than what they had before. Muskogee is  crops and some livestock grazing.  What   s the oldest agricultural experiment station?  20  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Probably the one there at Stillwater.  Was that started when the university was founded?  Yes, that   s my thinking on it, that it was part of the land-grant college,  when the program was initiated.  What are the differences between an agricultural experiment station and  a normal university laboratory? Is there any difference?  A laboratory may be a part of the research station. I mean, maybe not  located on the research station but it does some analysis of the work  that   s being done on the research station.  How does the experiment station fulfill the land grant mission? Can you  expound on that further?  I would say it   s just part of the educational research and the extension  program. The research station is part of the land grant system, and serves  as part of the land grant system.  How are the experiment stations funded?  I think there   s probably at least two state and federal, and then some  commercial funding for the research stations, for work on the research  stations.  Are the Magruder Plots part of the experiment station?  Yes, they are.  What can you tell me about the history? How do you understand the  history of the Magruder Plots?  The Magruder Plots, as they are now, was just a fragment of what was  initially located there on campus, on the west side of the campus where  some of the dormitories are. The Magruder Plots as we have them now  are the selected plots to be moved from the original location to the  current location. There were other plots in the same study, but these  plots that were moved were the selected plots to be moved. You  probably have the dates on that, of those that were moved.  Were they selected because A.C. Magruder worked on them, or do you  know how they were selected?  Of course, I wasn   t there when they were selected. I don   t have a real  21  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  knowledge of just what all went on, but it   s my impression that they  selected the research plots that they felt at that time would be the most  valuable for the future and moved those Magruder Plots to the present  location because of, at that time, their judgment as to which plots would  be of the most value for the future.  How big were the original plots? You said they only kept a selected few  acreage?  You know, I cannot tell you the exact dimension of the plots at that time.  I think they were somewhat a little bit larger than what the plots are  now. I don   t think they moved the entire plot, and somewhere in this  literature, it gives that. There   s another publication that probably gives  more detail to that than what we have here. Yes, there   s those three  fellows right there. I was visiting with Dr. Tucker and Dr. Raun the  other day and I missed Dr. Westerman. He was not in.  If you can   t find it, we can fill it in later.  Yes, I thought, in one of the publications it has a drawing of those plots  and I don   t recall. I don   t have that publication and I don   t remember  what it was.  Well, we can look for it. In the current spot, has there been a time the  plots were in danger of disappearing?  Yes, there was. There was a lot of controversy about that, as I recall.  When I was at K-State, I was involved in the last harvest of one of the  long-term plots up there under which now is the football stadium. I told  Dr. Westerman, or Dr. Tucker, I said,    We can   t let that happen, if  there   s any way possible.    So, he made contact with one of the history  professors, and the name has left me. But they began to   in fact, at that  time, also, when he was doing that, I was out looking at other areas that  might serve as a research station and I had been asked to   which I  responded,    What would it cost to move that station, just to move the  facilities?    Actually, you couldn   t move the facilities. Their facilities,  you don   t pick up and move. But my response to them, as I recall, is  someplace in the five to six million dollar range, and this has been back  almost thirty years ago and no one had that kind of money to move, to  do anything, really.  Then, the feeling sort of slowed down on trying to move those plots  because of the potential cost and potential loss of a research program  there. At that time Dr. Tucker was talking with one of the professors in  the history department, getting some contacts and getting some  suggestions as to how we might counteract the thought of moving those  22  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  plots and moving the research station. It was decided that we would try  to make it a registered historical site, and Dr. Tucker continued to work  on that until, and I can   t remember how long it took, but until it was  registered on the registry. And had that not taken place, who knows?  The football stadium might be out there. But after that happened, then  they lowered the level of the football field by six feet, I believe it was.  They hauled that out and put it on the research station as kind of a low  area there in the vicinity of the Magruder Plots. So, we   re farming it  now. As long as it didn   t molest the Magruder Plots, well that   d be okay.  So, you saw sort of a reverse history of it?  Sort of, yes. (Laughs)  So, you   re farming what once was the football field, whereas K-State,  the football field was once the plots.  Yes, yes. I helped the last harvest on that plot that then became the  football stadium.  How old was that, the one up at Kansas State, when it was torn     Well, I was trying to remember, maybe, what that length of time was,  but it was long-term, but I can   t tell you the number of years.  Can you place the plots within the context of Oklahoma A M and OSU  history? What has been their role, how are they perceived and what  attention do they bring to the campus?  Well, because of the longevity of that program, I think that perhaps  there   s a lot of feeling there that it is extremely important that that  continue. I think that not only is it valuable to get the number of bushels  that are harvested each year, from the planting of the Magruder Plots, I  think that more than the number of bushels, there is analytical programs.  Dr. Bill Raun was showing us the other day some of the analysis that  they   re now using in the soil fertility program and that was something  that was not being utilized and carried on at the time I was up there.  Speaking of Dr. Raun, at your time at OSU who else have you seen work  on the plots or conduct research dealing with the plots?  Dr. Tucker before Dr. Raun, and before Dr. Tucker, I think Dr. Gray   Researcher in Charge, 1952-1956  had some leadership there. And then  prior to that, of course, all of the individuals that are    Yes, Dr. Fenton  Gray and Dr. Horace Harper  Researcher in Charge, 1926-1951 . Both  of those fellows were professors up there when my dad went to school.  23  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  When did your father go to Oklahoma A M?  I think it was 1927. And he went for a year and a half or two years and  then he couldn   t go any longer. Now, when he went up there to go to  school, he took his milk cows with him.  Really?  And he milked those milk cows and sold milk to help pay his way  through college. That lasted for, I guess, a couple of years.  Wow.  Then he decided he better get back to the farm in Custer, at Custer City,  because, oh, I think he had his eye on a young lady back there. She went  to Southwestern at Weatherford and became a teacher at some of the  rural schools out in the Custer City area.  As an undergad, or later on?  As an undergrad, and then later on also. Dr. Harper and Dr. Fenton  Gray.  What were they like? What were their personalities?  Dr. Harper was a very good researcher and teacher. He was one that  wanted to get it done quick. Let   s get after it; let   s get it done. And that   s  okay. That   s not a criticism. Dr. Gray, I knew him, and he was more laid  back. I   m not sure just what contribution he made, but he did make a  contribution. Then Dr. Tucker was very, you just couldn   t have asked  for better people than Dr. Tucker, Westerman, and Raun to follow up on  whatever needed to be done to get the maximum out of the program.  What was your working relationship with Drs. Westerman and Raun?  Very good. Those fellows were, in my opinion, super. I first knew Dr.  Westerman when I came back from Ethiopia and started my master   s  program. He was still there as a student. And then he had left to go to the  University of Illinois. Dr. Raun, I knew him when he was a student  there. He   s the one that   s doing a lot of the analytical work on the  Magruder Plots; soil fertility in general, but Magruder Plots specifically.  What kinds of training do the plots offer students?  It gives them an insight of the importance of long-term soil fertility  studies, research. There   s value in knowing what some of the program  24  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  was back in the    20s and    30s and    40s, I think. They can look at the  treatments and look at the yields and maybe the weather reports and it  gives them some idea as to perhaps what they might expect if they had  the experience of those kinds of programs in the future.  Can you explain how the wheats are tested and experimented on?  The wheat?  Yes, like what   s actually done to the wheat plant on the plots.  They plant the wheat on the entire area, and then they   ll watch and  observe the wheat as it   s growing. It   s quite obvious. The wheat on the  check plot is not nearly as good as it is on the treated plots. And then to  observe the yielding of the wheat on the various areas where there has  been different treatments of fertilizer applied.  There are different wheat varieties in the plots, correct?  Well, there have been changes of the varieties that have been used in the  plots, but the plots will all have the same variety. In any particular year,  they won   t mix varieties on the Magruder Plots during the year.  So, what varieties of wheat are there that are grown on the plots?  They will get the yield amounts of the wheat research that is being  conducted by wheat breeders. Then they   ll decide from the results of  those, then, what to put on the Magruder Plots.  Are the wheat varieties native or non-native species?  They would be varieties that have been developed in the wheat breeding  program like the old Turkey wheat was brought over, I think, from  Russia, and I don   t know, probably back there in some years they  probably used the Turkey wheat. Each year they will determine in  conjunction with the wheat breeder as to perhaps what wheat should be  planted on that plot.  Are these wheats used for human consumption or animal feed?  It is human consumption, primarily.  What kind of knowledge has been gained for the farmers from the  Magruder Plots studies?  Well, I think the yield level of the plots is of interest to the farmers and  25  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  if that particular variety of wheat that has done well on the wheat  breeding program, would certainly be, should be considered to be put on  the Magruder Plots.  Where do you see the plots evolving in the near future?  I would see that the plots would be cared for and continued on from now  on, as long as there   s a research station.  What about the role of the agricultural experiment stations? Where do  you see that heading into the future of farming or research?  Oh. I think as long as the farmers can make a living producing wheat, I  think they will continue to consult with the wheat breeders on what  variety of wheat is the most productive in their particular area.  What kind of challenges do you see agriculture or wheat farming in  general facing, that farmers will have to face in the future?  The price of fertilizer is going to be considered very strongly by the  farmers. The price of fertilizer has been going up and up and up and up.  I know that there are farmers that have decided they   re only going to  fertilize every other year, for example. I think that   s one of the big  influences of the wheat production. Of course, you never know what the  weather   s going to be, so you can   t plan to plant something that is going  to be produced in a low rainfall year. There   s no way you can know  that   s going to be. There may be some ideas that people like our  meteorologists want to suggest, but who knows.  How have you seen the College of Agriculture grow and evolve at  Oklahoma State University during your time and since you   ve been  retired?  I think that it has grown considerably. There were times during the time  I was there where funding was extremely low and you just barely hang  on. But I think that as long as farmers can make a living by all of the  inputs that they have to have and get a decent crop, then I think it   ll  proceed. You know, somebody   s got to raise to feed the population.  One last question. Do you consider yourself a Cowboy or an Aggie?  (Laughs) I guess I don   t know which I would be. I guess I would be an  Aggie.  Have to ask since you went to OAMC before it became Oklahoma State.  26  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  I told Dr. Willham at the time they changed the name, I said it didn   t  make any difference what the name of it is. To me it   s always going to  be Oklahoma A M. He just kind of laughed. That was in Ethiopia. He  came to our program in Ethiopia, and I had the privilege of being on a  trip with him out into the bush. We were gone two or three days out in  the bush, and really had a good visit with Dr. Willham.  Is there anything you would like to add that we haven   t discussed?  I would like to commend the individuals that have been directly in  charge of those Magruder Plots all these years. They   ve done a  wonderful job. My input has just been to see that what they want done to  those Magruder Plots is done correctly. I   ve felt honored down through  the years to have that opportunity. The Magruder Plots to me, that   s a  real good program, and I think it should continue under the leadership of  good quality researchers and that   s what we   ve had.  Well, I want to thank you for this interview today. Thank you for  granting us the time and inviting us into your home. We really  appreciate it.  I   ve enjoyed it. Thank you.  ------- End of December 15, 2009 interview -------  Today is January 8, 2010 and I   m in the home of Dr. Billy Webb. This  part two of our interview with Dr. Webb and today we   re going to  discuss his endeavors in Ethiopia. This interview is being conducted by  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. My name is Jacob  Sherman and this is part of the O-STATE  Stories  Series.  Thank you once again for having us in your home today. Is there  anything else that you could possibly share with us about your time at  OSU that we didn   t discuss last time, before we get into the Ethiopia  project?  On arrival home from Ethiopia, I went directly into graduate school and  did a master   s in agronomy in the program of soil fertility. Dr. Billy  Tucker and Dr. Pat Murphy were guiding me through the program. Dr.  Murphy was a professor at, then, Oklahoma A M when my father was a  student there in the late twenties. Dr. Tucker was there during the time  that I was doing my B.S. degree in agronomy, so I knew both of those  fellows. I knew that with their guidance and with their assistance and  help, I   d get a master   s degree.  It  took me a little time to do it, but I  did. I was working full-time, primarily for Dr. Tucker. I finished the  master   s in   well, most of it was completed by 1963, then I went to  27  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Altus to coordinate the research station at Altus and Tipton and was  there for three years. I left there in 1967 and went to K ansas  State to do  the doctorate program.  I  came back to campus then June 1, 1970. I was  on faculty then until I retired in 1995.  So you spent at least three decades at OSU, then?  Essentially, yes.  And what kind of changes did you see at the university? Were there any  philosophical changes? What kinds of building changes?  There were a few changes along the way. This was during the time that  there was kind of a shortage of funding. Funding wasn   t coming through  so some of the additions and some of the programs could have been  enhanced by some additional funding, but we attempted to completely  go on with our program and do the best we could with what we had. I  was coordinating the operations of thirteen research stations over the  state of Oklahoma. Occasionally we   d add one and occasionally we  would close one. This would be determined by the importance of a  commodity or the importance of what programs needed to be done at  that time. Then of course the funding influenced that also.  How many university presidents did you see through your time there?  At Oklahoma State? I saw Dr. Willham and then Dr. Kamm, I believe it  was   I can   t remember who followed Dr. Kamm. He was there for a  short time, then Dr. Halligan. Then there was an interim president. That  was the first time we beat OU  University of Oklahoma  in football in  many, many years, so we gave him credit for winning a football game  with OU.  Do you remember any particular style of leadership each had?  Well, Dr. Willham was very, very cordial and he was very open with his  communications and contacts with him. The other presidents, they were  likewise, essentially. The one that I   m failing to remember the name, he  was there only a short period of time. I never did have real contact with  him. He was there a short period of time and things didn   t work out like  the Board of Regents had envisioned, so he moved on. Then Dr.  Halligan came in. Dr. Halligan, in my opinion, and I didn   t have a great  lot of contact with him, but he was very sociable and a very nice fellow  to know and be with occasionally.  Because you were head of the research stations, did you have much  interaction with them?  28  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  No, I didn   t have all that much interaction with the presidents. I was  coordinator of the research station for the Department of Agronomy. I  had a lot of contact with the deans and the associate deans in the division  of Agriculture. I enjoyed visiting with them, working with them, and it  was a good experience.  Do any deans stand out in your opinion?  Well, Dr. Baker was a fellow that was very cordial. I didn   t agree with  all of his appointments, but that   s not a problem, it   s his decision. Then  the next one that followed him was   I wish I could remember all these  names, they kind of left me. Basically I had a good contact with the  people in the dean   s office and they were cordial,  and offered  a lot of  guidance. So it worked out quite well.  Now because the agricultural experiment stations are a separate line on  the state budget, did you ever have to lobby for funds? Did you ever  report down in Oklahoma City?  No, not really. I was in Oklahoma City once or twice with some of the  people out of the dean   s office, but I was just simply with them to get  myself acquainted with where things were and who they were, and that  was a good experience. I enjoyed going down there. But I did not go  down there just waving my flag and trying to obtain that additional  funding at that level.  What was your interaction  with  farmers? What kind of interactions did  you have?  I had a lot of interaction with farmers and it would be in regard to the  cooperation that they would provide, support they would provide for us  out on the various research stations. Some of them were very cordial     most all of them were. If we needed a tractor, if we needed a plot of land  to put a study on, a commodity study or a soil fertility study, we could  do that about any time we wanted to. They were all very cordial. That  was helpful.  What was your favorite aspect of being the head of the agriculture  experiment station? What was your favorite component of your job?  Well, it was the association I had with the personnel on the research  stations. Some of those fellows I had gone to school with previously.  Some of them had been there when I was a graduate student. I knew and  kept in real close contact with each one of them. There were only two  times in the twenty-five years when I had problems with personnel. It  turned out that they were invited to look for another opportunity  29  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  someplace. If I   d see them today, I   d shake hands and visit. But the  personnel, I think it wasn   t just because I was supervising and  coordinating the program, they were just good people and I tried to be  very supportive of them. We would discuss the programs that we would  want to proceed with and sort of how would we do it. That was the  highlight of my experience in that position.  How much time would you be away from Stillwater with your job?  Oh, most every week I would go to a research station. Normally, they  were a day out and back. If there was some particular program going on,  a meeting at night with some of the people there or interviewing  someone or something like that, then I   d be out maybe a couple of days,  a week maybe. Mostly it was just out and back in a day. I did have the  opportunity to become involved in the National Research Station  Program and I enjoyed that. We would have the agronomy meetings; we  would have superintendents or people from the stations from all over the  nation. Then we had what we called the Southeastern group and we   d  meet once a year, sometimes twice a year. It was always interesting and  both of those occasions we   d have our meetings and then we   d tour our  industry in that part of the country. Like in Florida, we   d go to the citrus  farms and the vegetable farms. If it was in California, we   d go to the,  well again the citrus and the irrigation programs. If it was in Louisiana,  we   d go to their programs down there. We   d go to research stations. It  was a very good experience; I really enjoyed that. That was one of the  regrets that I would miss that when I retired.  Were you involved with leadership roles in those organizations?  I was the leader of each one of them at different times. I really enjoyed  that because I had contact with a lot of people and they were very  supportive of our programs and they would support the programs that we  were trying to present in their meetings. So yes, I really enjoyed that.  So did you do a program anywhere for those conventions?  Oh yeah, I can remember the research station group to begin with, with  the National Agronomy meetings, we did not have a section identified.  We would meet and eventually we planned to present to the Board of  Directors of the agronomy program that we   d be allowed to become a  section of the agronomy program. I was selected to make that  presentation. I made that presentation to the board of directors and we  were accepted. I felt very good. It wasn   t just what I did; it was what the  entire group that I was representing did. Then the following years we  would meet and our membership increased considerably and essentially  we had people from most every area of the nation, not every state but     30  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Every region?  Every region of the nation. They were coming from New York, from  California, Washington and about every region of the nation.  Now did you have much interaction with neighboring states     agricultural experiment stations? Kansas, Texas?  Well, at those meetings we would have contact with them. Now I was  asked to go, two different times, for a review. The programs (one of  them was in Missouri and the other was in Tennessee), I spent two or  three days at each of those and then I was asked to present a report of  how I felt that that program was being conducted and make  recommendations or suggestions as to what might be a better approach  to some of their programs there. So I enjoyed that very much.  What kind of research stations does Tennessee have?  Tennessee has a lot of research stations. One that I remember and I think  it   s probably no longer in operation is tobacco.  Yeah, that makes sense. You   re in tobacco country.  Right, and I knew that fellow; I met him earlier. I don   t know where he  is now. Then one time we went to a lumber company in Tennessee and  went through their saw mill. Then one time we went to one in Tennessee  that was across the road from the manufacturing of cars and General  Motors, Spring Hill.  They made Saturn.  Saturn, that   s right. So we got to go through that plant. Then another  time we had the opportunity to go through a Nissan plant there in  Tennessee. We went to the brewery   it was in a county that was dry.  Oh, the Jack Daniels brewery?  Jack Daniels, right, went through that. So we   d get to see a lot of  different programs and so on.  Let   s fill in some gaps. You met your wife as a neighbor   was she a  neighbor of yours?  That   s correct. We were born within three miles of one another in Custer  County. Her family moved from Custer County over into Ellis County, I  believe it was, north of Elk City there. Sometime along about the fifth or  31  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  sixth grade, they moved back into the Custer area. I remember it and  that   s the first time I remember seeing her. It was noon one day when the  weather was bad and the kids couldn   t get out and play on the  playground, so everybody was inside and just kind of rustling around. I  saw this little   I called her a little freckle-faced red-headed girl. I said,     Who is that little girl over there?    They told me who it was. She was a  grade ahead of me. I   d see her occasionally.  She graduated in 1947 from high school and we had a junior/senior trip  to El Paso. We really went high class   a farmer put a tarpaulin over his  wheat truck and we rode in that wheat truck to El Paso. The next year  we did the same thing going down to Houston, down in that area. But  anyway, the coach was one of the faculty that went with us to El Paso  and he and one of my wife   s friends and I were playing cards in the back  of truck as we traveled. We got to talking about what we were going to  do  that  night. The coach said,    Well Bill, if you   ll take Jean to a  movie, I   ll take       the other girl there, I   ve forgotten her name. So I  said,    Okay, that   ll be fine.     So we got to El Paso and got into our motel and some of the kids went  on downtown and came back pretty quick and said,    Don   t go  downtown to the movies, it   s rough down there. You don   t want to go  down there.    So we didn   t. So the next night we decided we would go  downtown for the meeting. I took Jean and he took the other lady and  when we got home we dated a little bit. She went to work intermittently  at the Oklahoma City Farmer   s Union. So we dated a little bit and just as  time went on, we   d see one another on and off. I guess it was about  1950, we began to date pretty frequently, or    49 maybe. So it turned out  that we married Christmas Eve of 1950.  How did you propose?  Well, I don   t know. I tell her that she was the one that proposed.  (Laughter) She doesn   t take that. I don   t know. We just got to talking  and decided that we gotta put it together to where we could be together  and not have to drive. There wasn   t any big proposal or anything like  that. I did get her a ring but it wasn   t anything real significant. We were  married on Christmas Eve of 1950, so we   re not too far off from being  sixty years married.  Congratulations.  And that ring has not been off that finger since she   s put it on there.  So she moved back with you, then after you got married, to the farm?  32  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  I was a junior at Oklahoma A M, so we rented a little apartment across  the street from the auditorium there on Husband Street. Just across the  street there   s a house there that had several little apartments in it. We  moved into that and liked to have froze to death there, but we made it.  So you dated back and forth; were you driving to Oklahoma City at that  time before you were married, from Stillwater to Oklahoma City?  Yes, and occasionally we   d both go home over the weekend and we   d  meet at Custer County.  What do you remember about Oklahoma City from that time period?  Oklahoma City was kind of a fun place to go. I had two or three aunts  that lived here and we were here as a family when I was growing up  occasionally. This coach that I was talking about brought us over two  years, I believe it was, in December for the basketball tournament.  The All-College Invite? Or was that the Big Eight basketball  tournament?  Well, no, it wasn   t the Big Eight; it was just a lot of different     I think it   s called the All-College Invite.  All-College, that   s what it was. We would stay in the Skirvin Tower  Hotel and that was a real treat. In the morning, we   d get up and go  across the street to the radio station, WKY, and see the superior  program, Wiley and Jean. They had a fifteen or twenty minute program  and we   d go over there and watch that. We   d listen to it every morning  at home but we wanted to see it, so we went across the street to see it.  Dixie Boy Jordan and Wiley and Jean.  So you graduated in 1952 from OAMC?  Right, went back to the home farm.  So you were there four years before you went to Ethiopia?  Four years, yes.  How did you hear about the Ethiopian project?  Well, it happened kind of strangely like. Dr. Pat Murphy was in Ethiopia  and I wrote him a letter and told him that if they ever needed somebody  they could work into the program in Ethiopia, I   d like to apply for it. He  33  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  gave the letter to a professor that was over there and that May, May of     56, I went to a field day at A M there on the campus. This professor  that Dr. Pat had given the letter to was there and I had known him from  being on the crops judging team from Cameron. We chatted a little bit  and he said,    Would you come down to the Ethiopian office there on  campus before you go back home?    I said yeah, I would. So I went there  and he and the director of the program on campus asked me if I would  be interested in going to Ethiopia. I said,    Well, yeah.    The primary  reason was, drought years from    52 to    56 liked to have drove us out, we  couldn   t make a living. I said,    Well sure, I   d consider that.     So then, a little bit later, probably along in July, they came out to the  farm at Custer County and visited with us, had lunch with us. Soon after  that, we were invited to come back to the campus and talk to Bill. We  came and visited with him and so they offered us the opportunity to go  to Ethiopia. We scurried around and got things gathered up and in  August of    56, we left to go to Ethiopia. I told my dad,    I   ll go over  there a couple years and then come back and we   ll farm again.    Went  over there and came home in    58 for a month and then went back and  then came home again in    60 and went to grad school.  What was your family   s reaction when they heard about your plans of  going over there?  Well, they were pleased that I had the opportunity but they didn   t really  like to see us go because we had two little kids and they were going to  miss those kids, probably more than they would miss us. So we went  ahead and went on over. They didn   t try to bar us from going. Some  people told us we were crazy for doing it, but we did it anyway. We  enjoyed it, had a good time. It was a good experience. Dr. Pat Murphy  arranged for me to go to grad school when I came back in 1960.  Had you ever traveled before this, extensively?  No.  Did you have any apprehensions about going over there?  Not really, because Bill, the fellow on campus, outlined things to us. We  asked a lot of questions and they were very helpful in explaining to us,     Yeah, you   ll be provided a house over there. You   ll have privileges at  the embassy,    and so on and so forth. There were a couple of hospitals  there that would be available to us and the embassy would have a nurse,  and    you   ll probably have servants, a cook, a housekeeper,    and that all  sounded rather interesting. So no, we didn   t have very much to be  concerned about.  34  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Was there a formal selection process? Were there others applying to go  over there at the same time?  I really don   t know if there were any that they were considering for that  position other than me. I do know that there was a friend of mine that  applied to go and he was in Ag Education, but he was never selected to  go. He did eventually go ahead and get his doctorate degree and he did  go to South America later and he did some foreign service.  How did you physically get over there?  We flew. We flew from the airport here to Tulsa or maybe Chicago and  then to New York. We stayed the night at the  Waldorf- Astoria Hotel.  We thought we was in high heaven. (Laughter) We stayed, I think, one  night, maybe two nights. I can   t remember. I didn   t have a suit; living on  a farm, I didn   t need a suit. So I went to some place there near the  Astoria Hotel and bought a suit. Then we flew to Zurich, or Geneva, and  stayed two or three nights. That was kind of an issue, trying to get us to  forget about the farm. We enjoyed that, took some tours there in Geneva.  Then we flew down to Rome and took a tour in Rome. From there we  flew into Addis Ababa. They had people there to meet us. We went into  a motel to begin with and stayed there until a house was available.  What was your initial reaction to Ethiopia, Ethiopian culture,  Ethiopians themselves?  Well, of course it was a lot different than what we were accustomed to.  The customs and the people and the country had been discussed with us,  so it was not a real big change or jolt for us. There were some things that  we had to become acquainted with and accept, which we did. You just  do that. You   re there and you know you   ve got to become acclimated.  What kinds of items were you told that you needed to pack or needed to  take over there?  Clothing, groceries, even though there was a military post there, we  could use the PX and get groceries, but we were told to take such and  such and took a washing machine so Jean could to do the laundry. We  didn   t take any furniture essentially because we would be provided with  furniture. We took shoes for the kiddos. They wear this size now and six  months from now they wear another size, so we tried to take shoes with  us and clothing that the two kiddos would fit into. Our son, who   s now a  medical doctor here at Mercy, was about four years old at the time and  our daughter, who now lives in Bartlesville, she was about a year and a  half. She had her second birthday over there. We had to take things that  would be needed by the children, primarily. I took some shop tools with  35  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  me because I   m kind of a wood butcher. I don   t remember anything in  particular. I think we took an ice cream freezer, too, to make ice cream  with. You know, some odds and ends like that.  You had to ship that stuff separately, right?  Yes, we had the office arrange for a moving company to come out and  pack us and load us up and ship it. It took about, seemed like two  months maybe for it to arrive over there. I took some hunting gear also.  They told me the hunting was real good, took fishing gear and used it  quite a bit.  Did you take guns over there?  Took guns.  Was that a problem?  No, didn   t seem to be.  I   ve heard other stories where it was a problem.  Well, if it was a problem, I didn   t ask any questions. I just wrapped them  up in tarpaulins or tents or something and took them. I didn   t bring them  home, I left them over there.  Where were you assigned to live and work in Ethiopia?  Well, we were assigned to live in Addis     The capital?  The capital, which is about 6,000 feet above sea level and very, very  good atmosphere   very good. I was assigned to work for a little town  about thirty kilometers out, called Debre Zeyit. Bishoftu was the first  name and then it became Debre Zeyit, which is a better name, in their  opinion. I would commute each day. Occasionally I would stay in Addis  to do some shopping or talk with personnel. I would make that trip to  Bishoftu about three or four times a week, sometimes every day, and  work with the Ethiopian people that were assigned there and some of the  American people that were there teaching either at Jima or the college,  Alemaya. They would come in and do some research and give me some  directions on research that they would like to initiate and I would then  carry out their research program in the fields for them.  You did field research, like you assisted with Ethiopian farmers, or what  36  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  was your primary assignment?  I didn   t help Ethiopian farmers very much. Now if there was a fellow  that was an individual that was directed to work with farmers  occasionally I would go with him to show him how to use a plow that  we had developed or how to build a chicken house. They kept most of  their chickens in their house under their bed. We would show them how  to build stucco chicken houses with thatched roofs on them and I would  go out and help with that occasionally. We would take a machine, like a  corn shelling machine, out to them and show them how to operate it.  One time we did that, took it out and they invited us in. They were  building a new house and they had the sticks in a vertical position, but  they hadn   t put the stucco mud on yet. They insisted that we come in and  visit and see their house and we did. They were very gracious. We saw  the people outside kind of milling around and we saw a lady go down  the slope a little ways and pick some coffee beans. We didn   t know it,  but she was picking coffee beans and was going to process them and  grind them and make coffee for us, which they did. They also had killed  a lamb and nothing to do, but we were expected and demanded to stay  and eat with them, which we did. It was a very good experience. Injera  wat was their primary food and I enjoyed it.  How would you compare the Ethiopian agriculture at that time to  American agriculture?  Well, Ethiopian agriculture was very, very backdated. They still plowed  with oxens and a one row plow. They still had their chickens in their  house. They still would cut their crops with a knife and tie up bundles  and take it in later and run their cows over that to stomp out the grain. It  would be about the size of this house here, the diameter would be  twenty, thirty feet. I   ve seen them do that many, many times. Compare  that with our tractors and combines and it was just really no comparison,  hardly.  So small plot farming? No large farms?  There were beginning to be a few larger farms as I left. Some of the  students that were from wealthy families would obtain land areas out in  their home area and they would begin to buy tractors. They were  bringing in tractors and plows and beginning to farm similarly to what  we were farming. But that was just beginning to happen as we left.  Would you say agriculture was subsistence? That they raised primarily  to feed their families?  Yes, primarily. They did export some of their agricultural products.  37  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  They exported coffee, they would export some of the grains; they had  capability to produce a lot of grains, but they just didn   t have the  procedures down to do that, until they began to farm with equipment     farm equipment. But the coffee, they exported quite a bit of coffee at  that time. They had good quality coffee, too.  What was the climate like?  The four years that we were there, I think I saw frost three times. Being  at that altitude, they had two rainy seasons   one big rainy season and  one small rainy season. Other than that, it would get pretty dry. They  could raise crops if they planted correctly. They had the capability to  produce a good bit of their foodstuffs. Barley was a commodity and  wheat was a commodity. Teff is the primary one. It was a little bitty seed  that they   d grind to make their bread, their injera.  So mild winters, hot summers?  The rainy season was a little bit chilly at night. At our house, when the  sun goes down it would be nice to light a fireplace; it would be very  comfortable. Now, that   d be during the cold season, the rainy season.  During the dry season, it wouldn   t get all that cold. Many of them would  wear shawls or   I   ve forgotten now what they call them, but kind of a  big blanket that they   d wrap around and then walk down the street. They  sort of invented what they needed in that regard. But when it rained, it  rained almost every day.  Did they call them monsoons?  Oh, I don   t think they were stormy like a monsoon.  So were they hot summers though, too?  Summers were pretty warm. And, of course, being as close to the  equator as it was, as long as you were in the shade, you could survive  quite well. But you get out in the sun, it could bake you pretty good.  So you taught farming techniques in the classroom?  I never did have a classroom for them. On the station I would show them  how to plow or how to gather or how to process or show them how to  put out a research plot in sort of duplicated plots so we could tell what  the capability of that crop was. Yes, I would work with them in poultry,  they had poultry there. We built a poultry house. It was a modern one.  Then we built some that would show them how to build a dummy house  to put their chickens in. They had cattle   we imported some cattle from  38  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Oklahoma.  Really?  Sent over by air. I believe it was Holstein and Jersey and short-horned.  Dairy cows.  Yeah, dairy cows. We had those there on the station and the animal  science director then would work with them so that they could improve  their herds out on the farm.  So did you live in a house or apartment?  We lived in a house most of the time   well, except when we first  arrived. Then we moved into a house that was vacated by someone that  was in the program, but they had come home. Until that contract  expired, we were in that house. Then we moved to another house. Then  we had an opportunity to move to Bishoftu into a house that was     Ethiopian Airlines had people from the Netherlands, I believe it was,  there giving them training in airline flying and airline business. They  had a house that was vacant and they weren   t going to use it, so we were  able to contract it and live there about eight or nine months. Then they  needed it, so we had to move back to Addis Ababa. At that time, we  moved into a house that was sort of in the central part of the lower part  of Addis. Then we moved into another one across the swamp there that  was a little larger. By that time, we had a couple of kids   two sons born,  I think, so we needed a larger house. We took two children over and  brought five home; three sons were born over there.  How did Ethiopian coffee rate with American coffee?  Well, once you became accustomed to it, I think it was as good of  quality, maybe better than American coffee. The procedures they have in  drying and grinding and roasting makes the difference, primarily, in the  way the coffee tastes. I really enjoyed, immensely, their coffee.  Are there any particular foods you recall offhand that stand out in your  memory of Ethiopian foods?  Well, yes. They would eat a lot of lamb and chicken and, of course,  some beef as well. The way they prepared it, I really got hooked on it. I  really liked it. In fact, at noon, when we   d get ready for lunch, many  times I would go with Ethiopian workers that I worked with, people that  I worked with, we   d go to a little restaurant down in the village there and  have injera and wat. Injera was kind of like a pancake that was made  39  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  from their teff. It was cooked on a big round piece of tin and then when  it was finished it was kind of like a real thin pancake. They would take  that and dip into the injera, which was the meat and the beans that were  cooked together and they   d eat that. They didn   t use forks and spoons. I  learned to do that.  Do you still eat Ethiopian food?  Occasionally. There   s an Ethiopian restaurant here in Oklahoma City  down south of here and we occasionally still go down there to get injera  and wat and their foods.  Is it as authentic as what you had?  Yes, because these are Ethiopian people that run that. They order a lot of  their ingredients in from Ethiopian. Their beri-beri, which is powdered  hot peppers, real hot peppers, we still have some in our freezer now. We  use it on chili and different things like that. It   s very good.  You lived in the capital, right?  Yes.  How big was Addis Ababa?  I have heard, and I don   t know how in the world they would count them,  but around two million people in that area. The city was not very well-developed.  You   d have a little trail going off this way and a trail that  way off the main drags and you never know. They didn   t have maps of  the city or anything like that. You   d just have to have one of the students  or one of your workers guide you around to where you needed to go.  Where is Addis Ababa? Is it on the Nile River?  No, it   s probably a couple hundred miles east of a tributary to the Nile,  which runs through the western part of Ethiopia. It   s a tributary; the Blue  Nile is what it   s called. I think the Blue Nile is further north there and  this river is   I can   t remember the name of it now, but that   s where we  would go to hunt crocodiles.  Really? You hunted crocodiles?  I hunted crocodiles.  Can you share some of that experience?  40  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Yeah. There was a Presbyterian mission station down there and we  became acquainted with the missionaries as they came to Addis. They  invited us to come down and go hunting and fishing, so we did. I was  down there two or three different times. One time we drove down there  and the other times we flew down. We   d drive down   of course it   d  take a four-wheel-drive vehicle to get there. You   d go over some pretty  rough roads. I think there was two or three or four of us that went down  in the four-wheel-drive Land Rover. We were hunting and you had to be  real quiet because those alligators would hear you coming and they   d  slither off into the water.  We were up on the bank and being real quiet. We saw a couple lying on  the sandbar down in the river. We very quietly went down there and got  about a hundred yards from them. We decided, well we better do what  we   re going to do now, because when we try to go closer, they   re going  to hear us. There were two of us at that time and we shot and I got one  that was nine feet, eight inches and the other fellow got one that was a  little bit smaller. This one that I got, I never made such a direct, correct  shot. I hit him just between the eyes and about right behind his eyes was  his brain and it just took the top off his head. He wiggled his tail a  couple of times and laid right there. Yeah, nine feet, ten inches, I believe  it was. There were some natives there and they helped us skin that  crocodile out. I brought it home with me. I had some boots made from it  and camera cases. I still have some of it around. Yeah, that was a good  experience. We didn   t do much fishing; we did some fishing but not  very much.  So you actually got that leather processed here in Oklahoma?  No, I had it processed in Addis Ababa. They export a lot of hides. There  was a curing place there that I could take a crocodile hide to and they did  a good job on it.  I was wondering if there would have been a reaction when you walked  into a leathery down here,    Hey, I got this croc skin       That would have  been funny to see their reaction. Did you see any other exotic animals or  have any other adventures?  Yeah, we would see the horned animals, about like a deer. I   ve forgotten  the name of them now. Frequently we would go hunting fairly close to  where we lived but we   d have to go down rough trails and early in the  morning. We   d usually get like a deer, but they   d call it something  different. We lived on deer meat and then we   d hunt guineas (the  guineas were the white meat rather than dark meat like domestic guineas  here) and partridge. When we lived out of Addis there for that eight  months, that   s about what we lived on was guinea. I never did get a shot  41  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  at one; it was way far off but it was a real dark lion one night. I guess  that was primarily what we saw. There were a lot that we didn   t see.  Did you experience any of the political culture that was going on at that  time  around Addis Ababa ?  Just a little bit before we left. There were some Russians coming in.  They were not really welcomed, is my impression from the general  population. I   m not sure just why those Russians got a foothold in there  but they   re the ones that eventually took over shortly after we left. But  that was the primary political thing that happened while we were there,  nothing more. We had pretty close contacts with the Emperor, Haile  Selassie. Haile Selassie came to the research station. On three different  occasions, I had the opportunity to host him on the station. He was  always very, very cordial. Of course, I always tried to be as cordial as I  could be to the Emperor. He was always interested in the crops and the  livestock, the poultry.  One time, we were at the livestock building, that we had built, looking at  the livestock we had imported from the US. He seemed to be real quite  pleased with what was going on. I said,    Your Majesty, we have a  poultry place here, too, if you would like to see it.       Why yes, we   d like  to see it.    I said,    It   s right over there. I   ll get my vehicle and drive over  there and you get in your car and I   ll meet you over there.       No, we will  walk over there.    So he and I started out walking across   probably less  than a quarter of a mile. It wasn   t very far. He was a very, very energetic  little fellow. He was not as tall as I am and thin, but he was just walking  right along very briskly and visiting as we were walking. So we looked  at the poultry place there and then he had some of his little grandchildren  with him. They were, of course, interested in playing and running  around there. We would show him different things each time he came.  He was always very gracious and seemed to be very pleased with what  he was seeing.  Then each Christmas, the royal family would invite the American  community to come into their home for desserts and so on. They would  have a row of tables that must have been fifty feet in length and they  would have all kinds of desserts, cookies, cakes, pies, you name it and  they had it. We had an opportunity then to visit with the royal family at  those times. Then we would walk in very cordially and bow as we went  in and when we left, we would step backwards and bow on our way out.  That was the custom. I don   t know if we had that opportunity the four  years we were there. We may have missed one year, I can   t remember.  But anyway, they were always very cordial in inviting us to the castle.  What was that castle like? What do you remember about it?  42  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  It was very clean-cut, usually large rooms. (What we saw. Now I   m sure  that in the living areas, there were probably more smaller rooms.) Most  of these rooms and corridors were huge. They would be fifty, seventy-five  feet long, maybe forty or fifty feet wide. The halls leading to those  were wide and decorated with their d  cor and very clean   just as clean  as could be. From the outside, they were stone   big, cut stone and very  elaborate; very elaborate. You had at least two palaces there that we  were in and then he had a palace on the lake right within a mile of the  research station. I had been up there once or twice. I   d just drive up there  and turn around and come back out. I was just curious as to how it  looked. Very nice palace. He would go there on weekends for rest and  just to get away.  Did the Ethiopian people revere Haile Selassie?  They did. I suppose there was a segment of them that had some  opposition to him. I never really knew what that group was, how many  there were, how much opposition they had, but I get the feeling, and this  is just what I   m feeling, that that   s probably the group that might have  enhanced the Russians to come in and take over. Most of the population  that I was aware of really admired him greatly. I think that when he fell,  it was just a few of them that arranged that.  Now let   s get back to your work assignment. Were there any parts of  your job that were difficult to complete?  Not really. We had a truck and we had a tractor   a big tractor and a  couple small tractors. We had a combine. We were pretty well equipped.  It wouldn   t be the equipment that we would buy back here but it was  equipment that was available there. At the end of the Italians being in  there, they left a lot of equipment around the country. It was put in what  they called the equipment yard. We had access to some of that. We  obtained the equipment that would be advantageous to us from there and  use it on the station. I think that tractor came from there. It was there  when I arrived. It was big (I don   t remember the brand) and it was a  huge crawler tractor. The program bought, I think, two tractors while we  were there.  Did you see any other remnants of the Italian invasion?  Oh, they put roads all over the country. We saw those roads and we  traveled on them. They were cobblestone   big, big stones that they  would take out of the mountains and put along to make a highway. They  were rough. It was a road but it was rough. They put up a lot of  buildings, too. They trained a lot of Ethiopians into trades and they  married into the Ethiopian population and there were still a lot of Italians  43  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  there in business and had enterprises of various kinds that was needed  there in Ethiopia. Now the Italians, as I recall, were not allowed to own  property. If they married an Ethiopian lady, then the lady could own  property and have a business. That was the way that many of them  operated. The Italians, even though they were in the country for a long  period of time, they did a lot of training to the Ethiopian population.  They trained them to do a lot of things, a lot of mechanical things,  building capabilities and so on.  It also sounds like you moved around a lot. Is it because your family kept  growing?  It was maybe a larger house or a more convenient house. It was not  forced or anything like that, it was just an opportunity that normally  we   d move into better surroundings.  How were you paid?  The check would go into our bank in Custer City and then we could get  checks cashed at the embassy or we could get checks cashed sort of  under the blanket by some of the retailers. There was a tire store, sold a  lot of big truck tires. I can   t remember the fellow   s name now, but he  could take our check and he would send it to Europe. Europe would then  send it to   usually, they   d give us a better rate than going to a bank or  going to the Embassy. The Embassy had to cash our checks exactly  according to the comparison of value. They couldn   t give us extra  money. These retailers, they could give us extra money.  So the Ethiopian government paid you?  No, the American   it was our program that would pay us. They would  pay us from Stillwater.  What about the mail? How long would it take for you to send a letter  back to the States and how long would it take for a letter to get back?  Maybe like a week. We had military privileges. There was a military  group there in Addis and they   d send it to the APO  Army Post Office   and we would get our mail that way. We could order things out of the  Sears catalog or other catalogs, as long as it was small.  You   re not buying a house and sending it over. (Laughs)  Yeah. But we ordered from John Plain   s, I believe, catalog, at that time.  We ordered a few times, not very many from John Plain. It   d come  APO.  44  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  How long were your contracts?  Usually two year contracts.  And you had the option to re-up?  Yeah, we   d have the option to re-up. Of course, there   d have to be a  need on their part, too. If they were going to close the program, then  they wouldn   t need us anymore. We decided to re-up and I talked to  them about,    Yeah, that   d be fine. We   d like to have you.    And then  when we left, then there was another fellow that he used to go to school  with at A M that went over and he took my place. I don   t know if  you   ve ever met Dr. Ed Smith there on campus. He went over the next  time; so as long as you did your job, you could go back if the program  was still open.  Did you have much interaction with fellow Americans over there?  Oh yeah, all of the Americans, they would have programs of various  kinds. The Embassy, the missionaries   we had very close contact with  three different missionary programs. There was a Presbyterian, what  they called the Sudan Interior Mission, which was funded by a lot of  small churches that would participate in that. Then there was an  American Baptist group there. We had contacts with all of them pretty  close. Fact is, there were times that we   d go to church three times on  Sunday because their services were at different times.  How were American holidays celebrated?  We would get the American holidays as we would if we were here and  then we would also get the Ethiopian holidays as they came up. It was  kind of interesting. We had lots of holidays. Ethiopians have a lot of  holidays and we had the option to take those holidays as well, so we had  a lot of holidays.  What were the holidays that were different between here and Ethiopia?  What kinds of celebrations?  Well, the Ethiopian holidays, there would usually be a big parade with  the Emperor at the head of it. There would be all kinds of vehicles  decorated, a lot of people walking, a lot of groups walking with flags  and d  cor. It was just really a big event and there would be a lot of  Ethiopians involved in it and it was really colorful. Now, the Americans  would, a lot of times, like for Christmas, we would get together, various  families. There weren   t very many programs that I can recall that were  sponsored by the Embassy or the American military group that was  45  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  there. They would have parties. They might have a party on that holiday  but it was nothing that was regular.  How long did it take for you to feel culturally acclimated to Ethiopia?  Oh, I don   t know, probably six months or so. We kind of worked into it.  It was sort of routine then and we felt comfortable with it. We always  had servants. A cook and a housekeeper and sometimes a gardener and  then a night watchman; those people we were pretty close with. One of  the ladies would help take care of the kids quite a bit, although Jean took  most of the care for the children. She was dependable enough where we  could leave the kids with her and go to a party or go to an occasion or go  shopping or whatever.  What was the thing that caused the most culture shock for Americans, in  your opinion?  Oh well, it was probably the fact that you couldn   t go down to a Sears  Roebuck or a JC Penney or Macy   s store and shop; the limitation of  shopping privileges.  What did you find that you missed the most about the United States?  Well I missed family more than anything else. But some of the  Americans that were there, we associated with enough that you know, to  a limited amount, you kind of felt like they were family. But the lack of  being able to go to Grandma and Granddad   s house or Uncle and Aunt   s  house, that was probably the thing that we missed the most.  Did you travel anywhere else in that region, outside of Ethiopia and  Africa at all?  Within Ethiopia, we did ride the train over to Dire Dawa one time and  stayed with the group   that was when the college was built near Dire  Dawa, south there. We went over and stayed with a couple of families  two or three nights over there, took all the little ones with us. We rode  the train over, as I recall. We may have flown, I can   t remember. It did  have a train. It was a fairly slow train, a small train. It had two or three  cars on it and it was an interesting ride to do that.  Did you bring back any mementos of your experience?  Oh yeah, we brought back a lot of lumber, for this table. I made the sea  freight crates out of native lumber. That table was made from some of  those sea freight crates that I dismantled when we got home. We had  that built in Ethiopia and these chairs   two there and one here. We had  46  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  eight chairs but they were not all that substantial and we had broken  some of them but we sold them at a garage sale. I wish ever since that I  kept them because I could have refurbished them. We brought back a  table that   s in there where the ladies are sitting. Our bedroom furniture,  we brought back three sets of bedroom furniture made from that wood,  just like that. One of them is made out of a kind of a cherry looking  wood and the other one is a lighter colored wood. We still have some of  those. We have, of course, the master bedroom but some of the kids as  they moved on, they took some of their furniture. That was the biggest  amount of mementos that we brought. See that little stool sitting right  there? We brought back one of those for about all of our siblings and a  lot of people. That   s a small version of it but in fact, there   s one right  behind you there by the door. And we have another one outside there.  We only have three of those left. But yeah, we brought back quite a bit  of things like that.  Any artwork or anything like that?  No, just furniture primarily.  Did you take photographs or did you document your experience?  We   ve got a lot of slides. I want to put them on a disc sometime but I  just haven   t taken time to sit down and sort them out and have that done.  I want to do that sometime. We have hundreds of slides.  Do you still keep in contact with any people that you shared your  experience with?  We   ve maintained some contact with some of the missionaries but one  of those has passed on   well, two of them have passed on. I talked to  the widow of one of them three or four months ago and she   s kind of in  bad health. So we   re about to lose our contacts with the missionaries.  With the people that were in our group over there, a good many of them  have passed on. There   s one fellow in Stillwater, Conrad Evans. Then  there are a few others, but the group has really dwindled down.  That   s the thing we   ve run into as we try to collect people   s stories about  their experience over there. But Conrad Evans     As far as I know, he still lives north of the high school there. He   d be a  good one to interview if you   re interested in     Oh yes, definitely.  He spent a lot more time there than we did. We spent four years and I  47  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  think he spent ten or twelve years over there.  What impact on your life did this experience have?  Well, it kind of gives you a feeling of how some other people live or  have to live. It   s interesting and it   s really, in some cases, sad that some  people are living at the level that they are. Hundreds and thousands of  people over there don   t have access to medical services and that   s bad.  It   s sad. As far as the people are concerned, they   re great people. I really  admired the people. The servants we had, we trusted them totally. The  students we had, they were really brilliant. They went on and came to  the US and did work on their additional degrees. It was a good  experience to have that opportunity to visit with people and work with  them and become friends with them.  Did the program live up to Henry Bennett   s legacy?  I would say to some extent, yes. There were some things that perhaps  was not   and I guess I don   t know if I was ever aware of all of his  visions, but I think all of his visions that were capable of being solved, I  think they were solved. Henry Bennett had a lot of vision for that  program. I remember seeing Henry Bennett on a few occasions and he  was just as sincere about that as anything he   d ever done.  Were you at OSU when Dr. Bennett passed on?  Yeah, he was killed in that plane wreck and I was  at OSU . I think it  was my first year there. We went to the service over in     Gallagher Hall?  Yeah. I remember Bob Kerr did the eulogy, part of it. I remember that.  What was the campus mood when that happened?  Well, of course not a lot of people were associated and knew what was  going on over there but those of us that had a care for that kind of care, it  was a sad situation. Dr. Bennett had been such a support of OSU and  everybody just really loved him as a dad, you might say. It was pretty  solemn.  How would you think people should remember Dr. Billy Webb? How  would you want to be remembered?  Well, I   d like to be remembered by people as being helpful and someone  who was serious about what he was doing and serious about what he  48  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  Webb  Sherman  could do for others. Hopefully I lived up to some of that, but you can  always do more.  Is there anything else that you would like to add?  I   d like to say this, that my associations with Oklahoma State University,  the Oklahoma A M University, to me have been extremely great and  that   s been a very gracious opportunity that I   ve had to be associated  with the university and to work with people like I   ve worked with in  Ethiopia and at the university. I don   t know of anyone that I wouldn   t  shake hands with as they came in that door, that I   ve worked with or  have known. There   s been some people that I   ve been concerned about  and probably had a little bit less respect for, but still, if they came in that  door now I   d be glad to shake hands with them and greet them, because  you can   t get crossways with people and shut them out. You should not  do that.  Some of the best people that I   ve ever worked with are Dr. Tucker and  Dr. Westwood. Those two people have been really a joy and very  supportive of me. They have great families and Dr. Westwood   s still  serving. I asked him some time back if he was going to retire and he said  well, he   d retire when they put him in his box and hauled him off to a  hole. (Laughs) He   s a great guy. I   ve really appreciated everyone,  especially those two. Dr. Pat Murphy and different ones that I   ve worked  with all these times   I could name a hundred people that have been  extremely gracious to me and helpful.  Well, sir, I thank you for the time that you   ve given us, both times. We  truly appreciate  the chance to  capture your story. Thank you, and I  wish you the best of luck.  Thanks to you and I   ve enjoyed it.  Thank you.  ------- End of January 8, 2010 interview -------   
