 Sherman. Today is September 11, 2009. I   m here on  the campus of Oklahoma State University interviewing Dr. Robert  Westerman. This interview is part of the O-STATE Stories project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Today we   re discussing the  Magruder Research Plots and Dr. Westerman   s career. Thank you for  being here, Dr. Westerman.  Thank you.  First off, can you describe for me a little of your family background,  where you grew up?  I   m a native of the state of Oklahoma. I grew up in southwest Oklahoma  on a cotton/wheat farm. I graduated from Snyder High School in Kiowa  County. Then I went to Cameron University for a couple of years. Then  came up here to Oklahoma State and received a BS and MS degree. I  have a B.S. degree in agriculture education and a M.S. degree in  agronomy soils.  At that particular point in time, I went into the military as an officer after  having gone through ROTC here and served most of my career, three  years in the military, as a platoon leader of a helicopter unit. After being  discharged from the army, I entered the University of Illinois and  studied soil fertility, soil chemistry. Received my Ph.D. degree in 1969.  Went to the University of Arizona as an assistant professor of soil  fertility/soil chemistry. After seven years, I was fortunate enough to be  able to return here to Oklahoma State University. I   ve been employed  here at Oklahoma State University since 1976. I came here as an  Associate Professor, advanced to Professor, Regents Professor,  Department Head, Assistant Director to the Agriculture Experiment  Station, Interim Associate Director of the Agriculture Experiment  Station, and now currently serve as the Assistant Vice President for  5  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Agriculture Programs for the Division of Agriculture Sciences and  Natural Resources.  That   s quite a career. When did you attend school here as an  undergraduate?  I transferred from Cameron University. As an undergraduate I was here  from the fall of 1958 and received my B.S. degree in January of 1961  and immediately entered into graduate college and received my master   s  degree then in 1963.  Wow. Can we discuss possibly your undergraduate experience, too,  since this is part of the O-STATE Stories?  Sure.  Where did you stay on campus? Where did you live?  I originally was living with some friends in a campus apartment (which  is still here by the way). About the corner of Knoblock, across the street  from Chris   s  University Spirit  store now, off of Knoblock.  So like on Third  Street  there?  Yes, it is Third.  And what was that living situation like?  It was good. There were four of us roommates. It was close to campus  and we had a lady that owned that particular complex who also served  meals and then we fixed a few meals ourselves.  And did you live there all four years?  No. I married my wife, Sharon, who happens to be from southwest  Oklahoma also. Then after we got married, we moved to a little small  duplex on Husband Street and then eventually moved into college  housing in some of the apartments here on campus.  How did you meet your wife? Did you meet her on campus?  No. We were raised almost together, about three miles apart, down in  rural Oklahoma, southwest Oklahoma. So we had known each other  practically all our lives.  And did she follow you up to school?  6  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Yes.  So what was her major?  Well, she just had an interest in general education. She was not able to  finish her degree. But she was very supportive in helping me get through  the program.  What were your first impressions of Oklahoma State University?  Well, actually I thought it was a very large school. Much larger than I  had ever been accustomed to because I came out of a small rural school.  So it was quite an experience to be among about 10,000 students, at the  time. As a matter of fact, when we were here the student population  increased to 10,000 and also the population in Stillwater increased to  10,000 at that particular time.  Was that kind of a scary situation?  Oh, not particularly scary I guess. It was just something that certainly we  were not accustomed to.  Were you involved with campus activities?  Yes, I was involved in a lot of undergraduate student clubs such as the  Agronomy Club, the ROTC   I can   t remember  if  it   s Scabbard  and  Blade , and maybe one or two other organizations. Alpha Zeta for one,  Block and Bridle. So some student organizations.  Now did you have any favorite spots on campus?  Well, in what regard?  Did you have any favorite hangouts? Or do you have any favorite  memories of any locations on campus?  Well, really the agronomy department per se. There were a group of us, I  guess, that were students that worked together with other professors on  projects. That was a good time, a good learning experience for us and it  really probably helped map the career that I chose.  Now do you have any campus memories that you   re particularly fond  of? Or any traditions that you can recall?  The organizations, I guess, particularly  the  Agronomy Club, was a  good leadership experience. I enjoyed that very much.  7  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  What was the transition like from being an undergraduate to graduate  school? Was there a transition?  Yes, there was quite a transition. You know one of the things that really  became apparent very quickly was that the courses at the graduate level  were moving at a much faster pace than what they had at the  undergraduate level. I had been accustomed to taking eighteen hours of  course work, that sort of thing. And with a graduate research  assistantship, we were taking ten hours and kind of under the false  assumption that ten hours is not very much of an academic load but  pretty quickly, due to the speed and intensity of the courses, you realize  that there   s a lot of material coming at you pretty fast.  Did you enjoy this course work?  Yes I did, as a matter of fact, I really enjoyed it. I enjoyed the research  that went along with it as far as the thesis was concerned, so it was a  good experience.  So what sparked your interest in agronomy?  Well, first of all, as I mentioned before, I came from a farm. Then the  first job that I had on campus was sweeping the music building. Then I  took a course here in the agronomy department and I was fortunate to  have made hundreds on all the exams all the way through the course. So  I didn   t miss a single point on the course and the individual that was  teaching that course actually asked me to come to work for him as an  undergraduate student. Then eventually he was my major advisor for my  master   s degree in soils.  What was his name?  His name was Dr. Billy Tucker.  Why was he such a big influence on you?  Well, first of all, he taught me a lot of things in regard to basic soil  science and agronomy and he was also a very good influence on us in  terms of leadership and how to work along with people and get things  done.  Do you remember any other professors that had influences on you?  Here? Dr. Lester Reed was the professor of soil chemistry and certainly I  enjoyed his courses and I also enjoyed the opportunity to visit with him  as a student, which he did rather freely. We had a lot of out-of-class  8  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  discussions on a lot of different things. I thought that was a valuable  experience.  What type of learner are you? Are you a book learner or more hands-on?  Well, I think I   m probably more of a hands-on type learner. That has  helped a lot, I think. And where it   s been beneficial, I think, while I  could master things from the book learning, et cetera, the hands-on thing  seemed to remember those experiences more than just reading a chapter  in a book.  What was your master   s thesis? What area did you focus on with that?  It was primarily in soil fertility and soil chemistry and it had to do with  the adsorption of phosphorus in soils and looking primarily at the effect  of phosphorus fertilization on wheat yield and also the resultant effect on  water soluble phosphorus in what we call soil solution. That   s the liquid  portion of that bathes the plant roots for nutrition.  Where did you conduct your research?  My research was conducted on our agronomy farm at Perkins which is  about ten miles south of here.  Now is that still around?  Yes it is. It   s on Highway 177 south of town about ten miles.  Did you have a car at that time, or how did you get out there?  To answer your question, yes we did have a car. Dr. Tucker, for  example, had a pickup for his project and that was what we used to go  back and forth to do experiments. But we had experiments all over the  state of Oklahoma. So we would travel and do the necessary things to  establish those, harvest them, maintain them.  Now were they called research stations at that time?  Well, we had a number of research stations, that   s correct. But we also  did a lot of work on farmer or cooperative fields where we   d get  permission from the farmer. If we identified a particular nutrient  deficiency for a crop we would do an experiment on that particular farm.  Most often those would have been on farmer fields.  Did you like doing those?  9  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Yes, very much so.  Why is that?  Well, it   s an opportunity to get acquainted with rural people and they are  the nicest people in the world to work with. It also was gratifying to  determine what some effects were that could benefit that particular  grower and producer to help him increase his yield and profitability.  Now do you remember what kind of experiments that you helped with  these farmers?  Yes.  For a layman, what would you tell them?  What we would do in many cases would be to evaluate different sources  of fertilizer materials, some of which were different sources of nitrogen,  different sources of phosphorous and then we did a lot of work with  micronutrients out in the very western tier of the state.  Can you explain some of the differences of the soil types between the  western part of the state and the central part of the state were, like here  in Stillwater?  Yeah, right. You know Oklahoma is a very, very diversified state. Rain  fall in the eastern part and southeastern part of the state could be fifty-five  inches of rainfall. In the Panhandle out at Goodwell, Cimarron  County could be twelve to fourteen inches. And the elevation ranges  from say like 550 feet in the southeast, to over 4,000 feet in the  northwest corner of the state. So as a consequence, you have a wide  variety of outcrops of soils and geologic formations which they form  from. There are ten universal orders of soils that we order those soils  into across the country and nine of those orders are present in Oklahoma.  So we had the opportunity to work in a lot of different soils, lot of  different environments. Oklahoma is just a wonderful environment to  work in soil science because you   ve got so many different soils to work  with and different problems.  Now at that time, in western Oklahoma did you see some of the results of  the soil conservation programs?  Yes.  Can you describe what those results were or what they were doing at  that time?  10  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Well, one of the things that we were doing at that particular time, we had  a program where we were trying to promote what we call stubble  mulching. Stubble mulching is a management practice where you leave a  large amount of residue on top of the soil to prevent wind and water  erosion, which is a major problem in western Oklahoma particularly. So  we had a number of educational programs and experiences trying to  show farmers the benefits of stubble mulching and also determining if  there were different fertilizer requirements for this management system  compared to the conventional clean till system.  What would the stubble mulch consist of?  Primarily when we harvest the grain for wheat, for example, the tillage  that would be used would be an implement that would have big wide  sweeps that moved to a depth of about four inches in the soil and  keeping the residue on top. It would simply cut it off, lift it up and come  back down on top of the soil. So you had a lot of residue there to protect  the soil from wind erosion and water erosion.  So basically like the stalk of the plant?  Yes, it would be from the crown of the plant. As you know, wheat has  multiple tillers on it. So the combine might leave as much as eight to ten  inches of straw on it and that would be the residue that we   re talking  about that   s on top of the soil surface.  Now you come along in the early    60s. Were the results seen then? Was  it working at that time?  Yes, it was working. At that particular time, one of the problems that we  encountered is that it was more difficult in this management system to  control some undesirable weeds. We didn   t have the chemical arsenal  then that we have now, so that made it a little bit difficult to promote  that practice. But we did have a large number of people that adopted that  practice.  What kind of weeds were the problem? Were they an invasive species?  There could have been a variety of weeds. There could have been some  Bromus species which are commonly referred to as cheatgrass. We had  some mustards, out of the mustard family, that are broad leaves. So there  were a host of different weed pests, I guess, that were sometimes  difficult to control.  And this was pre pesticide era?  11  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Yeah. It was prior to many of the chemicals that we have. At that  particular time they were just beginning to develop agriculture chemicals  for wheat control.  Did you do any experimentation around the pesticides?  Well, our particular area of expertise was in the area of evaluating plant  food nutrients and sources of plant food nutrients. We had other  scientists who were in the department, at that time, who were working to  evaluate chemicals for wheat control. So what we would do is try to use  the best chemical that had been shown to be effective from their  research.  Did you work with chemical nutrients as well?  Yes, anhydrous ammonia for example. Ammonia nitrate, mono-calcium  phosphate, potassium chloride, diammonium phosphate. So most of our  work was with what we call chemical fertilizers.  How did you apply those chemical fertilizers?  In varying ways. Some of them could have been broadcast on top, disc  in. Some of them were placed in the row by the seed. We had some that  were full year applied. So we were looking at all of the methods of  applications as well as sources of materials.  Where would these sources come from?  Well, at one time in Oklahoma, we had approximately, I believe, seven  different anhydrous ammonia plants where anhydrous ammonia was  being made. Anhydrous ammonia needs a hydrogen donor to make it.  And so, the hydrogen donor here in Oklahoma, of course, is natural gas.  We have a large amount of natural gas. After anhydrous ammonia they  would make another product called urea or they could make a product  called ammonium nitrate. And so we did have a fairly large industry in  the state for the production of nitrogen fertilizers. The phosphorus is a  mined product. It primarily came from deposits in Florida. There   s a bit  in the northern part of the United States, but most of it was from the  Florida deposits. Potassium, again, is a mined product. And we had  some potassium mines in different areas of the state. Not in the state, but  in New Mexico and in other areas of the United States where that was a  valuable source.  Now you did your Ph.D. at the University of Illinois. Did you continue  your focus that you started here at Oklahoma State? Or did you work on  something different?  12  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Well, it was a different focus and probably a much more basic and  detailed approach to trying to help understand nutrient availability to  plants. In my research at the University of Illinois, I used stable isotopes,  N-15 particularly, to tag nitrogen fertilizer materials and then I  monitored the transformation of that material in soils and uptake in the  plant and where it got concentrated in the plant. Then the total amount of  the fertilizer applied actually got into the plant. So it was a detailed  study. It involved a good bit of chemistry, particularly an analysis of the  isotopes.  Did you work in the lab or did you work on   .  It was a combination thing. I put the experiments out in the field but  once we got the material harvested, the soil samples taken, whatever,  that became a number of analytical procedures to isolate varying  compounds that we were looking at and then finally utilizing mass  spectrometer to analyze N-15 content of the particular material that we  were looking at.  Was this field on the South Farms or   ?  It was on the South Farms, as a matter of fact, at the University of  Illinois.  Did you work with Morrill Plots at all?  I did not have the privilege of working on the Morrill Plots. Of course,  the Morrill Plots was located very close to the library as you know so I  certainly was aware of what was going on and the purpose of the Morrill  Plots and that sort of thing, but I did not physically work on the Morrill  Plots.  Were you there when the undergraduate library was being built?  Yes.  Can you share some of that, your experiences with that?  Well, the Morrill Plots, first of all for those people that don   t know, are  the oldest continuous corn experiments in the world. And it so happened  it was there on the main part of the campus of the University of Illinois  and they wanted to expand the library and, of course, the growth of  plants is affected by shade and so basically it caused them, in their  library expansion, to put the expansion library underground so it did not  affect the Morrill Plots.  13  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  How long were you at the University of Illinois?  Three years.  What kind of plants did you work on? Did you work on corn or did you  work on soy beans?  The particular plant that I worked on was a forage sorghum. It   s a plant  that produces a lot of biomass and is used primarily for feed for animals.  Beef feed?  Yes.  Now after coming out of the University of Illinois, you took a  professorship at University of Arizona.  That is correct.  Since Arizona is not known for it   s agriculture because it   s desert, can  you share your experiences about working at the University of Arizona  in soil sciences?  Right, you are correct there   s only about a million acres of irrigated land  in Arizona. But it   s very intense agriculture, so we had some work there  where irrigation was available. Then we also did some work on what  nitrogen transformations in soils on what we call the desert biome. We  monitored a lot of the different nitrogen transformation of soils under  semi-arid conditions. Then I did quite a lot of work in the laboratory  where we did things under controlled conditions where we   re monitoring  and determining nitrification rates and movement of nitrogen through  soils and the transformation process.  When did you come to Oklahoma State? When did you return to  Oklahoma State?  I came here in 1976.  How did you come to hear about this position?  As a matter of fact I was invited back. There was a position that came  open here at Oklahoma State that was to assume a leadership role for  soil fertility, soil chemistry, which I was very much interested in so  when I came here as an associate professor I assumed that leadership  role and became the lead person in this group. My appointment was  primarily research and I did teach graduate level courses.  14  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Now how did you become involved with the Magruder Plots?  When I came here as a lead person in soil fertility, I assumed the  responsibility for managing those plots. My former advisor, Dr. Billy  Tucker, was still here on the faculty at that particular time. He had  managed those plots a number of years prior to my coming.  Now we   ll get into the questions pertaining to the Magruder Research  Plots. First off, can you define agronomy for me, or for the listeners?  Oh yes, agronomy is the study of plants and soils basically, in very  simple terms.  So would it be similar to soil sciences or is there a technical difference?  Well, first agronomy is crops and soils. You could specialize in one or  the other or sometimes a combination of both. So you can get as detailed  within each of those disciplines as you want to get.  Now the Magruder Plots, they are part of the agriculture experiment  stations, right?  That is correct.  Currently, how many agriculture experiment stations are there across  the state?  We have nineteen different locations today. And they are scattered all  over the state and they represent key soils in the state and selected  environment conditions for production.  Can you describe for me the range   like you talked about the  experiment station out in the western part of the state. Do we have  experiment stations in the southeastern part of the state?  Yes, we do. As a matter of fact, our furthest west experiment station is  located in the Panhandle in Goodwell, Oklahoma. Our furthest  southeastern station is located in Idabel. So we have a transit across the  state from southeast to northwest. We have stations in the southwest.  And we have stations in the northeast. So we cover pretty much the key  soils in the state for where ag production is important.  Is there a focus like in the southeast pertaining to cotton at all?  Well, not today.  15  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Not today?  Primarily in the southeast it   s forestry. We have recently acquired some  land that was donated to us by Mr. Mac Lindley. It   s about 2,000 acres  of land and that consists of forages, forage production, has some timber  on it, has some pecans on it, and we   re currently developing that which  will get us a little broader scope of research in the southeast than what  we had before.  Now was there a cotton research?  At one time, cotton was grown predominately across the state of  Oklahoma. And it is, through time and a lot of factors involved, where  that cotton is not being produced in southeast Oklahoma these days. Our  cotton production now is confined and concentrated mostly in the  southwestern part of the state.  The research stations also deal with soybeans and alfalfa, correct?  Yes, we do. Right. We have basically all of the major crops that are  grown in the state of Oklahoma. There would be experiments at those  experiment stations on those crops. They are important to the farmers  and ranchers in that area.  Now how do the agriculture experiment stations work within the  university structure?  Well, this is a good point. First of all I   ll start by saying we have three  agencies within the Division of Agriculture Sciences and Natural  Resources. First we have the College of Agriculture Sciences and  Natural Resources which is budgeted under the Oklahoma State  University budget line. Then we have the Oklahoma Agriculture  Experiment Station which is a separate line item in our budget. Then we  have the Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service which is also a  separate line item. So we have a line item in the higher education budget  just like Oklahoma State University does. What makes us different, and I  think more powerful, is that we have about fifty-eight to sixty FTE   s   full-time employees  in teaching in the College of Agriculture. When  we add the Ag. Experiment Station and the Cooperative Extension  Service to that we have a total of slightly more than 200 so we   ve  increased our numbers by about 150. Now our faculty, the majority of  them have split appointments. So we might have a faculty member that  has a 75  research appointment and 25  teaching appointment. So that  means that he has all of this valuable experience that he   s getting from  research and the students are getting first hand information in his classes  that he teaches.  16  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Can you explain how the experiment station works within the extension  services too?  The experiment station and the cooperative extension service work hand  in hand. The experiment station is the research arm of the ag division  and university. In the experiment station we are discovering new  knowledge, new practices, and new technology. The extension service  has a responsibility to disseminate that information to the producers and  farmers and ranchers in the state. They would be taking the information  that   s developed on our experiment stations and conducting educational  programs to help our farmers understand how best to implement some of  these practices.  So basically the experiment stations have two big outlets of  dissemination? One being in the classroom and one being through the  extension services?  Well now the extension service is a separate entity. But they take the  information from the ag experiment station. The classroom part and,  you   re correct as long as you understand that cooperative extension  service is an independent line item in the budget and they have their own  set of employees. The agriculture experiment station has its own set of  employees and the college has their set. Then, we have what we call a  mixed set. They can be appointments in extension and research.  Appointments in research and teaching, appointments in extension and  teaching. So we have all combinations and mixes of appointments.  Thanks for the clarification. How does the experiment station fulfill the  university   s land grant mission?  Well, first of all, if you go back and look at the history, the formation of  the university here as a land grant university, in 1862 the Morrill Act  was passed and said every state and/or territory should have a land-grant  university to allow anyone to go and get an education in agriculture  and/or in mechanical arts. So that   s a land-grant university. That was  initiated in 1862. Of course at that particular time Oklahoma was Indian  Territory, but we still fell under that act. Now in about 1887, I believe,  the Hatch Act was passed and that provided funding for the agriculture  experiment station. Then, it wasn   t until about 1913 or so that the Smith  Lever Act was passed and then that was the formation of the extension  service.  Now the first extension service was where? Was that Connecticut?  The first experiment station was in Connecticut.  17  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Wesleyan University?  Well the Morrill Act, of course, set the stage for each university. Every  state has an experiment station.  Now what can you tell me particularly about the history of the Magruder  Plots? What is your knowledge of it? Can you give a snapshot of its  history?  From the beginning? Magruder Plots were established in about 1892 by  Professor A.C. Magruder who was the first professor of agriculture that  was hired by Oklahoma A M College at that time. He established the  experiments as a very simple experiment that consisted of two plots, one  being un-manured and one being manured to determine the strength of  the soil to provide nutrients for crop growth, primarily wheat. These  plots were located just near Murray Hall and Stout Hall and as the  campus began to expand in the 1940s there was danger in losing the  plots. These plots were further modified, others to include different  treatments of synthetic fertilizers, nitrogen phosphorus, potassium, lime,  as well as manure. When it became apparent that the campus was going  to destroy the plots with expansion, there was quite a considerable  amount of discussion and effort to preserve those plots.  In about 1942, it became apparent that one of the dormitories was going  to destroy the plots, so they made arrangements to move the plots. They  took the top soil out of each of those plots and kept it separate to zero to  six inch depth. And then they did the same thing with the six to fifteen  inch depths because that is where the majority of the plant roots reside in  crops. They went to the present location (which was about a mile west  and on our current agronomy farm) and excavated that area and placed  that soil back in those varying plots. In a very short time they began to  respond in a very similar fashion that they did in their former location.  So those have been in place now since about 1942 out at the agronomy  farm here.  When I first came on board here, in 1976 there had been discussion and  eyes cast on the agronomy farm to establish an athletic facility and so we  became very nervous about that. Dr. Billy Tucker, myself and another  individual, Dr. Webb, worked very hard for about three years and we  were able to get the plots into the National Historic Register and to  preserve those plots, so that   s where they reside now. And fortunately  for us, the athletic facility renovation remained in its present location.  How big are the plots? What are the dimensions?  The plots are about a hundred and ten feet in length, and they are  18  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  twenty-one and a half feet wide. The actual portion of the plot is about  seventeen feet, so that gives you a border in between, a few feet between  the plots. There are six plots. There   s our check plot that has not  received any fertilizer or nutrients of any sort ever since 1892. That   s  been in continuous wheat. So these plots have been grown in continuous  wheat. There   s a manure plot. It gets animal manure. There   s a plot that  gets nitrogen fertilizer. A plot that gets nitrogen plus phosphorus. And  then nitrogen plus phosphorus plus potassium, then nitrogen plus  phosphorus plus potassium plus lime. So those are the plots that are  there.  How much acreage does it take up? The plots themselves?  Well, let   s see. The plots are 110 feet long and we have six plots that are  approximately 20 feet each. That   s 2200 square feet per plot, so that  would give us approximately   let   s see that   s 110 and 120. We were  probably thinking about a third of an acre I think. If you give me a  minute here I   ll tell you exactly.  Not a math person myself.  It   s about 1/3 of an acre. There   s 43,560 square feet in an acre, but that   s  about what it is.  Do you think that the move affected the legitimacy of the experiment?  Well, we were very fortunate to have a scientist  Dr. Horace J. Harper   at that particular time that was managing the plots. He took deep soil  cores out of each plot in certain locations and analyzed the soils prior to  moving them. And he determined that there wasn   t any change, the  treatment did not have any change below fifteen inches no matter what  the treatment was here on campus. So he went out to the present location  at the agronomy farm and cored those same soils and determined that the  sub soils below fifteen inches were very similar. So when he placed  them back in on top of that same sub soil then once those soils settled  they were back into the same form that they currently had. I will say  this, that the significance of the Magruder Plots is that they are the oldest  continuous wheat plots in the Great Plains and the second oldest in  continuous wheat west of the Mississippi. The Sanborn Plots in Missouri  are about four years older than our plots are.  What I always hear is that these plots are considered the second oldest  research plot. If Missouri is older, why are we considered the second  oldest research plot?  Well, the Sanborn Plots in Missouri were established in about1888.  19  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Magruder Plots were established in 1892 so those guys are about four  years older than we are.  Okay, I was just thinking in terms of relation with the Morrill Plots.  Well, now the Morrill Plots, remember, are corn. They are the oldest  corn plots. So we   re talking about continuous wheat, where they   ve  grown wheat on soils year after year after year.  Oh okay, now that makes sense. In terms of research plots, where do we  rank as being the oldest all together? Do you have any idea?  We   re probably about number three.  Behind Morrill     Morrill Plots first, Sanborn Plots and then the Magruder Plots.  I   d like to get into discussing how you became part of the National  Historic Registry, its importance, and the controversy dealing with the  proposed athletic fields. So set the stage for us. What was the plan of the  athletic department and what did they want to do?  Well basically, the plan (although it was never formally presented to us)  we became aware of the interest of establishing a new athletic facility  and, of course, if you   re coming into Stillwater  on  Highway 51, a large  open research station to the left is an ideal location for a facility like that.  We did not want to lose the Magruder Plots to an expansion of the  athletic facility. So we began to be proactive in our approach and  worked to get those plots listed in a National Registry of Historic Places  in hopes that we could give them a permanent home.  Describe that process for being listed on the National Historic Registry.  Well, there are particular set of forms and questions and that sort of  thing that you have to document and submit and then they have a group  or committee that rules, makes a judgment call, as to whether this should  be a historic location or not. We were able to put the documentation  together that was appropriate for them to grant permission to put it on  the Registry of National Historic Places. We recently have an addition to  that. One of the barns that we have out here on the agronomy farm, what  we call,    Barn A,    it represents the architectural structure for that period  of time, so we have that listed also.  Now did you help certify that as a historic place?  20  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Well, at that particular time I was in administration here. I knew it was  going on, but there were other folks that were working to get that done.  Did you have to appear before a committee in person? Or did you  submit the paper?  No, this was primarily a submission of an application form with the  documentation. So we did not actually appear before a committee.  Who have been some of the major researchers, professors working  within the plots? Who have you worked with basically, that   s what I   m  trying to ask.  Here?  Yes, on the plots themselves.  Of course, Dr. Billy Tucker who I   ve mentioned before. Then the  current manager of the Magruder Plots is Dr. Bill Raun who I served as  major advisor for his master   s degree here. So those two individuals  primarily are the two major individuals that I   ve worked with on those  plots.  So you   re the link between the two?  I am, yes.  So it literally comes full circle.  It does. I think that I managed those plots from 1977-1991.  And the current person took over in    91?  He took over in    92 to present time.  And Dr. Tucker was here     Dr. Tucker was here and he managed those plots as a major researcher  from 1957-1976. So the three of us have managed these plots for fifty-two  years.  Does that continuation help preserve these     Yes it does, as a matter of fact. Some of the early folks that had  responsibility for managing the plots may have only been there for two  to five years. Dr. Raun and myself, particularly, were able to utilize a  21  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  new statistical approach to analyze the data for over a hundred years.  There   s merit involved by having folks manage the plots continuously  over a longer period of time.  It also helps maintain the institutional memory.  That is correct.  Do students assist you over there?  Yes, as a matter of fact, students would be involved in planting and  harvesting and taking soil samples and any other measurements that we  might take. And also involved in the analyses of the samples that are  taken.  Graduate students or undergrads?  Both. One of our natural entries into our graduate program is that we  attract quality students at the undergraduate level. They work in our  programs and then if their interest is in pursuing a master   s degree, then  we can move them into graduate level work and they are familiar with a  lot of the things we do and how we do things.  So have there been a lot of thesis and dissertations come from them?  Well, I personally was major advisor to over fifty-five students in my  career here as a research scientist. I moved into administration in about  1991. That   s when I gave up the leadership role for the Magruder Plots.  Dr. Raun has probably served as major advisor of even more students. I  don   t know what his total number is but it   s significant.  Explain for us how the wheat is actually tested on and experimented on?  Over the years wheat varieties have changed on the plots. Generally  speaking we keep varieties on the plots for a number of years so we  don   t get into what we call nutrient variety interactions. So you have to  have a consistent period of time to evaluate your nutrient treatment.  Now as a result of that we   re doing two things. We   re taking probably  the most popular and preferred wheat variety of the time when we  change them. And then we establish them and we grow out the wheat for  a number of years. Then after we get enough data to evaluate this  process then we   ll change varieties. So we don   t actually evaluate every  wheat variety but we do have a number of different wheat varieties that  have been planted on our plots.  You   re trying to avoid nutrient deficiencies by that?  22  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Well first of all, there   s a lot of genetic diversity in the plants and as our  plant breeders develop new varieties, they may have different nutrient  requirements. In order to gain the information that   s necessary for the  real mission of the plots, which is determining whether or not and how  long these soils can sustain production, then we have to have some  consistencies in our varieties or we won   t know whether it   s a variety  change or a change in the nutrient status.  Can you explain these differences in wheat varieties? Are they just  different seedlings?  They can be a number of different things. Some of the first wheats that  were grown are what we call turkey red and those were wheats that were  brought here by Mennonites in Kansas and they migrated here to  Oklahoma. That was the first wheat we had. Very tall, small head, but  through plant breeding we   ve been able to increase the size and number  of kernels in the head, increase yields, reduce the length of straw, so it   s  generally an improvement. Also, the other thing is that through plant  breeding we   ve been able to incorporate valuable traits that might  consist of disease resistance, green bug resistance, soil born disease  resistance. So you keep packaging these varieties with these different  protection devices and you keep increasing yield. But these protection  devices may fail. In other words plants builds up resistance to that and  then the wheat variety is not as effective as it was so you have to come  back another generation. The strains change of the diseases.  Are any of the current wheat varieties genetically altered?  No, not on the Magruder Plots. There   s quite a controversy on  genetically altered plants, particularly wheat, and those crops that are  used for food, cereal, grains. So we do not have genetically altered  wheat plants at this time.  Now what are the uses for this wheat that is grown at the Magruder  Plots?  Those varieties represent wheat that would be used for milling and  baking. Hard Red Winter Wheat is the type that we have and we grow in  Oklahoma the majority of it. It is the preferred wheat for protein content  and milling and baking quality.  Do you have corporations assist you with funding for this type of  research?  Yes, we do. We   re very fortunate in Oklahoma to have what we call a  fertilizer check-off program whereby a certain fee per ton of fertilizer  23  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  sold is devoted for soil fertility research. That program, along with  competitive grants that our scientists have been able to garner, supports  the program. Supports the graduate student assistantships to get the work  done and provides maintenance and operation monies. In about 1989,  after a number of years of work, we were able to get a law passed in the  state of Oklahoma that set up the fertilizer check-off program for  research in this area.  Is that program just for wheat or is it for other   .  No, it   s for crops that are grown in the state of Oklahoma, so it could be  any crop.  What kind of knowledge have farmers gained from the research at the  Magruder Plots?  Well, the Magruder Plots have been something like   to put it in  perspective I guess, it   s something like a barometer. First of all, if we  have a favorable growing season, you might be able to produce fifteen to  twenty bushels of wheat and they   ve never been fertilized. Under  fertilization that might be forty-five to fifty bushels. And so what that  has done has been a very good teaching tool to our farmers and  producers in the state. The other thing that is very important about that is  that it has measured the decline of soil organic matter with continued  tillage. These soils were in grasses prior to the site being broken out for  cultivation and  had  the inorganic matter content of near 4 . After 100  years of tillage the organic matter content is 1  or less now. So there   s a  tremendous amount of nutrients that are stored in the organic matter. It  has now gotten to the point in the continuous wheat plot without  fertilization that it is depleted.  So can you take that organic matter and actually take it and look at the  history of the grasses here? Or is that even viable research to look at the  content?  Well we can   t really determine if those soils that the plots are in were all  quote,    as uniform    as they could be. They all had the same kind of  grasses growing on top of them so we can   t make any differentiation.  But what we can do is we can look at the microbial populations in the  soils, and there have been some studies that we have conducted on those  plots, to help us understand changes in populations of microorganisms   and their  different functions.  Okay, I was just curious about that. What have you personally learned  from the research being conducted at the Magruder Plots?  24  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Well it   s a kind of a continuing story, I guess. When the Magruder Plots  were first established, the nitrogen in the soils of continuous wheat  depleted first. Then it was the phosphorus that depleted secondly. Then  it was the potassium. I happened to be managing the plots when the first  effects of these plots to potassium fertilizer were detected. So that   s a  barometer of the such soils as a Kirkland Silt Loam. But that   s a  barometer of the nutrient status of those plots. So it   s been a continuing  thing. One nutrient, one nutrient, one nutrient, in a line. So it depends on  what period of time you   re really managing those plots. I know when  Dr. Harper was managing the plots in say 1942 or something, he began  to see differences in phosphorus fertilization responses to that.  Over time does the nutrient replenish itself?  No, in terms of phosphorus and potassium, you can add fertilizer  nutrients to put it into percent sufficiency levels that are adequate for  plant growth and you would not get a response. In the case of nitrogen,  not necessarily so. Because nitrogen happens to be a mobile nutrient in  soil. That means that it moves with soil water. Also, it has many more  transformations that nitrogen goes through in cycling in soil. Inorganic  nitrogen can move into the organic fractions where they   re not available  for plants.  Now over time, naturally, without you coming in and adding the  nutrients, would that be replenished? Or once it   s done it   s done.  No, it would not. It would not replenish. First of all, there are thousands  and thousands of acres in underdeveloped countries that are nutrient  deficient and it will be hundreds of years before adequate nutrients  might be reestablished there. First of all, they have no place for nutrients  to come from, as you know. They can   t produce enough growth to  mineralize nutrients from the organic matter that is produced.  Now can you over fertilize?  Yes, and that   s crop specific.  Can you do it with wheat?  In terms of nitrogen? Yes. At times and it depends on the favorableness  of growing season. If you have adequate moisture and you   re growing a  variety that you can get excessive growth and during windstorms or  whatever it will have a tendency to blow the crop over, or lodge as we  call it. So that can be a tribute to over nitrogen fertilization. But it also  can be attributed to a weak- strong plant. So it   s how you want to look at  it. In terms of phosphorus and potassium, probably not. In fact, you   d  25  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  have to get unreasonable rates before you   d ever see an effect.  Has there been a point in the Magruder Plots that it   s been over?  No.  You take steps to prevent that?  We have a constant rate of fertilizer for nitrogen, phosphorus and  potassium plain and manure that we apply annually. That rate doesn   t  change.  What kind of manure?  Animal manure, cow manure.  Cow manure. From OSU or     Well, actually in order to try and get consistency on it, we   ll buy it from  commercial sources. Because we have to have a known nutrient content  on the material we apply. As you know the animal manures can vary in  nutrient content depending on how much straw is in them and how deep  did you dig it out of the lot, among other things.  Originally, was the manure analyzed or was it just tossed on   I hate to  use the word tossed, but put on the plots.  The manure has always been analyzed. And the manure rate is supplying  about the same amount of nutrients, nitrogen particularly, that we have  in our nitrogen plot.  When looking at wheat research, I know the University of Arkansas does  wheat research. I know Minnesota has wheat research, Montana State, I  believe, has some wheat research. Are there any differences within the  wheat research, or how do you compare it to other institutions?  Yes, the differences are number one the kind of wheat that they   re  growing. They use up north what can be spring wheat in Montana. North  Dakota, Minnesota for example, could be a spring wheat. It could be a  soft wheat. So we have different classes of wheat. In Arkansas it would  be a soft red. It would be a soft red winter wheat. So the classes of wheat  change depending on which geographic area you   re in. They all respond  differently to nutrients. But the general thing would be basically the  same. No matter which one of these you   re working on, you   re working  on trying to develop wheat that would be the best for that environment.  If there   s a disease problem, an insect problem, you are breeding for  26  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  resistance. Also these wheats have a different fertilizer requirement so  you have to determine what those are. So you would be doing similar  things even though the classes of wheat are different.  Where do you see the Magruder Plots heading into the future here? Is it  going to continue?  As long as we can possibly continue those plots, they need to be  continued. Hopefully since we   ve got them in the Historic Register  they   ll continue from now on. But like I said, those plots are the living  history of the reddish prairie soil as far as nutrient depletion is  concerned.  Can you place the plots within the context of Oklahoma A M and OSU  history? What has been their role, how are they perceived, and what  kind of attention do they bring to the university?  Surprisingly, we have a very, very large number of alumni across the  state that have come through Oklahoma State University, Oklahoma  A M at the time, that have had the privilege to work on those Plots as  students. So we have a large clientele for support. As far as historical  significance, like I said, it   s the oldest wheat plots in the Great Plains  area and the second oldest west of the Mississippi, so it has a high  degree of recognition, not only locally or nationally but internationally.  Do you think that it   ll be a permanent fixture here on campus?  I   m going to say yes.  You left the Magruder Plots, working with them, and came to  administration. Can you detail a little about what you   ve done since  1991?  Yes, I became Department Head of the Agronomy Department at that  particular time in 1991. We changed the name of the Agronomy  Department to the Department of Plant and Soil Sciences and I served in  a leadership capacity of the department for, I believe, eleven years. I had  a lot of experiences, not only with soils and the soil fertility aspect but  with crop breeding. We also had weed management. So I got a chance to  really be in a supervisory role for a wide number of programs. After that  particular period of time, I joined the Oklahoma Agriculture Experiment  Station Administration as the assistant director. And with that  experience, of course, we have agriculture experiment stations in every  state.  Every state?  27  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  Every state, plus Puerto Rico, Guam and the Virgin Islands. But we  began work more on a national, international level. And then, of course,  since I   ve moved into my current positions, I   ve had the privilege of  working for all of the programs, the college experiment station and  cooperative extension service. It   s been a broadening experience.  What have you seen as the biggest evolution of the College of  Agriculture here, in all your time?  Well, I think one of the biggest evolutions that we have had is the basic  training that our scientists have today compared to some of the earlier  years. We have people that are trained in the very basic sciences at the  molecular level. So we kind of expanded our faculty working group to  include more molecular aspects of our program than we did originally in  those quote    earlier years   . First of all the sciences of biotechnology has  only recently been generated in terms of the history of the department.  So we   re able to move genes out of one plant and into another plant.  We   re also able to move desirable traits from one plant to another more  quickly with some of the techniques that we have available to us today.  What about changes towards the university? What have you seen? What  do you think has been the biggest change?  At the university level? Well certainly presently we are going under one  of the greatest expansions of facilities that probably the university has  ever had the privilege of being involved in with all the things such as a  multidisciplinary science lab across the street and everything. So we   ve  had a marked change in the facilities that we have and our science staff  to work with. That has been very beneficial for us to maintain  competitiveness for national grants and also to help us move our  programs forward.  One last question. Do you consider yourself an Aggie or a Cowboy?  (Laughs) That   s a difficult question. That   s a difficult question. I guess I  would have to place myself as a cowboy. When I came up here in 1958,  that was the first year I believe that   it might have been 1957 when  Oklahoma A M College was changed to Oklahoma State University.  So my experience here has been as Oklahoma State University. I think  the Aggie term is more appropriate and relates to those folks and alumni  that may have come through as Oklahoma A M College.  So a Cowboy then?  Yeah. (Laughter) But I   m proud of each of them.  28  Sherman  Westerman  Sherman  Westerman  I had to ask since you are still within the College of Agriculture. Is there  anything you would like to add before we end this interview? Anything  you   d like to share that we haven   t discussed?  No, the only thing that I would hope is that you could continue to  preserve the valuable history of the Magruder Plots. Of all the  agriculture experiments that we have, this is the one that we have the  longest history with. This is the one that is the most well-documented. In  100 years from now, the value will have increased markedly. I would  just encourage everyone that has the opportunity to be involved in the  experiments to fully document their activities and make sure that they  are archived properly and the best history is recorded that we possibly  can.  Okay, we   ll take that advice. I appreciate the time that you   ve shared  with us and best wishes with your current and future endeavors. Thank  you.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
