 Gill. The date is October 17th, 2008. I   m interviewing  Matt Ketchum, a former Pistol Pete mascot in the ConocoPhillips OSU  Alumni Center on the OSU campus. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project and is part of the Oklahoma Oral Research Program.  Matt, welcome back to the 50 year reunion of the Pistol Pete mascots.  Thank you. It   s good to be here.  Are you looking forward to it?  Yeah, I am. It   s going to be a great weekend.  I   ve already interviewed a couple guys already and they   re really  pumped for it.  Yeah.  You live in Alaska now and don   t come back that often, right?  Correct.  But it must be fun to get back and meet with all the guys.  Yeah, it   s interesting with the internet now, it   s almost like I can live  here because I   m on it every day. My homepage is the Oklahoma State  alumni page and so I read the Daily Oklahoma sports page dang near  everyday but it is great to get back, the first time in this facility, anxious  to see that and see the stadium.  Now this is special, this is the 50 year reunion of the first time that Pete  wore the m  ch   head on the field, is that right?  5  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Yes, the 50th anniversary when we adopted the Pistol Pete mascot which  is from Frank Eaton   s resemblance.  Someone else reminded me that this is the 50th anniversary and, sort of  unfortunate, that Frank Eaton, the real Pistol Pete, died in 1958 and this  is the 50 year anniversary of his death.  Yep, that   s right.  You grew up in Stillwater, so you   re a Stillwater boy. Can you remember  when you were young, some of your earliest memories, what was your  first memory you have of Pistol Pete?  Yeah, the first memories I remember   I mean this is a college town and  everything revolves around the University, even when you   re growing  up here as an elementary school kid. I remember going to the football  games and I remember parking at Aqua Mart over in that area with my  parents and walking to the game, either having a pre-game somewhere,  tailgate at someone   s house and then going to Aqua Mart, walking to the  game. In the east end zone is where all the kids were; that was before the  coach   s building was there and obviously before Gallagher-Iba had  expanded. We didn   t watch much of the game, we ran around and  played football, you know, with paper cups that we would stuff in each  other. I remember seeing Pistol Pete on the sidelines, was always a  fixture in any of the events we went to whether it was wrestling or  basketball or something else, but football is when I really first  remember.  Did you think he was a pretty cool dude?  Oh yeah, I thought he was great. (Laughter) I was always intrigued by  that. And then when I was in junior high a guy that I knew from  Stillwater named Don Giles became Pistol Pete. I just knew him from  Stillwater High. He was a pretty good athlete, a pretty good student and  he knew my older brothers. I remember when I was in junior high and he  became Pistol Pete when he was at school and I remember thinking that  was a possibility at the time.  That   s great.  And Don is coming back supposedly.  So Stillwater boys are a little different. Did you have any choice about  coming to OSU?  Yeah, I did. My father did go here and my oldest brother, Daniel, was  6  Gill  Ketchum  going here, but I did not want to go here during my junior high,  freshman and sophomore years. I was interested in going somewhere  else. I did go to a couple years of high school in Alaska, so I was  thinking east coast. A lot of kids in Alaska go to out of state to college  and I was somewhat influenced from that. But I came back to Stillwater  for my junior and senior year in high school and really kind of fell in  love with the school and then realized that the University activities are  much different than the community activities and it was a pretty great  time. I think it was when I went to a fraternity party that my brother was  in and realized there   s more to this than I had seen in high school   (Laughter)  You may not want to tell some of those stories. (Laughter) Just kidding.  Tell us about your OSU experience part from your Pistol Pete  experience. What were some of the other things you were engaged in,  some of the other activities you were a part of?  Other than Pistol Pete? Well, I was hugely influenced by my brother that  went here and I really kind of followed him   went and joined the same  fraternity that he did. He had excelled academically and had a great  social experience, had lots of friends with common interests and so I  kind of naturally fit into that. Really followed him and only had, you  know, your son was the only other classmate that had joined the  fraternity, the same one that I had. But it was guys with common  interests and so my best friends now are still some of those guys   Kent  Walstad, he was a Pistol Pete the year after I was. Gary Johnson, Jeff  Wood, Greg Tontz, and then guys from really all over the state and so I  was inspired by some of their stories of where they   d come from. Some  smaller towns, some bigger towns, and so I got involved in stuff at the  University.  I knew what I wanted to major in, which was construction management,  and I declared that as an incoming freshman and graduated with that and  still am in the business, but I got involved with the student council and  engineering and got involved with some of the academic fraternities that  they had for sophomores and stuff. Actually was named Top Ten  Freshman my freshman year which was significant for me because I was  starting to come into my own academically, which was great. And I was  involved with intramurals and involved with Homecoming and stayed  involved with student council basically my whole time that I was here. I  was involved with some of the construction management society stuff  and I was actually the Interfraternity Council Rush chairman a year. So I  served to represent the whole Greek community rather than just the one I  was in.  What was interesting about when you   re a freshman coming in, you   re  7  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  surrounded with new friends and that   s kind of your nucleus and the  older you get from your junior and senior year, you realize and start  expanding those friends and it really starts preparing you for your career  to where you   re not so biased to just your little group. You realize that  you   ll develop friends all over campus. And then I was Pistol Pete my  senior year and that was a great experience.  You tried out in your junior year?  Yeah, tried out the spring of my junior year and made it and it really  started that summer, actually about midsummer. But that summer I had  accepted an internship with a construction company in California and  that was the year, or one of the years, that we had sent both of the  relatively new heads back to get them re-detailed. I was in Orange  County, California and so I got to go meet the guy that had worked  basically his whole career at Disneyland that had developed and made  the heads the first time. So we had them all touched up and it was really  fun to go meet him and for him to meet someone from Oklahoma State  because he would just   the head would get sent to him, he   d work on  them, send them back and his contact was with Dave Martin at the  Athletic Department. So here I was, someone that was going to put the  head on for the next year, and we had a great couple of visits. Then it  started as soon as I got back, I started making appearances and it was  fantastic. I went to every single football game that year with the  exception of going to Tokyo.  Well Matt, picking up on your head experience a little bit. Did the guy  work with Disney or was he an independent contractor?  He was an independent contractor, at least at the time. I think at some  point he had worked for Disney and I believe his name was Bob  Johnson; there was actually something in one of the OSU magazines  about it.  I   m going to ask you a little bit about the uniform. Let   s start with the  head; we   ve seen the big huge head. What   s under it?  What   s inside there, there   s a suspended hard hat braced without a top in  it, and then it   s got pads on the shoulders. So it rests on your shoulders  and then you   ve got this hard hat that   s got padding on the front and the  back and so it sits like a halo on your forehead and on the back of your  head and it weighs 45 pounds. So you   re not very agile in it. And then  there are small screens where the eyes are, so you can see through two  little wholes, right there, and then there   s a screen in the chin, so you can  see your feet because often times its really hard to climb stairs, you   re  going to step down on something, you need to look down, but you can   t  8  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  see much in there. It   s really hard to not talk. Pistol Pete doesn   t talk and  people will come up to you and ask you a question that needs a response  verbally but you   ve got to somehow respond to them without speaking  because they couldn   t hear you anyway.  What about the rest of your outfit?  The rest of it? When I was a Pistol Pete, we were pretty much outfitted  by Tener   s. It   s a western store; at least there was one in Oklahoma City  at the time. They hooked us up with four or five pairs of Wranglers and  a new pair of cowboy boots, a new belt and belt buckle, four or five  white button up cowboy shirts, and then a black vest and that was pretty  much the apparel uniform of Pistol Pete. Also had a couple of .357 six  shooter revolvers and a double barrel shot gun, so part of Pistol Pete had  to go to the campus police department.  Firearms safety?  Yeah and get some of that. A little bit of training. I   m sure they   re  getting a lot more nowadays than they used to at the time. I had kind of  grown up around guns a little bit, so I wasn   t intimidated by that, but  that   s where we had to go get our blanks and they were always fine with  Pistol Pete, so that was the apparel and I kept all of that stuff with me,  the head was in my room at the fraternity house.  Did you keep your outfit? I know you didn   t keep the head, but did you  get to keep the rest of the outfit?  We didn   t keep, and I guess I didn   t mention the chaps, had a bright  orange pair of chaps which is almost really, other than Pete   s head,  probably his signature outfit is his bright orange chaps. We didn   t keep  those, but we basically kept everything else, all the shirts and the boots  and the pants and all of that and so those were great. I probably still have  some of my pants. (Laughter) I couldn   t fit into them, but I still probably  have some of the Wranglers that I got from Tener   s.  One of the other neat things at the time, was one of the local car  dealerships had donated a truck and it was an extended cab pick-up truck  with a shell on it, so when we had to travel with the head, I mean, it   s  large, it fits in a three by three crate. Most of the time we didn   t travel  with it in the crate, and it did get bunkered up a little bit loading it up in  trucks and cars and stuff, but occasionally on trips, when I   d go to  parades in different communities in the state, I was able to take that and  the gas was paid for. They take care of Pistol Pete, that   s for sure.  Matt, stepping back just a little bit, you waited until your senior year,  9  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  what was your decision to finally decide to be Pistol Pete?  Well, I was dating a pom pom girl at the time, (Laughter) so I got to see  more about what Pete did. The guys in front of me were Lance Mills and  Jack Franks and so I   d kind of seen them and some of their activities, got  to see what they were doing. You   re ambassadors, you   re not a  cheerleader; you do lead a cheer occasionally, but it   s a different type of  school spirit. I   m a    true-to-your school    kind of guy and I wanted to do  something like that   that kind of fit what I wanted to do. It wasn   t  maybe as athletic as doing some of the other stuff, but I certainly wanted  to do that. I got interested in it, talked to a few people about it and  actually went, I think, to Jack Franks and borrowed the head one time,  went over to the Colvin Center and got in front of the mirrors and got  comfortable with it on to see if I was really going to like doing it and  did. Then tried out in this interview process.  Can you tell us a little bit about that process?  Yeah, I believe it was a formal application that we had to submit and  they advertise in the O   Colly. That was how information was spread in  those days. In the late    80s, you didn   t go to the internet and find out  when the Pete try-outs were, but found out about it in the O   Colly. Filled  out the application and I think there were probably only about ten,  maybe twelve guys that tried out when I did. The first thing that we did  was an interview process and it was an interview with Dave Martin who  was an associate athletic director, and then four or five former Pistol  Petes that were either working for the University still or were in close  proximity community-wise in some other vocation. They would come in  and do an interview, so they wanted to see if you were a decent guy,  they wanted you to know what the job entailed in being an ambassador  and being a good guy and being able to make good choices and  representing the university, particularly when you   re Pete and also when  you don   t have the head on, too.  Did you have to act out some things in the interview?  Yeah, and then after that, they wanted to put you in a couple of  situations and so   really they realized they wanted you to do some  acting, or do a situation without the head on because often times, you  can get heckled without it on and you   ve got to be able to react  positively, or you   ve got to be able to speak to somebody without the  head on. So they asked me to do a skit with   you had to prepare  something, and you knew this before without the head on   then they put  you in a situation with the head on.  Do you remember the first events you went to as Pete? Can you share  10  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  some of your memories?  Yeah, I think one of the first ones that I remember specifically was  really outside the athletics because I think the first one I went to   I think  it might have been freshman orientation, and then the rest of them were  athletic stuff. But the first one I remember I really enjoyed, it was a  Halloween contest. I think it might have been for kids, so I think it was  in the early evening of Halloween at Eskimo Joe   s. So there were 20  kids that were dressed up for this Halloween competition and Pistol Pete  was going to be there and that was probably what brought some of them  there. Pistol Pete got to pick which kid had the best outfit on and the best  costume and I picked this little kid that was dressed up like a werewolf.  And I remember, it just made his day. It was great and I remember that. I  do have a littler picture that his mom had taken and given to me, so I  especially remember that one as one of the first things.  One of the great things I got to do was I got to go to   they have a  mascot ski invitational in Winter Park, Colorado and it   s hosted by the  University of Colorado. We were in the Big Eight at the time, they  certainly invited all of the Big Eight mascots, but there was probably  200 mascots there, and it was a big ski event. I was a skier having lived  in Alaska   an alpine skier. I wanted to go to the event; I raised a little  bit of money, got the university to help cover things   I think my airfare  was like  200   times have really changed now, I think it   s significantly  more than that. But I got the crate and packed the head up and went  during school in probably February to Winter Park and skied with the  head on and all of that. It was pretty fun.  I bet it was a bit of a tough thing  (Laughter)  It was a lot tougher than I thought it was going to be. (Laughter)  You mentioned the Halloween party, we think of Pistol Pete obviously at  athletic events, probably makes a dozen appearances a year, but more of  the personal appearances, can you share some of the outside events,  places you went as Pete?  Yeah, one of my favorite things I did is I went to Pond Creek,  Oklahoma. It   s a little bitty old town up kind of north central; I think it   s  close to Alva. I always remember seeing it as Pond Creek-Hunter  because they had to combine two towns to make up a football team.  They played eight man football. One of my buddies in the fraternity  house name is Van Shea Ivan. Great OSU alum, he   s from that  hometown, parents both big OSU alums. I think his brother now is the  head trainer here, the sports medical doctor, Val Gene. Anyway, he  wanted Pistol Pete to come to his homecoming, or come to his county   s  11  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  parade, in the worst way and I said,    Sure, we   ll work it out and I   ll  make it.    Well I went up there and they rolled out the orange carpet for  me. (Laughter) I mean Pistol Pete, he was the main event of the parade  and everybody loved it. The Ivans took fantastic care of me and I  remember that specifically because it was a personal connection there  and then getting to see another small town in Oklahoma that really  cherished their heritage, which was farming, and also really cherished  Pistol Pete. I remember walking in a lot of those long parades and my  feet getting tired in the cowboy boots.  You made probably a hundred appearances a year?  Yeah, probably more than that. There   s two Pistol Pets each year, at  least there was when I was Pete. We   ve always claimed that Pistol Pete  makes about 400 appearances a year. So each guy would probably do  200. Occasionally, sometimes, you   re paid. Some of the parades would  pay Pistol Pete and that money would go to the athletic director or to the  associate athletic director. Occasionally we   d get a stipend that would  help offset some of our books and some tuition. I probably didn   t collect  more than  500 over the whole time, but I didn   t have many expenses  either.  Matt, you   re pretty active in other things on the campus, how did you  balance these two lives?  Well, Pistol Pete always came first. There   s no doubt about that. I  remember missing some intramural sports activities. You   re on a team  and you   ve got a commitment to that, but Pistol Pete came first. It was  my senior year and I think the students involvement is pretty heavy  when you get started and some of my campus involvement did  somewhat taper off as I get older and closer to graduation, you   re not as  involved with maybe some of the Homecoming events that our fraternity  was in and you   re starting to look towards your career. I was doing the  Pistol Pete thing. I don   t recall it being much of a challenge juggling  some of my other activities and that. Academics, we were able to study  on the trips and what have you.  You had the chance to view  Pistol Pete  when you were kid. What were  your expectations? Looking at it, your thoughts and your experiences as  your time as Pete? How did those differ?  Well, looking back on it, it   s one of the best things that I did. I   m super  proud that I did it. It   s funny, where I live now, people find out   I mean,  I   m in Pac-10 country in Alaska. They   re not too familiar with the Big  XII other than our football teams. When they find out that I was a  mascot, it gets a chuckle. (Laughter) Most people think of a mascot as  12  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  maybe some purple chicken doing back flips off of a mini tramp. So I  get a chance to talk about the heritage of Pistol Pete and how it was  named after a real man, Frank Eaton. Another thing that is interesting in  Alaska is there are a lot of people from Wyoming up there. The  University of Wyoming has Pistol Pete as their mascot and has the same  caricature as our Pistol Pete, so does New Mexico State. They call him  Cowboy Joe.  Also talking to my kids about Pete. My kids see Pistol Pete on TV and  they think it   s me and it   s great  (Laughter) Just driving over from Tulsa  this morning, my son asked me    Dad, were you ever on TV?    and I said,     Well, sure I was.    So they think it   s pretty neat. My youngest son asked  his mom,    Do you think I could be Pistol Pete someday?    (Laughter) So  we got to talk about that and just today coming over, they   re pretty  excited about it and this is going to be a fantastic weekend because my  kids are going to be indoctrinated into Oklahoma State, which I love  dearly. I hope my kids   they can go to University of Alaska-Anchorage  or they can go to Oklahoma State. That   s their choices if Dad   s paying  for it.  Picking up your conversation about the Frank Eaton Pistol Pete. Was it  special to you that OSU   s mascot was named after a real historical  figure rather than some mythical character or something like that?  If we had still been the Oklahoma State Tigers   like we used to be  Oklahoma A M Tigers and were orange and black because we were     the Princeton on the Prairie    and so our mascot came from Princeton  University and so did our colors   I probably wouldn   t have done it. But  yeah, it was special for me, the heritage of Frank Eaton, and I didn   t  know about that until I started researching to see if it was something I  wanted to do and it was intriguing. There are artifacts around campus  about Frank Eaton. He was even teaching a class on Oklahoma history  and was showing off his gun and his gun discharged. I think one of his  bullets is in one of the classrooms in the Student Union basement  somewhere. It was pretty neat to know that. And Pistol Pete does   he   s  not a goofy mascot. He   s a cool mascot and he   s a calm, respectable  mascot with guns, and he does represent the rugged old west and yeah, I  really like that.  For OSU fans and for Oklahoma he represents, you mentioned, the  rugged west. The pioneer and the image ties in. Picking up on that a  little bit, when you portray Pistol Pete as the mascot, were those  character traits you tried to emulate some that the real Frank Eaton  had?  Well, you know, probably not. I wasn   t able to study some of his  13  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  physical characteristics because I think he was a little bit shorter than I  was. I noticed that some guys do, you can tell that there   s different Petes  when you   ve got the head on. But I   m already pigeon-toed and  bowlegged (Laughter) so I didn   t have to act too much, but mainly  you   re trying   you   ve got to make expressions and you   ve got to  express yourself with your hands and maybe the way you walk and  waving the towel, but there   s not a whole heck of a lot else Pistol Pete  can do. Shaking hands   if I had a dollar for every time a kid came up  and stuck his hand out and said,    Pistol Pete, sign my hand  Sign my  hand     I would always carry a sharpie and sign his signatures and unless  you hold your hand right here you   re just signing Pistol Pete. (Laughter)  Did you have Pete   s swagger?  Oh yeah, oh yeah.  His bowlegged swagger?  Bowlegged   that   s not too hard for me. (Laughter) Some of my friends  call me    up hill.    I always look like I   m walking uphill, anyway   Matt, can you share some especially meaningful experiences as your  time as Pete? You already shared a couple of them, but some other  things that you really remember?  Yeah, a guy that I work with wanted me to come to his daughter   s  birthday. I worked at Dupree Sports. He was one of the managers there  and it was his daughter   s birthday. What I remember is how pleased     she was happy to see Pete and all that and it was a highlight for her, but  how pleased her parents were that I took the time out as a college  student, as a representative of the University to be able to do that. They  were obviously working on the periphery of the University and weren   t  working directly for it, but obviously saw that as a benefit and were  happy that I was able to come as Pistol Pete. When you   re going to a lot  of those events, you spend probably 75 percent of the time without the  head on. So I remember going to that.  My mother was an elementary school teacher here and I went to her  class probably three or four times throughout the year because she  wanted me to hit every single class that came through. So I   d get to  wander in Skyline Elementary out there where I met Derek, I met your  son out there where he used to go. So going to that and seeing how  pleased my mom was and how proud she was that I was doing it. It  wasn   t necessarily any type of accomplishment that I had done, but it  was just those people   s admiration and appreciation for, not only for  what I was doing, but for the university as well and what it represented.  14  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  You were talking about the kids, is that pretty special when you go to the  birthday parties and the schools and get notes back from someone?  The kids love Pistol Pete and that probably is a lot of kid   s first memory  or their first impression of Oklahoma State is Pistol Pete, if they   ve  gotten the chance to see Pistol Pete up close or gotten the chance to  shake his hand or get a picture signed from him. I certainly realized that.  I   m kind of like that, I like little kids anyway. I   m coaching now. That   s  my joy   seeing kids improve and seeing kids sparkling eyes light up,  and they certainly do when they see Pistol Pete. My kids love it too and  so I   m excited I   m going to get to put the head on tonight (Laughter) at  the hoops event. They   re going to have a Pistol Pete from each of the  five decades, the last five decades. So I   m going to represent the    80   s  and see if I still got it  (Laughter) That   s going to be fun.  That   s great. Let   s get into some special memories and be honest here.  Give me a couple of embarrassing moments that you had as Pete.  One of the embarrassing moments was I was at the competition where  all the cheerleaders and the mascots go together at the end of the  summer, prior to the school year starting; it   s a competition with all of  the other universities and it   s training. So the mascots had their other  little events, but when the competition came together, your whole school  represented themselves, the cheerleaders with Pistol Pete and the pom  pom girls with Pistol Pete. Well, I had learned to spin the .357 revolver  on my hand pretty good, but when I spun it I always wanted to spin it  and then shoot it real quickly and so I thought, (Laughter)    Every time I  spin it takes me a little time to get it cocked in order to shoot it, so I  think I   ll just cock it before I spin it on my finger.    It   s just firing a  blank, so if it   s dark there   s a flame that comes out the end of it. Well, I  cocked the gun and I spun it. Well, it went off as I was spinning it and it  shot right up my arm and I would have sworn that my arm was on fire,  although I had no idea to look cause I couldn   t see. One of the other  Pistol Petes was watching and noticed that I had done that, that it went  off as I was spinning it and he could see that I was trying to put the fire  out   I thought my arm was on fire  (Laughter)  So that was pretty embarrassing. There was another time where I was  with the gun again and a little kid   I was standing watching an event  and a little kid got the courage to finally, probably three years old, to  walk up to Pistol Pete. He walked right up to me and was in my blind  spot, I couldn   t see him here, and I couldn   t see him out of my chin. But  he was, I mean he was two feet from me. Well, I got the gun out and  started spinning the gun and it was going about an inch in front of this  little kid   s face and finally someone came up and grabbed my arm. I put  it in and got it to where I could see this kid and he was still standing  15  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  there just petrified (laughter) because I had spun   I   m sure his parents  were probably wondering,    What in the world is going on?    So I was a  little bit embarrassed, but what   s so great about being Pete is your face  turns red but I had to express myself with my hands over Pistol Pete   s  face. But those were pretty tough times.  Matt, being Pistol Pete, being that persona for Oklahoma State, did that  carry some sort of special responsibility with it?  Yeah, I certainly saw it as an OSU ambassador. I was even trying to  explain to my kids today what it takes to be Pistol Pete. Well, I was  explaining it to them that you have to be an ambassador and my wife  was laughing. Because they   re nine and six, well they don   t know what  an ambassador is. But I took on that responsibility as being an OSU  ambassador and I enjoyed speaking to alums and went to several alumni  events and they   re always interested in who   s the guy under the head  and I liked that. I certainly saw it as a networking and marketing  opportunity opening for myself,    Hey I   m a senior. I   m looking for a  job. I   m in construction management. You know, if you   ve got a  construction company, I   m looking for work.    So I enjoyed doing that  and I certainly do now, its really special to me to tell somebody that I  was Pistol Pete. Everybody gets a little chuckle out of it, but they think  and shake their heads and, well that   s pretty neat. I really like it.  Did you feel a special sense of responsibility, sort of what you did and  what you didn   t do in public about your actions?  Yes, certainly, I mean a lot of people knew that I was Pistol Pete, at least  those that were my friends. So yeah, in a sense I was still Pete even  when I didn   t have the head on and when I wasn   t with the Spirit Group.  So yeah, I took that on and represented the University even without it,  too. And I was looking for a job heavy too. (Laughter)  All the Pete   s are coming back together.  Yeah, there   s 53 coming back.  Wonderful. Is there a special bond between the former Petes?  Yeah, there is. My special bond is my best friend was Pistol Pete the  year after I was. His name is Kent Walstad. I think he   s going to  interview here. Well I met him   we   d never met    til college and we   ve  been best friends for 20 plus years. He was Pete the year I was. We are  the biggest OSU alums outside of Oklahoma, that   s for sure. He   s in  Grand Rapids, Michigan. I talked to him three times the other night  during the Missouri game. He was watching it. We always know where  16  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  each other is. I remember when we finally beat OU 12 to nothing. I think  it was in    96 or something. He actually was living in Alaska at the time.  We got together and celebrated that. But yeah we   ve got a special bond  from our friendship and from Pete for sure. He   s bringing his whole  family down. And just knowing Kirk Carter and those guys. Coming  back for Homecoming I always know that there   s a former Pistol Pete  float and there   s always open arms and usually there   s a guy that was a  former Pistol Pete in the Alumni Association working there. But yeah,  it   s a great way to connect, that   s for sure.  Looking back, has being Pistol Pete influenced your life a little bit  since   ?  It probably has just from knowing that   not only did I volunteer my  time as a senior, I juggled some academic stuff. It wasn   t much of a  burden at all and it was really fun and I got a benefit out of it. But it was  really my first experience to an extended amount of service. It   s really  kind of like when someone starts to learn about service, whether it   s in  your community or for your state or for your school or whatever. The  more you give, the more you receive, and so I really enjoyed that aspect  of it and it was really my first lesson of an extended period of service     the return has been the rest of my life. So I   ve used that and other things  when I   ve been asked to serve. If it   s going to interfere with my school  work or my social life or now it   s going to interfere with family life or  something, I realize that the benefits far outweigh any sacrifice you  might have to weigh within the service. So that   s kind of how I look at it  now. It was a time where I could serve my university with my time and  the return as far exceeded what I put into it in    88 and    89.  What would you tell an OSU student today that is thinking about being  Pistol Pete? What would you tell him?  I would strongly encourage him. I would say that most of the time  they   re traveling with the pom pom girls (Laughter) and that   s a great  benefit. You have to take care of them, so    But no, it   s a great  experience; you get to interact with really everybody across Oklahoma.  You get to travel. That   s always fun as a college student. You get to go  to the athletic events. I   ve gotten to meet coaches and I got to be pretty  good friends with Eddie Sutton when they came and played basketball in  Alaska a couple of years ago. All he knew was,    Hey, a former Pistol  Pete lives there. So he must be a good alum.    I   d strongly encourage it.  It was a great experience. It was great to serve the University. And it   s  been great for me 20 years later.  All over again, would you do it again?  17  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Absolutely. Absolutely. I   d probably do it more than just one year of my  college career. Absolutely.  Close this with a question. How do you hope they remember Matt  Ketchum as Pistol Pete?  I hope they remember me as an ambassador of the University. That I  upheld a positive image of Oklahoma State with and without the head  on. I hope they know that I bleed black and orange. I know that  everybody in Alaska does. They often get OSU mixed up with Oregon  State, but people are starting to learn that orange and black OSU is  Oklahoma State. I hope they remember me for that. I know they know  I   m a true-to-your school type of guy and I   m loyal. Kind of like our  alma mater song is, and I ride for the brand.  Last question. Briefly catch yourself in the life after you left OSU.  I took a job in Dallas, Texas with Manhattan Construction Company. A  great Oklahoma construction company. They were out of Muskogee at  the time, but I think they   re in Tulsa now. Went and worked in Dallas  for about two and a half years. I went to a couple of years of high school  in Alaska and I always wanted to get back there, and finally did in    92.  My plan was to go up there for about four or five years and work and  maybe work part time. Work on the pipeline and work some  construction jobs, work seasonal and then eventually make it back to this  area, but that was 17 years ago now and I   m loving it. I   ve got three  kids. I met my wife up there even though she   s from Arkansas. So when  we come down here we   re able to travel in between Oklahoma and  Arkansas and kind of visit everybody.  I   m in construction management which was what my degree was in. I  have worked for the same firm now for 17 years. It   s called Wilder  Construction Company. We just got purchased and the company is now  called Granite Construction Company out of Watsonville, California.  We   re heavy highway civil contractors, so we   re the creating and paving  contractor in Alaska. We ski and play hockey and fish a lot and I  brought down a bunch of smoked salmon that everybody in Oklahoma  loves. So life is good. I   m living the dream as far as I   m concerned.  So the last question is kind of political. You   re hometown is   ? And who  else lives in that town?  Sarah Palin (Laughter) went to high school with my wife. She was one  year ahead of my wife. A 1982 graduate of Wasilla High School and I  live in Wasilla right now. In my neighborhood, Sarah   s parents live a  couple of blocks over   Chuck and Sally. Great people. You take them  18  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  Gill  Ketchum  and put them in Oklahoma and you   d never know the difference. Great  people and I   ve seen CNN and MSNBC and TNN, all these news  stations going to the Heath   s house and so, pretty funny. And she   s a  great lady too.  Kind of turn things around in your hometown quite a bit? It   s on the  map now?  Yeah, it has. Yeah, Wasilla is on the map, but it   s still just a couple of  stop lights and we just got our first Target, opened last week there. So,  you know, we   re big time now. We   ve had a Wal-Mart for years. But  it   s a small town. I like it. It   s a spread out, sprawled-type of community  but it   s nestled in between these mountains in Alaska and rivers. About  40 miles north of Anchorage; it   s a great place to live and I   m anxious to  have my kids grow up there.  Well, is there anything that was left out? I know you want to get back to  your kids and everything, but anything else you   d like to mention?  No, I don   t think so.  Well I appreciate it very much.  You bet.  And you have a great weekend.  I know I will. I know I will.  -------  -------   
