 Peters. I   m conducting the interview today with (do you prefer James or Jim?)     Troxel Jim.  Peters    Jim Troxel, who was a student here in the mid-  60s. We   re going to be talking about his experiences at OSU, so let   s start with   Jim, tell me about yourself. Where are you from, and how did you get to Oklahoma State University?  Troxel Okay. David, I was born and raised in Oklahoma City. Went to Sequoyah Elementary School, Taft Junior High, Northwest Classen High School. My father was an alum of then Oklahoma A M, class of    34, business school. My brother, who is five years older than I, also came to OSU. Frankly, I   m going to say I probably applied to some other schools, but I don   t remember which ones they were. I knew I was coming to Oklahoma State, and upon graduation in 1964, I was here that fall, 1964.  Peters So you graduated, then, in May or June of    64 from high school.  Troxel From high school, correct.  Peters Then after that summer, you immediately started here then in the fall     Troxel Correct.  Peters    of    64, okay. Where did you live when you were on campus?  Troxel I first pledged and joined the fraternity Beta Theta Pi, and I did that through my sophomore year. My junior year and senior year, I lived off campus, my junior year with four other guys in a house, and my senior year in a single residence, rental, over on Main Street somewhere. I think it   s still there. 5  Peters What was your major?  Troxel Started out as a math major because I thought I   d be a high school math teacher. After I didn   t do too well in calculus, I shifted gears. Went over to psychology for maybe a couple terms. I can   t remember exactly, but sociology certainly was   . I found my home in sociology and graduated with my degree in sociology.  Peters Okay, so from math to psychology to sociology.  Troxel Correct.  Peters And you graduated in four years?  Troxel I did. Pretty routine, normal pathway then.  Peters What on-campus activities were you involved with, and they may have changed over time, so   .  Troxel Oh, they did, yeah. As indicated, I was a member of a fraternity, and I was very grateful for that experience. As my student days wore on, I found it less to my liking. I found a home off campus in   well, the Wesley Foundation, the Methodist student center, was certainly, became a base of my concern, social. It also provided a community of students that I enjoyed being around, as well as the campus ministries there. Also, should say that they were closely aligned or affiliated and worked with the other campus ministries, so I enjoyed my time learning more about the Lutheran student group as well as the Newman Center, the Catholic student center. Appreciated that. Then we had some ecumenical dialogues over in the chapel, as I recall.  Peters The Bennett Chapel?  Troxel Yes  We had, as I recall, we had evening dinner meetings and discussions of various kinds of theologians and other issues   . By the way, you know what? I just now remembered this. I even became a member of the First United Methodist Church here, and my membership still may be there, as far as I know. (Laughter) I don   t have any idea. Let   s see. Aside from the other things that we   re going to be talking about here in a minute, I assume, I don   t recall any other major    off-campus    activities. Some may occur to me as we continue conversation.  Peters Did the UCCM exist? That was the United Campus Christian Ministries. It was a group of the Methodists, the First Christian or Disciples, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, and I think maybe the Salem Lutheran Church. 6  Troxel I remember Salem Lutheran. The minister there was Cliff Smith, and he, certainly in my senior year, was very influential with me. I think that   s what we called it, David, but (I   ll be frank) I can   t remember. (Laughs) It   s been a long time, but UCCM sounds familiar.  Peters I know there was, the different churches had campus ministries, and at some point, they decided that they needed to collaborate when possible or partner, especially when they were trying to invite speakers in, where one group may not have the power or influence to do it, but they thought, as a collective thing, might be able to. I think they formed about the time you were here.  Troxel Could very well have been. I can say that I was   somehow or another, I got appointed to the committee responsible for what we had then, the Religious Emphasis Week. We had, over the years that I was affiliated with that, we had various speakers come in, some of which I can remember. There was a fellow, a seminary professor from Perkins School of Theology down in Dallas, and he wrote the book The Gospel According to Peanuts. I can   t remember this guy   s name  Robert L. Short , but he came in with the slides of Peanuts and talked about its relationship to Christian theology. I remember that was one of the speakers we had for Religious Emphasis Week one year.  Peters Do you remember who the leaders were at the Wesley Foundation at all?  Troxel At the time I became active, there were two ministers. One was Carl Caskey who, by the way, is still living in Northfield, Minnesota, and I communicate with him on occasion. His associate was a gentleman by the name of Vance Engleman. Vance was the one, at that time, who particularly got me involved in the Wesley Foundation. In fact, Vance was the best man at my wedding in 1969. Unfortunately, he has since passed away.  Peters Okay, all right. What was it about the Methodist student center, the Wesley Foundation, that intrigued you? Were you Methodist back then?  Troxel Yes, I was. I was active at May Avenue Methodist Church in Oklahoma City, and there I was involved with MYF, Methodist Youth Fellowship. We were strong Methodists, and I very much appreciated my affiliation with my Methodist heritage and identity. It certainly nurtured me. At that time, it created both a social conscious, as well as, I   ll call it theological hunger and fascinated, (fascinated is not the right word) interested in contemporary theologians that were writing about the time. They had sort of the existentialist flavor to them, so they were always trying to relate Christian theology to your personal life. I remember the key word back in those days, David, and you may recall it: relevant. Everything had to be relevant, and 7  the theologians that we were led to look at made Christian theology relevant to my life.  Peters You said you joined the First Methodist Church because the Wesley Foundation, you really couldn   t be a member of. They had activities there, but membership   had to be through a church here.  Troxel Yes, yes, and I   m not too sure exactly what was the motivation at the time, what led me to do that. The minister there at the time, I believe   I can   t think who it is right now. I kind of wish now I   d kept my membership back at May Avenue, but it really doesn   t matter. I can   t remember what the motivation for my joining the First Methodist Church was. It was a plus, you might say, in addition to my connection to the Wesley Foundation, which certainly was the primary driver.  Peters So the campus speakers policy, is that what sparked your involvement in this adventure?  Troxel Even though I wrote a piece up here, David, it   s hard for me to remember the chronological connections and pieces.  Peters So you had Religious Emphasis Week. That was made up of   there was a student group that coordinated that.  Troxel Well, with faculty, and I don   t remember its    authority,    yeah. I don   t know what chartered it, but we were responsible for extending invitations for speakers to come in for a week.  Peters Some of the churches in town were involved, or at least some of the leaders of some of the churches were involved.  Troxel I think so.  Peters Right, and it was under the auspices of, somehow under the umbrella of the university as an activity that was approved.  Troxel Yes.  Peters I believe Thomas (we decided the name was Altitzer?)     Troxel Altizer.  Peters    Altizer was invited to speak. What do you remember about him?  Troxel Well, he made the front cover of either TIME or Newsweek. He was the one who was raising the question,    Is God dead?    and wrote a book along those 8  lines. Well, maybe that was the title of it. He got the earmark as the    God is dead    theologian, and so he was very popular. I believe he was with Emory Seminary in Atlanta. As I said, our group was interested, the UCCM, I guess. We were reading some heady stuff. We were bringing some people that we thought would be thought-provoking, so we said,    Well, why not invite him and just see? He may not come,    but we extended the invitation. You know, it was sort of a feeler, sort of sent out a feeler. I don   t even remember how   . I don   t even remember if he responded. It   s too long ago.  Peters Too long ago, but I think that one of the challenges is the headline regarding his name is    God is Dead,    but actually he was proposing a question     Troxel He was raising the question.  Peters    raising the question. In the book that he   actually, he just edited a series of essays. I think he was one of the authors of one of those essays. The book combined the headline of    God is Dead.     Troxel Yeah, he probably got a bum rap, but, be that as it may, everyone identified him as being the    God is dead    theologian.  Peters So then at some point, that information becomes   . Others in the university community become aware of at least the invitation to bring him to campus.  Troxel Robert B. Kamm, K-A-M-M, (Laughs) was the president, and he was still new, only about a year into his tenure.  Peters It was his first semester.  Troxel Oh, was it? Okay, you   re right. I guess you   re right. He was a little nervous about having such a personage come to the university. I don   t remember the exact channels of communication, but I remember we did have a discussion about it. We were asked to reconsider the invitation. I don   t remember the debate. I remember we weren   t all in agreement, but I do remember we came out and agreed with the president that we would rescind the invitation. I wish I could tell you what went on in that conversation. David, I just can   t remember. It   s just too long ago.  Peters That   s fine. It   s only been     Troxel Fifty years or so  (Laughter)  Peters    fifty years. Sixty-six, so it was fifty years ago. (Laughter) There   s a response. Okay, so Dr. Kamm responds with asking the committee to not 9  invite Altizer to come speak. Okay   what develops is a response to that within the university community. Can you tell me anything about that?  Troxel Oh, gosh  I don   t think that incident alone created   . Like in the human sciences, it   s hard to make a connection between cause and effect, but I don   t   .  Peters So that may have been the straw.      Troxel There were other things going on, also, around this time. I think it was the invitation to some other speakers that probably prompted more, or began to create more of a backlash, if you please. I do remember when we asked Dr. Kamm. Somehow or another, one of our members reported that in the conversation with Dr. Kamm, (and I don   t know if it was about this particular issue, Dr. Altizer   s invitation, or someone else) he quoted the in loco parentis doctrine, if you please, which is Latin for    in place of the parent,    that the university is entitled to act in place of the parent, deciding what   s best for the students while they are students on campus. That was part of the rationale for why he   . I don   t know if he applied that to Dr. Altizer, but it may have been to other speakers whose invitations were extended and also asked to be revoked later on.  Peters Timothy Leary soon thereafter was asked to come speak, and I believe Dr. Kamm felt he was a bad influence.  Troxel Oh, yeah, he didn   t really care for that one. Now, who invited him for what purpose, I can   t remember. Do you? Maybe   .  Peters I think it was the   there was a student forum.  Troxel Oh, yes  The Student Government Association had a committee, the Forum Committee, I think, the student Forum, where they could invite people to come speak on campus. During those years, we had some really terrific speakers come. Dr. Han Suyin came. Some others I remember whose names appear in the piece I wrote   .  Peters Did Adam Clayton Powell speak while you were here?  Troxel No, he was invited, but that was another invitation that got rescinded. Again, I can   t remember whether the invitation was extended and then revoked, or if we were suggesting it and it got ixnayed before we even got that far to extending invitations.  Peters He was a member of the US House of Representatives.  10  Troxel He became one, and I can   t remember if that was after or not. It was certainly while he was one of the key civil rights leaders in New York City at the time. That   s true.  Peters There were   the speakers policy and the application of who could speak was becoming more and more of a challenge.  Troxel More and more of a challenge, clearly more and more of a challenge. Again, I don   t know which particular speaker   s rescinded invitation sparked the first of, in my memory, three gatherings of student and faculty and others, student and faculty, in various kinds of   rally, I guess would be the best way you   d talk about it. The first one, well, they were all in front of the Library here. The first one, the documents say there was four hundred. The second one was about two thousand, and the third one, which might have been a year and a half later, was five thousand students and faculty showed up on the lawn of the Library,    protesting    the speaker policy.  Peters This is the south lawn of the Library, looking out towards the building. Would people talk, then, on the steps right in front of the Library or that fountain area?  Troxel Yes, in front of the fountain there   s a little   I can   t remember if the landscaping is the same then as it is now, but they were able to get a platform of some kind, and there was a speaker system in all of these events. I don   t know where it came from, and they projected to the south, yes.  Peters These were called events. I mean, people knew this was going to happen.  Troxel Oh, yeah, yeah. I do not know if they appeared in the O   Colly. They must   ve, maybe. Maybe there were just flyers. I bet a lot of it, David, was word of mouth, frankly. We also, though, had at the time our so-called underground newspaper going on, The Drummer, and that was another means of communication particularly amongst the people who were of like mind and concerned about the administration   s speaker policy.  Peters Were you a part of The Drummer at all?  Troxel I don   t   I may have written an article or two for it from time to time. I was certainly not on the editorial staff. My good friend Ron Stevens was, for at least a semester if not longer. Like many things, a lot of these things evolved. Apparently there was another iteration of a similar kind of underground effort out of one of the dorms, but I don   t remember exactly specifics. Ron and his efforts, I think some of that originated at the Wesley Foundation, if you want to know the truth now that I think about it.  Peters It did. The Wesley Foundation had a publication, and then they merged    11  Troxel They merged; that   s what it was, right.  Peters    with The Drummer.  Troxel Right, and so that was probably another key communication vehicle. It might   ve been, (it wouldn   t surprise me to learn) though I can   t tell you for a fact, that the network of the UCCM that we talked about earlier was also another network through which the word of mouth or the news of these    rallies      . I   ll call them rallies. I don   t know what we called them then, but they were like a rally. That was the way the word got out.  Peters They were described as a student protest, student demonstration, and the worst-case scenario by the Oklahoma City paper referred to them as a riot.  Troxel I was at all three of them. There wasn   t a riot at any one of them in terms of what we would describe as that. Demonstration, even that might be a little strong. It was a bunch of people talking and raising their concern. Maybe there were some   there were probably a few banners and stuff like that, but it was mainly just the people, speakers, sharing their concerns about this, this, and that.  Peters There was a designated time, so people knew to arrive at a certain time. There was a sound system that was set up.  Troxel Yeah, somehow.  Peters There was a series of speakers who spoke     Troxel Yeah, there was organization.  Peters    and then when it ended, the crowd     Troxel Dissipated.  Peters    dissipated and dispersed. Okay.  Troxel Right, right. As I recall, the time generally was in the late afternoon, four o   clock or so. That   s my recollection, late afternoon.  Peters And who did the speakers represent?  Troxel Boy, you   re really pressing me, David  (Laughs) First of all, I   m going to say that they may not have represented any group. I think these were concerned students and concerned faculty. I think we also had some graduate students who were part-time faculty, as well, I believe, at the time. 12  No one, though, represented an entity or an organization. There were attempts, and they were marginally successful attempts to actually start some sort of student-faculty organization. I don   t think it had legs, but there were other meetings that took place amongst those who wanted to sort of serve in a leadership capacity to try to give this movement, if you please, some sort of structural expression. I don   t think those efforts lasted long, but there were efforts.  I remember the first meeting, bless our hearts, we got bogged down in trying to write up our by-laws. (Laughter) Nothing can kill an organization more than trying to come up with its by-laws. (Laughter) I don   t think that that went too far, but it was at least a place where people could air some things out before they then reached any purpose. I want to say that the Student Government Association itself, though, all of their meetings at the time seemed like they were dealing with issues that were in relationship to the administration. They were a vocal, a force   maybe not a force but a vocal group where a lot of the concerns got aired out. I believe the faculty had its own vehicle for airing out its concerns, though I was not privy to any of them. Only heard about them after they were expressed.  Peters We had like a university chapter of the Association of University Professors. Let   s see. American Association of University   it   s AAUP.  Troxel AAUP, and I know that they wrestled with this issue, and I know they asked for some help from their national organization to come look at what was going on here.  Peters There was also a board of faculty reps, the BFR, who were meeting occasionally, and so they were dealing with the administrative level and faculty level. You said they met three times. The first time there were four hundred, so why were more meetings necessary?  Troxel Well, because the administration continued its practice of turning down or requiring that invitations to outside speakers be rescinded. Also, the board of regents itself got involved and drafted more (I   ll use the word) stringent policies about who could be invited and why, and their values and criteria. Many people, students and faculty, considered these to be suppression of First Amendment rights. I think that   s particularly what precipitated representatives of the faculty of the Sociology Department to particularly show their concern. Dr. Larson resigned in protest of the regulations.  Peters Richard Larson.  Troxel Richard Larson. Then before too long, eight of his nine other colleagues, nine of ten of the entire faculty, resigned in protest to the administration   s not only the policy but the way that they dealt with the faculty in trying to 13  wrestle it through. I also think there were some other issues between the faculty and administration that did not involve First Amendment rights that I   m not fully aware of. I believe there were some tenure issues going on and so forth, so the faculty may have had additional concerns beyond what the rallies in front of the Library were expressing. The point being, during this relatively short period of time, there were plenty of things that the students and the faculty were aggrieved about, relative to the administration. It seems like there was some reason or purpose (I   m exaggerating here to make my point) weekly to want to call the administration into question over this, this, or that. By the administration, I don   t necessarily always mean Dr. Kamm himself. Whoever was in charge at the time, Mr. Hesser, I believe, of the Student Union     Peters It was Abe Hesser.  Troxel    they had, Abe Hesser, some policies that we didn   t care for, and so on and so forth.  Peters Okay, so it was, in some regard, it was concern over how the process was being managed or controlled by the administration that continued to fuel frustration by students, graduate students, faculty, and others. It was reflected most in the Sociology Department when you said eight out of nine   .  Troxel Nine out of ten of them. They had ten faculty, and nine of the ten resigned.  Peters And the tenth one?  Troxel He was a long-term resident of Stillwater, had a lot of roots here. He may or may not have been sympathetic with his colleagues, but he felt strongly   . He had strong roots here and cared not to resign.  Peters I believe that was Gene Acuff     Troxel Gene Acuff, and....  Peters    and he just so happened to be on sabbatical.  Troxel I think that   s right. He was trying to get his PhD. He had not earned his PhD at that time, so I believe he was on sabbatical. That may have been another factor; I don   t know.  Peters There   d been quite a change in the Sociology Department. One time, sociology came out of   it was sociology and rural development or something like that, but it came out of the college of ag.  14  Troxel Oh, it did?  Peters It wasn   t until the early   60s     Troxel I   ll be darned.  Peters    that it moved from that area into arts and sciences. In fact, I believe it moved into arts and sciences perhaps when Kamm was dean of arts and sciences before he became president. Both the membership of that department and the focus of that department had actually changed considerably in the ten years prior to this event.  Troxel Is that right?  Peters So most of the new faculty, who had been brought in beginning in the early   60s, just had a different perspective on the academic aspects of sociology than the prior folks had, and it was in a new college. They were young guns in many ways.  Troxel Is that right? I wonder, (and you pause me to speculate) I wonder if Dr. Kamm as dean of arts and sciences was instrumental in the hiring of Dr. Gerald Leslie, the department head of sociology, who then later on (Laughs) was the one who led, not led but was part of the resignations against him. I don   t know, but that would be interesting to find out.  Peters Well, I knew there were changes. I don   t know the exact dates of when Leslie was hired and when Kamm transitioned from arts and sciences dean to   . Actually, he transitioned first to VP, and then he moved into the presidency.  Troxel Okay, all right so there was a time period there.  Peters But that was kind of a transition.  Troxel Was he provost, Kamm? Provost?  Peters He would be the equivalent of provost.  Troxel Okay, at that time.  Peters I believe he was acting, actually, and then he was named to the presidency and took that position. All right, so let me kind of backtrack just a little bit. It started as a response to the speakers policy, and then it kind of grew into other agendas that different groups, either disgruntled or upset or concerned, brought to the table, and so this was a response in many ways to a number of things that were going on. How do you think this reflected what was going on in American society at the time? 15  Troxel I think what happened at OSU mirrored very much what was happening on other campuses across country. Each locale, each university probably had its own iteration, own set of issues and concerns. You had the Vietnam War going on, had the civil rights movement going on. We had one or two civil right marches led that were campus-based. They were allowed. I don   t specifically remember any anti-war demonstrations. That   s not to say we didn   t have them. David, I just can   t remember that we did. It wouldn   t surprise me to learn that we did, but I just can   t remember the specifics about when and where and who was involved, how many and all that sort of thing.  Peters Well, and military training on campus was required into the early   60s.  Troxel It was required. ROTC was required through school year    66-   67. After that, it became voluntary. My senior year   no, no, no, no, wait. ROTC was required for all undergraduates for their freshman and sophomore years, but that policy ended as a requirement at the end of the    64-   65 school year. The reason why I happen to remember is because as a freshman, I was a part of ROTC. I was in the ROTC band. It came time for the annual big inspection, where the general came from somewhere, or a group of generals, you know, the brass. Even those of us in the band had to be well-prepared for any question they might ask us about a firearm or rifle or the manual and so forth. I remember when the general (I   ll call him a general; I have no idea what he was) came up, stood in front of me while we were standing at attention in the band. I had my baritone under my right arm   .  Peters Baritone sax?  Troxel No, baritone instrument. It was a little   .  Peters Oh, baritone  Got it.  Troxel I had my nameplate, Troxel. He says,    So, Troxel, what do you think about them going voluntary on ROTC?    (Laughs) That was the last question I ever thought I   d get asked. I thought I   d get asked a myriad number of things that I hoped I had the answers to, but here he asked me my opinion, which was very odd. I remember at the time I put on a straight face as best I could. I said,    I think it   s very good, Sir. It gets rid of some of the dead wood, Sir     (Laughter) Course, I   m the first one not signing up for ROTC when it became voluntary, but that was my   . (Laughs) I   ll never forget how that came out of my mouth at that time. I   ll never know how that happened. It was one of the things, for some reason, I still can remember that, so that was when ROTC went voluntary.  16  Peters So your freshman year, you were ROTC, and then at the end of your freshman year, it was no longer mandatory.  Troxel Correct. So that would   ve been   so the start of school year    65, it was no longer required for underclassmen, freshman and sophomore year.  Peters Did you have a draft card?  Troxel Eventually, sure, yeah. When was it required? When you turned eighteen?  Peters When you turned eighteen.  Troxel Yeah, I had a draft card, sure. As I approached   now entering my junior and senior years, the war in Vietnam was heating up. I remember we even had our physicals before I even graduated from school here in May, June of    68 because they wanted to get you in the queue. They wanted to get you in the queue right away. I remember going down to Oklahoma City to the wherever, somewhere, and having my physical even while I was a student.  Peters Do you remember the lottery?  Troxel Yeah, I can   t remember what number I had, but I had a number. In fact, I was called up, but that was after I   d left school. That   s another story. If you want me to get into it, I   ll   .  Peters Okay, after we get through with your OSU time, then we   ll   . (Laughter)  Troxel    tell you what happened with me and the draft.  Peters Okay, we   ll do that. So your freshman year, you   re a pledge and then a member of Beta Theta Pi. You   re an ROTC. You   re a math major looking at other options as you go through your academic career.  Troxel Dean   s honor roll.  Peters Dean   s honor roll. So you attended all three of these demonstrations or events on the Library lawn. What impact did that have? Did it have any lasting impact on the campus? On you? What influence did this event, these series of events   .  Troxel David, that   s a great question. First of all, I cannot give any testimony to what happened to the university, per se. I have the impression that things became more tolerant here, and so on and so forth. I would like to think that some of our expressions of concern led to that, but I, again, I can   t give you a cause and effect. The thing that impresses me most, and   I was not aware of this as much. I think you know that some of the people who are closer to 17  the leadership of this, I   ll call it movement, if you wish, if you please, this move of concern of expression, we   ve had two reunions since those days. The first one I missed, but I came back to the second one. I had a chance to talk to some of the folks. Some I knew well; some I did not know as well. One of the things that really impressed me was the fact that almost to a person, every one of those people became involved in a rather significant, socially-concerned vocation of one kind or another.  Some remained in academia. Some became lawyers and worked for civil rights issues. Some ran for public office. Some became social workers. Others became teachers. Some got involved in childcare issues. Some became journalist. Almost to a person, every one of them expressed a social conscious of a social justice nature, though expressed in a variety of different ways. All of them gave testimony, so to speak, or witness that the seeds of some of that, of their expression, was sown here at Oklahoma State University. That, for me, is probably the biggest legacy of those days, if you please, the years    66 to    68 and on into    69 after I left. The legacy of the vocational concern and commitment and care of those people expressed is rather amazing in my opinion.  Peters Did they all come from similar backgrounds, or, I mean, were they all part of the Greek system, or were they   .  Troxel We had a handful of Greeks, but no, they were diverse. They were diverse.  Peters You had people living on campus, off campus, Greeks     Troxel Oh, sure.  Peters    those involved with traditional Student Government Association, student newspapers, those involved with off-campus organizations, underground newspapers, so it sounds like an eclectic group of folks.  Troxel Very eclectic, very eclectic, and it would be a group of people that you probably wouldn   t pull together for a social event, a party. They came together because of their common concern for what was in the best interest of the university, its students, and its faculty.  Peters Okay. I   m going to throw out some constituencies that were involved in some way. Just want to get your reaction and response. The Oklahoma legislature, do you remember what their response or reactions were to this?  Troxel I do not know of   I do not know or remember anything the legislature said or did in relationship to what we were doing up at Stillwater.  Peters The Board of Regents? 18  Troxel I am aware that they did express their concern. They memorialized that in some revised speaker policies. They also expressed it some   I   m aware that a couple of the children of members of the regents, or students, at that time here or around that time here   . That was an interesting kind of an overlay on what was going on, as well.  Peters How was this event viewed in state newspapers? Do you have any idea?  Troxel Well, I did not know until recently, frankly, that our movement, (Laughs) our rallies got as much attention as they did. It was the piece put together by Ken Dahms and the other gentleman.  Peters Ron Stevens.  Troxel No, not Ron. Ron kept it. It   ll be in here somewhere. Ken Dahms and Bill Streck put together a piece that they sent to Dr. John Kenneth Galbraith. We can talk about it if you wish. In it they had put together a rather sizable dossier of news clippings that I did not know that we had made that big of an impression across the state. Pro and con, and some of it was just our articulation of what happened, that we had a rally, and others in terms of opinion, both supporting either the administration or the student effort.  Peters Are you familiar with anything that faculty council was involved with?  Troxel I know that they had discussions. I know that they took   that they had a representative. Dr. Margaret Brooks wrote a report on it. This had to do   and now it   s coming back to me a little bit. After the first rally, Dr. Kamm pulled in the department heads of four of the departments in arts and sciences and told them that no faculty nor any paid graduate student who is playing a role as a assistant teacher or whatever could participate in any of these rallies. I know that he had other things to say that I   m, of course, not privy to, but I know he said that because then Dr. Brooks was commissioned to write up a report about that particular event and some of the fallout that came from that. Her report was submitted to the faculty council.  Peters Those departments were history, political science, sociology, and philosophy, I believe.  Troxel I think that   s correct. The dean of arts of sciences at the time was Scales, James Scales, who obviously in a delicate position of representing the administration, but also having underneath him some of the departments where many of these students resided, shall I say. He was in a delicate position, but Dr. Scales was a terrific confidante, advisor, mentor to people on all sides of the equation. He later went on and became president of Wake 19  Forest University, and he was great. He came from a Baptist university down in Shawnee     Peters OBU.  Troxel    OBU, Oklahoma Baptist University, and my aunt was his secretary there and knew him. She and I had separate correspondence going on behind the scenes (Laughs) about how to work with Dr. Scales. I found him to be a terrific educator.  Peters He   d been at OBU almost thirty years     Troxel Gosh   Peters    and then he took the position here as dean of arts and sciences for just a short period of time, two or three years.  Troxel I think so; it wasn   t long.  Peters Then he moved to Wake Forest as president there. You mentioned the AAUP, briefly. They got involved, both nationally and the local state chapter. Do you know anything about the National Student Association?  Troxel I do not.  Peters Okay, we had not been a part of that association before this     Troxel Oh, really?  Peters    or after activities, and then at that point we asked for and joined the National Association of Students.  Troxel Terrific   Peters Do you know anything about the Students for a Democratic Society, SDS?  Troxel Yes, yes  In fact, I think all of us who were even remotely connected to this endeavor were espoused to be card-carrying members. I didn   t ever join the SDS, myself, but I was accused of being a member of the SDS. They had a bad national reputation. We were talking about Dr. Acuff earlier. His wife, in a private conversation with Ron Stevens, one of the members, (Ron would be closer to the leadership circle than I, certainly) they were having a visit during this period of time, and Mrs. Acuff said,    Well, all those people are communists, members of the SDS, and just stirring up no good.    Ron said,    I happen to be one of these people. I   m not a communist, and I   m not 20  a member of the SDS. Are you talking about me?    (Laughs) They had a confrontation there in the living room during that period of time.  Peters From what I understand, even though Acuff had been kind of a mentor to him, there was a bit of a falling out after that point.  Troxel Yeah, and   I experienced a little bit of that, myself. Gene was really a good professor. Really he wasn   t technically a professor, I guess, but a very good teacher. I had some classes with him, and I really appreciated what I learned in class. One of the sociology classes I had with him, the topic of group persuasion came up. About this time, the Billy Graham movement had put out some movie about something or another, and he assigned the class to go to the movie and observe what the dynamics going on of group persuasion that we could see, or write a paper about it. I can   t remember the details that we were supposed to write a paper or just talk about it in class. Well, later on, I began to get suspicious (Laughs) that what he was trying to do was get us all converted to Billy Graham. I   m not sure this was happening, but I   d always scratched my head as to why. It was kind of interesting, but he never closed the circle, closed the loop on the learning experience about that, which was why I always got a little suspicious about this. At any rate, we   ll leave that alone. (Laughs)  Peters When did the Friday Afternoon Tea and Glee Society begin meeting?  Troxel Well, I can   t remember the specifics. It   s one of these things that evolved. I didn   t go to it frequently.  Peters This was during your years?  Troxel Oh, yeah, it was while I was here. This thing started, our movement, our rallies   it really began to percolate in    67, school year    66-   67, then on into school year    67-   68. It would   ve been in those two school years and maybe fall of the following semester, at least, that the Friday Afternoon Tea and Glee Society would have its sessions. Again, I wouldn   t consider myself a regular. I attended on occasion. It was just a bull session, a venting session, a little bit of strategy maybe going on from time to time, and a lot of heavy talk.  Peters How many people would attend these? Where would they hold them?  Troxel I think they were   I don   t recall them ever being in the Union, but I bet they probably got their genesis at the Student Union. They were probably more off campus. I mentioned Ron Stevens being one of the leaders during the    66-   67 school year. Ron, and I, and three other guys rented a house together, and some of the events would take place in our house. We had Julian Bond come speak here once. After his speaking engagement, he came 21  over to our house, and that   s where we had really some of the best discussion going on, while we were there. That was off campus, of course. Some of those Tea and Glee Society meetings were probably at our house, I think. (Laughs)  Peters Do you remember where your house was located?  Troxel Well, let   s see. What   s the name, east-west street?  Peters University?  Troxel University, one block south of University, but west of Monroe about two blocks.  Peters So close to the Beta house.  Troxel Behind it and further west. One of the sororities was across the street.  Peters Kappa Kappa Gamma?  Troxel I can   t remember. Recently I drove by there, and the house is not there anymore.  Peters It   s gone.  Troxel There   s some apartment buildings.  Peters Is there a plaque or memorial?  Troxel (Laughs) I tell you, there ought to be  Julian Bond, we gave him a magic marker, and he autographed the wall. (Laughter)  Peters Was the Hideaway here when you   .  Troxel The Hideaway was here. That could   ve been where some of this was taking place, yes, down on     Peters Just off of Knoblock.  Troxel    yeah, Knoblock  We walked down Knoblock, right. The Wesley Foundation and some of the other religious student centers might have also housed some of the gatherings from time to time. It circulated because it didn   t have a place. This was not centralized anywhere. This was a real movement, in a sense. It gravitated all over, all over.  22  Peters The word would go out,    We   re meeting this Friday,    in some location, and people would gather there.  Troxel People would gather.  Peters Mostly students?  Troxel Yes, and graduate students. Faculty would show up on occasion but not too frequently.  Peters Okay. Let   s talk about some of the personalities that was in the groups of some of the personalities. We mentioned some of these people already, but I want you to kind of reflect back on, maybe try to, well, if you can, see things from their perspective. Robert Kamm, so he   s just arrived here. Actually, he   s been here as arts and sciences dean. He transitions into the presidency after, well, he   s president after Oliver Willham, who had been here for a long period of time. He came out of the  Henry  Bennett administration, so there   d been a long period of     Troxel Stability.  Peters    stability on campus. Kamm does not come from an ag background. He comes from arts and sciences.  Troxel That   s right.  Peters Willham, of course, came from an ag background, and most of our early presidents came from an ag background. So what do you think Kamm   s perspective was on all this   or his role?  Troxel I   ll take a     Peters I know it   s impossible for you to answer because you   re not him, but   .  Troxel    right, I   ll take an attempt. I think   and to be fair, there wasn   t any university president on any campus where any kind of    demonstrations    or    rallies    were happening were prepared for this. He was probably doubly ill-prepared in the sense that nothing even remotely like this had ever occurred here at Oklahoma State or Oklahoma A M before. I think it probably caught him off guard, and there wasn   t a playbook. I do not know to what extent he had any kind of kitchen cabinet that he checked in with, or peers that he would call. It looks to me like he was making some, was forced to make things up as he went along. I think given the conservative nature of this campus and this state at that time, (still is, of course, to a large degree) he was probably just following what seemed like was the logical path. Again, I made reference earlier to his reference to in loco parentis. I think 23  that gave him the intellectual logic for him deciding that he could say who could come on campus and who couldn   t.  I think he did not think that First Amendment rights applied to students, therefore, and I can see how he thought it. I think he was also, of course, accountable to the Board of Regents, which I think would be considered a pretty agrarian group at the time, Panhandle farmers and so forth. I think he was probably doing what he thought was best. I don   t think he had any   I don   t think any of us realized the degree to which there was something going on across the nation that our little rebellion, if you please, here at OSU was able to tap into, and it powered it. It didn   t power it for very long. A couple years, and it faded out. Students graduated and so on, and so forth. At that time, we were all surprised and a little bit caught off guard at the energy that was present and that had been tapped into, and I think it caught him off guard, as well.  Peters Abe Hesser, what do you remember about Abe Hesser?  Troxel I don   t remember   that   s too long ago, David. I do remember he had a personality about him. He had been around longer than a lot of folks, and   .  Peters He serves as director of the Student Union, and a lot of student activities and organizations are centered in the Student Union.  Troxel Yeah, and we all loved the Student Union. Whenever we could, all the students loved going to the Student Union then and, I bet you, that   s still the case now. I don   t remember anything specifically, but he was the one who said the ACLU could not have its meeting there. Then he found himself in the crosshairs, (Laughs) and I   m sure he wasn   t prepared for that, as well.  Peters That event, the ACLU had been invited to meet at the Student Union, the Little Theater. He said they couldn   t. Actually, eventually the board said,    Well, they could,    but the word go to them     Troxel Two weeks too late.  Peters    too late...  Troxel It was too late.  Peters    to do anything about it. By then, they   d moved it to another location here in Stillwater.  Troxel Some hotel called the El Sol     Peters El Sol. 24  Troxel    at which I don   t even remember where it was, and I   m sure it   s long gone.  Peters Sixth and Western, it   s still there.  Troxel Really? It   s still there?  Peters It   s got a different name now, but it   s still there, the El Sol. (Laughter)  Troxel I   ll be darned.  Peters Do you remember the governor, Dewey Bartlett, at the time     Troxel Gosh, no   Peters    or anything that he   okay. Ken Dahms was involved. In fact, was he one of your roommates?  Troxel No, he was not.  Peters Ron Stevens was.  Troxel Ron   the five of us in the house: Craig Campbell, Wade Martin, Mike Eischen, myself, and Ron. (Laughs) I can remember it by heart, our five guys there, but no. Ken was our thought leader. He was our intellectual guy. I remember he wrote well, and he provided the intellectual vigor to our conversations. That much I do remember.  Peters Do you remember Clarence Cunningham? He was on the faculty.  Troxel He was on the faculty. I   m going to try to remember what department. I   m going to say he was in chemistry.  Peters Yes, he was.  Troxel Gosh, how did I remember that? (Laughs) He was certainly a sympathetic faculty member. He may have been, in fact, an advisor to certain groups. I somehow recall him, and I could be wrong on this, David. Could he have been on the board of the Wesley Foundation at that time?  Peters He was a member of the Society of Friends. He was a Quaker     Troxel Oh, a Quaker  That   s right   Peters    and they had kind of an associate affiliate status with the UCCM. They had a large enough group, so Clarence was actively involved with the 25  Wesley Foundation board, just as kind of an associate. So that   s   yes. He was a World War II vet, but he was also a member of the Society of Friends as a Quaker, and in the chemistry department. Okay, so Clarence. Louis Bullock? Did you ever make much contact with him?  Troxel No.  Peters Ron Stevens?  Troxel Well, yeah, Ron and I go way back. Ron and I met at the Wesley Foundation. We discovered we both were in the same high school together in Oklahoma City, Northwest Classen, but we were a year apart. We never met in high school. We met once we got into college. He had become active in the Wesley Foundation, and we spent a lot of time together. He lives in Chicago now with me, and he and I are in a Chicago Cubs baseball tickets syndicate together. I just saw him a couple weeks ago, as a matter of fact. We   ve been friends   we   ve remained friends over the years. Ron is a great example of what I meant by someone whose social consciousness was awakened here. It probably was awakened before he came to school, (I don   t know) but it certainly got   his fire got fanned here while he was at OSU. He moved to Chicago after graduation, went to law school for   . I don   t know that he even took the bar exam, but he was active in politics in Chicago. In fact, we elected the first African American mayor, Harold Washington, in 1983 or   4, and Ron was active in Harold Washington   s campaign on the north side. After that, Ron took a job as director of the United Way in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Then he went and joined their national staff, and he   s back in Chicago now.  Peters What do you remember about Margaret Brooks? She was on the faculty here.  Troxel She was terrific. She was a passionate English professor, as I recall, and she was a confidante to our Friday Afternoon Tea and Glee Society group. Provided some real thought-provoking ideas to it, terrific integrity. She also authored the report that I made reference to earlier. The student senate asked her to be its advisor. I believe that would   ve been my senior year. She accepted, but after a while then she found it, because of the scrutiny that she had to go through to get okayed by the administration, she found it just a little bit too bearing. Again, this is related, David. At the student level, there was a level of concern going on, but at the faculty level, there was another level of concern that I certainly was not privy to. We heard things, but we weren   t a part of it. She apparently found herself in the crosshairs of a lot of antagonism coming from the administration. She also had to submit her resignation during my senior year, and that was a big blow, losing someone of her stature. I wish I could tell you more, but she was   .  26  Peters She was a tenured faculty member     Troxel Tenured faculty member, that   s right.  Peters    and had recently been named head of the Honors school. The Honors school had just started.  Troxel That   s right  She had to either tone it down or they were going to take the Honors program away from her or something like that. It was too much for her.  Peters I believe the threat was they were just going to close the Honors. They had spent years trying to develop it. They finally got her approved; she was named as one of the first heads of the honors program; and then because of her involvement, there was the threat. I   m not sure where the threat came from, that unless there were changes that they would just close the Honors program down. She felt that she couldn   t be the reason for that happening, so she submitted her resignation then. James Scales, we mentioned James Scales. Anything else to add about Dean Scales?  Troxel No, the few conversations I had with him one-on-one were some of my favorite memories. I don   t remember anything specific, but I remember he had good counsel.  Peters And then Richard Cummins. You may not have known him.  Troxel No, I did not know him well. I knew of him.  Peters He was involved with the     Troxel The AAUP report.  Peters    AAUP. Okay, all right. What do you know about contacting John Kenneth Galbraith?  Troxel Okay, yes. I   m not sure   the student senate had the speakers forum, and an invitation for him to speak was extended. I don   t know the motivation behind it; I   m not privy to it. Who were the two fellows that wrote the report?  Peters Kenneth Dahms and Bill Streck, I believe.  Troxel Ken Dahms and Bill Streck, who were members of the senate, as I recall, put together quite a dossier of all the things that had been transpiring at OSU during the last eighteen or so months, including, I believe, a copy of the AAU report, including the press clippings from around the state, and a little 27  piece on each one of the incidents that had occurred, the refusal to allow various speakers to come on campus, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera, and submitted it to Dr. Galbraith, who then sent back a telegram eventually, saying he would not accept the invitation to come speak so long as the particular speaker guidelines or policy was in place. Sort of as a protest against what he considered to be a stringent speaker policy, he refused to accept the invitation to come speak.  Peters I don   t know if you   re interested, but there is Galbraith   s letter.  Troxel Oh, yeah  I don   t think I   d ever seen the letter. No, you   re right.  Peters Underneath it is the telegram.  Troxel I   d heard about the telegram. I think I   d seen the telegram. Yeah,    On reflection.    (Laughs) Okay, thanks for sharing, gosh   Peters So initially he had said he still might come then speak about the issues, but eventually after receiving the dossier materials from Dahms and Streck, then he declined the invitation, which apparently they had been working, those within the administration, had been supporting, working on having him come here for an extended period of time.  Troxel Yeah, yeah, yeah, and it would   ve been terrific, so this is interesting, wow  This is in the right place, David. You   re great to have that.  Peters We also have copies of The Drummer, and there were several other student underground newspapers.  Troxel In fact, at our last Friday Afternoon Tea and Glee Society reunion, you and/or your colleagues allowed us to come over here and flip through some of them. I took one of the copies of the old Drummer and was looking at it and realized that it was the one that had been mailed to me. I   m wondering now if I was the one who donated one of my own copies of The Drummer. (Laughs) I have no idea how that could have got here, though. I can   t remember.  Peters I   ll look for the address. We   ll figure out where that house was where you lived because it was mailed to you.     It was one you   d gotten, or received.  Troxel Yeah, it was mine, my copy   Peters Well, thank you.  Troxel Well, yeah, but I don   t know how I got it to you. (Laughs)  28  Peters Are you familiar with the black student protests?  Troxel I   m not familiar with the detail.  Peters I think that happened after    68.  Troxel Could   ve been. I   m not familiar with the details of that.  Peters Are you familiar with any of the residence hall policy changes? They were   well, until that time the residence halls were closed to members of the opposite sex. At some point, they opened those up to members   .  Troxel That came later.  Peters Later? Okay. Because then they said the halls were to be opened to members of the opposite sex, but you had to keep your doors open in your rooms. They had a whole series of restrictions. They can come in, but you couldn   t just entertain them anywhere. That was all later. Kent State, of course, is later.  Troxel Later,    70,    71, somewhere in there.  Peters So let   s talk   I think we   re closing in, wearing you out here. I appreciate your patience with me. Let   s see. You   ve graduated. You   ve got your draft card. Are you drafted?  Troxel No. Three days after graduation, I put all my worldly belongings in my Volkswagen Bug, Beetle Bug, and drove up to Chicago and joined the staff of the Ecumenical Institute at the time, which later morphed into a group that   s currently operating in Chicago called the Institute of Cultural Affairs (ICA). I was with them for a long time, thirty years or so, or more maybe. At any rate, relative to the draft, sometime in the winter or spring of    69, my number got called. I had already attempted, I believe (I can   t remember, again, I can   t remember the sequence) I   d already applied for conscientious objector status with my draft board. I was denied that.  Peters Was the draft board still in Oklahoma City?  Troxel In Oklahoma City. Actually, at first, when I joined the Ecumenical Institute, I applied for seminary continuing education status or some sort of deferment for the nature of the work and studies I was involved in. I was denied that. Then I applied for conscientious objector status, went before the draft board for that, and was denied that. I subsequently received a presidential deferment by virtue of the fact that I called upon US Senator Fred Harris to see if he could intervene on my behalf. Senator Harris was familiar with the organization with whom I was working. He was head of the subcommittee 29  on intergovernmental affairs. It looked into the riots following Dr. King   s assassination and invited members of our group that was involved in community development in an inner-city ghetto of Chicago, in an African American community, to testify before his subcommittee, which we did. We enjoyed good rapport with Senator Harris, and so we asked what he could do on my behalf. Once it became clear, I got the deferment. The presidential deferment came in the mail to me three days before I was supposed to report for duty.  Peters That was in 1969.  Troxel That was spring of    69.  Peters And the war is   .  Troxel We   re in the throes. It   s heated, very heated at that time.  Peters But you get the letter from the president   s   . Then what did you do?  Troxel I got married that spring, also, and my wife, Karen, she   s from Indiana. We both stayed with the work of the Ecumenical Institute and subsequently the Institute of Cultural Affairs. We were assigned to Washington, DC, and opened up our original office there. Stayed there two years, then went to Milwaukee with the regional directors there, and then Los Angeles. Came back to Chicago. Then we spent a year in Belgium doing similar work in training people, theological training, as well as community development methods. It was what we were strong on. That   s how I applied my sociology degree, in community development. After a year in Belgium and Europe in general, we were assigned to Taiwan and got to travel a little bit around Asia. Then back to Chicago in 1976. We   ve lived   .  Peters All of these places are between    69 and    76.  Troxel Right, about a year each. Our son, who was born in Washington, the first six years of his life he lived in a different city. We   ve lived in Chicago ever since 1976. We continued to work with the Institute of Cultural Affairs until 1995, after which, my wife and I and some others started a consulting company working with non-profit groups and government and educational groups. Then we kind of semi-retired about five years ago. That would   ve been 2011 or so, 2012, and we   ve been volunteering. I am now on the board of the group that I used to be a staff member of.  Peters Okay. Sounds wonderful.  Troxel Oh, it   s been great. It   s been a great ride.  30  Peters You have the one son?  Troxel J Just Jonathan, yeah, and his wife. They   re living in Chicago. Along the way, I got my master   s degree at DePaul University in Chicago.  Peters In?  Troxel In integrated learning with a concentration in organizational development, so I became an OD professional and used that skill, as well as the skills in group process facilitation that I had honed at the ICA. That   s how I made a living.  Peters What brings you back to Oklahoma periodically?  Troxel Along the way, I started another company with a friend of mine in development finance. We have a contract to do several programs. We also started an endeavor, along with OSU   s research foundation and their wing called Cowboy Technologies, which is the technology commercialization function of the university to bring together   . We founded and manage the group called Cowboy Technology Angels, a group of alums, high-net-worth individuals who invest in or at least get to decide if they want to invest in new companies that might get spun out of the university   s research. We   re just getting started, only about two years old.  We invested in one company that came out of the university   s chemistry department, a technology that removes arsenic from water. Nine of our members, all of them alums, invested in that business. None of us are rich yet from this enterprise, but we   ve invested in four other enterprises and made six investments so far. We   re growing, and that brings me back. Like this Friday, we   ll be looking at another investment opportunity. A technology company   s getting started in Oklahoma City that   s licensed out of NASA that   s going to help drones not run into airplanes, so protection sensor technology that we   re going to take a look at on Friday. I come back and talk to people about joining, look at other deals that the university has   .  I had a chance to give a talk to the sociology department a month ago. I was just over there before I came over here, as a matter of fact, talking to the head of the department, Dr. Bird, Sharon Bird, about maybe creating an internship program for having sociology students come up to Chicago and work with the ICA, which is very much involved now in the climate change discussions and is working in the arena of sustainable communities. I did not know this until recently, but OSU, the sociology department, has a strong environmental sociology component. We would love to have their students come and work with us up there in Chicago and take a look at helping build sustainable communities across the city of Chicago with us. 31  Peters Looking back, was your time here at OSU, did it serve as a pivot point, or what impact did it have on your   .  Troxel Yeah, very much so. I also am going to say that my involvement with the Wesley Foundation, which provided impetus for a lot of these things we   ve talked about here today, David, but also in and of itself was a source of concern, and I got very involved in the campus ministry. It very much nurtured me, helped to grow and foster this social consciousness that got developed along the way. Very much appreciate my time with the Wesley Foundation, so I have to tip my hat off to my Methodist groups, the Wesley Foundation, there. Appreciated that very much. When the nine of the ten faculty resigned, I happened to be president of the Sociology Student Association.  They sent me in to meet Dr. Kamm and confront him, to be assured that our degrees were not going to be in peril. Here I am, getting ready to go into my senior year, and I don   t have a faculty to teach. (Laughs) Are all these credit hours for naught? That was true of all of those of us who were rounding the bend there with our degree programs. Sure enough, Dr. Kamm and the university and Dr. Scales were able to put together a faculty that enabled those of us to complete our programs. I probably, in my time here, I got to one basketball game, maybe a handful of football games because I was required to do that as a part of the fraternity or something, but a lot of great people I met here along the way, faculty and students. Many of them, I   m still friends with.  Peters Did you work at all part-time or have a job, employment while you were     Troxel Only in the summers, and that was down in Oklahoma City doing everything. I worked at the YMCA in the boys    department. That was right across the street from the Murrah Building that got   .  Peters So that   s where you worked in the summers?  Troxel That   s where I worked in the summers; it   s true. My first paying job was at the YMCA in Oklahoma City.  Peters Do you know that Dr. Kamm was a member of the First United Methodist Church here in town?  Troxel Yes, I do. The name of the minister there, it seems like his last name was also Smith. No, no wait, the bishop was Angie Smith.  Peters Angie Smith was the bishop.  32  Troxel Okay, now who was   I can   t remember the name of the minister there. Do you remember?  Peters Lloyd Peters came here in the late   60s. I think he came after you had left.  Troxel Yeah, the gentleman I   m trying to remember, I think he then went on to St. Luke   s Methodist Church in Oklahoma City, I think. I   m not positive.  Peters Okay. Anything else you   d like to add?  Troxel I think it   s great, as an advocate of all of the work of Studs Terkel in oral history, that OSU has got such a great archives here at the Library, and the oral history project is terrific. I hope this story and all the others that you take for all sorts of reasons, that people have a chance to benefit from over the years. I finally got around to reading Angie Debo   s book     Peters And Still the Waters Run?  Troxel    And Still the Waters Run. That   s a terrific book. She was the premier sociologist of her time. That should be required   . As I finish the book, I   m saying,    Why wasn   t I required to read this as a high school student in Oklahoma?    It was such a classic; really is a classic. I   m so proud of the fact that she donated her work, all of her work, here to the library, and I   m so proud of the fact you all have maintained it, too.  Peters I think it   s fitting that we   re in the Angie Debo Room today     Troxel The Angie Debo Room  (Laughs)  Peters    and I appreciate your participation in this project. It   s really been a joy for us, and I think we   re going to wrap it up, then. Thank you very much.  Troxel Thank you, thank you. All right.  Peters Okay, thank you, Jim.  -------  -------   
