 Finchum Today is August 18, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University, and today I am in Jones, Oklahoma, which is in Oklahoma County. I   m going to be interviewing Don Ramsey, and this is part of our Cowboy in Every County Project. Thank you for having me today.  Ramsey Well, I   m certainly glad that you   re here. You   re certainly welcome. Jones is a rather small town in size, but we   re big in other ways. We   re glad to have you and appreciate it, and I consider it an honor to have you here interviewing my little part of life.  Finchum Good, thank you. Let   s start with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Ramsey I was born in Three Sands, Oklahoma. That   s in Noble County, up in kind of the northwest, and it was an oil field town. I was born in a tent. My family followed the oil wells, oil fields, and when they would go dry the whole town would move. There   s nothing at Three Sands now but a little sign about that tall and a little T and just says    Three Sands.    I   m not even sure it   s there now. Soon after that particular time, that field, that oil field, went dry. The custom of everybody was to load up their things on their wagons and go to where the next oil field was. My dad decided at that time   and it was getting so hard to stay up with those, they got to be little pockets of oil here and there. We   d go there and get set up, and then it   s time to move. He decided that there must be, I guess, a better life than that was, so we left Three Sands when I was very young, I think about two years old.  He started driving, didn   t know where he was going, but he was looking for a good school. I had one sister and three brothers, and of course my mother. He was looking for a good school. This is a story that has been told me. When he got down to Dale, Oklahoma, which is in Pott  Pottawatomie  County just east of here about twenty or thirty miles, he thought he found a good school. He found a little two-room renthouse, and we moved into that 5  little two-room renthouse. I can just barely remember that house before we moved to another little two- or three-room house. Then we stayed there a little while. He was working for farmers in the area. He wanted to start farming, but he couldn   t just start off farming. He started off working, at that time, for ten cents an hour. We talked today about low salaries, and they are low, but they   ve been lower than it is now.  He worked that way. He and two of my older brothers worked that way, what work they could get, just scrounging up a little bit of this and that until then he decided to start farming, himself. Of course, farms back then were much smaller than what they are today. To kind of shorten the story, we moved to five different farms while I was in school, and I graduated at Dale in 1946. He wanted a farm, thought he could farm. We finally did get a little, I believe it was a sixty-acre farm. He thought he could make a living on it. It just never did work out, and he always thought that the next farm was going to be a better farm. Sixty, seventy, seventy-five, eighty acres, eighty acres was a big farm then. We would move from one farm to another about every two years, load up on the wagon, and move all of our stuff to the various farms in the community.  I graduated in Dale at Dale High School in 1946. My three older brothers didn   t finish high school, but my sister, which was the older of all of us, she did finish high school. She didn   t go to college. I was the only one that did go to college. We had a good family. We weren   t just rubbish, you know. We were a good family. We tried to do things decently and in order. That   s sort of the way we were brought up, and thank goodness. They   re all gone now. That   s the way it was all their life: just do things right. If you couldn   t do them right, don   t do them. We moved to those, like I said, five different places, so that   s about a move every two years, really. He always thought that that next farm was going to be better. I mean, we   d move over here, and    We   ll make so many bales of cotton, and it   ll be so much better.    It never did happen. He just wasn   t cut out to be a farmer, yet he finished his life farming. Here I was, not a real good student, probably a C or C-plus or maybe a B. When I was in the seventh grade I decided I wanted to go to college. I knew what I wanted to be. I wanted to be a   . Sorry.  Finchum It   s okay. Were you the baby, the baby of the family?  Ramsey Yes.  Finchum And you were born in    30   no     Ramsey Nineteen twenty-eight. October 31, 1928. I was born in Three Sands, Oklahoma. I was the last of the children and the last to be born there. The rest of them were older than I was when we came to Dale. We scrounged through those years. My two older brothers, the one next to me was still a 6  little bit too young. He didn   t fit in to that work level, but the two others did. They would go out with my daddy and work for that ten cents an hour and hopefully bring home enough money. We weren   t expecting to accrue anything. We were just expected to eat.  Finchum Was cotton the main thing he     Ramsey Cotton was the crop. It really was. I remember getting on the wagon and going with my daddy from Dale to McLoud, which were three miles, to the cotton gin, and taking that bale of cotton and getting it ginned, getting back on the wagon, and going back to that farm. I didn   t know it then, but it was such a hopeless, hapless, thing for us to do. Maybe that was his only choice, but that   s the choice he made. He finished his years, making a living on the farm. I don   t know how he did, but he did.  Finchum Did your mother work?  Ramsey Yeah, she was a housewife and taking care of five kids.  Finchum That   s work.  Ramsey That was housework. Now, she did go out in the field and pick cotton, or what we call pulling bolls. She did that. I still wasn   t very big then. I remember I was pretty big, but I   d ride on her cotton sack while she was going along. We had enough people in the family to kind of take care of the gathering of our crop. We had then an ag teacher. I wasn   t in Ag or FFA, but we had an ag teacher of one of my older brothers. In fact, it was my next oldest brother. I liked that guy. He was just a good guy for even a little ol   kid. I decided then that I was going to be an Ag  teacher .  Finchum In the seventh grade.  Ramsey Yeah, I didn   t have a dime.  Finchum But you had a goal.  Ramsey I didn   t have a dime, and my parents didn   t have a dime. I don   t know why looking back now that I thought that I could ever go to college, but I knew I was going to go to Oklahoma A M. I don   t know. I got a scholarship my first year to play basketball at another school. I told the coach then, I said,    I   m not going to be down there but one year.    See, I   m still in school. I say,    I   m not going to be down there but one year, and I want you to know that because I   ll be leaving.    He probably thought that I wouldn   t, but anyway, I stuck with that. When the year was over, I got me a way to Stillwater, and I enrolled in Oklahoma A M. The thing of it is, what was so good about it, I knew what I wanted to do. That never did change. I don   t know what it 7  would   ve taken for me to have changed that because that was just in me for some reason or another. That   s the kind of work I wanted to be, and I was going to be an ag teacher.  I transferred then. That was in   I   d gone a year to another school and then transferred to OSU in the fall of    47. I had no money, washed dishes for a while. It didn   t take much money. This is something I have to thank OSU for is people back there then. I wasn   t the only one. There was people back there then that they would make a way for a student if they wanted to go to school. Now, they may still do that. I don   t know. I know that they would make you a way if you wanted to. I wound up in the lunchroom, washing dishes. I didn   t care what it was. It was such a situation. We lived about   where I stayed was about a mile and a half out of the major part of the campus from what we used to call  Whitehurst  Hall. I don   t know whether you remember. It   s just straight west of the Student Union now.  I lived in a place called Oretoopa Halls. That was the period of time when there was a lot of veterans coming back. They were out of housing, and they had brought in hundreds of army barracks. That   s what they called them. They wasn   t barracks. They were about a twenty-by-thirty, just a square building with a low top. They had two bunkbeds in there, so four boys could stay in that Quonset. I don   t know what they called it. I found out back then, and I still remember, that I always couldn   t wonder   there was probably two or three hundred of those. It   s about three-quarters of a mile southwest of the present hospital, the  Stillwater  hospital, about three-quarters of a mile. That made it about a mile and a quarter from the main campus. That didn   t bother me. I was used to just whatever. Getting that didn   t matter.  I found out then, and I   ll never forget it, but somebody needs to make it known. You know what they called those Quonsets, those little twenty-by-thirty?    Home of the red man.    Oklahoma   s got Indians, and whoever named it that, but that was sort of the official name of those Army barracks that they had moved in, four people, two bunkbeds, one up and one down. They named it    the home of the red man.    I stayed in there all the time until I finished school. I   d walk. I didn   t even have a bicycle. I did have a bicycle about the last year. Walking a mile and a quarter or mile and a half and carrying four or five books, that didn   t mean nothing to me. I was a tough farm boy. I was there in the fall of    47, having gone to another school a year already, fall of    47, fall of    48, and the fall of    49, and graduated in the spring of    50. Need to go back to the other school. I was playing basketball. We   d leave Friday afternoon, and we wouldn   t get back in until Sunday.  I had enrolled in about sixteen hours, which they didn   t want a ball player enrolled in very many. I didn   t have no study time. When I left this college, I only had twenty-seven hours. I passed all of them but not very good. When I got to Stillwater and I knew what my major was going to be, I decided, 8     Okay, when I get into my major and they   ve given me a chance, they   ve done all they can do. I   ve got to do it.    I just about studied all the time. When I went home on the weekends, which I did from Stillwater to mainly Shawnee when I went down there, I would take my suitcase packed full of books, and I didn   t do much of anything except study. To make that story, you know, try to shorten it down, I actually made straight As in all of my major subjects, not in all of my subjects but all of my major subjects.  I was kind of honored a little bit how they still do some of that. There was a lot of them that beat me because some of them was straight-A students. I wasn   t that, but it pleased me so much not having been ultra-successful in my past history that that was pretty good. In fact, it was pretty good for the people that was in the Department of Agriculture Education. I had a couple of people that knew my background a little bit. In fact, one of them was my old superintendent in high school. He was asking everybody,    What are you going to do when you get out of school?    He got around to me, and I said,    I   m going to go to Oklahoma A M, and I   m going to be an ag teacher.    He started laughing because my background was nothing. You wouldn   t think he would do that, but he did, not thinking. I   ll give him credit for it, but he put me down, deep. I had one other guy that told me the same thing. He wasn   t a very influential guy.  We were hauling hay one day, and he said,    What are you going to do? You   re getting out of school.    I said,    I   m going to college.    He said,    You   re going to college?    I said,    Yeah.    He said,    What are you going to do?    I said,    I   m going to be a school teacher.    He said,    You   ll be out here with me hauling hay the next time I see you.    I said,    Okay, you just wait and see.    I showed both of them. I went through college, and Oklahoma A M was a good college. They would, like I said while ago, if they determined that you was determined to direct yourself in a certain way and would do it, they   d help you. That was the situation in my college life. During that time while I was in Oklahoma A M, I was in the National Guard which required some time each week and during the summer because I was in the Reserve. I can   t remember the reason, but they were still taking people that were not in school or not in some occupation that they considered important. I had to do what I had to do along with my schooling. The National Guard had to come first, but I was able to do that.  While I was at OSU, which was three years, I missed one weekend going home from Stillwater to Shawnee, except one. I hitchhiked. Back then you could catch a ride, and I hitchhiked from Stillwater to Shawnee every weekend but one in three years. That time it was snowing, and I caught a bus and went down there. You couldn   t do that now, and I don   t know how students do that anymore. I just imagine that if they go up there with the determination, knowing what they want to do and will do it and will put out whatever they have to do, they   d find a way. There just isn   t a situation 9  that   I   m looking back a long ways, but there just isn   t a situation where if the student wants to do it badly enough, they   ll do it.  Finchum How did you get there the first time? You said you made your way. Did you have to hitchhike when you transferred?  Ramsey I had a friend that was going up there, also, and he had a car. We went up and enrolled together. We kind of parted ways. Finally, (and I have to get this in) after I left  A M , there was 115 students in agriculture education graduating in December and the spring of    50   no, of the middle term of    50 to spring of    50. There was 115 graduates, and there was fifteen jobs in Oklahoma. Back then they would send everybody out. You could go in your own car, but when you got to that school, you walked in like little soldiers and sat down on a bench or chair for your interview. This was my first interview, and it was for a new school. It didn   t make me any difference; I   d have gone anywhere. I got the job. Stayed there two years and was drafted into the Army after I had taught the two years.  That was a pretty good blow. The Korean conflict had come along. I wasn   t the only one. Going to school or teaching, quite a few teachers then didn   t go because they were teachers, but there was a lot of us that went that were teachers for some reason or another. I went into the Army, and luckily it was only two years until the Korean conflict came to an end. They let a lot of us out early if we were going to go to school that summer. I was working in what we call the discharge section. I was reading these orders that the lieutenant was going to get next. I was a private. I wasn   t wanting to make a career out of it. I looked at that thing, and it said any of our military people that are going to go to school or want to go to school this summer are going to get out early. I couldn   t believe it. I read it two or three times, I guess. I took it in and laid it down on the lieutenant   s desk, and I said,    You know, that affects me, if I understand what it   s saying.    He said,    You wanting to go to school?    I said,    Yeah, I   d love to go to school.     Of course, I already had my degree, but I would   ve started my master   s, which I finally did get. He said,    I understand the order. How soon do you want to get out of here?    I said,    Today.    (Laughter) He said,    Come on, now.    Anyway, in about a week, one of the other sergeants walked up and gave me my papers and said,    You   re leaving here.    I came back, (it was kind of late summer) and I had to get another school to teach because all the jobs had been taken. School hadn   t nearly started by then. I spent two years at that school, and then I came to Jones and spent sixteen years here. That   s when my wife and I started all of what you see here today. The students that really want to go, I mean, if they really do, they can.  Finchum Did you meet your wife at OAMC, Oklahoma A M?10  Ramsey No, I didn   t meet her until 1965. We got married in  1966 , so she was here, though, when all of our children were born and all of this started. The pictures are over there on the wall that shows from one period of time to another. We   ve taken a great deal of pride in what we   ve done. We   ve tried to put it in scrapbooks or put it up here on this thing. I   ve maintained a good relationship. I had a chance at one of the graduations to say a few words. I told the graduates that day, I said,    Don   t ever forget your school.    I said,    You don   t realize it today,    they were graduating,    but you will, and you will recognize just how important and what a part that the school has played in your life. When you can, you pay back to your school what they   ve given you.    I don   t know. I wasn   t a good student, although I did make grades that got some attention in my major.  I was just determined to do as well as I could, and I was willing to study. I didn   t take those books home for nothing. I worked. Being just an average or a little bit better student, I just took advantage of it. I taught for a total of twenty years, and I loved it. It come that time when I wanted to try something else, and I thought I knew what to do and how to do it, taking some risk. Didn   t have any money. Had six thousand dollars in teacher retirement. Of course, that doesn   t go very far. I went to the local bank down here, and I told Nina Hogan I said   he was on the school board. I said,    I guess you know what I   m wanting to do.    He said,    Yeah. What do you want?    I said,    I need some money.    He said,    How much have you got?    I said,    I   ve got six thousand dollars, and it   s all in teacher   s retirement. I can get it, but that   s all I got.    He said,    That isn   t very much to start a business.    I said,    I know it, but I   m going to do it.    He said,    I   ll loan you six thousand dollars.     He did. He loaned me six thousand dollars, and until this day we have not borrowed one dollar since then. That   s right. The boys, they   re responsible for all of this. I retired about three or four years ago, but they had already started running the thing. They   re both OSU graduates. One   s in ag econ, and the other one ag education, double major. They loved it, too, but things had changed. They didn   t go under the same circumstances as I did. I tried to instill in them what I could, but that   s just sort of something that you have to experience. They   re doing an excellent job. They designed all of this, then had it approved. They have done a better job than what I did. They were so much more capable and willing to work. They   re running Blue   Gold Sausage now, and they   re covering a part of four states.  Finchum Why sausage?  Ramsey See, I was the FFA instructor. See that over there on the wall? Blue and gold was their colors. I remember Dean, my wife, saying,    What would you call your sausage?    I said,    I   d call it Blue   Gold.    I   ll have to get into this. That started as a project when I was the teacher down here. The school 11  didn   t have any money, and we had to make our own money. We had lots of hogs, and we started having the hogs butchered by a packing plant, made into pork sausage, and then we would sell it door-to-door. When I got to thinking about it and kind of wanting to quit the teaching, I thought,    If I do, I think I know what I need to do. I think that I   ve seen so much with my boys down here.    It didn   t make any difference how much  sausage  we made; we sold it. We were the richest   . The superintendent either didn   t have any money or he wouldn   t give us any money from day one.  Finally, he was coming to us for money because you could transfer funds, then, from one department like FFA and agriculture education, to another by law on his books. I   ve had him come to us and say,    Can I pay the lunch bill out of your Blue   Gold fund?    I kind of hated to say yes because he hadn   t been totally fair with us, but they finally changed it to where you couldn   t exchange funds from the two different departments. I was glad of it because it took a load off of me. That   s where Blue   Gold   see, the name Blue   Gold is FFA colors, but they have trademarked in Washington DC, they have the letters FFA, Future Farmers of America. They have those letters trademarked. The emblem itself is trademarked. I knew that I could   and didn   t even want to. I mean I thought too much of the organization to cut into their   but what we did, we decided we would call it Blue   Gold and make the package blue and gold.  Immediately when that happened, everybody started calling it the FFA sausage. We couldn   t name it that, but they did. Today that   s it; it   s Blue   Gold Sausage. We sell mostly to FFA chapters, but we do sell to other groups other than FFA now. Where it got its name was from the FFA organization. I have to give Stillwater credit for this, Oklahoma A M. (I   ll always call it Oklahoma A M.) They knew how to turn out ag teachers. Then, it was more of an agricultural college than I think it is now. I had friends that slept in chicken houses. I know one guy,  Wes Watkins , slept in a chicken house. Ralph Dreessen, that I was telling you about a while ago, I think he slept in the barn. I   m not quite certain about that, but we just all did what we had to do to survive. We didn   t understand that. Most of us was just kind of raised up that way. When we got up there   I have to tell this story. I probably set the record   I don   t know this, but I probably set the record for the number of hours that was completed in one year   s time at OSU. Here   s what I did. I was short on hours when I left my first college, after playing basketball and got behind two or three hours. Let me see. I lost my thought.  Finchum How many hours did you have?  Ramsey Thank you very much. After losing that, if I was going to finish in four years, I actually took out a semester and a summer. That   s what it was. I took out during those four years to teach veterans agriculture training because lots of military guys coming back. Here I just had one year at 12  A M. I thought,    They   re really wanting teachers,    so I went in over there. They said,    We   ve been waiting on you,    just like, you know. I took out a summer and taught, and a semester, of course, accrued some money. I was smart enough to say,    Hey, I didn   t take this job to keep it.    I resigned and went back to A M. In one summer   s time at A M, counting two semesters and summer school and August intersession, I completed fifty-four hours.  Finchum That   s a lot.  Ramsey The last year to graduate in the spring of    50, I had to get twenty-four hours. You had to go to Dr.  Oliver  Willham. You don   t know him. He finally became president of the college. I went in there and told him. He was real nice, real friendly.    What can I do for you Mr. Ramsey?    I said,    I hope you can help me out.       What do you want?    I said,    I   m wanting to enroll in enough hours that will get me out of here next spring.    Then it was this spring, and he said,    What are you wanting to do?    I said,    I got to have twenty-four hours.    He looked at me kind of mean because that was unheard of. He said,    What is your hurry?    I said,    If I don   t get out of here, I   m going to starve to death. You   ve got my transcript right there. If that   s not enough to tell you that I can and will do it, then just forget it.    He reached over and got his pencil kind of mean-like and scribbled. (Laughter) I finished that twenty-four hours in my last semester, and that made the fifty-four hours from one year to the next year. I don   t believe that that has ever been exceeded. I just don   t believe it because it   s just kind of ignorance, really.  Finchum But you passed them all.  Ramsey I passed them all and passed them good. I didn   t have no   I was up in those subjects where they were in my major, a little more agriculture like I had a background for. I would like to have thanked him later on for that. He would probably have remembered it because he was upset. It   s just like I said a while ago, they would bend the rules if they had to.  Finchum Were you still working in the cafeteria while you were doing that?  Ramsey No, I wasn   t. I   m on my second marriage. The last two years, I didn   t wash dishes.  Finchum You didn   t live in   did you live in Oretoopa     Ramsey Yes, I did. I stayed in Oretoopa Halls,    home of the red man.     Finchum How were they heated? Did they have a   13  Ramsey They had a lunch hall that was a bigger barrack-type deal that everybody  ate at  up towards the hospital   . Of course, all that   s gone now. Been gone for years. You know what? I wouldn   t take anything for having lived in Oretoopa Halls. The people, some of my friends lived on campus and was lucky to get rooms. They was awfully short with veterans coming in with GI Bill, taking up all the room that they had.  Finchum Were there showers or that type of thing?  Ramsey You had to go outside. About every sixth or seventh little hut, they would have a little hut that had a shower in it. Everybody in that area, not just in five or six, but a bunch of people, you just went out there. I can remember maybe there   d be six or eight in there at one time just trying to get wet. (Laughter) Let me tell you this. You know what it cost us by the month, the college? You know what A M charged us by the month? Six dollars. Six dollars a month. I want to tell you one more thing. At that time, A M was just charging up to fourteen hours for any expenses. If you took sixteen, you got two free. I was taking sixteen and eighteen and twenty. Look what I saved when I got to twenty-four because you still paid four dollars an hour for fourteen hours, and that   s all you paid for. I never have figured that out, but it was so helpful then that it made a difference in my deal.  Finchum You played basketball at the other school. Were you not able to at     Ramsey No, I wasn   t that good, and I didn   t even try. Had I been good enough, I might, but I wasn   t of that caliber.  Finchum Did you go to the games?  Ramsey No, and I tell you what I did. I saw one basketball game and no football games in the three years I was up there. I always sold my ticket. I had a guy that always   he was a veteran, so he was on the GI Bill. He   d give me a dollar for that ticket. He knew where to go and get it, and I   d save it for him. I   d get that dollar and stick it in my pocket. That   s something that right now I don   t know what it is, but I do hear it   s so expensive. I just don   t know how they   re doing it, but we got by, and so they can get by. They will get by if they want to. They will get by.  Finchum What would you do for fun if you were studying and working? Did you have time for fun?  Ramsey I didn   t fun; there was no fun.  Finchum No dances or playing cards? None of that?14  Ramsey No, no, no. There was none. It   s kind of affecting me now because I don   t really have a pastime. Oh, I watch TV and things like that. I went to one basketball game. I remember that very game I went to. OSU, Oklahoma A M, was winning their basketball games at that time. I guess that was good. I thought the idea of them charging you four dollars an hour up to fourteen, and nothing there on up, and here I am every semester taking eighteen and twenty and twenty-two and twenty-four   . Mine was about half price. Didn   t nobody ever say anything to me about it. I   ll just never forget what the college did for me.  Finchum Graduation day, did your parents go up for it, the ceremony?  Ramsey For graduation?  Finchum Yes, for graduation. Do you remember?  Ramsey I don   t remember. That   s a good question.  Finchum You were just done. Done and out.  Ramsey I just don   t remember. They were proud of me. My dad wasn   t too hip on me going to college, but my mother, whatever I wanted to do, she was going to see that I got it. Been a time or two that I   d have to lean on her. She didn   t have no money either. Have to lean on her, but if I owed her fifty dollars when the school year was over, that summer I paid her back before I ever started trying to accrue anything to start back again in school.  Finchum When you went home on the weekends, would she do your laundry?  Ramsey Yeah, she would do my laundry. I had books and some laundry. I tell you what I did. When I was at Oretoopa Hall and I was working in the lunchroom in that long barrack, washing dishes, I got my one meal when I was doing that. I   m kind of forgetting that.  Finchum One meal? What would you do for the other two?  Ramsey You   ve never heard this before. When I was living in the Oretoopa Halls at Oklahoma A M, I would buy a pound of bacon on Monday, and that would do me until Friday. Now, I was eating my noon meal in the place where I was working, washing dishes. I don   t remember what I did for breakfast. I don   t know.  Finchum So you could cook in your room?  Ramsey No. Well, I believe you could have a little electric burner. I believe you could. I never did. Other than just frying the bacon, that   s all that   yeah, I 15  did. I fried the bacon to make that sandwich. It was a bacon sandwich, and I ate that for a long time. Bacon will keep in the window a long time.  Finchum Especially in the wintertime, I guess.  Ramsey Yes, that   s even better.  Finchum Do you remember, like, how many changes of clothes you had when you went, one or two outfits?  Ramsey Not very many.  Finchum Blue jeans or     Ramsey I think some of them were still overalls. I remember in high school I had to make one pair of overalls do a week. Boy, you learned to take care of them when you know that you   ve got from now until Friday to put that same pair of overalls on.  Finchum Your mother washed once a week?  Ramsey Yeah. That   s sort of a little different story that you will maybe hear on  A M , but I haven   t forgotten them. I still help the OSU Foundation. They made me a honorary member two years ago. Just things that I   ve kind of worked with OSU now in doing some things that someone else has to do.  Finchum What did you think of the name change?  Ramsey I didn   t really like it, even though I had just gotten out. I couldn   t imagine anything other than Oklahoma A M. I hope they don   t ever change it again. You never know. The college has grown so. Back then, Dr., I believe it was  Henry  G. Bennett, was the president, Dr. Bennett. He was also good. They all had a heart that wanted to see people do good. We may have lost a little bit of that because we got so many people that   s going now. I don   t know, but I know they   re still doing a good job. I know enough about what   s going on up there right now to know that they   re still doing a good job.  Finchum Do you go up for Homecoming?  Ramsey When I can. Sometimes they   re working here, and I don   t go, but sometimes we   re able to go up and catch the Friday night and Saturday deal. My two sons both graduated there, and one of my daughter-in-laws graduated there. We don   t have anybody around here to argue with us about OU. (Laughter) I mean, they just shut up, and it   s OSU.  Finchum Back on your sausage, did you have a particular recipe you used for it?16  Ramsey Yes, I did. This man that was making our sausage for the local FFA chapter while I was teaching, Oklahoma City bought him out. He lived down here about eight miles. They bought him out to build a lake, and he was making our sausage for us. We wasn   t making it. One day I was taking a load of hogs down there, and I said,    You going to quit or move or what?    He said,    No, I   m through.    I said,    What are you going to do with your recipe?    He said,    I   m not going to do nothing.    I said,    How old is that recipe?    It was a good one. He said,    As old as my daddy and me.       What are you going to do with it?       I   m not going to do nothing with it. You want it?    I said,    Yeah, I want it     I didn   t have any idea. That was probably the first thought that I ever had about getting in the sausage business myself.  He said,    It won   t take me long.    He just had a little ol   box there. He just reached in there and got it and handed it to me. He said,    I   ll have to notify my company that I   ve done this, but you won   t have no trouble,    because everybody had their own recipe. Nobody   d copy our recipe now. It   s a military secret. (Laughter) That   s just the way it is. We think it   s the best that   s made. There   s probably someone who   s doing better, but we   re doing the best we can do. Started it in, really, in 1970. That   s seventy up to a hundred. That   s what, thirty years, and then fifteen. We   ve been in it forty-five years. That   s quite a while, and so you ought to accomplish something. A lot of people go forty-five years and still haven   t done nothing.  Finchum Do you still do your own hogs?  Ramsey Do we do it now?  Finchum Yes.  Ramsey Yeah, we   ve got a new plant back there. It   s just like this. We kill our   wait a minute. Let me back up. We did a little bit. You said kill our own hogs. We get our meat boned out from Seaboard Farms at Guymon. It comes in on a eighteen-wheeler, and they haul us in 42,000 pounds. Each truck will haul 42,000 pounds of boned-out meat. We   re getting it boned out now. Have been for quite a while. I was about to mess up on that.  Finchum Makes a lot of sausage.  Ramsey Yeah, we make a lot of sausage. We make about sixty thousand pounds a day. When we started, we could make about two thousand pounds a day. We used to take the package of sausage and have a roll of film, and it would be enclosed on the bottom and seamed up the side, but the top would be open so that you could fill it. We would tie each bag with a red twist, one bag at a time with a red twist. We   ve got a machine back there now that will make nine thousand pounds an hour. We   re proud. We have a right to be proud. I 17  just look back and try to know how everything worked. It   s pretty silly, really.  Finchum What was the vocational ag teacher   s name that you admired so much?  Ramsey They had two that year. His name was Eldon Gunn. He got shot up in the war. I was little ol   boy about that tall, and he always had something to say to me.  Finchum Made an impression.  Ramsey You never know when you   re going to make an impression on somebody.  Finchum Were your parents from Oklahoma?  Ramsey Yeah, they were Oklahomans. Little bit of Arkansas but mostly Oklahoma.  Finchum Was church an important part of your growing up?  Ramsey Church has always been an important part of the family. Was then, and still is today.  Finchum When you were at Oklahoma A M would you go in Stillwater.  Ramsey No, I did not go.  Finchum You went home most of the time.  Ramsey I was at home. I don   t know that I missed a week going home hitchhiking. Then, you could hitchhike. People would pick you up. They won   t do it no more, but they would pick you up. Boy, if you   d put an Oklahoma A M sticker on your suitcase, they   d just pick you up like everything. That one day, I won   t ever  forget . It was half sleet and half snow. A bus come along, and I waved him down and rode it to Shawnee.  Finchum And the reason you would come home every weekend was to work with your dad, or get your mother   s cooking? (Laughs)  Ramsey It was a little better then than it was up there. Getting there and getting back, I didn   t consider that a problem. Laundry, I remember they would go to Shawnee, which was six, seven miles away, and I   d stay at home and study. I was taking a lot of hours. I had to do it, but I probably would   ve done it even if I   d been taking twelve or fourteen hours. I   d have probably still studied. That just had to come first. 18  Finchum The Library and the Student Union, the building process was just started when you were there, or finishing up? Do you remember? The Library opened in    53.  Ramsey I remember them building the Library. I think after then it came a big hailstorm. I think both the Union and the Library (I could be wrong about this) had that clay roof on it. Hail just beat that stuff all to pieces. What was funny (now, this is funny) back then we had walkouts. They don   t know what it is anymore. Back then, if one of the teams won an important game, we just all walked out. Students didn   t go to class. Didn   t make no difference what the teachers said, if they was there or not. There wasn   t no students in that classroom. That   s faded. I haven   t heard of that term in I don   t know when. All the time up there when OSU would win a basketball game that was important or a football game, there was an automatic walkout. After that, I do remember the school started giving that day off because they knew, I guess, that there wasn   t going to be no students in there, anyway.  That   s something that was interesting. I always looked forward to it, and you know what? I studied. It was a day that I was able to catch up. I worked harder than I had to work. I always thought when I started out that I was going to not do well in the class, but when I got through, I   d have a A or a B. I was serious all the way through. I thought,    I   m going to flunk this course.    I don   t even know how that   it was just that way. I took courses probably a little ahead of where I was and did all right with them, did well. When I got into my major subjects, I was president of what we called the Agriculture Education Department. I was a president the senior year. It was by election by the students. I had no idea. In fact, they caught me by total surprise when I was nominated, and it was just about unanimous that I was the president.  Finchum You didn   t have time to be.  Ramsey I didn   t have time, and I   ve never been in that position. It come time when we had to do some things as officers, president, vice president, just like any other organization, and I was literally scared to death. It went fine, and I found out later I got an A. It   s just a story that I   m not saying other students didn   t do the same thing, but there   s not very many that did it under the same circumstances that I did.  Finchum You   re right. Did any of the students that you taught follow in your footsteps?  Ramsey I had one that made a doctor, and he   s in Stillwater today and already retired: Cary Couch. 19  Finchum Did he do vocational ed or ag?  Ramsey He took ag, but then he became a doctor.  Finchum An MD doctor, not a PhD doctor?  Ramsey I told him that all the people of Stillwater, most of them knew Dr. Couch. I always told him when I got a chance that the first thing he ever did in becoming a doctor was when he helped castrate pigs or sew one up that was ruptured. I was telling it like it was, but they thought that was funny. Well, maybe that was the start of him being a doctor. How do I know? See? I   m not going to take nothing away from it. He   s retired now. Made a good doctor. In fact, a lot of the personnel at Stillwater, he was their family doctor. Sometime they   d find out that he had graduated at Jones and was president of the FFA, and he was quarterback on the football team.    That   s strange. He   s our doctor.    Anyway, no. I don   t think I ever had a student that made an ag teacher.  Finchum Or Cooperative Extension?  Ramsey No, not that I know of. A lot of boys, we had quite a bit of Shop in addition to our livestocking. I had boys that would come back years later and say,    Mr. Ramsey, you know what I   m doing?       No. Have no idea.    Maybe hadn   t seen them in six or eight years. They said,    I   m a welder,    just as proud of themselves as they could be. That   s really what it   s all about.  Finchum Yeah, finding what you have passion for, and you found yours early, seventh grade, (that   s pretty early) and stuck with it.  Ramsey I   m so close to it because going on to then Oklahoma A M, I was so close to it then, and I   ve maintained that relationship clear up until today. That   s good when you can do that. They   ve been good to me. I have one group in particular that we   ve helped in various ways. We started the organization that really put them on the map up there. They appreciate it. You know, it   s not something that you can do, and you   re not ever   they don   t even know where it come from. That   s not really what it is. That goes with the college itself. We   ve had people sitting here at this table from OSU, from practically every level. We don   t forget them, and they don   t forget us.  It   s just nice to have that relationship because there   s so many that, they lose that when they leave. They don   t ever gain it back. Since being an ag teacher, I was associated then with four hundred other teachers across the state. When we started, I had a pretty good base because when I would go to those people and say,    Hey, Jack, you need to try this fundraiser,    they   d do it.    We   ll try it.    If I could just get them to try it, they   re hooked. That thing, 20  it   s still going today. We have competition as everybody else has. We   ve got a motto that   s rather common:    If you can do it better than we can, do it.     Finchum And both boys   you said you have two children.  Ramsey I had one daughter that passed away, and I had another son that passed away early from heart surgery.  Finchum They were OSU grads. You didn   t force them to go to OSU?  Ramsey I didn   t really force them to, but when we would go, like going south, I always said we went around Norman, so they didn   t hear anything. They didn   t   I mean, it wasn   t even an issue. I   ve got a granddaughter now that we   ve already started her fund, and the two daughters here are going to be veterinarians. You know where they   re going to go to school. They   re my wife   s niece   s children, and they work for us. They   re little now. One   s about a fifth grader, and the other one   s about a eighth grader. They   re good.  Finchum OSU legacy?  Ramsey The only difference going to be in them is they   re going to have to go by OSU. I guess we   ll just have to forgive them for that. It   s been pleasurable, and I wouldn   t trade a minute for it. Don   t ever look back and say,    I should   ve done this,    or,    I should   ve done that.    When I walked down to the bank down here and had six thousand dollars, I   d drawn my teacher retirement out because I was drafted into the Army and I never did think I   d teach again. I drew it out, about three thousand dollars. Anyway, when they said,    We   ll loan you six thousand dollars,    I went out and spent that six thousand dollars in about a month, I   m going to say. I didn   t have no school check coming in, and I thought,    What do you do now?    We had a little business started already. Two years before I had quit, I had gotten some, they were ag teachers but already retired, to do this for me. We really started two years early because they were doing it because I couldn   t do it and teach ag. The ag program   now, where   d you say you was reared?  Finchum Tennessee.  Ramsey Yeah, they   re good, too, but the ag program in Oklahoma is good. It is good, and both my sons were national winners. This trophy here and the one over there, they were national winners in Ag Processing. They had to win the local, had to win the state, had to win the   no. The local, the district, the state, and then go to the national and compete on a national level. They were three years apart, but they both won that division when they came to that. I have a lot to appreciate the FFA for, even personally. They followed me, and I didn   t have to do any coaxing. They knew the business was here because it was already established. They knew that they would be running it. 21  That is if they chose to. There never was a question. That   s kind of strange, really, because I hear students say all the time,    I   m not going to do what my dad did.    They never had the thought of not doing what we did. In fact, we made a family partnership, and they became part owners when one of them was seven and one of them was ten, partnerships. Can you imagine kids being in partnership? They didn   t even know what it was.  Finchum But they do now.  Ramsey Oh, yeah  They do now, I guarantee you.  Finchum How has Jones changed through the years?  Ramsey When we came here, this was a gravel road out here. That   s one thing that   s happened. It hasn   t changed a lot in the people that live here, numbers. We   ve upgraded; the school is new from one end to the other. In fact, year before last, we built a new FFA show barn, not a classroom, a show barn, that we have the county fair, which is usually at the fairground. We have it out here. We also built the FFA a new classroom and shop, but three years before that, our school burned down. Had to go to a big bond issue, but anyway, our school is totally new. We   re getting people moving in because you can drive by the school and say,    Hey, I want my kids to go to school there.     Finchum We   re pretty close to   no, Oklahoma City   s not that far away, is it?  Ramsey Oklahoma City, really about a mile west, parts of it. Yeah, parts of it is.  Finchum Going to learn my geography here.  Ramsey Yeah, we have Choctaw over here five miles. Then we have Harrah over there seven miles. Then we have Luther back here about six or seven miles, then Carl Albert, which is a part of Midwest City over this way but farther away, then Edmond up where they are. This county   s, we have good schools. Of course, Edmond   s building two new schools this year. They   ve got the tax base to do that, and we don   t have that out here.  Finchum Keeps growing, Edmond does.  Ramsey Yeah, and it never will stop, I don   t guess.  Finchum It   s a lot of subdivisions.  Ramsey Only way they   ll stop is for people to surround them. That   s the only way they   ll stop.22  Finchum Been a pretty good life, huh?  Ramsey It   s been a good life.  Finchum And do you have a little bit of orange in your closet, at least one orange shirt?  Ramsey I   ve got orange everywhere. (Laughter) I have orange. They talk about your blood running orange. I guess I have that. That little cap right there was given to us. Maybe you can look at it and tell that it was made by someone at (well, no, I don   t know that) at OSU. That was a token of their appreciation for a thing that we had done for them. They   re one group   I   ll speak for ourselves. We haven   t ever done anything that we don   t get more response from than what we deserve.  Finchum They tend to do things in style, don   t they?  Ramsey Yeah, right on.  Finchum Anything else you want to say before we close?  Ramsey No, a lot of that you will have to cut out.  Finchum No, it was perfect. It was. That   s why we   re here. We want to get those stories that you don   t hear every day, and yours is one very good one. I   m glad we have it, so thank you so much for sharing it.  Ramsey I don   t know. You get to wondering about other people around. I don   t know anybody that went from nothing to something. They   re out there, a lot of them. You can do it  I mean it   s just   you got to be hard-headed, and then you got to be ignorant. I mean, who would walk into a bank and borrow six thousand dollars expecting to start a business with twelve thousand dollars and eat off that? That   s not normal. People laughed at me and made fun of me and whatever. They   d say,    You   ll be back.    One guy I remember in our group said,    You better watch Ramsey because he   s looking for your job.    I wasn   t looking for his job. I just went back that day to visit with them. I had a chance about five years ago to remind him of that. He said, (we was on a school bus)    I believe I do remember saying that.    I said,    I know you said it.    He said,    You don   t want nobody   s job, do you?    I said,    No, I don   t want nobody   s job.    (Laughter)  Finchum Hopefully he   s having your sausage for breakfast.  Ramsey I don   t know whether he   s living or not. See, I   m close to sixty   wait a minute, eighty-seven. He   s older than I am, so he   s in his nineties if he   s still living. 23  Finchum When was the last time you had a bacon sandwich?  Ramsey I hurt this leg a while back, and that   s why I   ve got the walker here. We have a lady staying with me. My wife still comes down here. I try to get her to quit. Since I   m not here, she   s got two daughter-in-laws that she   s kind of breaking in. I don   t know. I know about the past, but I don   t know about my future. (Laughter). Oh, my, don   t know about the future.  Finchum I appreciate you talking with me today.  -------  ------- 
