 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Saturday, April 18, 2009 and we   re in Stillwater,  Oklahoma interviewing Connie McIlvoy. This interview is being  conducted as part of O-STATE Stories, an Oral History Project of the  OSU Library. Today is a very special day here at Oklahoma State, the  1959 NCAA Championship baseball team is here for their 50th year  reunion and we   re so happy you could join us.  Thank you very much. It   s great to be here.  We   d like to begin by learning a little bit more about you. If you could  start with where you grew up and give us a little background into your  early life.  Okay. Well I was born in Lawton, Oklahoma at the Fort Sill Army base,  but spent most of my time in Oklahoma City. I went to elementary  school and middle school and Southeast High School in Oklahoma City.  Graduated in 1955, came to OSU in    55, and graduated    59. Didn   t play  baseball all four years, I did not have a scholarship, I walked on as a  senior and I had earlier walked onto the freshman basketball team. I  made the team but didn   t get to play a whole lot, so I didn   t really  continue that. But later on I decided I was about ready to graduate, I   m  going to try to hit the baseball field again. I walked on in    59.  Wow.  My degree was in Accounting and I went to work for what became  Exxon about a week after the College World Series and have lived in  Houston now for 50 years. I   m not a Texan though, I   m still an Okie and  I   m a Houstonian, but not a Texan. (Laughs)  What motivated you to come to Oklahoma State as opposed to the  5  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  University of Oklahoma (OU)?  Well, that   s a good question. I grew up 15 minutes from OU and  throughout high school went to football games and basketball games  there. But I just kind of wanted to be a little bit farther away from home  and I had followed OSU over the years and visited both the campuses  and loved OSU and decided to come here.  Now, did you play sports in high school?  Well, I played all of them in high school and basketball and baseball  were my best. I always wanted to play in college and I was a pretty good  high school player, but I just had no athletic scholarship offers. But I  loved sports and I thought maybe I would have a chance to walk on and  at least experience it. It was a great experience, I walked on the  freshman basketball team and was able to be around Mr. Iba for a year  and that   s a wonderful experience. I learned a lot of basketball but it was  obvious I wasn   t going to play much. But I felt that was a possibility for  me, that was another reason for coming here.   What was your  first impression of Coach Iba?  Well, it was just a wonderful experience. That   s what I can say. What  was nice about it, the freshmen at that time couldn   t play on the varsity  so we had our own freshman schedule, but we practiced quite a bit with  the varsity so I was around to just experience his style and technique and  I learned a lot. I mean I thought I knew a lot about basketball, but I had a  good freshman coach. Sam Aubrey was our freshman coach at that time  and  was a  wonderful man and treated me very well as a walk-on. Most  everybody was on scholarship and he always treated me very well. So  that whole experience was good even though it was just a year.  So you walked on to the baseball team your senior year. Were you in  game shape when you decided to?  Well, what had happened   baseball was my favorite sport, so I  continued to play in the summers while I was in college and I played  against a lot of college players. A lot of the OSU guys played in Cushing  for Kerr McGee. They had a team there called Kerr-Mac and I played on  a team in Oklahoma City, and we would go up a lot during the summer  and play Kerr-Mac. I always felt I could compete with them, but again  there wasn   t a good opportunity to get a chance to do that. But after my  junior year, the OSU short stop and third baseman, who were  tremendous ballplayers, signed pro contracts and those were the two  positions I had played. I thought,    Well, let   s go see if Coach Greene  will let me come out.     6  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Toby Greene was our coach at the time and I was able to get in to see  him. I was talking to somebody today, I was trying to think what did he  tell me, he was a man of few words and he probably just said,    Oh,  come on out.    You know. (Laughs) So that   s what prompted it. I think  had those two guys not left   as it turned out, we had a returning short  stop that had been off in the military and came back, Bob Andrew, who  was the brother of our second baseman, Bruce Andrew. Then Jim  Dobson was a sophomore that I had forgotten about, he was a third  baseman and I   d played against him in high school because we both  were from Oklahoma City. So as it turned out, the positions I thought I  had a shot at, that wasn   t going to work. But Coach moved me to the  outfield and I got to become the starting leftfielder and played on the  National Championship team. It was exciting.  So what was your batting average that year?  Well, I was telling somebody today, my wife kind of smiled, he   ll have  the average down to the last thousandth of a point. But I did have a good  year, I hit .337 and I think I was the second leading batting average  player on the team and then in the College World Series I hit .429 and I  made the All-Tournament team. And it was a dream. Whoever heard of  a senior walking on and making the team and doing pretty well and you  win the National Championship? I used to kid the guys, I   d say,    What   s  the difference in this team this year? Oh yeah, it   s that walk-on guy.  (Laughs) That made the difference right there.    But it was an  unbelievable experience.  Tell me about the team chemistry. Everybody seems so friendly with  each other. It   s just a nice cohesive group.  Well, it was a really good group. I mean, I was telling my wife today,  they were just genuine people and we cared for each other. We were all,  almost all of us, were Oklahomans. Four of my teammates I had played  against in Oklahoma City so I knew them from the past. Some of the  others I played against in the summers and it just was a good group of  people. You know there just weren   t any bad apples on the team. So it  was a really cohesive group and they pulled for each other. I felt  particularly good because I was not one of them until I was a senior in  terms of being on the team here at OSU and they made me feel at home  and that I was part of it.  Tell me a little bit about the baseball facilities back then.  Well, I don   t know a lot about what all they have now, but obviously it  was pretty trimmed down back then. We played at the same ball park. I  think it became Allie Reynolds Stadium later, I think in the    80s. And  7  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  frankly, I don   t remember what the field was called back then, but it was  in the same location, same basic setup. We didn   t have batting cages like  they have for batting practice. I don   t know what they have in the way of  training facilities, but back then we really didn   t have any. I mean we  didn   t lift weights. We didn   t do any of those things. And it kind of dates  me 50 years ago. (Laughs) But the basic layout was the same. And you  know, I felt right at home over there today going to the game. I mean it   s  different. It   s jazzed up a little more. Somebody asked us,    Was the field  that green back then?    The answer was,    No, it wasn   t quite that green.     But it was the best field I   d ever played on. When I played in high  school, it was all dirt. And all of a sudden we had a grass infield and a  grass outfield. (Laughs) So to me it was like Yankee Stadium playing.  And locker rooms?  Well, we did. We had locker rooms over in Gallagher   at that time it  was just called Gallagher Hall and so we did have that. None of the  equipment, batting gloves, and things like that. I used to tell my kids, I  said,    Now if I   d had batting gloves like you guys do, maybe I would   ve  hit .400 it would have felt so good.    So we didn   t have anything like  that. We were talking today about the   I had on a jacket that I got when  Gary Ward was the coach here and they had a little get together at five  years and some of our guys were here. I wasn   t here, but they gave them  all a Cowboy jacket. Really a nice jacket. We were joking about what  we had in the way of jackets when we played then. They were just kind  of an old olive drab color windbreaker with our name written on it with  a Marks-a-lot or something. (Laughs) So things have changed a lot, but  we had a great time. We had plenty of equipment.  Now did you work while you were playing for the team and going to  school?  Well I did in a way. I was in a fraternity here, Lambda Chi Alpha. So I  worked in the kitchen of the fraternity house a couple years and then I  was treasurer of the fraternity one year and I got paid for doing it. I got  my room and board. Room and board was  75 a month and I got that  paid for. Then I was president of the fraternity my senior year and I got a  little stipend there too and so that was the extent of my job. Interestingly  enough though, that paid all of my room and board for two or three  years. Unlike now the scholarship guys, I don   t know that they have any  kind of job. But we   d go over and practice for two hours and I   d go back  to the fraternity house and do my thing there, and I could do all of that.  Things have changed so much. We didn   t do anything in the fall to  speak of and in the spring we would spend a little time down under in  the field house down in the basement. We had some batting cages down  there. But no, I could go to class, I could practice. We also, generally  8  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  speaking, only played on weekends. We played half the games they do  today. We would take a trip to Houston before it got warm here and play  Houston and Rice and that was kind of our road trip. But everything else  was weekends, except I think the OU series were  in the  beginning of  the week. There weren   t any weekday games, typically, like today so  you really had more time.  How would you travel to away games?  Well we didn   t travel in a very sophisticated way. We went in cars,  whoever could drive, we would drive. The coaches would usually drive  a car and several of the players who had cars would drive and we   d  probably take about six cars or so. But we didn   t go on the road too  much because we didn   t play that many games. I think my senior year  we went to Colorado and Nebraska and Houston and then we went to the  World Series. We went to a playoff game before that in Peoria. All by  car.  Boy times have changed.  Oh, they   ve changed, yeah. (Laughter)  You mentioned about the batting cages in Gallagher Hall in the  basement. Can you describe that setup for us now?  Well, it was just all dirt down there and somebody today I was talking to  said they played football   some of our guys played football also, and  they remember working out down there and they were dodging baseballs  while they worked out. It was a pretty good activity down there. We had,  I don   t know, a couple of cages that you could take batting practice and  we   d take ground balls and played catch. Wrestlers would be down  running and doing things to get in shape, and others would be down   it  was just kind of a hodgepodge of people down there.  Wow. So you said Coach Greene was a very soft-spoken man. A man of  few words. What were your impressions of Coach Greene?  Well, I can   t help but have fond memories of him because he let me  come out and play. And I   m forever grateful for that. He always treated  me well. He didn   t say a lot, when he said something he was pretty upset  with you. (Laughs) We were sharing thoughts today about things we  heard from him. Some people said,    I don   t think he spoke two or three  words to me the whole time.    So he didn   t say very much, but if there  was something he didn   t like, you knew about it. I had that experience  one time and I   ll never forget it.  9  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Well tell me about that, please.  Well, we were practicing and we had a batting cage we put behind home  plate. He would always stand right behind home plate. And our pitchers,  were getting their practice in too, throwing batting practice. Dick  Soergel was one of our pitchers, I was a left-handed hitter and he kept  throwing pitches on the inside corner of the plate and they really  would   ve been strikes and I kept letting them go. I tended not to be able  to pull the trigger on that inside pitch and so I said,    Dick, that   s a good  pitch. I should   ve been swinging at that.    There was silence behind the  screen. And it happened again. I said it one more time, still silence. It  happened a third time, and I said it again, and Toby hollered out,    Stop   If that   s such a       and I won   t say the words       that good of a pitch, why  don   t you stand up there and swing at one of them?    And he screamed it  at me. It was an experience that I won   t forget for this reason. He did  that and there was something it did to me, my adrenaline started  pumping, and I was not known as a power hitter. The next pitch, over  the right field fence. Next pitch, off the right centerfield fence. That   s  the only time in my whole career I hit the ball for any distance. I was a  singles hitter. (Laughs) But I will never forget that, that all of a sudden I  had this newfound power because Toby hollered at me. But he just  didn   t say a whole lot.  He made a speech, a short speech of course, because he was a man of  few words, after the World Series to the crowd and said,    This team has  made an old man very proud.    He had told us one other time that he  thought his    55 team, I think it was, should   ve done it, should   ve made  it, didn   t make it. We weren   t predicted, necessarily, to do that well. Our  starting lineup, we had great pitchers. We had Joel Horlen, Dick Soergel,  and Roy Peterson, two of which were seniors so it was their last year and  Dick was a junior. But our catcher was a sophomore, first baseman was  a sophomore, second baseman was a sophomore, third baseman was a  sophomore, shortstop was a junior. I played leftfield and had never  played college ball. Ben Bancroft played centerfield and told me today, I  asked him if he   d played much   he was a junior, if he   d played much as  a sophomore and he said,    I came to bat 16 times is all.    So he didn   t  play much and then Tim Green played right field, same thing. So we  didn   t have a team that had a lot of college experience. But we had really  good pitching and then things just came together. We were ranked  number two in the country going into the playoffs and Southern Cal was  number one. Right at the time the playoffs were about to start, they were  found to have an ineligible player and they had to forfeit a lot of games  and could not represent the West. Fresno State ended up representing.  Then at the end of the season we were ranked number one, so we came  from not being expected to do that much to there.  10  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  At the start of that season, did you guys think you could compete for a  national title?  Well, I certainly had no idea. I mean I was the new kid on the block. I  really believe the pitching staff knew what they were capable of. They  were very, very, very good. They probably had quite a bit of confidence  that we could do well. But the rest of us were all kind of new. Back in  those days, you really didn   t know a lot about your competition. Today  they have scouting reports. We didn   t really know a lot about them and  so it was kind of hard to say. We went to Houston for the first four  games of the year and Rice beat us once, and Rice really didn   t have that  good a ball club so you couldn   t really tell. But things just came  together. And we played   we had good pitching, we had good defense,  and we had good timely hitting.  Well, tell me about some of the players you recall that made outstanding  contributions during the season or in other ways that just really stand  out in your mind.  Well, first of all, the pitchers all stand out. In fact, Joel Horlen who was  one, and Joe   s interviewing now, Joel was an All-American. He had  such a good year, was voted to the All-American team, played Major  League Baseball for 13 years, two World Series teams, and an All-Star  team. So he was just excellent. He was as smooth as silk. He just knew  how to pitch. Roy Peterson was very aggressive, very confident, and he  and then Dick   all of the pitchers stand out. In fact, Dick played at  Capitol Hill High School, played all the sports at OSU. He was a three  sport player for three years and a starter all three years. He had never  lost a game as a pitcher from, I think, his junior year in high school all  the way up to the College World Series and lost the first game in the  College World Series that he had ever lost as a pitcher. So those all  stood out and then we had two power hitters in Jim Dobson and Ben  Bancroft, who could win a ballgame for you with a home run. We had  excellent defense at first base and second base. All the defense was  good, but the second baseman Bruce Andrew was superior as was the  first baseman. And it   s hard to say, I mean the people that got the honors  ultimately were the people like Joel Horlen who was an All-American,  Ben was an All-American, Jim Dobson was voted the Most Valuable  Player of the College World Series. So those can   t help but stand out,  but it was just a really good bunch. A lot of talent.  Any favorite memories during the regular season that stand out for you  as a player?  I can remember two experiences that jump out right away. Again, I  walked on so that was in itself kind of unusual. We had just gone to  11  Colorado and played a three game series and came back and The  O   Colly, we called it, I don   t know if they still call it that, had this story  about us sweeping the series and    McIlvoy leads the team hitting .395.     I looked at that and I said,    My, what   s happening here? This can   t be  happening to me like this.    Then I went into a slump. So reality set in,  but I remember that point  in the season and the article . It helped that  the editor of The O   Colly was a fraternity brother of mine. So from kind  of a general experience that hit me and I thought, I can   t believe that I   m  getting to do this and doing fairly well.  Then, in the College World Series, one particular thing that stands out.  We were in the finals and Bruce Andrew, our second baseman, had had  a tough series hitting. He was a good hitter and just got in a slump  during the Series, but he was such a good defensive player that he made  the All-Tournament team. We were tied going into the ninth inning   against Arizona in the finals  and I believe it was, pretty sure it was the  ninth, and somebody got on and Bruce hit a triple and tied it up. They  changed pitchers and they brought a left-handed pitcher in. Well I was a  left-handed hitter and I was not a very good hitter off left-handed  pitching so Coach came out of the dugout. I started walking back sure  that was it for me and he said,    I want you to stay in.    I was a pretty  good bunter and he said,    I want you to stay in and on the second pitch  we   re going to squeeze. We   re going to squeeze that runner in from  third.    I thought well, I think I could bunt off a left-hander, I just  couldn   t hit a left-hander very well. We were able to exercise a squeeze  play. He scored and it gave us a two run lead so we got a little bit of  cushion and then we won. Dick pitched the ninth and we held them. So  it wasn   t a base hit, it was just a bunt at the right time. I was, as I said,  not good against left-handed pitchers.  I later moved to Houston when I graduated and was in church and I  spotted a fellow that had pitched for the University of Houston and was  a left-hander. When we played them, he just wore me out. I think that   s  when the coach said,    This McIlvoy kid is not going to do too well  against left-handers.    And I saw him in church and I walked up and  introduced myself and I said,    You don   t know me, but,    his name was  Charlie Peepers. I said,    Charlie, you ruined my career in baseball.     (Laughter) Striking me out three times against University of Houston. So  those are a couple of the things that I remember. And a great experience.  Well I gotta say one more experience playing OU. We had the bases  loaded and two outs. I was at the plate and I hit a real high pop fly but it  was into short right-centerfield, there were two out and the count was 3-  2 so all the runners were moving on the pitch and they all scored on my  little bloop pop-up into right-centerfield. Later Toby Greene was being  interviewed before we went into the playoffs and he was saying,    We   ve  12  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  played good ball, we   ve had some breaks. This kid I picked up off the  intramural field got this banjo hit against OU and scored three runs.    So  he said,    You know things are going right when that happens.    (Laughs)  So I can   t forget that one against our hated rival anyway.  I read the whole intramural deal before coming down here today and  I   m like,    Surely, he wasn   t just playing IM baseball before walking  onto the team.     No, no, I played intramural stuff here but not baseball. But I played  baseball in the summer. It   s still like a dream to me that it happened the  way it did.  Back then was the College World Series a big deal like it is today?  It was in Omaha as it is now. Nowhere near the crowds they have today.  But we were treated like kings. I mean it was, just like I   m sure they do  today. We had a sponsor there, it was the Junior Chamber of Commerce.  If we didn   t have a game in the evening, a couple of times they brought  us out for cookouts. We had a parade through downtown Omaha before  the Series started and we just really got treated well. I know it   s the same  way now. But the difference is the crowds. We played in the same place  they play now, but it   s much enlarged. They   ll have 26,000 or 27,000 at  a lot of the games and we only had I think 4,200 at the finals. But it was  a smaller park and you still felt like a big crowd was there. We would  have kids come down and want an autograph and that sort of thing.  We   d never been through that before. But it was really a wonderful  experience just like it is today. Yeah, I think it was only about the   it  really makes me realize how old I am.It was only I think about the 14th  or 15th World Series. In fact, former President Bush, Senior played for  Yale at the College World Series, I think in the very first one if I   m not  mistaken.  Well, it seems like it was just a great atmosphere to play there.  Oh, yeah.  Were there a lot of OSU fans in attendance?  Not too many. We had some people that lived up in that area that were  there. But not like it would be today I   m sure. There   s a lot more pizzazz  around it today than there was back then. But we had some and then,  most of the fans were Omaha people and they would tend to begin to  favor one team or the other. So we felt we had good support.  You mentioned a couple of special moments from both the regular  13  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  season and the playoffs. Do you have any special memories of the  College World Series that stand out in your mind?  One for sure. Did you talk to Lew Wade today? He was leaving when I  came in. But Lew, we were playing Penn State and we had already lost  one game of the World Series to Arizona so we were in the loser   s  bracket and had to come back up. And we   d already beaten Penn State  once but they were coming up also and they were ahead of us 3 to 1.  And I think I   ve got this story straight in my memory, almost sure it was  in the ninth inning, we were behind 3 to 1, Lew came up and pinch hit  and got a base hit to right field. I don   t remember this exactly who was  coming up next, but we ended up scoring a run. We were behind by two  runs. We scored a run and closed the gap 3 to 2 and two outs. I can   t  remember now who hit it, but somebody hit a ground ball to the third  baseman. It should   ve been the third out and we   re out of the World  Series and would   ve lost 3 to 2. He bobbled the ball, made a bad throw  to first and we had two runs scored and we won 4 to 3. Then we went  ahead and won it all. So I gotta say that that was probably one of the big  things that I remember because we were just on the verge of being out.  And in how many games did you play in?  I think we played five. We won our first two, Arizona won their first  two. We had to play each other in the winner   s bracket. They won, we  lost. That was three games. We had to go down and   no I think we  played six because we had to go down and win two to finally get back to  play Arizona in the finals.  And were you on the roster for all the games?  Well, I was on the roster. I didn   t play in one of the games with the left-hander  throwing. (Laughter)  Oh, okay. Well that was probably a smart coaching move.  Yeah that   s right, absolutely. I tell people all the time, I love to play  golf. And I said,    There   s only one other thing harder to do than play  golf, and that   s to hit a left-hander   s curve ball.    (Laughs)  So tell me about that championship game against Arizona.  Well, they had beaten us the first time, but  it was  a real close game, I  think it was 4 to 3. Their pitcher for that game was one of their best  pitchers, but I felt he was not that difficult to figure out. I mean he threw  pretty hard but not real hard. The person that threw against us in the  finals really, really could bring it. I mean he really could bring it. I hit  14  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  second in the lineup and he struck me out the first time and I remember  coming back to the dugout saying,    I hardly saw those pitches.    I mean  he was really throwing hard. I remember that clearly. Generally I could  get around on the ball pretty good and pull it. I didn   t swing late that  much, but I only got one hit in that game and it was a ground ball right  down the third base line so I swung pretty late and I still don   t know for  sure how I hit him. But unfortunately, we all were having trouble with  him. But we scratched around and picked up a run here and there. Then  he was replaced somewhere along the line, and we were relieved. And if  I   m not mistaken, Jim Dobson hit a two run homer and got us back in  the game but it was tied going into the end. So it was a real close, tight  game all the way. They had a really good ball club and they played  about twice as many games as we did. Arizona and California teams  tended to play a lot. It was just a well pitched game.  The other really important thing about that final game, because we  didn   t play a lot of games during the season, our three main starting  pitchers pitched complete games nearly every game. So our other  pitchers really didn   t get to pitch a lot. But in the College World Series  you   re playing just about every day and you   ve got to have a little more  depth than that. So we ended up starting a left-handed pitcher named  Toby Bensinger who I played against in high school, and was from  Midwest City. He had not pitched probably in three months. I mean he  had stayed in shape and he had thrown batting practice, but because our  starters tended to go all the way and we didn   t play that many games, he  didn   t get to pitch. He pitched just short of four innings and really did a  great job. He deserved so much credit for that game. He held them and it  was 3-3 and then Dick Soergel came in and as I mentioned earlier, he  had lost the first game in his career against Arizona and he got credit for  the win in the second game. But that is a real key part of that final, that  Toby Bensinger came in and did so well after not having pitched a  whole lot. Other than that it was just a well-played game all the way  around. I think we had, I   m biased obviously, but I really do think we  had a really fine ball club. In fact, that year we lost two seniors, pitchers,  and I was a senior and Tim Green was a senior but we had all these  sophomores and we had a lot of freshmen. They went real far in the  World Series the next two years. It was a good nucleus that they had.  And All-Tournament team honors for you?  I got named to the All-Tournament team. I had no idea. We were  walking off the field and Bob Dellinger, who was the sports editor of  The Daily Oklahoman in Oklahoma City came up, put his arm around  me, and he said,    I   m going to show you something here. You got  named to the All-Tournament team.    So it just kind of, it was a great  way to finish my baseball career. I   d always wanted to play pro-ball but  15  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  the scouts I think really felt I didn   t have that potential. I had no power,  no speed, and no arm. (Laughs) I didn   t have any of the things they were  looking for. But to receive that honor was something I   ll always have  that with me. It was such shock for it happen. I think we had four people  named to the All-Tournament team and Jim Dobson was the Most  Valuable Player also.  Do you remember the trophy presentation in Omaha?  Yeah, I remember a little bit about it. It was pretty low-key. It reminded  me, my wife and I went through the Heritage Hall Museum today and  were looking at the baseball section, and it was not a huge trophy but it  was a nice presentation. It was great to win it, obviously, for all of us but  for the coach who was older and retired just a few years after that. But it  was a pretty low-key kind of presentation.  Are there any other members of the coaching staff that stand out in your  mind?  Well, Toby Greene was the head coach. He didn   t do as much hands-on  with a lot of us, I think he did more of that with the pitchers. But Freddy  Babb, who had played before, helped with some of the coaching. But I  think if you compare that time to now, from a coaching standpoint it   s  quite different. Because I   m sure OSU now has a pitching coach and  probably a hitting coach and I don   t know how many other coaches they  have. I got help from Freddy in the outfield because I   d never played the  outfield before, so that was a plus. But it was just much more low-key  than today, for sure.  My youngest son played at Bellaire High School in Houston and it was a  baseball school. The other sports weren   t that good, but baseball was  top-notch. They spent more time practicing and they played many more  games than we ever did. I remember talking to the head coach one day, I  said,    Ray, I played at a major college baseball program and I didn   t  put  in  half the time you guys spend.    And so that gives you a comparison     but that   s the way it is in all the sports now, a lot more hands-on  coaching, a lot more training, a lot more weight lifting and all that. We  just sort of played. (Laughs)  What would you do if you got injured?  Well Byron Bird was our trainer and so he was there for all the games  and helped us with things like that. But I never had to have any special  training things. It is funny that we talk about it here. It was more that we  got out and played. Yet, we had a really, really good team.  16  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Have you stayed in touch with your teammates over the years?  Well, not often. I haven   t lived in this area. I   m in Houston so I don   t  naturally see everybody, but we   ve gotten together. We got together at  ten years. Our 40th year we were inducted as a team into the Athletic  Hall of Honor, so we were here for that. Then, of course, now the 50th  year. So that   s been primarily it. Sometimes when I   ve come up when I  still had family here, my mother and dad, I   d give Dick Soergel a call  and kind of reminisce a little but it hasn   t been an ongoing thing.  How special is this reunion for you this weekend?  Oh, very, very much. Very special. The whole experience was so good  and we were a close-knit group and it   s just been a tremendous   I   ve  really been looking forward to it. In fact, I didn   t know it was going to  happen and I wanted to organize a 50 year celebration if there wasn   t  going to be anything and I had called and ended up talking to Jason in  the Posse Club and he told me that something was being planned. I knew  that a couple months ago and I   ve really been looking forward to it the  whole time. It   s been great. It   s been well-organized and we   ve had  plenty of time to reminisce and share stories and it   s just been really  special.  In your opinion, how has college baseball changed over the years?  When I watch the games and I   ll go to college games at Houston quite a  bit and if OSU   s down there, I always go. I don   t think it   s changed all  that much. The big change in college baseball is the aluminum bat  because we played with a wooden bat, which makes, I think, the power  hitting that a couple of these guys did even more special with a wooden  bat. So the aluminum bat has made, I think, a big difference. I think  there   s more hitting and probably better batting averages, more runs  scored; we had an awful lot of low scoring games. We had a few that  weren   t, but most of them were pretty low-scoring. So I think that   s  changed probably more than anything else.  But baseball is a game to me that doesn   t change all that much. OSU  played in a regional tournament in Austin, it   s probably been 10, 12, 15  years ago, and I went up for it and Bill Platt, I don   t know if you   re  familiar with him but Bill Platt was the radio announcer, the sports guy  at KSPI Stillwater and he would travel to our games and broadcast the  games back. So he was there and I went up and I said,    Bill, let me ask  you something. The game doesn   t look like it   s changed that much to  me. Now give me your totally unbiased opinion. Could we compete with  these guys today?    He said,    Oh yeah, you could compete.    So that  made my day. (Laughs) So I don    t really think it   s changed that much  17  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  except the equipment   s different, the bats anyway, and probably they do  a lot more physical training things than we did.  Could you  catch us up  with what happened after graduation, what did  you go on to do?  Well, I left   we came back from Omaha in our cars and the University  had announced when we   d be coming back so we had a lot of people  here and it was special driving in. I went back to Oklahoma City and in  two days I was driving off to Houston. I   d gone to work for a company  there, Humble Oil and Refining Company, which later became Exxon. I  remarried about nine years ago and we have six children between us and  a bunch of grandchildren. Some of the grandchildren are in athletics. I  have one playing high school baseball and another one in track, and two  have played volleyball so we   re doing some of those kinds of things. But  I was with Exxon for about 30 years and I retired early and wanted to do  other things. I wanted to have more flexibility in my life and it turned  out not quite that way because I started a business with another Exxon  retiree and we   ve worked harder than ever. We did a lot of work for  Exxon and I still do some consulting there. I   m going to say two or three  days a week, my wife would say,    More like five days a week.    But it  kind of comes and goes. So my career has been in the oil and gas  industry. And I would help coach youth baseball teams when my kids  were young.  Always followed OSU sports. I mean I really do bleed orange, as my  wife would say. As I tell my UT friends, I bleed bright orange, not that  dull burnt orange. And I really follow the team, but not in person,since  we haven   t been up here that much. But if they   re playing down in our  part of the country I   ll usually go to the games and I still just love to  follow the athletics up here. So that   s been it. I   ve had a wonderful life  and this experience clearly  has been  one of my all-time favorites.  When I retired from Exxon, I had a good friend from OU that was  working there too. He was one of the Assistant Controllers and I was the  Manager of the Information Systems group and we did a lot of things  together, went to lunch together a lot and all that. He wrote a letter in my  retirement book and he said,    I really don   t know what we   re going to  do without you here because we   re going to miss those tales of how you  led OSU single-handedly to the National Championship.    (Laughs) So I  talked about it a lot I guess. But it was such a wonderful experience that  I   ll certainly never forget. In fact, I   ve got a scrapbook at home, I   ve got  some of the games, some of the articles, I   ve got a lot of the finals stuff.  My goal is to see if I can find all of the old write-ups from my senior  year and try to put together something that I could reproduce for the  team or maybe it could be used up here. I   m just missing a lot of games  so I want to do that.  18  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Nykolaiszyn  McIlvoy  Well, we spoke about, kind of got a glimpse into your time with OSU and  serving as a walk-on during the    59 season. Is there anything else that  you would like to mention that we have not spoken about today?  Well, I don   t think so. My whole experience here was good. I loved  going to school here and I think from the baseball standpoint, we  probably covered the key experiences that I remember from that time.  So I   m probably drained of any more tidbits.  We appreciate you spending your time with us this afternoon and  welcome back to campus. Enjoy the rest of your reunion.  Thank you very much. I   ve enjoyed doing it.  -------  -------   
