 Finchum Today is September 8, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University, and today I   m in Grady County in Minco to  interview Gene Overton. This is part of our Cowboy in Every County  project. Thank you for having us.  Overton You   re welcome.  Finchum Let   s learn a little bit about you, beginning with when and where you were  born.  Overton Okay. I was born here. I was actually born in Chickasha  Oklahoma  at the  hospital, but my parents lived in Minco. I   ve lived here all of my life. The  only time I   ve ever been gone is when I went to Stillwater, to OSU. I   m  fifty-three. I was born in 1962, June 4.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Overton My dad worked on the railroad. He was working on the railroad when I was  born, and then later he worked for General Motors for a little while and  farmed. He always farmed on the side no matter what he was doing, and  then he ran a service station here in town, a Conoco station, for several  years. I think he had it for seven or eight years, and then he sold it. I worked  there growing up and then farmed with him on the side also. Then he sold  the service station and farmed fulltime, and I helped him, of course, farm.  Right after I got married, which would have been in 1987, he bought the  service station back and had it for three years again, and I helped him with  that. Well, he mainly ran it then. I did the farming, but I helped there some,  too. That   s what he did, and that   s how I came to be here.  Finchum When you say    farming,    what kind of farming?  Overton I raise wheat, alfalfa, cotton, corn, milo, some soybeans, and I have some  cattle. That   s what my dad always raised, too, and I do quite a bit of custom  farming for other people, too.  Finchum Well, when you were younger, was your home on the farm?  Overton Well, we always lived around town or in town, but we still always farmed.  My dad always rented land. He didn   t own any land until later on after   I  guess the first farm he bought was whenever I was probably in junior high.  He always just rented land, and that   s mainly what I do. Most of my ground  that I farm is rented land, and I have about a little over three thousand acres  that I farm.  I guess he was probably farming fifteen hundred acres when he quit. He quit  in 2008. In 2007, we had a big flood statewide when the hurricane came  over Oklahoma, and we got fourteen, fifteen inches of rain in just a few  hours. He decided that he was going to retire the next year. That   s when I  started. I bought his equipment and started farming the ground that he had  rented and the land that he owned.  Finchum Did you have brothers and sisters?  Overton I have two sisters, two younger sisters, Polly, who lives here in Minco, and  Jenny, who lives in Enid  Oklahoma .  Finchum As the only son, it came to you to do all this?  Overton Right, and we all helped. My mom helped. When I was in high school, they  had a feed store also that my mom ran, and I worked there some whenever I  was a sophomore, junior, senior in high school. After school, I   d go get feed.  The feed was made in El Reno  Oklahoma , and I   d go pick up feed after  school and come back and get friends of mine to help unload it. They sold  plants, tomato plants and stuff like that, in the spring, garden supplies, and  then they sold animal supplies, vet supplies, things like that there, too. It was  a pretty good little business, and actually, in 1979 Dad and another man here  in town decided to build a cotton gin. There was a need for another cotton  gin here in town. There was already one here, but they weren   t keeping the  cotton ginned up on a timely basis. They decided to build a new gin, and  they combined the feed store with the cotton gin whenever they built this gin  where we   re at right now. The feed store was absorbed into the cotton gin,  and they started selling feed and the vet supplies from here.  Finchum That was in what year?  Overton That was in 1979, I believe. It was my senior year in high school. That was  the first year they ginned cotton, which would have been the fall of    79.  Finchum You graduated high school in     Overton       80.  Finchum Were you in FFA or 4-H?  Overton I was in FFA, yes, every year I could be in it. I was in 4-H before that, but  not as actively as involved as I was in FFA.  Finchum When you were working for your dad, were you getting paid, or were you  free labor?  Overton Actually, I wasn   t getting paid, per se. My dad told me when I was about,  and I started driving a tractor when I was six years old and bought my first  tractor when I was twelve years old and later traded it for a combine when I  was fourteen years old. I mean, I   ve been farming basically my whole life,  but my dad told me that if I would work for him and not get paid that when I  turned sixteen, he would buy me a new pickup. I did that, and I would say I  was never without money. If I needed spending money, he gave me  spending money, but then I was making some money on my own, too, doing  some custom farming.  I rented some land whenever I was about fourteen, fifteen years old. I had a  little money coming in from there, and then I had a pretty good show pig  operation. I was raising show pigs, and I showed pigs whenever I was in  FFA. Then I started raising my own and selling them, and I had a pretty  good   I raised Durocs and had some pretty good show pigs and did that for  a while, but my dad told me when I went to college, he said,    The pigs are  going to have to go because I don   t have time to take care of them.    I knew  that. That   s when I got out of the pig business is when I went to college.  Finchum Well, when you were earning this money along the way, did you have a bank  account?  Overton Oh yeah. Yeah, I had a bank account when I was fourteen probably. Had my  own checks and everything.  Finchum Here in town?  Overton Yeah. Well, actually, a bank at Union City  Oklahoma  is where we always  banked, which is five miles away.  Finchum Is that pretty unusual for this area?  Overton Oh, probably not at that time. I mean, there wasn   t a whole lot of kids that  had checking accounts     Finchum    at fourteen?  Overton Yeah, but there were some. It wasn   t unusual to start helping at a very early  age. It   s a little bit different times now than it was then. My kids, I haven   t  let them. I didn   t let them start helping at that age, no.  Finchum You learned how to balance your checkbook early, too?  Overton Oh yes. Just like nowadays, it was hard to keep it balanced then just like it is  today. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, you started driving a tractor when you were six?  Overton Yes.  Finchum How did you reach the pedals?  Overton I had to sit on the front of the seat, but about a mile from here is where my  mom and dad lived then. My mom still lives there today. I lost my dad in  January, this past January, and that   s made for a rough year. Yeah, we were  there, and we had a farm about fifteen miles to the southwest of here. He  was needing to move this tractor, and there wasn   t anybody to help. He said,     Why don   t you   ?   , which, I had driven it, but I had never driven it out on  the road. He said,    I want you to take this tractor down there,    and I never  even questioned it. I just got on it and took it down there. I   ve been driving  ever since.  Finchum On the road?  Overton Yeah, I drove down the road to   it was fifteen miles, and he followed me.  Finchum Didn   t have any issues?  Overton Never had any problems, no.  Finchum The first one you bought, what was it?  Overton It was a John Deere 3010.  Finchum Are you still a John Deere guy?  Overton Pretty much. Yeah, I have some other brands, but John Deere has always  been the brand that I   ve always ran.  Finchum Was it new or used?  Overton Oh, it was used. Yeah, I couldn   t afford a new one.  Finchum Where would you have to go to have it serviced, or did you do that yourself,  too?  Overton There was a local, there was a dealer here in town at that time, Moss  Emblem that was here in town, and that   s who I bought him from. I don   t  know what his age was when I bought it. He was probably in his sixties,  because he kept it open until he was in his eighties and was a really nice  gentleman. If somebody like me was trying to get started, he would, and my  dad, he helped my dad get started, too, when my dad still had the service  station. He would let you have a tractor or whatever, and you could run it  and make money with it until you could afford to make the down payment.  He   d do that. Like I said, it   s kind of different times. They couldn   t do that  nowadays, and the cost of things is so much more now.  He helped me get started, and of course, my dad, he always helped me. I  could use his equipment if I needed to, and that went all the way up until he  sold out. Then after he sold me all of his stuff, he still helped me. Probably  worked harder helping me than he did when it was all his stuff, but I helped  him even after I got out of college and through college. I always helped him,  and he   d let me use anything he had. Anything that I bought, he knew he  could use anything that I had. Worked out pretty good. A lot of people can   t  work with their parents like that. It   s different because you   re working with  them and also they   re your family. You got to get along. I   m not going to  say we never had any problems, but we didn   t have very many.  Finchum How early would you have to get up to do all of this?  Overton Oh, whenever I was still in high school, I had to get up at six o   clock and  take care of all of my livestock before I went to school, and then like I said,  in the afternoons when I got out of school or after, a lot of times, after  football, football practice wouldn   t be over with until six, seven o   clock.  Then I   d go get in the truck and go to El Reno  Oklahoma  and get a load of  feed and come back, and usually I   d get one of my friends to help me unload  it because it was all in bags, fifty-pound bags. We   d unload a load of feed,  and a lot of times it might be eleven o   clock before we   d get done.  Finchum When did you do your homework, or did you do your homework?  Overton I didn   t have much homework. I got most of my work done at school. Very  seldom did I have homework, and if I did, we   d usually do it. I   d usually do  it. I   d go to school early, and we   d sit down. A lot of us was, there were a lot  of kids that were   I remember algebra. A lot of kids had trouble with  algebra, and if you didn   t pick it up right off the bat, it was tough to stay up  with the class. There was three or four of us that picked it up early. We   d sit  down, and if we had a problem, we   d work it out with each other. We would  do our homework together. I mean, our teacher knew what we were doing  because we were doing it at the lunch tables at school. If I had homework,  that   s when I   d usually be doing it was in the morning before school started.  Finchum How many were in your class?  Overton We had about thirty-five all the way through school. I think we ended up,  there was only twenty-nine graduated. There was some that moved away  right at our senior year. We had thirty-three or thirty-five most of the way  through school.  Finchum One through twelve together?  Overton Yes. There was a lot, over half of my class went K through twelve. I actually  didn   t go to kindergarten. They offered kindergarten the year before, and it  wasn   t at the school. They had it at the Baptist church because they didn   t  have a place for it. The next year, they offered it at the school, and it was  optional. You could send your kids or not, and my mom said she, I don   t  remember this, but she said she asked me if I wanted to go. I said no. I  didn   t go. I just started out in the first grade. I didn   t go to kindergarten.  Finchum Wanted to drive that tractor? (Laughs)  Overton Yeah, yeah. During school, once I got to be fourteen, I could get a  motorcycle license. I drove a motorcycle, and then as soon as school was  over, I   d drive to wherever I knew we had work to do. Before that, I rode the  school bus to the field, and the bus driver would let me off at this place. I  would hop off and go get on the tractor and work until my dad come pick  me up. That was before cell phones or anything like that. If you had trouble,  you just sat and waited until somebody came to get you. That   s all you could  do.  Finchum What would you do for food and such?  Overton Well, this would be after school. I   d be fine until I got done.  Finchum You mentioned football. You played football.  Overton Played football, yes.  Finchum Any other sports?  Overton I played basketball in junior high, but I didn   t play in high school. Football  was the only thing I played in high school. We were pretty good. My  sophomore year, we were really good. Junior and senior year, we were okay.  We weren   t anything special.  Finchum It was the Minco what? What was the   ?  Overton Minco Bulldogs.  Finchum I noticed the paw prints, but I wasn   t sure what   .  Overton Yeah.  Finchum The colors?  Overton Blue and white.  Finchum Would you have a favorite subject?  Overton Oh, ag. Ag was my favorite subject probably, but I liked math. Math   s  probably my next favorite subject.  Finchum While we   re talking about your parents, what were their names?  Overton Bill and Verna.  Finchum Had they gone to college?  Overton No. They had both graduated from high school here at Minco. My dad  actually went to a country school, probably the last one   I don   t know if it  was, probably wasn   t the last one in the county, but it was one of the last  ones in the county to close. He went to Hazel Dell. It   s out west of here  about seven or eight miles and then north a couple miles, and he went first  through eight there. Then he came to Minco in ninth grade, and my mom  was raised southwest of here. She was actually in the Amber school district,  but her dad wanted her to go to Minco. There were several kids. They got a  transfer. They just lived across the road from Minco school district, and they  let them transfer. She had went through first through twelve here.  Finchum How would she get to school, on a bus?  Overton Yeah, on a bus.  Finchum Is the school still standing where your dad went, the country school?  Overton Yes. It was a church. In the Hazel Dell community there was a church, and  the schoolhouse was across the road. I don   t think that   s actually the  schoolhouse. I think it   s just their community building now, but I don   t think  it   s actually the same building. I don   t know that for sure, but I think that   s  right.  Finchum At what point did you decide you wanted to go college, and how did you pick  where you went?  Overton Well, I was always an OSU fan. I don   t really know why. I guess my  parents, they liked OSU, but I didn   t really have any family members or  anything that had gone there. I knew it was an ag, had an ag program. I  wasn   t all that fired up to go to college, but my mom really pushed me and  encouraged me to go to college. I thought about it, and I thought,    I know  what I want to do. I want to farm. That   s what I want to do. I don   t know  how much college is going to help that, but there might come a time where I  might not be able to farm.    I wanted to have something I could fall back on,  and my mom always told me,    If you get a degree, you can go get a job  doing anything. It doesn   t necessarily have to be what your degree is in.     She was probably the one that pushed me to go to college more than  anything.  My dad, he didn   t discourage me, but he was probably, I   m just thinking  now he was probably thinking that,    I   m going to lose my help.    He never  said anything. He never did say anything discouraging, and he encouraged  me to go actually and made the same deal with me. My mom made the same  deal with me that my dad made whenever I was in high school. She said,    If  you   ll go to college and graduate, when you graduate, we   ll get you a new  pickup.    I didn   t get paid until I was out of college by anybody. That was  my pay, was a new pickup.  Finchum Was it orange?  Overton No, it wasn   t orange. (Laughter) I thought about orange, but no, it wasn   t. It  wasn   t orange.  Finchum Well, did they go up to campus with you when you were first enrolling and  moving in?  Overton Yes, they did, and actually, before I enrolled, I had a friend that was two  years older than I that had wanted me to join a fraternity. I knew nothing  about fraternities other than what I   d seen on Animal House or whatever.  (Laughs) I wasn   t really interested in that at all, but he had a young man  come from Watonga  Oklahoma  who came to recruit me and came to my  house and sat down with my mom and dad. There was three guys from the  Alpha Gamma Rho house. I sat down with them, and they told me all, what  it was all about. When it was over with, my mom said,    Now is there  anything we need to sign?    (Laughs) She was ready for me sign up with  them, and I said,    Hold on, Mom     I hadn   t decided if this is what, but she  was, they really impressed her. They were. They were an impressive men,  and it was an impressive organization that I ended up joining and never  regretted it. Probably kept me in school actually.  Finchum They have a new house now.  Overton Yes, a brand-new house. I haven   t been in it yet, but it sure looks nice. It   s  impressive from the street.  Finchum They   ve added rocking chairs, that   s a good thing. (Laughter) Your first day  on campus   well, let   s back up. Where did you live when you were a  freshman?  Overton I lived in the Alpha Gamma Rho house.  Finchum As a freshman?  Overton Yes. Yeah. I think all the pledges lived in the house.  Finchum How would you enroll? Was that in the day with computers? Oh, it was  probably before computers.  Overton Oh, they had computers. They were just getting started. I don   t really  remember. I remember going to enroll. I don   t remember, really, all the  process. I had history. I had ag orientation. I had agronomy, which was my,  what my major ended up being at that time. I had English, and I think I had  seventeen hours, I believe. I think I had chemistry also for my freshman  year.  Finchum Pretty full load   Overton I had a pretty good load, too much really.  Finchum Agronomy, it   s not dirt. It   s soil, right?  Overton Well, right. It   s plant and soil science. They dropped that major, I think, and  called it something else. I don   t remember what they   ve changed it to, but I  think they brought back agronomy just in the last few years.  Finchum Spent much time in the library there?  Overton Quite a bit, yeah. I   d go there to study and get away. That was the most  quiet place you could go to study.  Finchum Did you work on campus, or you came home to work?  Overton I came home to work a lot. I did do some work up there for one of the  professors in the forage sorghum division and did some work out on the  research farms, the one at Perkins and the one right on the west edge of  Stillwater there.  Finchum Have a favorite professor?  Overton Oh, not really. I mean, all my professors were good. Of course, I liked the ag  professors probably better just because the subjects that I was more  interested in. I was on the crops judging team while I was up there for two  years, and professor   s name that coached that just completely has gone out  of my head. I really liked him. He was an older man. He was probably in  his   I say that now. He doesn   t seem that old now that I   m getting up there,  but he was probably in his seventies. He was an older man. He retired. My  senior year, he retired. He was my adviser, too.  Finchum Did you have a favorite spot on campus?  Overton Oh, I like the Union. That area between the Union and the Library, I always  enjoyed that area. It was just pretty. It   s a nice place to go sit and watch  people go by, and out by the fountain. That was probably my favorite places,  right around there.  Finchum What would you do for fun?  Overton Oh, I don   t know if I can tell everything we did for fun, no. (Laughter)  There was always a lot to do at the AGR house. There was a lot of social  events to go to. I got my pilot   s license while I was going to school up there.  It was in the Flying Aggies, and I liked to go fly. I had some friends that, I  didn   t have the money to afford a plane or even to go rent one, but I had two  or three friends that did. They either had planes or had the money to go rent  planes, and we   d go flying a lot in the afternoons. If we didn   t have class or  didn   t have homework, we   d go maybe fly for a couple of hours then come  back. I really enjoyed that.  Finchum I don   t know anything about the Flying Aggies. What all would that entail?  Overton Oh, it was just a flying club, just pilots. A lot of the instructors were going  to grad school and different things, and it was a college credit. I got college  credit for the ground school and even for the flying part of it, too. I was glad  I got my pilot   s license, even though I haven   t really used it. I just really  enjoyed that experience, and it wasn   t all that costly at the time. I think I got  my pilot   s license for less than twenty-five hundred dollars. That included  the flying time, the ground school, and everything. It   s probably, no telling  what it   d cost now. Probably over twice that.  Finchum Any close calls?  Overton No, not really. We had really good instructors. Most of my classes would be  in the afternoon. My flying class would be in the afternoon. Once we came  up, we went up, towards the end of my, before I got my license, we were up  flying, and we were just about to come in to land. A northern blew in, and  the wind changed just as we were about to land. The instructor, it shook him  up, too. It was scary because we were about to land, and the wind was going  to change. That would have really changed   you always got to land into the  wind. We had to pull up and go around. It changed the whole flight pattern  at the airport whenever the wind changed. That was probably the closest call  I ever had. I even took an aerobatics class after that where we went up and  did stunts.  Finchum Loop-the-loops?  Overton Loops and barrels and things like that. That was fun, too.  Finchum Did your mother know you were doing that?  Overton My mother, yeah, and my mother really never said anything. You could go  parachute over at Cushing  Oklahoma . They had a place where you could  go. I decided I was going to do that. I had my pilot   s license and all that, and  that   s the only time my mom put her foot down and said,    I haven   t said  anything. You got your pilot   s license and all that, but no, you   re not going  to jump out of airplanes.    I didn   t go ahead and do that.  Finchum Have you done it since?  Overton No, never have. Probably wouldn   t do it now. Probably got more sense now  than I had then.  Finchum Put it on your bucket list.  Overton (Laughter) Yeah.  Finchum Were you a member of any other organizations, or that kept you pretty busy  between   ?  Overton I think that was about it. That was the only thing I was really involved in.  Finchum How often would you come home?  Overton I came home quite a bit because I had things I was involved in here, too,  farming and work. I   d say I came home probably at least every other  weekend.  Finchum Did you bring your laundry, or did you do that yourself?  Overton No, actually, there was a place, and I can   t remember the name of it, that  would do your laundry. You could take your dirty clothes down there in a  basket, set it on the counter, and for  3.50, you could get your whole basket  washed and folded and put in the basket. My mom would say,    Did you  bring laundry home?    I   d say,    Well, no. I can get it done up there for three  fifty.    She said,    Oh, that   s a better deal. Just do that,    and that   s what I did.  Finchum I would agree. (Laughter) For graduation day, what do you recall from  graduation day?  Overton Oh, the graduation was outside. It was at Lewis Stadium, which has changed  now to Boone Pickens Stadium, but anyway, that   s where we had  graduation. All my family came up. My grandparents came up, or one set of  them did. My sisters came up, and it was a big deal. I had an aunt that had  gone, my dad   s sister had went to college, and she went to OSU for a while.  Didn   t graduate from there. Wound up going to SMU  Southern Methodist  University , but she was there. It was a big deal because I was the first one  since my aunt that had and the first one that I know of that had graduated  from Oklahoma State.  Finchum Did you sisters go later?  Overton My oldest sister got married right out of high school. She didn   t go to  college. My youngest sister went up there, and she graduated from there. I  don   t know what year. She was eight years younger than I, so    92, probably,  when she graduated.  Finchum Orange is still in the family? (Laughs)  Overton Yes, and my oldest daughter graduated from there, Jordan, the one that  wrote the letter. She graduated from there a couple years ago or a year and a  half ago, and then I have two up there right now. My middle daughter,  Jenson, is up there, and then one of my middle sons, Jacob, is going to  school up there. He   s a sophomore. Jenson   s a freshman. I have seven  children.  Finchum Did they choose to go there, or did Dad say,    If you   re going to college,  that   s where you   re going   ?  Overton That   s funny because my son, Jacob, he played football here in Minco, and  he was an all-state football player and was very good. He had a chance to go  to Oklahoma Baptist and play football, and he did that. His freshmen year,  he went there and played football and decided that that wasn   t what he really  wanted to do. He liked OBU okay, but he had always planned on going to  Oklahoma State until this football deal come along. After he had decided  that he didn   t want to be playing football anymore, which is really a strain  on you. I can   t imagine trying to go to college and play sports. Even  whenever I was in school, I had some friends that were football players, and  they had no free time.  Anyway, this past summer, he said,    What do you think about if I transfer to  OSU?    and I said,    Well, that   d be great.    That   s where he always wanted to  go, anyway. My daughter, Jensen, that   s up there, they   ve never wanted to  go anywhere else. We   ve had season football tickets up there for several  years. They   re a lot more familiar with the campus than I was whenever I  went to school. I   d never been on campus until I decided that   s what I was  going to do.  Finchum Then Jordan?  Overton Jordan graduated from there. She had a real good experience there. She got  married in May, and her husband, Larry, is an ag teacher at Elgin   Oklahoma . Just got a job there this summer, and he graduated from  Oklahoma State as well. Now I got a lot of ties to OSU. (Laughter)  Finchum You sure do  Lots of orange all around   Overton Lots of it   Finchum Was Bedlam a big deal when you were there?  Overton Oh yes.  Finchum Was it?  Overton Yes. Probably every bit as big as it is now, yeah. It was a big deal.  Finchum Do you remember if OSU beat OU while you were there?  Overton They didn   t ever beat them while I was there. In    76 they beat them, before I  got there. I remember that. Terry Miller was playing when they beat them. I  went to a game in Norman with the friend of mine that got me in the Alpha  Gamma Rho house. He and I went to Norman to watch a game. That would  have been, it was after we had graduated. It was when Gundy was  quarterback, and Hart Lee Dykes and Thurman Thomas were playing. We  were pretty sure we were going to beat them that year in Norman. We went  over there. We swore we   d never go back to Norman to a football game, and  I haven   t to this day. I   ve had a chance to go a few times, but no, I   m not  going back there. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you go back for Homecoming, Walkaround and all of that?  Overton Try to. Don   t always make it to the Walkaround, but we try to take the kids  up there, at least for the parade that morning. Like I said, we have season  tickets. We usually always try to go to the game.  Finchum Well, with seven children and three already there, the other four will  probably head that way, too?  Overton Well, the oldest one didn   t go. My oldest son, Josh, he didn   t go. He went to  work out of high school. He never really had the desire to go to college, and  that   s fine. I told him that college isn   t for everybody. He did actually try it  for a year, but it wasn   t for him. The three that are still home, I still have  three still in school. I have one that   s a junior. I have one that   s a freshman. I  have one that   s a seventh grader, and they   re probably going to go to OSU.  Finchum Not ag, all of them?  Overton None of them have been in ag so far   Jordan was in ag communications for  a while, and I don   t know what she   I can   t remember what her degree was  actually in when she finally got a degree. It wasn   t ag communications.  Jacob is undecided right now. Jensen   s a psychology major is what she   s  majoring in. If any of them go up there to get an ag degree, it   d probably be  my youngest, Jackson. He probably has more interest in farming, except for  my oldest son. My oldest son just in the last few months has come back to  help me on the farm. He   s decided that   s what he wants to do.  Finchum Did you let any of them get on a tractor at age six?  Overton Not and drive it, no. Like I said, it   s a little bit different times. The  equipment   s a lot bigger. It costs a lot more. The one that   s a seventh grader,  he   s my youngest. He   s started helping a little bit. The rest of them are all,  have all helped some.  Finchum We should probably back up and mention the wife, the mother of these  children.  Overton Right, and my wife went to Oklahoma State for one year. She was from  here. She was from Minco. She   s younger than me. She   s about five, six  years younger than me. I was out of college when she was still in school, but  her and my youngest sister were pretty good friends. That   s how I got  acquainted with her. She was coaching my youngest sister   s summer league  basketball team whenever we started dating. She was going to OSU. Her  older brother had went to OSU. He went to vet school. He graduated from  vet school. He   s a vet now in Tulsa, Michael, but she went there for one  year. We decided we were going to get married. I hate to tell you where she  graduated from. She graduated from OU. She doesn   t tell very many people  that, but she was OSU all the way. She still is, even though she graduated  from OU. That   s when I knew she really loved me, whenever she left OSU  to graduate from OU, and she commuted back and forth and graduated.  Finchum Did OSU offer what she was going to get her degree in?  Overton Yeah. Physical therapy is what she was wanting. She wanted to be a  physical therapist, and then after a couple of years into that, she decided that  that wasn   t what she really wanted to do. She decided she was going to be a  schoolteacher. She got her degree in elementary ed, and she teaches school.  She teaches fourth grade over at Bridge Creek.  Finchum A lot of patience   Overton Yes, and she   s a good teacher. She really is, but she didn   t start teaching     actually, we got married, like I said, between her freshman and sophomore  year in college, and then she was pregnant with our oldest son when she was  a senior. When she graduated, she was actually pregnant with our oldest son,  Josh, and she was a stay-at-home mom until the youngest one started school.  She had taught a little bit. She had taught up here at Minco for a semester  when there was a teacher that was sick and was unable to teach. She filled  in, but she really didn   t start teaching fulltime for real until the last one  started school when she got this job at Bridge Creek. She really loves it.  Finchum It   s an interesting grade, too.  Overton Yes. She likes the grade. That   s a good age.  Finchum They already know how to read, for the most part.  Overton Yes. They   re still sweet, she says, before all of the hormones kick in.  (Laughter)  Finchum You still have season tickets?  Overton Yes.  Finchum For all nine of you? No, let   s see. If I could do my math   .  Overton Well, the oldest ones, I   ve told, if they want season tickets, they have to buy  their own. The two that are in college are buying student tickets. We   ve  been able to cut back on our tickets a little bit. The ticket bill   s not as high as  it   s been.  Finchum Do you usually have a tailgate party?  Overton Not usually. We usually get there at least an hour before the game, and we   ll  go in and eat and tailgate in the stadium usually. Now sometimes my sister  and her husband, my youngest sister, Jennifer, who graduated from there,  sometimes they   ll have a tailgate party, and if they do, they   ll usually call  us. We   ll maybe go swing by there for a little bit. Usually we   re running  behind, and we get there. We get to the stadium, and we go to the game.  Then I have a friend here in town that, he has two tickets, and I buy all the  tickets. Then he pays me for two of them. We   ve been doing that for twenty  years plus probably, and we sit with him. He usually takes one of his nieces  or nephews, and we always have our kids. There   s several people here in  Minco that have season football tickets, and they usually all come by and  see us before we   we have our same spots we   ve had for ten, fifteen years.  Finchum A moving caravan then.  Overton Yes. (Laughter)  Finchum Do you usually go up  Highway  81?  Overton No, we go up and take the Kilpatrick. Yeah, that really shortens the time to  get there.  Finchum Basketball, not so much   .  Overton I   ve had season basketball tickets. The friend of mine I was telling you  about that shares football tickets with us, he and I   ve had season basketball  tickets a few times, but it   s too hard. There   s so many games, and they   re  usually at night. It   s late getting home.  Finchum During the week.  Overton Yeah, and I   m usually busy here at the cotton gin during that time, too. That  makes it hard to go. We quit getting them.  Finchum Once you graduated from high school, take us through what you did after  with, not necessarily with your degree but career-wise. You came back here  and started doing what?  Overton Right. You mean start when I graduated from college?  Finchum Yes.  Overton I graduated from college. I came back and bought a trailer house and moved  across the road over here. My dad had a farm just across the road here from  the cotton gin. Lived there and started farming and helping my dad, working  for him, and he was paying me then, after I got out of college.  Finchum You already had your truck. (Laughter)  Overton I already had my truck, yes. Had some of my own equipment, and that   s  probably what I did most of was custom farming. I did cut hay up for  people, cut and bale their hay, all kinds of different custom work when it  came to farming, but then I   d also, in the wintertime when it was slow, I   d  work at the cotton gin because they   d built this here. They always needed  employees during the season. I   d work there.  Finchum What would you do?  Overton Whatever they needed me to do.  Finchum What, for instance, those of us who don   t know much about what goes on in  a cotton gin?  Overton Well, at that time everybody harvested their cotton and dumped it into  wagons or trailers, and this whole yard out here would be completely  covered with trailers. Somebody had to keep them lined up. They had to be  ran through the gin in the order they came in, to keep everybody happy. I  did some of that, moving the trailers around. When they actually ginned that  wagon, they had a big suction pipe, kind of like a big vacuum tube, and you  had to get up there and swing that tube and suck that cotton out of that  wagon. I did a little bit of that. Not a whole lot, but just whatever they  needed me to do. Just general, whatever needed to be done, that   s what I did.  Finchum Where did it go then?  Overton Went into the gin and started cleaning and being processed. I drove a truck a  little bit. I got my chauffeur   s license not too long after I got out of college  so I could just drive a truck if   I   d just do whatever I needed to do to make  a living, I guess. Then after we got married, Michelle and I got married, I   ve  tried all different kinds of things. I worked at the lumberyard one winter.  There was a lumberyard here in town. It   s not here anymore. I worked there.  I raised vegetables and produce the year that Jordan was born, which would  have been 1992. I had about fifteen acres of produce. I had twelve hundred  tomato plants. I had four hundred pepper plants. I had four acres of sweet  corn. I had an acre of okra. That was probably the hardest I   ve ever worked  in my life was that summer, and really, it wasn   t that profitable, either. You  couldn   t do it all yourself. You had to hire help. By the time you paid your  help, there wasn   t much left.  Finchum You can   t do much of that with machinery, can you?  Overton No, it was all basically handpicking. I mean, I   ll never forget we did that,  and Michelle was pregnant with Jordan that year. She picked tomatoes up  until Jordan was born in July, July the 15th. She was picking tomatoes up  within a week of when Jordan was born. It was quite a summer.  Finchum Hot here during that time, too, I guess.  Overton Yes. Yeah, and then after that, there was a period of time there I wondered,     Is this what I really want to do?    I couldn   t imagine doing anything else. I  just made up my mind that this is what I want to do, whatever I got to do to  make it happen and started farming probably a few more acres. An  opportunity came along to rent some ground, and did that. My dad was  doing a lot of custom hay work, and he was wanting me to take that over. I  took that over, and that was a little more steady income during the summer.  I   ve continued doing that all the way up until now.  I   ve always had some of my own land that   I bought a farm about fifteen  years ago. That   s the only farm I still own. The rest of it, all the ground I  farm, I lease from others. I   ve never went and asked anybody to lease  ground. They   ve always contacted me, and I   ve always felt good about that.  I   ve never rented anybody out of their property or anything. There   s some  that they took it away from someone to give it to me, let me farm it, but I   ve  never, they did it on their own. I have never ran anybody out. I can say that  very proudly. Every farm that I have, that I farm, that I lease, the landowner  has came to me and wanted me to farm it.  Finchum I noticed windmills coming in. Are there any on the land that you have?  Overton Some of the land that I custom farm has wind towers on it, but none of my  own land that I rent has any wind towers on it.  Finchum Cause any issues?  Overton No. There   s some good and bad to them. I don   t really have a problem with  them. I thought they did a pretty good job with trying to put things back like  they were before they put the towers there. I   ve seen some places that it   s  caused some problems, but as far as what I have been associated with, it   s  not that big a deal. The noise is probably the only thing I don   t care for. If  you   re right up next to them, you can   t hear them. If you   re half a mile away  downwind, that   s when you can hear them. Sounds like a jet engine roaring  all the time.  Finchum Really?  Overton Yeah, but if you   re standing up next beside one, you can   t hear it at all.  Finchum They   re huge. When you get up   . (Laughs)  Overton They   re big. They are big.  Finchum I didn   t realize there were any south of I-40. You see them going the other  direction.  Overton There   s a pretty good bunch of them. They start just to the southeast of here  and run all the way almost to Hinton  Oklahoma .  Finchum I noticed coming into town I crossed Buggy Creek. Do you know anything  about how it got its name or anything?  Overton Oh, probably from years ago, people getting stuck in it with buggies is what  I would say, but Buggy Creek is really, there   s really fertile ground. I have a  lot of land on Buggy Creek, and it   s, I   d put it up against anybody   s ground  anywhere in the state. It   s really good. It   s sub-irrigated. It   s a little bit  sandy. It farms pretty easily. The only problem is from time to time Buggy  Creek gets out of banks and floods it, and that   s why it   s so good. That   s the  only problem you got to worry about is a lot of rainfall and the creek getting  out, but yeah, Buggy Creek is really good land.  Finchum Has the drought impacted what you   ve done in the last couple years?  Overton The drought was really, yeah, it was the driest I   d seen it in my lifetime, and  my dad, like I say, I lost him in January. It was the driest he   d ever seen it,  too. There were ponds and wells that were drying up that had never been  dry, that he had ever remembered since he was a kid. He   d lived here all his  life. Yeah, it was pretty tough. You get to thinking,    Well, surely we   ll have  a normal year.    Well, I don   t know if you ever have a normal year when  you   re farming. This year, it was rain. Three or four years before this, it   s  been drought. You just got to realize that that   s part of it and go make the  best of it.  Finchum Farm insurance?  Overton I have crop insurance. Yeah, I have crop insurance, and it   s really helped in  the last few years. I didn   t have any crop insurance up until probably about  ten years ago. The very first year I took it out on my wheat. That next  spring, my wheat froze out, and I really collected good on it. I   ve been  keeping it ever since. Most years, you don   t collect on it, and you hope you  never have to collect on it. Insurance is one of the deals you hope you never  have to collect on, but it paid really good on my wheat this past year. My  wheat was not very good this past year. During May, it rained for three  straight weeks. We had about twenty-five inches right here around Minco in  May in three weeks    time, and that was when the wheat was trying to  mature. It was not very good, but the insurance paid enough to keep going.  Finchum Did you ever do the wheat harvest with a traveling crew?  Overton Yeah, actually, I did when I was in college. My dad bought a new combine  in 1982, and that was when I was between my sophomore and junior year.  Actually, I took that combine, and my brother-in-law, he had a combine. We  went on wheat harvest. He was going before that and went after that, but I  just went those two years. We went to, all the way to South Dakota. In fact,  the last year I went, I came here. They were still up there cutting, and I came  back, got home on a Friday, and started college on Monday, my senior year.  I had a guy to help and drove a truck. We came back, and they stayed up  there and finished up. They ended up going on to Minnesota, but South  Dakota was as far as I ever went. Usually I went to Colorado. I think I went,  actually, the next year, after I graduated also, but whenever I was in my  senior year, starting my senior year, I had to come back early just so I could  come back to college.  Finchum Where would you sleep when you were working that?  Overton We had a little travel trailer we stayed in. That was a lot of fun. My dad  went on wheat harvest when he was a kid, and he   d always told me, he said,     Every kid ought to go on wheat harvest.    Whenever I was in grade school,  my dad had two combines, and he sent four boys that were still, one of them  was a sophomore. The other three just graduated from high school. He sent  those four boys with his two trucks, two combines, and a pickup and sent  them on wheat harvest. Now I can   t imagine doing that nowadays, but those  four boys took those combines and went all the way to Chadron, Nebraska,  cutting wheat.  Finchum Without adult supervision?  Overton No adults. Now my dad went up there a few times. They had a tendency to  pull into a town where everybody was cutting wheat already instead of  going, say, another forty, fifty miles farther to where they were just starting  to cut wheat because they would pull into a town, get a job, cut that, and  then the wheat harvest was over there. They   d have to load up and move on.  He went up there and explained to them,    You need to move a little bit  farther, and then you can stay in this spot for at least a week or so and then  move again.    That   s what they did. Pretty responsible boys to take a crew  and go do something like that.  Finchum Their parents trusted them, too.  Overton Yes, and they were good guys. They really were.  Finchum Have your kids been on a wheat harvest?  Overton No, they didn   t have the desire. Josh, my oldest, would probably be the only  one that would have wanted to go, and he never really has said anything  about going.  Finchum Now the machines are so expensive, I don   t know if you   d send a teenager  off with one.  Overton Yeah. I mean, they   d have to be used to running one for a period of time  before I   d turn them loose on a machine that cost quarter of a million or  more dollars.  Finchum Well, did you learn anything at OSU that applies to what you do today?  Overton Oh yeah. Yes. A lot of my agronomy classes were very helpful. Plant  physiology, soil morphology, all those things have been helpful to me. I  took an irrigation class. Even though I don   t have any irrigation, I learned a  lot in that class just about how you irrigate and all the processes. That was  probably one of my most enjoyable classes, even though I don   t even  irrigate. I really enjoyed that class. I learned a lot about flow. It applies to  other areas, too, but yeah, I learned a lot of things that, more than I ever  thought I would when I went there. I didn   t think some of that stuff would  ever help me, but it has.  I think college, though, more than anything is the contacts you make and the  lifelong friends that you make. I have friends from the AGR house up there  that I   m still very close to, a lot of friends that weren   t in the AGR house  that I still see and a lot of people that work for farm-related things. If you  have a problem, you can call. If you have a question about something,  there   s a lot of people I can call. If I have a problem with something and  want to find out information, I can usually have a friend somewhere that I  can contact and find that out.  Finchum County agents, extension agents?  Overton Some of the extension agents in the state right now are some that I went to  school with. The county extension agents are very helpful, even today, to  me.  Finchum Well, let   s talk a little bit about Minco. How has it changed since your high  school days?  Overton Since my high school days?  Finchum    or earlier?  Overton It hasn   t grown all that much, but it has grown steadily, which is good.  There   s a lot of communities around here that have grown very rapidly.  They   ve outgrown their schools and their infrastructure, and Minco   s  beginning to outgrow its infrastructure. I don   t know if you noticed there   s a  new water tower in town they just put up this summer. We built a new high  school just on the south side of town, and that   s due to the windmills now.  That   s the tax money from the wind towers, allowing us to be able to build a  new high school, but it hasn   t changed.  The businesses have changed. Some of them have closed down, and some of  them have changed. Whenever I was in grade school, we had three grocery  stores in town. Now we don   t have any. The grocery store burned down  about nineteen years ago. Nobody   s built one back. I wish we had a grocery  store. Got the Dollar General. It was built about five years ago, and it   s been  really helpful. Minco hasn   t changed all that much. It was about eleven  hundred people, I think, whenever I was in school, and it   s probably fifteen  to seventeen hundred now. It has grown.  We   ve had some new housing editions go in, but there   s farmland on three  sides of Minco. The people that own that land weren   t interested in selling  it. It limited on how fast Minco could grow, and some of that land started  coming up for sale now. There   s been some new housing editions go in.  Because of that, they   re having to do some work on the infrastructure, and  it   s not easy to do in a small town because there   s not a lot of money.  Finchum Did it have a movie theater when you were growing up?  Overton There was a movie theater whenever I was pretty young. I can remember  going to the movie theater, but I   m going to say probably before I was eight  years old, it closed down. Yeah, I   m going to say probably about the time I  was about eight years old, about 1970 probably.  Finchum What   s the county seat? Is it Chickasha?  Overton Chickasha.  Finchum How far is that from here?  Overton Eighteen miles. That   s where I was born, at the hospital there in Chickasha.  Finchum When people go to shop, do they go to Oklahoma City, or is El Reno the  closest?  Overton El Reno is probably the closest. That   s the closest Walmart. If you go  through Tuttle  Oklahoma , it   s not too far to get to Mustang  Oklahoma . A  lot of people go to Mustang. We   re in a pretty good spot. We   re still small.  You still have the rural life, but you   re also close enough if you want to go  out and eat at Oklahoma City. It   s thirty-five, forty minutes away. You can  be in Oklahoma City eating someplace.  Finchum Hop on I-40 and go whichever direction?  Overton Yeah. Getting to Stillwater is a lot better now than it used to be since the  turnpike. Used to, you had to go either up 81 all the way to Hennessey   Oklahoma  or go on I-35 through Oklahoma City, and all the time I was  going to Stillwater, they were working on I-35. Up there around Frontier  City  Amusement Park  it was always construction, the whole time I was  going. For four straight years, there was construction somewhere that would  slow you down. I usually went up through Hennessey or Crescent   Oklahoma  or somewhere.  Finchum Do you remember the alma mater, the song?  Overton Oh yeah.  Finchum The alma mater? I won   t ask you to sing it.  Overton I   m not going to sing it. I can tell you the words, but I   m not going to sing it.  You   re not going to get me to sing it. (Laughter)  Finchum I know part of the words, and I   m not singing either, so we   re good.  (Laughter)  Overton Okay. Donna might come and sing it. Donna, from the office.  Finchum You consider Minco home? Not considered living anywhere else?  Overton Yes. Been to lots of places. Never even considered living anywhere else.  Finchum What is it about Minco that holds you here?  Overton I don   t know. Probably diversity. As far as farming goes, we may not be  able to grow corn as good as they can grow it in Iowa. We may not be able  to grow cotton as good as they can grow in the Delta, but there   s not very  many places that you can grow any, just about any type of crop. I mean,  there   s some crops like sugarcane or something like that you couldn   t grow  here, but we can grow about any crop here. Maybe not as good as they can  grow it somewhere else, but we can grow it. That   s good for me to have  some diversity of what I can do, and the landscape where there   s some flat  areas. There   s some rolling areas. You can go west of here seven or eight  miles, and you get into timber. We don   t really have any mountains here, but  there   s hills. Of all the places I   ve been, it   s the best place I   ve ever found.  Finchum It   s home.  Overton It   s home, and I enjoyed my time in Stillwater, too. Stillwater was and still  is, you still get that small town feeling when you go to Stillwater, even  though it   s not a small town. It   s really growing, too, but it still has that feel  when you go into town. It has to be the people is what makes it feel like that.  Finchum It   s changed, I would assume, quite a bit since the    80s, too.  Overton It   s really changed. Yes, it   s really changed. There   s lots and lots of new  businesses, and the University   s really changed. Of course, all the dorms are  going down, and the new ones are going up in their place. Even where I  stayed in the AGR house, it   s gone. There   s a new house there, but still, the  feel of the University and the campus area, you still just get that small town,  hometown feel.  Finchum Theta Pond, was that a favorite spot?  Overton Yeah, it   s a nice place. Nice place to go throw somebody in.  Finchum (Laughs) Why would you throw somebody in?  Overton Well, if somebody got engaged in the AGR house, you carried them down  and threw them in Theta Pond. That was just what you did.  Finchum In the    80s, you did that?  Overton Yes.  Finchum You didn   t get engaged until after you graduated. You just helped throw  someone else in.  Overton Oh no, I was long gone from there, yeah. Yeah, I just helped carry them  down there and throw them in.  Finchum Was it pretty deep? It was probably not very deep.  Overton It   s not very deep, but it was cold in the wintertime. (Laughs) I never got  thrown in, but it was cold.  Finchum Was there ever a time when you thought,    Oh, I   m not going to finish. Let   s  just quit, hang it up, and go home   ?  Overton Oh, yeah, probably between my freshman and sophomore year. I really had  a hard time going back that year. I don   t know why.  Finchum A lot of kids do, though.  Overton Yeah. I had some friends in the AGR house that, they were all, everybody  there, you had to be an ag major. Not everybody was from a small town, but  probably 75 percent of them were. You had somebody that could relate to  you and you could relate to, and I had a friend from Sperry  Oklahoma   who   s the ag teacher at Blackwell  Oklahoma  now. He and I were pretty  close, and we   d go out driving in the country just to talk. He probably talked  me from quitting, and I talked him from quitting several times, because we  were just, we were probably, I mean, we were homesick. That   s what the  deal was. When you grew up in the same town and you   re close to your  parents like most farm kids are, then it   s tough being away from them. It  really is.  Finchum Your grandparents lived here, too?  Overton Yes.  Finchum Did they own a farm?  Overton My grandpa on my dad   s side, he farmed, but he never owned a   well, he  did own a farm before I was born, but he had sold it. He always worked  construction jobs in Oklahoma City, building office buildings and things  like that, whatever needed to be built, but he always farmed on the side, too.  He had a farm and ran it. My other grandpa, which was on my mom   s side,  he was quite a bit older. He was probably fifteen years older than my other  grandpa. He had already retired by the time that I, my memory, but he  farmed, too, yeah. My mom was raised on a farm. Grew up picking cotton  and hoeing cotton. Both of my parents, they didn   t have electricity or  running   well, they had electricity, but they didn   t have running water in  their house until their first house when they got married.  Finchum When was that?  Overton Oh, when did they get married? That would have been    59, I think, when  they got married, and that was the first house they lived in. They rented the  house when they got married, and that was the first house that either one of  them had had that had running water. They did have electricity, but they  didn   t have running water. They grew up pretty poor.  Finchum Outhouses then.  Overton Outhouses, yeah.  Finchum Had your grandparents grown up here, too? Just trying to figure out how  they came to be here.  Overton How they came here? My Great-Grandpa Overton was from out in the  Wheeler, Texas, area, and I really don   t know how he wound up here. He  lived here. He was a traveling minister, the best I can tell. He   s always been  a bit of an oddity, and nobody ever really has said what he did for sure. The  best I can tell, that   s what he was. My great-grandpa on my mom   s side,  they were from down in southeastern Oklahoma, and I can   t tell you how  either one of them, why they settled in Minco. I sure am glad they did.  Finchum Is there a religion that   s more prominent than another here?  Overton Baptist is probably the biggest, yeah. Presbyterian is where I go to church.  Been going there since I was a little kid. My mom and dad started going  there and been going there ever since. I   m actually an elder in the church.  I   ve been an elder for twenty-five years. I was pretty young when I became  an elder in the church. Yeah, and then my kids all go. My son, Jacob, who   s  going to OSU right now that   s a sophomore, yeah. He   s leaning towards  ministry. He thinks he wants to be a youth minister or some type of minister.  Finchum Well, that   ll take him away from OSU then.  Overton Well, I think he   s probably going to get his degree and then maybe go to  seminary. That   s what he   s thinking right now. Proud of all the kids, though,  what they   ve accomplished so far and what they   re doing. All of them have  different interests, and it   s kind of fun to see that. Having seven like that,  you   d think that a couple of them would be pretty similar, but they   re all  different, all different.  Finchum Did they have chores?  Overton Yes, they had chores at the house, and of course the boys helped me during  the summer. These past two summers, we   ve chopped the weeds out of the  cotton field, which is something that hadn   t been done in a long time. We  get a lot of resistant weeds to the chemicals and the herbicides right now.  The hardest work that I know of is chopping weeds out of cotton because  it   s hot, and it   s just not fun at all. I hate it as bad as they do. I want them to  know what it is to have to do manual labor. Hopefully it   ll make them  realize how important it is to get an education where you don   t have to do  this. Of course, I   m out there doing it, and I got mine. Still I   m hoping I   m  teaching them how to work. If a child knows how to work, then I   m not  worried about what they do. They   ll always be able to make it doing  something as long as they   re not afraid to work.  Finchum The daughters are helping?  Overton The daughters help chop cotton also. Yes, they do. They haven   t drove the  tractor very much. They help me move a lot. I   m scattered for about, oh,  about thirty miles to the southwest. I farm land all the way to Anadarko   Oklahoma  from here. We spend a lot of time moving equipment, and the  girls have always helped with that. My wife has a snow cone stand, and they  work there. The girls work there, and the boys work there some, too. That  gives them something to do in the summertime if I don   t have something for  them.  Finchum What was the name of your dad   s gas station?  Overton Bill   s Conoco.  Finchum I should have asked that earlier.  Overton Oh, that   s all right.  Finchum So your gas bill   s quite high then, if you   re moving equipment thirty miles.  Overton Yes. You wouldn   t even want to know how much my fuel bill is every  month.  Finchum That   s changed a lot, I would imagine.  Overton Yes, it   s gone up a bunch. I mean, I don   t consider myself that old, but I  mean I remember thirty-five, forty-cent gasoline when my dad had the  station the first time. People would come in and get two or three dollars, and  that   d run them for a week. Nobody ever filled their tank up hardly. They  just came in and got two or three dollars in it. I worked there growing up  when I was in school, too. Like I said, after I got a little bit older and got  where I could go farm without anybody being there with me or taking me  here or there, well, from that time on, I pretty well did the farming, and my  dad ran the station. If it rained or something, I   d go and help him.  Finchum Well, did they raise things like chickens?  Overton My grandparents did. My parents never did, but yeah, my Grandma  Overton, she always had chickens. They   d buy little ones, little chicks, and  raise them up, and a couple of times a year, they   d butcher chickens. Then  whenever I was growing up, probably junior high age and younger, my  Grandpa Overton and his brother, they butchered their own hogs every year,  and I got to help with that. I wished I would have been older and learned  more about that, but I mean, I helped kill them. I helped skin them, all that,  but I never did really learn how to cut the meat up. I wished I would have  been older and learned that because that   s just something I think would be  neat to know more about. If had to butcher something, I could today, but  cutting it up, I   d probably mess that up pretty bad.  Finchum Well, they have meat judging at OSU, not sure about that part of it, cutting it  up.  Overton Now my oldest daughter, Jordan, she was on the meat judging team here in  FFA, but she never did do it at OSU. Jacob, that   s up there now, he was on  the meat judging team here. My youngest daughter, Jentry, is on the  livestock judging team here in FFA, and they   re pretty good. In fact, she was  the high individual at the state contest back in the spring. She   s pretty good  at it, and I think she   s leaning towards going to OSU. She may go to a junior  college and judge livestock on the livestock judging team because it   s pretty  hard to get on the OSU livestock judging team.  Finchum Yeah, it is.  Overton You got about start out and go to a junior college, but I don   t know. I   d  rather see her start at OSU, but whatever she wants to do will be fine.  Finchum Well, any advice for current students?  Overton Oh, the same advice I   d give anybody. Just work hard. Students, go to class.  If you   re having problems, talk to your professors. I never had a professor  that wouldn   t help me if I was struggling in something. It took me about a  semester or a year and a half to learn that. If I   m having trouble, I need to go  talk to them because they really will. They really will help you. If you get to  know them, they get to know you. It makes for a whole lot better college  experience, I think. Stick it out. There   s going to be times where you   re not  going to be happy. You   re going to want to go home, but I encourage  everybody just to stick with it. You   ll never regret getting that degree. I  don   t use mine that much. It doesn   t do me that much good, but I   m still  very proud that I got it.  Finchum Anything else you want to add before we close? We   ve covered a lot.  Overton I don   t guess I really have anything to add.  Finchum My last question is usually to have people tell me how would they like to be  remembered.  Overton Well, you should have asked me that so I could be thinking about that before  you got here. (Laughter) I guess I don   t really want to be remembered for  anything that I have accomplished, just that I   ve always been honest, fair  with everybody I   ve came in contact with, that hopefully everybody can tell  from the way I live that I   m Christian. I was raised that way. I   ve tried to  raise my kids that way, and hopefully anybody that I come in contact with  knows that. My character, I guess, is what I want to be known for, not  necessarily any of my accomplishments. Hopefully my children reflect me  and my wife, and that   s my legacy is my children.  Finchum That   s a good way to end, isn   t it? Thank you very much.  Overton You   re welcome. Thank you.  -------  -------   
