 Gill. Today is September 23, 2010. I   m visiting with  Kenneth Mitchell here on the Oklahoma State University Campus in  Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project  of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Ken, I appreciate you  coming and taking the time to visit with us today.  Happy to.  I want to talk about your lifelong relationship with Oklahoma State  University and especially with the Alumni Association, but first of all I   d  like to ask you a little bit about your early life, about where you grew up  and your parents and your family, some things about you before you got  to Oklahoma State.  Okay. I was born in Oklahoma City. My father and my mother had  attended the University of Oklahoma together and were married while  they were in college, which was very much of a rarity in the 1920s. My  father was an assistant county attorney in Oklahoma County and ran for  county attorney and was defeated. We kind of grew up during the big  Depression of the 1920s and the early    30s, and my father and mother  divorced. I was in the first grade. I went to kindergarten and first grade  at Edgemere School in Oklahoma City, and my grandparents took us in,  so to speak. We moved to Guthrie in December of 1933. I went all  through the Guthrie Public Schools and enlisted in the Navy and got out  and came to school here in 1946.  Ken, let me back up and ask you, do you have brothers and sisters?  No, I   m an only child.  Only child, okay. Can you talk about maybe some of your high school  community activities when you were growing up in Guthrie?  5  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Well, I didn   t know girls existed, really, when I was in high school.  You smiled when you said that. (Laughs)  I was very interested in athletics. I didn   t grow until I was a senior, and I  played on the high school basketball team and the high school baseball  team. We only had three sports at that time, and I didn   t think I was big  enough for football. I wish now that I had tried to be the punter and the  place kicker. I think I could   ve won both jobs, but that   s history long  gone.  What position did you play in baseball?  Third base.  You had a pretty good arm? Usually a third baseman   s got a pretty good  arm.  Yes. I pitched some, too, not in high school but later.  Do you remember your batting average?  We lost only one game my senior year. We didn   t play many teams. We  lost to Oklahoma City Central, 2-1 in the semi-finals of the state baseball  tournament. That was the only game we lost. I played summer baseball  the next summer before I enlisted in the Navy, and we were undefeated.  We played teams from everywhere.  Was it an American Legion team?  We were not an American Legion team, but we played American Legion  teams. We did not have a sponsor. We just had a gentleman that worked  at a lumberyard that liked young men and put it together for us. We  didn   t have very fancy uniforms or anything. In fact, getting back to  uniforms, we played in the state tournament in Oklahoma City. We did  not have a coach my senior year in high school. We played on our own.  Four of us had what we called old Guthrie merchants baseball uniforms.  They were big old blousy pants and shirts. We looked like anything  but   shouldn   t have been in them. (Laughter) Our center fielder, he   s  still alive, and I remember him playing center field in Levi   s and a  baseball shirt. We played South Side of Altus in the first round and beat  them. Then the next game that we had was Oklahoma City Central, and  we got beat 2-1.  Without a coach you got to the semi-finals of the state tournament, wow.  6  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Without a coach.  Ken, what about other activities outside of athletics? Were you involved  in any school activities, clubs, organizations?  We didn   t have   it was during the war, and things were a lot different. I  had seven classmates that left our class and went into the military. We  had a class of a hundred, and seven of them had already gone to the  military. Everything was pretty tight. Money was tight. There weren   t  activities. We had no annuals during my three years in high school  because of the shortage of paper and shortage of money to put it out. So  it was pretty sparse, what we did. We had many students that worked at  Tinker Field and commuted. They   d get out of school and get on a bus  there by the high school at four o   clock in the afternoon and go to Tinker  and work until midnight and then come home and go to school the next  day, started the cycle all over again.  Can you tell me about your grandparents? You said you moved in with  your grandparents. Can you tell me a little bit about what they did?  My grandfather came to Oklahoma from Indiana. He worked for the  Grand Trunk Railway in Indiana, and he came to Oklahoma and worked  for the Santa Fe Railroad. He was yardmaster in Oklahoma City when  the Capitol building was built, and all of the freight and stuff for the  Capitol went through him. Then they moved back to Guthrie, and he  retired in 1936 from the Santa Fe Railway because of health reasons. His  last job was he was a conductor on what we call the Doodlebug from  Guthrie that went to Kiowa, Kansas, which was a cutoff place that  shortened the trip to California by rail. The Doodlebug had an engine  and one car, and half of the car was for freight, and the other half was  for passengers. It had no air conditioning, and it was operating off of  coal. If you wore a white shirt in the summertime with the windows  open, it wasn   t white by the time that you got to Kansas. My grandfather  died in the Santa Fe hospital at Mulvane, Kansas.  What year was that?  Nineteen forty. He had heart trouble.  What year did you graduate from high school, there?  Nineteen forty-five. I enlisted in the Navy on July 19, 1945, two days  before I would become eighteen years old. I did not want to be drafted  because we were still having a very heated war in the Pacific, and they  were drafting young men into the Marine Corps. I decided that I  7  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  preferred to sleep on a hammock rather than I did in a foxhole. My best  friend and I enlisted the same day in the Navy.  Let me back up and ask you real quick. I might as well get this out now.  You   re a real railroad buff?  Yes, I am.  Did that come from your granddad?  From my grandfather. My mother actually worked for the Santa Fe  Railway during World War I, and I had a great-uncle that was a fireman  with the Santa Fe Railroad. So I have a little Santa Fe in my blood.  I understand you got to do some traveling as a young man, as a boy,  really.  Yes, I had a pass until I was twelve years old. We traveled to Chicago to  the World Fair in the mid-   30s, the World Fair in San Diego, and the  World Fair in 1939, I believe it was, at San Francisco. So I got to see  quite a few world fairs, and I visited a lot of relatives in various places  that we could travel for virtually free.  Great experience as a kid.  Yes, it was.  Ken, you have, I understand, in your home there, (you live south of  Guthrie)     Yes.     you have two railroad cars?  Yes, I have a Canadian Pacific, what we call a parlor car. It sleeps  sixteen, has a kitchen and a dining room that we   ve had meetings. When  I was president of the OSU Alumni Association, we had a couple of  board meetings over there in the railroad car, and I used it when I was  president of the Oklahoma Land Title Association for several of my  board meetings. Guthrie is just about as central as you can get in  Oklahoma, and so it worked out for everybody, and we had good  meetings there.  And your other railroad car is     It   s a caboose. We had a foreign exchange student from Brazil living  8  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  with us our oldest son   s senior year in high school. They didn   t have the  word    caboose    in Portuguese in Brazil, so he didn   t know what he was  getting into. As soon as he got to Guthrie, I taught him how to   he was  a soccer player, and I taught him how to kick extra points and got him to  go out for the high school wrestling team. Unfortunately, our high  school team that year didn   t score very much, and so he didn   t get to  kick many extra points. By the time he was through with wrestling, he  finally could win. He spent all that time learning, and he made a pretty  good little wrestler at the end. It was a new experience for him, and it  was a new experience for us because neither of us spoke any Portuguese,  and it was a learning  experience .  Ken, what were some principles and values that you learned growing up  that helped you in your success later in life?  Well, one of the things that I learned was honesty, to be with people and  to be honest with them, to tell them the truth. I learned at a very early  age that alcohol was something I did not need to be a part of. My father  was an alcoholic, and he ruined a very promising career because of  alcoholism. It made me make up my mind that alcohol was not going to  be any part of my life, and it has not been a part of my life. That   s  another thing that I learned. I   ve learned that I get a great deal of  pleasure from volunteering and working with people less fortunate,  which I   ve done for many, many, many years.  Where did that come from, Ken, in your background, do you think?  Well, I grew up during the Depression. We had no money. It was very,  very difficult for my mother. She sold dresses and worked as a church  secretary for practically nothing. We had it pretty tough, and so being an  only child, I experienced it all firsthand. We have six children today, and  I want them to have things that I didn   t have. That   s just pure and  simple.  What influenced you to enroll at Oklahoma State? Let me back up. Your  Navy career, in July of    45     Until August of    46.  You were one year in the Navy.  I got three years of the GI Bill out of that one year of service.  Now, here   s the kicker for an OSU guy. Where were you assigned?  Norman, Oklahoma. (Laughter) I was a lifeguard, and I was a  9  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  benchwarmer on the softball team. I traveled with the softball team,  didn   t get to play much. We had some guys that later played professional  baseball in the major leagues, and so it was pretty hard to make the  team.  And this was the Naval base team?  Yes, in Norman.  Oh my gosh. What influenced you to enroll at Oklahoma State then?  My dad wanted me to go to law school at OU, and he   d kind of been  counting on me to do that. I had a mistaken idea of what lawyers do to  make a living. I know much more about it today, and I have some  regrets that I didn   t go to law school. I was treated in Norman, I felt,  much like many military people are in small towns, that the people of  the community kind of look down on you and tolerate you. I had about  enough of that, and Bob Kurland was doing so great over here in  basketball, (I love basketball and I used to see him play when I was still  in high school) so I decided that I would come to Oklahoma State to  school rather than go to OU because people just didn   t   I didn   t fit with  them.  Had you been to Stillwater before you enrolled?  Oh, yes, many times, many times. It   s a lot closer than Norman.  Did your granddad take you over there?  No, just friends usually that I came to football games over here when  that stadium was awfully small.  So you just sort of liked the experience and decided you   d like to go  here.  I liked it, and I was turned off in Norman because of the way people  viewed us. I thought,    Well, why should I go through four years more of  this, at least? If I went to law school it   d be even more.    I decided I   d  come over here.  So you enrolled, then, in the fall of    46?  Yes, just barely got out of the Navy in time to come over here.  What was your major?  10  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Well, that was a good question. I started out, I thought I wanted to major  in chemistry. The mathematics of chemistry, I didn   t have the  background for it. That was my own fault, and so I switched to  journalism, and my degree is in journalism.  I want to ask you a little bit later about that, but I don   t recall that you  used that degree very much.  I used it when I first got out of college. I went to work for the Guthrie  Public Schools, and I was clerk of the Board of Education. I always had  a love of athletics, and so I was the announcer for the home football  games for a couple of years or three, and I wrote for one of the  newspapers in Guthrie. I received the magnificent sum of ten cents a  column-inch for what I wrote, (Laughter) and I followed Guthrie  athletics and wrote a lot of stories for the newspaper.  Stepping back in your OSU experience and asking you a few questions  there, first of all, did you live on campus?  Yes, I lived in Thatcher Hall all four years. I worked for the O   Colly my  senior year, and I was sports editor of the O   Colly. Also, Dr. Reiff, who  was head of the national program, he gave me a job of editing four  issues of the magazine. I can   t think of the name of it right at the  moment.  It was the distributor for the various clubs of the United  States.   Can you share some of your OSU undergraduate experiences, activities  you were involved with, organizations, things you did?  Well, money was pretty tight. The GI Bill, when we came to OSU, paid  us  65 a month to pay our room and board. Our books were furnished;  our tuition was furnished. It didn   t take very long to the university to  find out that the  65 wasn   t enough. We were paying  41.50 for room  and board at that time a month, and they gave us a raise to  75 dollars  and raised the room and board to  51.50. It was a pass-through, but it  made you watch your money. There wasn   t very much, and I didn   t have  many other jobs until virtually my junior year that brought me in any  money. I had to pay my own way through my senior year because I   d  run out of the GI Bill.  Were you involved in any journalism clubs or any organizations?  I was in Sigma Delta Chi journalism fraternity, and I really wasn   t a part  of anything else. I had a lot of fun being sports editor. I didn   t get to  travel at all when the basketball team was gone, but I set up a system of  listening to the OSU basketball games and keeping score from the radio.  11  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Then I wrote specials to the O   Collegian, giving the story of the  basketball games. (Laughs)  That was a pretty good basketball team, Mr.  Henry  Iba, in those days.  Yes, and I took Mr. Iba   s coaching basketball course, and I took Ralph  Higgins    coaching track course because I liked athletics. They were both  good experiences.  How about Art Griffith? Was he the wrestling coach then?  Yes, and I knew his boys. I knew Jack better than I did Jim. I loved  wrestling, and I had two wrestlers that lived across the hall from me in  Thatcher Hall: Bill Jernigan, who was an Olympian in 1948, and another  one from Edmond that was on the wrestling team.  That   s great. Were there some favorite student hangouts back then  where you   d go?  We used to go to the hamburger joint that was down   oh, it   s no longer  there. It   s just off of Sixth Street, just north on Campus Corner. I can   t  remember the name of it.  It used to be the Aggie B. It wasn   t Aggie B, was it?  I don   t remember what it was, but when I had any money to buy, that  was one of the places that I always went. (Laughter) We had a lot of fun.  The guys that I lived with in Thatcher Hall, several of them I knew, still  know, still alive, that are friends that we had in Thatcher Hall. We   d pull  pranks on each other all the time, which college kids do. We had one  friend (and he lives in Oklahoma City right now) that complained that  my roommate and I got all the mail and he wasn   t getting any mail. So  one rainy day I had an extra dollar. I don   t know where I got it, but I had  an extra dollar, and I bought a hundred one-cent postcards, penny  postcards, and I cut up all the magazines that I could find in the dorm,  especially those that had samples of fruitcake or something like that that  you could send in for. I put his name on all of those, (Laughter) and  many months later I was in his room, and he had a place about three and  a half feet high covered with a blanket. We asked him,    What do you got  under that blanket?    He pulled that back and showed all that mail that  he   d been getting. He got it for six or eight years after he graduated.  (Laughter) He was still on the mailing list of many of those people. We  pulled pranks on each other all the time.  The O   Colly office was right where the Student Union is today, and you  had to go by the post office to get up the stairs to the O   Colly office.  12  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Well, I had a gentleman come in one day, and he looked at me, and I  kind of looked at him across the room, and I saw he had a hearing aid  on. He came over to ask somebody in the office where I was. He thought  he had me picked out. He did. He said,    I   m F. M. Adams, the Beltone  Hearing Aid man from Enid.    He said,    I   m glad to see you don   t need  one.    He said,    I have this card here that somebody sent in on your  behalf for a hearing aid test. By the way, I   ve got about fifteen or twenty  more cards. I wonder if you know any of them, whether they need  hearing aids or not.    I said,    Yes, I   ll be glad to look at it for you,    and I  knew every one of them. They were all athletes, and they   d all sent them  in on each other for the hearing aid. (Laughter)  My friend that I had pulled this prank on with all the mail finally found  out who did it, and so he fixed me up. He ordered me a dozen assorted  brassieres, COD  cash on delivery . (Laughter) I had to go up the stairs.  The post office was here, and the stairs were here, and I had to go up to  the O   Colly to work. I was scared they were going to catch me and want  me to pay for those brassieres. (Laughs) We were doing stuff like that on  each other. When I was in chemistry, we made some hydrogen sulfide  and put outside the dormitory window of some of our buddies. Of  course, it stunk up the whole dormitory. We thought we   d probably get  kicked out of school for doing that, but we had a lot of fun. Didn   t spend  a lot of money doing anything, but we had a lot of fun.  I was thinking about your being in Thatcher Hall. Wasn   t it right across  the street from Swim   s?  Yes.  Was Swim   s still kind of a big student place at that time?  Yes.  Did you ever go over to Swim   s?  Oh, yes, when I had a dime or something. I had a few Coke dates over  there.  You weren   t far from Campus Corner, were you, by the fire station?  Yes.  Did you hang out there a little bit occasionally?  Yes, when I had any money. (Laughter) Money was tight and especially  if you drove a car. I didn   t keep a car over here. I drove on special  13  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  occasions. If I had a date or something I brought my old    40 Ford from  home. I used it for summer school one summer, and it didn   t run very  well. I didn   t have the money to fix it. My lights went out one night. I  had a date in Perry. Guthrie was playing Perry in a football game, and I  went to a filling station. They didn   t have time to help me or do  anything, so I had to drive home in the dark. I followed this friend that  used to coach our baseball team. He, of course, didn   t know I was  behind him.  Then we were on old 77, which was two-lane, and the Santa Fe train that  came through Guthrie at midnight was coming to Guthrie, and he  decided to race it. I was behind him. I had a date, and another guy had a  date. We got up with a big old truck, and it left a crease right along my  right side, passenger side, of my car. I had to pass him, and I did pass  him. I got home the next day, took the car to a place to see what it was  going to cost to fix it. Twenty-five dollars. It seemed like all the money  in the world to me. I got me a twenty-five-cent roll of friction tape, got  underneath there, and taped up all of the bad places. Fixed it myself for a  quarter. (Laughter) Things I remember.  Were there some faculty and staff members at that time, Ken, that you  remember that were influential to your student development, some  faculty or staff members that were special to you?  Yes. Oklahoma History professor, Dr.   he was an excellent history  professor. He made me look bad one day, and I made up my mind that  was the last time he was going to make me look bad, so I got on his  good side because I answered every one of his questions. He lived across  the street from Thatcher Hall.  B. Berlin  B. Chapman?  Dr. Chapman, yes. I got on his team and didn   t have to go to class  anymore. It was an A. I went around to several small high schools, and  we put on programs on Oklahoma history. The question he asked me  was about the Red River oil case. I   ve always remembered that. What  that argument was is whether it belonged to Oklahoma or whether it  belonged to Texas. I didn   t answer it the first time to his satisfaction, but  I made up my mind I was going to learn. I was in with a bunch of guys  that were much older than I was. A lot of them were athletes that were  with the athletic department. One of the guys had been with Alfalfa Bill  Murray when he blockaded the bridge between Oklahoma and Texas. He  was from Blackwell, but he was much older than I was in this class. Dr.  Chapman really helped me understand Oklahoma history, and I still love  Oklahoma history. It was one of my favorite subjects over here.  14  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill     Oklahoma History 101 is fun, fun, fun     Isn   t that one of his sayings?  Yes. B. B. Chapman, I couldn   t think of his name. Thank you. He was  one of my favorites. My mother had been in school with a guy named  Gerald Forbes, who taught history. I still remember him. I was making a  straight A in that course. A lot of my friends couldn   t pass the course, so  they were wanting to sit by me, and I was helping them pass it. This was  freshman year, and my mother was in school with him at OU. I  mentioned that to him, of course, and I guess he remembered my  mother. Anyhow, when the grades came out, I had a B in the course and  an A in orientation. It should   ve been the other way around, but he left  and went to New Orleans, to Tulane I think, to teach, or wherever it is,  Louisiana. I never did get the B straightened out, but I helped several of  my friends pass that course because they couldn   t pass it otherwise.  Ken, thinking about the campus then, there was a big transition after the  war, and President Henry G. Bennett brought in a lot of the barracks  and the Quonset huts and stuff.  One of the things that I remembered, they used manure for fertilizer a lot  on the campus in those years.  Organic fertilizer?  When they put all the water on them, the campus had a certain smell to it  that you knew where you were. Dr. Bennett   s house is there by the  parking garage, where it was. I remember when he passed on and  remember all of the presidents.  Were you a senior that year that he     No, I was a freshman.  Freshman, okay.  Yes. I think he died in    46 or    47, maybe    47. He was involved with  Ethiopia a great deal from the government. He   d been appointed.  Did you ever meet Dr. Bennett or get a chance as a student to talk to  him?  I never got to talk to him. I met him, but I never got to talk to him. I  knew several of the presidents.  Ken, what year did you graduate?  15  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Nineteen fifty.  The Student Union, was it built at that time?  Yes, it was just built, and I was telling you earlier about the hail storm  that we had. We were going to Yost Lake, several of my buddies, and  we were going to have a picnic out there with dates. That big black  cloud came in from the west, and that was the worst hail storm I have  ever been in. Fortunately, we stayed in our dorm, but I went up and  looked at the hail coming down. We had Quonset huts beside the  building, Thatcher then, and you couldn   t hear yourself think because  the noise. My friend with the convertible, it was just going through the  top of his car and hitting the seats and bouncing up. It was quite  interesting. One of my buddies who lived back east that was going said,     Oh, it won   t hail any.    (Laughs) He said,    Let   s plan on going.    I said,     No, I   m not planning on going,    and it was a good thing we didn   t.  Was Yost a favorite spot for students?  Yes, it was.  Can you explain a little about where it was and what Yost was?  Well, it   s up north of 177 and back to the east. The dam on it was the old  right-of-way for the Santa Fe going to Pawnee. They created a lake  there, and a lot of people from Stillwater had cabins there. They had a  pavilion and kind of a dance area. A lot of students used to go up there. I  remember one time, one of my friends and I, we were going to have a  chili supper up there. His parents were in the grocery business in Putnam  City, and so I went down and spent the night with him. We   d gotten the  chili, and we put it on the front porch. Well, we came back to Stillwater  without the chili. His mother had found it on the front porch and put it in  the refrigerator and forgot to tell us, (Laughs) so that chili party didn   t  come off.  Ken, there were a lot of changes. When you got here in    46, we had a  huge influx at Oklahoma State in those years of GIs coming back.  Right.  What was that like, and do you remember what the campus was like?  I don   t remember exactly what the enrollment was in    45, but it was  much smaller because the incoming class in    46 was ten thousand, and  nearly all of those were veterans. My roommate, he only lasted one  semester. He fell in love, and he lasted one semester, but he was on the  16  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  GI Bill. He was an engineer. I remember all of the equipment that he  had. He lasted one semester, went home, and got married.  I understand that there was a lot of temporary buildings brought on  campus, Quonset huts and so on.  Yes, yes.  And of course, Vet Village, all of the housing out there. Could you  describe that a little bit, what that was like?  Well, Vet Village had a gymnasium that they got from the Army  someplace. It was a pretty nice gym until it rained and the roof leaked. If  you   ve ever tried to play basketball on a floor where the roof has  leaked    (Laughter) We were playing them. It was right after I got out  of college. I was involved in a hometown basketball team. We   d  scheduled them and came over here to play. We had to quit the game  because it was dry inside except the roof leaked over the floor.  Somebody was going to break their neck, and so by mutual agreement  we quit.  Vet Village was short for Veterans Village?  Veterans Village.  Mainly guys, veterans, coming back from war?  Right, they were all veterans that lived out there.  I understand they had a post office out there also?  Yes, they had a little city. Lots of them were married. One of my good  friends in Guthrie, he and his wife were married and lived out there.  He   s up in years and not here for too long.  Even some of the teaching facilities on campus were in Quonset huts.  Right, right. Quonset huts seemed to be a good bargain. Dr. Chapman, I  had his Oklahoma History class in a Quonset hut right there by Thatcher  Hall.  Those were not air conditioned and were not heated very well in the  winter, were they?  No, nothing very well, (Laughter) but it was a great experience.  17  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Can you share some of your favorite memories of your time at  Oklahoma State University, some times that stand out for you?  Oh, I remember a lot of the things that we had on our Allied Arts cards.  You bought an Allied Arts ticket for the various shows that they had  here over at Gallagher. You got into every other one, the way it was. It  was odd or even. I remember, I guess it was my senior year, Tommy  Dorsey   s band was here, and I, believe it or not, had a date and went to  that. (Laughter) Spike Jones, you got to go back a ways if you can  remember some of those outfits, (Laughter) but they were types of  entertainment that the university brought in.  Some singers and bands and other groups.  Yes.  Oh, and by the way, I was going to ask you. Was Jimmie Baker   s band   The Collegians  on campus at that time?  Oh, yes.  A lot of people remember Jimmie Baker and his band played in the Ball  Room, played at the   what was that room over there on Campus  Corner, up above? Was it Fiscus Hall?  I don   t remember, but I was there. (Laughs)  Also, it made me think about, when you were talking about the odd and  even, students in those days, when you went to basketball and wrestling  matches, did they also have the odd and even ID?  Right.  So if your student ID ended in an odd number or an even number     I don   t remember just how it worked.     if you were the odd number, you could go to the first, third, and fifth  games.  This was an odd game or even game. That way they were able to get  everybody in. Otherwise, it would   ve been total chaos.  I recall that not only basketball but wrestling would just about fill  Gallagher Hall. They called it Gallagher Hall at the time.  18  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  I have a particular wrestling story that happened many years later. I had  broken my leg with my friend, Oris Taylor. Our sons had some sheep.  We   d been to a wrestling match in Guthrie, and we went, after the  match, to go put the sheep up. It was cold. I was wearing boots. We had  one flashlight between us, and Oris took the flashlight, but he didn   t tell  me that he had this big pile of brush out in his yard. It was dark, and I  stepped in it. I could step in it a hundred times and never do anything,  but I stepped in it and snapped my right ankle and had to go to the  hospital, the old hospital in Guthrie.  I was still on those crutches, and we came to a wrestling match over at  Stillwater here when we were wrestling OU. I came with a friend who  barely attended OSU, but he always considered OSU. His son, who was  mayor for many years of Guthrie, was with us and he bleeds, dies, and  everything else red. The dad and the son got into a big argument over at  Gallagher Iba. (Laughter) The students all took the point of the dad and  were going to kill the son, and I was caught in the middle of it.  (Laughter) They were going to tar and feather him, I think, and I was  caught with crutches and a cast up to my knee almost. I   ll never forget  that. We finally calmed them down when they finally realized it was  father and son that were arguing about it at the wrestling match.  (Laughter)  That   s great. So you graduated, then, in    51?  Nineteen fifty.  Can you kind of trace your career, maybe some brief highlights of your  career after you left Oklahoma State?  Sure. I graduated in the spring of 1950. Jobs were very hard to get. I had  my heart and soul on going to work for Phillips Petroleum Company  because they were national AAU  Amateur Athletic Union  basketball  champions. They had a new gymnasium. They had a new swimming  pool and all. I went up there and got an interview, and the guy that was  one of the vice presidents had played basketball there and was a  graduate of the University of Kansas. He was just the greatest guy,  showed me all around and everything. Then he told me what I didn   t  want to hear, that the Korean War was just breaking out, and said,     We   re not hiring anybody. We have a freeze. We   re hiring seven  engineers, and that   s all we   re going to hire.    So I didn   t get that job. I  tried in Tulsa to get oil and gas jobs. I didn   t ever want to work for a  newspaper. I   d made up my mind that wasn   t going anywhere.  You were thinking journalism but with a private industry.  19  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Right, so I came back home, laid around home a lot. My grandmother  had a good prod, and she was using it on me to get me to go to work  someplace. She thought I was laying around too much. (Laughter) I had  a couple of other buddies. One had graduated from OSU, and the other  one had languished here. He had flunked the first course in econ five  times. (Laughter) He   d been on campus a long time, the other one. I  said,    I think I can find us a job. You guys want to go with me?    They  said yes. We went down to Davis, Oklahoma, to the YMCA camp,  Camp Classen. I got all three of us a job as counselors, and so we spent  the summer of 1950, what was left of it, as counselors at the YMCA  camp and had a good time doing that.  Got home, I didn   t have my suitcase down, and my grandmother told me  that the superintendent of schools was calling for me. He   d known me  from summer activities program, and we later became partners in some  business. She made me go right on up and find out just exactly what I  was going to get into. They needed a clerk of the Board of Education.  The clerk was going to the high school, Guthrie High School, as a  principal, and so they needed to fill this. I didn   t know what all I was  getting into. I was clerk of the Board of Education, and I was truant  officer. That was an experience because Guthrie had an area that poor  people lived in, and they didn   t care whether their kids went to school or  not. Some of them couldn   t afford to send their kids to school. They kept  me pretty busy as a truant officer.  It wouldn   t work today because you can   t tell whether a kid is supposed  to be in school or is home schooled. But that was my job, and so I went  to work for the school district. I signed for an airplane, which we used in  one of the courses. Came back to haunt me several years later because  my name was on that airplane. They were trying to get rid of it, and they  were tracking me down. Anyhow, I lasted from September of 1950 until  January of 1952. I did not have a teaching degree, and so the  superintendent got me enrolled in a class, extension class from OSU, so  I could qualify as a temporary teacher, get my temporary     Who is this individual, the superintendent you   re referring to?  Cecil Crooks. He was superintendent and sole and only coach of our  high school football team in 1944. Coached it by himself and was  superintendent of schools. The gentleman that was the president of the  Board of Education had seen me and what I was doing. They were  interested. His partner (I did not know it at the time) was wanting to get  out of the abstract business, so they made me an offer. Well, I taught one  class in journalism in high school, and then they wanted me to come  work for the abstract company.  20  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  I didn   t tell you what my first job in Guthrie Public Schools paid. It paid   150 a month. I had three of my classmates from here who came over  there and started teaching that same year. The teachers made  2,100 a  year, which we   ve come a long way. Anyhow, I went to work for the  abstract company, had never seen an abstract in my life. I spent fifty  years, seven months, and twenty days before I retired.  Was that Jelsma?  Jelsma Abstract Company. That was the family name. The president of  the school board, his wife was a Jelsma. They   d brought him in when  Mr. Jelsma died suddenly after a hunting trip. He was not schooled in  abstracting. I wasn   t either, but I had a teacher that was with me every  day for almost two years. Then he sold me his interest in the company,  and it was a pretty tough struggle for a long time.  That was quite a change for you, wasn   t it, I mean, a lot to learn?  Yes.  At that time, were there any qualifications that you had to be certified or  anything like that?  Later. Later we had to have a license. I had some good attorneys in  Guthrie. One of them had been in law school with my dad at OU, who  kind of took me under their wing. When I had a question that I didn   t  understand or what I should be doing, I   d call them. They were very  helpful to me to help me get through those first years. I had a good  career in the abstract business.  Did you wind up being a partner in the firm?  Yes. I was a partner, yes, and then I was president of the Oklahoma  Land Title Association. I was back to back   I can   t remember which  was which, the Alumni Association (I was going through the chairs of  both of them at the same time) and the Oklahoma Land Title  Association, one year apart.  Pretty busy years there for you. Ken, let me back up and ask. I know  you   re probably too modest to say this, but you   re probably one of the  most recognized and well-known individuals in the Guthrie Community.  For over fifty plus years, sixty years, maybe more, you   ve been very  involved. Would you mind sharing some highlights of some of the things,  your community involvements and activities you   ve been a part of?  Okay. I told you that instead of a r  sum  , I was bringing my obituary  21  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  over here to you (Laughter) because that has all those in the number of  years, but I   ll kind of refresh my memory a little bit. I served on the  school board for twenty-two years. I don   t think anybody in Guthrie ever  served that long. I ran out of kids, and I decided that   s time I need to get  out. I have been involved with the volunteering. I started back in 1950 or     51 when we had Red Feather drives, which were the predecessor of the  United Way. Then we had Guthrie Community Chest, which was a step  in between. I   ve been involved with those since college.  Sixty years now.  Yes, and I   ve been president, I guess, for about ten years. I   ve been drive  chairman on the board prior to that of the United Way. I   ve been twice  commander of the American Legion. I   ve been a member for sixty-one  years. I   m a Blue Lodge Mason. Have been for about pretty close to  sixty years now. I   m a Scottish Rite Mason. Have been for almost sixty  years. I am a 33rd degree Mason and have been for five or six years  now. I used to direct the 31st degree team. I was the leader of the team,  coach. I   ve told you this today, but I have not missed a home football  game in Stillwater since 1946.  Wait a minute. You   ve got to say that again. You have not missed a  single home football game since     Since 1946.  Wow. (Laughs)  I   ve had two close calls, and you were a part of helping me with one of  them. When I had back surgery, I couldn   t get into the stadium, and you  got me a seat in the press box by going up on the elevator. The other  one, my son and daughter-in-law were going to get married, and it was  when we were playing Kansas back many years ago, and they had the  wedding on a home date. We had to go through quite a bit to change that  because I wasn   t going.  You weren   t going to the wedding? (Laughs)  I wasn   t going to the wedding, but I   ve kept my streak alive.  What   d your daughter   how   d she feel about that? Was it your daughter  you were talking about, the wedding?  It was my daughter-in-law.  Okay.  22  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  It was my son.  Oh, your son, okay.  It wasn   t bothering him that much. (Laughter) Anyhow, I   ve been a  member of the Methodist Church since 1939. I joined when I was  twelve. I have done lots of things in Guthrie. I   ve been president of the  Chamber of Commerce. I   ve been chairman of the   89ers Celebration  twice. I   ve been commander of the American Legion twice. I   ve kept  busy.  Is there anything you haven   t done in the community? (Laughs)  I don   t know, but I   ve enjoyed my life, and I enjoy helping people. Right  now, I have people saying,    Dad died back in so and so, and we think he  had some royalty under this place,    or something and,    We need to  know what he owned,    so I do that kind of work for them. I do it for oil  companies. I   ve got a few customers still that want me to do ownerships  and determine who all the owners are under 160 acres and where their  addresses are. I do a lot of that. I just keep real busy in things that I try to  do.  You officially retired eight years ago, right, but you   re still staying  pretty busy with these activities?  Yes, yes.  That   s great. Well, Ken, let me ask you one other question about Guthrie  and your civic participation. One of the things Guthrie is known for is its  historical district.  Yes.  It   s really a key feature. Were you involved in that?  Yes, I was.  I couldn   t imagine you not being, but what was your role in that?  I have been. I didn   t mention that I   m a past president of the Lion   s  Club. Let   s see. I joined in 1951, so that   s fifty-nine years as a member  of the Lion   s Club.  Ken, we were talking about   you said something about your city council  experience, too, maybe?  23  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  I filled an unexpired term. The mayor asked me to take this guy   s place  that had had problems. He   d had a few arrests and had some problems  fulfilling his duties on the city council. I took it kind of reluctantly, but I  enjoyed my experience except I left a mic open one night that was open,  and I made a remark about some people, that the only reason they were  in this trailer house was because they couldn   t afford anything else. I got  to apologize to the people on camera and all for that, but that was my  real bad moment.  Well, how many years did you serve on the council?  Two and a half or three. This guy moved away, moved to Chicago. He  was a character. He had no business ever being on the city council. The  mayor, the one that I told you about, father and son that got into the  battle over the OSU-OU wrestling, is the one that asked me to do that.  We   re good friends despite he   s the biggest OU fan. In fact, he and I  were on television a few years ago down at the park. It was the  anniversary of the first game between OU and OSU was held in Mineral  Wells Park in Guthrie. We raised the money for a monument for that,  and John and I were on television together.  What year was that, around 1900 or so, was it?  Not too many years ago, yes.  We were talking earlier a little bit about the historical district, and you  were talking about your role in helping get that established. Can you  talk about that a little bit?  Well, somebody came along and decided that Guthrie needed to change  its image. They came up with the aluminum fronts that Woodward and  some other towns had come up with and that Guthrie should make that  change, so all of our historic buildings were covered with the aluminum  fa  ade. Ralph McCalmont came to Guthrie and bought the First National  Bank of Guthrie, and I was on his board. Ralph was a historian, and he  said,    The first thing we need to do is get rid of all of that and restore all  these old buildings.    So he led that movement, and I was a part of it  when we took all the old aluminum fronts off of the buildings.  Ken, what years were those? Do you recall?  Well, I remember Ralph put together a slide show and program, and  when I was president of the Oklahoma Land Title Association, we had  my convention that year in Tulsa. I had him present that with Jay  Hannah. You know Jay. He and Jay came and did that as a program, and  24  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  so that would   ve had to have been about 1980. I was either president in     80 or    81 of the Oklahoma Land Title Association, and I had just gotten  off being president of the OSU Alumni Association.  At that time, back in the    80s, there was a strong movement towards  historical preservation.  Right, there was money that the government made available for people,  to help them. I didn   t get in on it on the historical building that I owned  in Guthrie. I owned a couple of them: the old Kress building and the  Tallman Livery Stable, which is now the Stables Restaurant in Guthrie. I  didn   t get a dime for anything. We didn   t do something right. We didn   t  get any money, but we restored those buildings.  That   s a great story, though, how Guthrie built that and you were a part  of that in helping get that done. Around here, you   re pretty well-known,  also, at Oklahoma State University.  I have a lot of friends.  You   re pretty key, I know, in Guthrie, but you   ve served many years in  numerous leadership roles in the Alumni Association, as you indicated,  including your tenure as national president. Let   s talk a little bit about  your Alumni Association experiences, okay?  Okay.  When did your service begin? When did you first get involved?  As I recall, my wife Jane and I were married in June of 1959. I  apparently was already active in the Logan County Alumni Association,  and they had elected me to be on the board over here.  Were you ever chapter president of the county, then?  Yes, and I think I moved from that position, probably, over here. I  became on the board in 1959, and I remember the trembling in my bones  of going into that group where I thought I didn   t know anybody my first  day. Murl Rogers, at that time, had name plates for each of us where we  would sit. That helped carry me over that a lot. I had a few members  (and I don   t remember) that I was in school with or knew, but it was a  different group than we have today as the leadership of the Oklahoma  State Alumni Association.  Let me back up and ask you. Do you recall some of the activities and  programs that you had at the local chapter over there in Logan County?  25  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Yes, Murl was a great guy in believing that each county should have its  own organization. For several years in Logan County we had good  leadership. We had honors banquets where the people of Logan County  each invited a prospect to come to OSU out of the senior class of  Guthrie High School. I remember taking several girls, and I don   t know  whether I had any boys or not, but girls to those banquets.  They started inviting seniors, and then did they move to juniors later?  Yes.  Just took the top 10 or 20 percent of the class?  Right. Those were always nice events. I think it got pretty hectic for the  Alumni Association because a lot of people wanted to have them close  to the same time, and maybe one would be in the adjoining county and  the next one would be out in the Panhandle someplace. It was very  difficult, but they did a wonderful job in making that program work.  And it worked for a lot of years.  Ken, can you tell me a little bit about what the honors banquet program  was like?  The honors banquet, we always got a good speaker, the Alumni  Association did, off of the campus. It may have been one of the vice  presidents or a teacher or     Dean or somebody?     someone as a motivator to try to talk those kids into coming to  Oklahoma State and to learning about what they had to do to get  themselves enrolled and what the process was going to be. We, as  alumni, went to their homes, went out and got them, brought them to the  thing, and then took them home immediately after the program. It was a  nice affair.  I remember there used to be film they   d show to make sure     They had all kinds of gimmicks to try to entice those kids to come to  Oklahoma State.  The Alumni Association put together kind of a promotional recruiting  film, and then they would show it at the banquet. Is that right?  Right.  26  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Did your chapter have entertainment?  Yes, yes, we had entertainment, and the Alumni Association brought all  kinds of decorations. They furnished all the decorations to make the  thing look festive and make you feel like you wanted to come to  Oklahoma State.  One time there they had about sixty-some-odd of those that covered  nearly all the counties of the state, didn   t they?  And then Murl branched out and had some foreign big cities, other  cities, having a similar-type thing, only trying to get all the alums from  that particular area together and get them to become members of the  OSU Alumni Association.  As I recall, a lot of alumni that would come to those really enjoyed the  film as much as the prospective students, didn   t they? Kind of gives  highlights of the previous year and some things.  Right.  That   s great. Was the concept of the (we   ll go on to clubs and chapters  later) county chapter sort of built on a land-grant county extension  model where every county had an OSU connection?  Well, a lot of counties did an excellent job in finding leadership within  their counties. Where it failed and didn   t do well was a lack of  leadership in certain counties. That   s a broad brush I   m painting with,  but that   s what happened. After they   d run it several years, the people in  the background saw how much work was going to be involved in putting  the thing together, and so they backed off. So you didn   t always get  good leadership, but it was a good program.  Speaking of leadership, you mentioned Murl Rogers. Tell me a little bit  about Murl Rogers, some of his personality traits. Murl, kind of a  background, he was twenty-five years with his title then was Executive  Director of the Alumni Association. I guess he came in about the time,  would   ve been 1955 when you were getting involved with the Alumni  Association?  Yes.  What do you remember about Murl? Can you tell me some things about  him?  27  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Murl was one of the most dynamic men that I ever met in my lifetime.  He was a bundle of energy just all wrapped up. He lived and died  virtually for the OSU Alumni Association. He   d come from Hugo as I  recall. He put together a program to not only enlist grads into becoming  a part of the OSU Alumni Association   and it was very primitive  compared to today   s computer operation of how to call up those names  and all. It took a lot of space in the office.  To get all the addresses of the alumni, you   re talking about?  Yes. That took up a lot of space. He had people assigned to that job  probably far more than you would need today, even with a lot less  numbers. He was a pioneer, and he had a lot of great ideas. Then, of  course, his number-one idea was these honors banquets that we were  putting on all over the state, and he wanted one in every county. He  wanted two counties to combine where we couldn   t get enough interest  in one. He kept a staff of people, and he kept them motivated to going  and putting these things on. I don   t know how the speakers   sometimes  they traveled with the alumni people, or sometimes they traveled on  their own. It was a wonderful program, and it certainly introduced a lot  of people to the OSU Alumni Association. It   s the foundation that we  know today.  Do you have some favorite Murl Rogers stories?  Well, I   ve told you one, but I   ll change it a little bit. He had a member  that was going on the trip to Arizona. He had apparently told Murl that  he was taking his girlfriend with him, and they were not married. Murl  said,    That   s fine, but you   ll have two rooms.    He was very much a  stickler for seeing that the right impression was given to everybody  around. He says,    I don   t care what you do after you get to your room,  but you   re going to have and pay for two rooms.    (Laughter) I can  embellish that a little, but that   s enough to know about it. That happened  not once with the same individual, but I recall a trip to Colorado that we  were on that he had the same problem. It was a different girlfriend, I  guess, at that time. (Laughter) Murl ran a tight ship, and he wasn   t  interested in making things look bad for the rest of the Alumni  Association.  Did you ever go on any of the trips with Murl, travel on those tours  they   d take, alumni?  Oh, Murl was very kind to Jane and I the year I was president of the  Alumni Association. We were still in the Big Eight, not the Big Twelve.  We had a trip scheduled on the QE2 through the Panama Canal.  28  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Queen Elizabeth, II, luxury liner?  Yes, and he told me (and this may have just been a story he made up)  that he needed Jane and I to host that and that it would all be paid for by  the Alumni Association, which was a wonderful thing. We went on that  trip, and it was a wonderful trip. Our accommodations weren   t the best  that the QE2 had, but they were inside. That   s the first time and only  time I   ve ever stayed inside. It was very nice of him to do, and we got  acquainted with a lot of good alums from Oklahoma State that went on  that trip. That was a wonderful trip.  I   ll tell one more story about Murl that tells you what kind of an  individual he was. Oklahoma State used to play Arkansas every year at  Little Rock, and we decided this one year that we were going to stay in  Hot Springs at the Arlington Hotel. Well, I had a friend in Guthrie that  owned a hotel, and he had just been on a trip over there. He quoted me  the price that they gave him on the hotel. Well, I was a little green at the  time, and I did not multiply that room charge twice for two people being  in the room. I got over there, and we checked into the hotel, and we were  going into the Vapors, which was a night club right next door, to eat and  see the show.  I think I was a little sick, not green, maybe, but scared when I looked at  that price because I had filled the bus up with people from Guthrie and  from Stillwater, and I   d only charged them half enough for the room. I  didn   t have the money. It was the days before I ever carried a credit  card, and I thought I was going to be washing dishes over there.  (Laugher) I went to Murl. I was sick that night. It just hit me that I   d  done it wrong, and I was absolutely wrong. Murl says,    Oh, Kenneth,  don   t worry about it. The Alumni Association will take care of it.    It  took a big, big weight off of my shoulders, and I will ever be indebted to  him for that because I don   t know what I would   ve done. I don   t know  how I would   ve tried to talk my way through that, but that was the kind  of person that he was. He didn   t have to take me off the hook. He did it  himself, and I always admired the man for that.  You were president in what year,    79,    80?  I think in    79 and    80.  Wasn   t that Murl   s last year as executive director? Then Ray Sharp,  who   d been with him for, gosh, probably thirteen years took over. What  can you tell me about Ray Sharp? What do you remember about Ray?  Well, I remember that we had a number of applicants for the job from all  over the United States. The committee that had been appointed, (and I  29  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  don   t remember who all was on that committee) we   d narrowed the field  down to five. As I recall, we scheduled them all one week, one a day, to  interview about the job. The thing I remember most, that we had the  same meal all five days. (Laughter) Same sandwich, same potato chips,  iced tea, everything was the same. He didn   t want anything to show  partiality to anybody, so we ate the same thing all five times that we had  people. The committee decided that Ray Sharp probably could fit the  bill. Ray did it for a number of years. I don   t remember how many. I  remember being in Colorado, in Denver, when Ray had some kind of a  seizure while we were out there. I think it was anxiety probably more  than anything, too much pressure for him. That   s when he decided to get  out. But Murl had guided him and groomed him. We felt like, as a  committee, that he ought to be given the opportunity to try.  Ken, do you mind speaking to this? I just heard that Ray was the only  OSU alum in that final running, maybe, and there was some concern  that we needed somebody with an OSU background as executive  director. Was that   ?  That was part of the consideration, certainly.  Do you remember any other candidates years ago that just     Long time ago.  Okay. You served   gosh, you were probably on the   not counting as  past president, you served as ex officio member of the board, as well     Right.     but before that, you served probably fifteen years?  Well, I think I first came on the board in 1959, and I stayed on the board.  I think I was elected all those years up to 1979.  So twenty years, wow.  About twenty years. I used to have to run against somebody from  Kingfisher County. Of course, we were the dominant county. We had  more alums than they did at that time, and that   s why I got elected. Not  anything     They changed it. In those days, you actually had a ballot. You actually  had an election, correct?  Right, right.  30  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  That was an interesting process each year. I think they changed that a  little bit after     Yes, it changed.     which probably made sense because you didn   t     It wasn   t fair. It wasn   t fair to the people in Kingfisher County. They  needed their own representative because that   s a good, strong county.  Paul Schulte finally got on there, I guess. I remember Paul. Do you  remember some of the alumni leaders you worked with during that  period, particularly when you were president and then when you were  on the executive committee? Do you remember some of the names of the  individuals that you worked closely with?  Oh, yes. There were a lot of people. Mel vin  Jones certainly comes to  the head of the list because one of the great leaders that the Alumni  Association has ever had. I so admired that man.  Did you work with Glenn Yahn? Was he in that era?  Yes, Glenn and I became real good friends. We traveled together, Glenn  and Eleanor and Jane and I on lots of trips together. My friend, Oris  Taylor, of course was on the board, a past president, too.  From Guthrie?  From Guthrie, my neighbor. Veldo Brewer was another stalwart that I  knew.  Oh, a great one, yes. Around your era, I   m trying to think. Was Pete   Floyd  Bartlett, Fred Thompson part of your era?  Pete Bartlett and Fred Thompson, both. Pete was an outstanding man.  Named the Bartlett Center for the  Visual  Arts after him.  Well, his brother was in school with me, and I still get together with him  once in a while, that was catcher on our baseball team when I was a  senior. He lives in Tulsa. He   s not in good health.  Enos Vann was around your era, I think?  Enos followed me. He was from Muskogee. Everyone was a different  31  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  individual. They brought a little bit something different to the table as  leader. If you could roll them all up together, you   d have had a  wonderful, wonderful time. I   m not saying anything against anybody,  but the leadership was there and all different. We weren   t alike.  I   m thinking Jim Cobb was     Jim Cobb, I see him every football game. He didn   t see me Saturday  night, but I saw him come in. I saw him a couple of times.  So, some really strong leaders     Yes.     and like you said, different personalities, different leadership styles.  Right, different personalities, different ways that they operated it. I have  been impressed during your regime of the type of people, a younger  group, more or less, that took the reins and ran the wagon down the road.  They were outstanding people.  You know, that   s been one of the strengths the Alumni Association had  through the years is the volunteer leadership has been very active and  very engaged and very involved in helping lead and to run the  Association. We always had a good, strong staff, but always paired that  with real good volunteer leadership.  Right.  We were talking about earlier, Ken, this sort of transitional period from  Murl to Ray and the university, and a lot of things were happening. Can  you recall what some of the issues were at that time? I   m not thinking  about programs, necessarily, but issues and challenges of the  Association during that period, maybe its relationship with the  university, with other units, board issues, etcetera.  Well, money was always a problem. The question of what to charge for  a life membership kept cropping up during those early years. I got in on  a hundred dollars, and that   s a far cry from what it is today. But those  questions and money, and during your administration we got credit card  money. That was a coup and a half for the Alumni Association. Where  are we on that? Is it all gone now?  No, they   ve still got about another three or four years left on the  contract. That was a ten-million-dollar contract.  32  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Right.  We had two different contracts: one with Stillwater National Bank, and  then we went with a larger one. The name of it now is First USA, I think.  That wound up being a ten-million-dollar deal.  Yes, that was a great move. It certainly helped the Alumni Association  over a tough spot.  What was the relationship with the university during those times?  Well, one of the problems that we had in those early days, as I recall,  was the relationship between the Foundation and the Alumni  Association. The Foundation was raising money on one hand and  seemingly not helping put members back over here to the Alumni  Association on the other hand. Of course, they were located fairly close  together in those days. They were there in the Student Union, and that  was always kind of a raw spot that didn   t always sit well with the  leadership. I think that has come a long way since they   ve moved over to  their other place. I don   t know how much they help. I   ve not been that  active in it in recent years to know.  I   m trying to think of who was president of the university when you were  president of the Alumni Association.  Boger.  Larry Boger. I guess different presidents have had different philosophies  about and expectations for the role of alumni and the Alumni  Association.  Right. Larry Boger was a good leader, I thought. I went on a trip   well,  no. Wait a minute. No, it was a trip that I was on with Larry Boger. He  wasn   t the president when I was, as I recall. I don   t even remember who  it was, but I went to Wyoming with him. I won the Posse Award for  selling the most memberships to the Posse, and I got to go with the team  and fly. That was when     It wasn   t Bob Kamm, was it?  It probably was.  Bob was very supportive of the Alumni Association.  Larry was on this trip and we went some place to eat. He was just a  different individual. He led the singing, and we had a lot of fun. We had  33  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  coaches    wives and all with us. He was not the president. It must   ve  been Bob.  Bob, or it could   ve been John Campbell, maybe, after him.  Yes.  We   ve talked about some of the key programs and goals of the  Association at that time. We talked about the honors banquets and  talked about life membership programs. Are there some other activities  during your presidential era     Homecoming was always a big, big factor. I have to take my hat off to  those people because I   ve been involved in a lot of parades. They have  done an excellent job throughout the years. You   ve got a lot more people  to pick from than I had, not when I was with the Alumni Association,  but at home. It makes a difference if you   ve got good, fired-up, young  people ready to help with that thing, and they do an excellent job.  Ken, what do you remember about HEACO? Was that going strong, the  Higher Education Alumni Council?  Yes, I got involved in that. I went a few times to that.  Can you tell me a little bit about what it was?  Higher education. The idea was to have contacts with people in the  legislature and to help them help us.  And to help promote OSU and higher education issues.  High education issues. Some years I think it was better than others, the  leadership in getting it done. Maybe that was part of the problem with  the people in Oklahoma City. It was different.  I think student awards were pretty big at that time and alumni awards?  The top ten students. I remember that two of my friends, Rob Hudson  and Steve Davis, were selected as part of the top ten. In those days, it  was just five and five.  Five men, five women?  Yes, so I always referred to them as 40 percent of the top students at  OSU were from Guthrie.  34  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  That   s great. (Laughs) Were you a part of when Murl was getting the  turnpike extension to Stillwater?  Yes, he almost singlehandedly got  Highway  51 paved, four lanes  coming into Guthrie. He spent an awful lot of time getting that done and  did get it done before it needed to be done.  And that Cimarron Turnpike there, it was going to bypass Stillwater,  and he got a spur in Stillwater. Murl, certainly, individually, but the  Alumni Association was very involved in that program.  Right. He involved a lot of people where he could pull the strings and  push them towards the people that had the power.  To sort of reflect a little bit more in general terms, Ken, how do you feel  about the engagement of alumni on behalf of the university? I mean, how  important is that to advancing a university?  I think it   s very important, and I think there   s a very close relationship  between how well our athletic teams do and how many people pay their  membership dues. I think that   s closer than most people think. I think  their attitude towards the university is a whole lot the way that the  athletic teams have performed.  In what ways do you think alumni engage, things they do for the  university, and what legitimate roles of alumni in supporting the  university?  Well, a lot of people maybe had a bad experience of some sort or  another while they were in school: teachers, didn   t get the grades they  wanted, whatever it might be. Those people for the most part are always  going to be hard to get any money out of, to get them to join the Alumni  Association, to get them to give to the Foundation. That   s a group that I  think you just kind of mark off, but you need to cultivate the people that  have had good experiences. You have to ferret them out, find them, and  cultivate them to helping. One of the things that I always did, (and I  think Murl did this once or twice) invited all of the presidents of the  county clubs to come to a meeting in Stillwater for orientation. I think  that   s great. It   s a changed proposition now. We   re not doing those  things, but I think the Alumni Association needs to bring in key leaders,  maybe in groups, not the whole state, areas at a time and bring them in  and show them that building over there. A lot of people have never been  in that building.  The Alumni Center?  35  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  The Alumni Center. They need to bring those people in, key people, feed  them, and just take part of the states in the same geographic area and  bring them in together because people in the same geographic area  generally have the same concerns. That   s not always true, but they have  a lot of the same concerns over the university, the directions it   s headed.  I think that Larry needs to bring those groups in on a quarterly basis or  something like that, just divide the state up, invite the key leaders in, and  give them an orientation of what   s going on.  I was most impressed, most impressed, with one of the early meetings  that we had over there. You were still in charge. It showed the building,  when it was going to need a new roof, when it was going to need new  carpet, when you were going to paint it. Those kind of things apply at  anybody   s business. Most people don   t do it, but that move was one of  the great moves I   ve ever seen the Alumni Association do because it   s  laid out in front of you. When I was on the school board, we were  always having trouble with flat roofs. The architects always built flat  roofs. I   d go up to the school, and I   d say,    I   d like to see the warrantees  on all of the roofs in the school system.    They didn   t know what I was  talking about. (Laughter) You know, that sort of thing applies back in  your hometown. You can carry that information back to your hometown  and the things that are important to the people of your hometown that  you picked up from the Alumni Association.  Ken, you were saying one of the general roles of the Alumni Association  should be to keep alumni informed of the issues and what   s going on at  the university.  Right, that   s just one part of it.  You were talking about student recruitment. Is that a goal?  That   s part of it. That   s part of it. When you bring the leaders in from  those various counties around, they don   t have to be all in conglomerate,  but just divide the state up where you can do it about once a quarter and  then try and do it about every three or four years. Bring in a new crew to  find out what   s going on on the university. I think it   s money well spent,  and it wouldn   t hurt at all to have somebody on the program from the  Foundation to be a part of the thing and speak about that part of it.  Ken, from your perspective and your leadership experience over the  years, generally, what should be the mission and purposes of the Alumni  Association?  To bring people to the university, to keep them a part of helping the  university alive and viable, and to help them bring the students from  36  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  their home counties, to encourage them in things that they can do. I think  that   s one of the things that need to be   what can an adult do to help  bring a student to Oklahoma State? I know Veldo used to load them up  in his car and bring them up here and show them. Well, not everybody   s  a Veldo, but it needs to be planned with purposes for each segment of  what they talk to those people about.  So I hear you saying it   s important to keep alumni informed to connect  among each other, connect alumni to the university, help recruit  students.  You might want to do it as a part of the basketball schedule if they have  enough seats that could be worked out as far as suites are concerned.  You could put so many in each suite. Entertain those leaders, and those  leaders will respond, I think.  Ken, let me ask sort of a little bit different question. What do you feel is  the correct organizational structure for Alumni Association and its  alignment with the university? What should the nature of that  relationship be?  One of the problems that   s always been there, and you know it as well as  I do, is the faculty, the relationship with the faculty. The faculty kind of  lives off over here by themselves and are not encouraged to become a  part of the alumni. They may have come from Illinois or North Carolina  or Florida or someplace, and so they don   t feel like they have any real  allegiance to Oklahoma State. Their main feelings are that,    Our salaries  are too low. The football coaches and the basketball coaches are making  too much money.    So there   s a jealousy.  Ken, let me take it maybe in a little bit different direction. How  independent, dependent, in its role as an organization, as an association  should it be under the umbrella of the university? Should it be partners  with the university? What should be its relationship with the  Foundation? How do you feel about those, what I call, organizational  structures?  I think they all ought to be partners, all part of the same team pulling the  same direction. That   s hard to do. It   s real easy to talk about, but it   s a  lot harder to make it work. I think that there needs to be efforts made. It  won   t be an overnight thing, but to get all segments of the university  pulling together and understanding what the Alumni Association is  trying to do.  Ken, we talked a lot about it over the years, (I know your group did, it   s  been going on for years and years) the Alumni Association being what  37  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  we call a self-governing association and that the alumni should govern  the Alumni Association. How do you feel about that?  Well, I think that   s true, but I also think that the rest of the university  needs to have representation of finding out what the Alumni Association  is doing because if you   re a teacher over here in history and don   t pay  any attention to anything but your classes, you don   t know the direction  that the university is trying to take and that the Alumni Association is  trying to take. They have their meetings, but I think they need to be  melded together and work together.  Again, looking back at the perspective of several years of the Alumni  Association, can you share some special memories and some highlights  of your time with the Alumni Association, some special times that stand  out in your mind, special events, things that were key for you?  Well, I   ve always been impressed with the leadership. That, to me, has  been very special, and I think that the Alumni Association, by and large,  has done an excellent job in selecting leaders for the Association to  guide and direct the activities. There   ve been very few flukes in there in  my opinion. They   ve been good people, and I think during your regime  we got even better people. I know one of the things Murl  Rogers  told  me. I don   t even remember how many at-large appointments that I had,  and everybody does. I think I would   ve felt more comfortable if they   d  have been my appointments rather than Murl saying,    You ought to put  so and so back on, and so and so, and so and so.     He did that, and I accepted it because I figured he thought he was correct  on it, but I think it would be better if the president himself was able to  select without any pointing at these repeats. It   s nice to have those  people and not throw them off the board, but I just think the leadership  has enough friends scattered around the state of Oklahoma that they  need to get involved in this and not keep repeating the same people  whose roles don   t change much.  I can hear what you   re saying between the lines. You   re right. Well, how  do you feel about the future of the Alumni Association?  I think that there will always be a need. I feel like the push for  membership has not been as strong as it needs to be. I think there needs  to be more mailing pieces go out. I realize I   m spending money, but I  find that people that are trying to get you to join   and they change it  from time to time, the pitch, a little bit. If there   s something special  going on, why, you know,    We   re inviting you back for Homecoming  and hope that you will come over to our new building,    and,    I hope that  you will take part in this or this.    I don   t go.  38  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  I   ve attended sixty-four Homecomings, (Laughter) and I   m not out there  to try to get my name before fifty thousand people. That isn   t my intent  at all. I wouldn   t want that. People that are kind of lukewarm towards  the university that haven   t joined that you   d like to join need to have  something special for them.  Ken, speaking especially in terms of home ballgames, how do you think  alumni of your generation feel about the Alumni Center? I   ve talked to  several alumni leaders that preceded my time here that said there had  been talk of an alumni center for several years. How do you feel about  that? How do you think alumni feel about it?  Well, I really don   t feel like there   ve been enough opportunities for the  fringe alums to come to that building. They have not come. That   s what  I   m talking about, this where you invite them in to a dinner. It doesn   t  need to be a fancy dinner. It needs to be something that you bring those  groups in, and I think they   ll pay for themselves on the dinners and all if  you get them feeling like what   s going on and you tell them something  that they haven   t read in the newspaper yet that the Alumni Association  is doing.  Ken, going forward and talking about the future of the Alumni  Association, there are some things that you certainly always think about  evolving and changing. What have been the traditional strengths of the  Alumni Association that you   d say,    Whatever you do, continue to build  on these strengths   ?  Well, I think the strengths are in the leadership. I think the leadership  points at certain things that you do. Like Homecoming, if the leadership  embraces Homecoming and helps with that and makes recommendations  as to a voice in when are they going to have the parade, where are the  floats going to be afterwards, and how do people come that didn   t  belong to a fraternity or sorority or lived in a public housing. How can  you bring them in and make them feel more comfortable with the  operation?  Good point. For you, a personal question, Ken. You   ve remained closely  connected with your alma mater ever since you graduated, for sixty  years now, and for thirty of that you were very much involved in the  Alumni Association, or certainly twenty-some-odd years. You   re so loyal  to Oklahoma State University. Why has OSU been so important to you  that you   ve given so much of your time and talent and energy over the  years? You have a huge amount of passion for this. Where   d it come  from?  39  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  I feel like it   s the education that I got here that has helped me through  life, and it   s a way for me to give back to those who have helped me. I  feel the same way about the American Legion. I know the guys that  were in World War I wrote the GI Bill of Rights for people like myself  who got out in World War II. I feel extremely indebted to them because  I couldn   t have gone to college. We didn   t have loans then as easy to get  to. I don   t know how I   d have gone to college if I hadn   t had the GI Bill,  and so I try to give back. The same way with the Alumni Association, I  try to give back to the university what it gave to me. It gave me a  foundation, a way to look at life and try to run my life with the  principles that I learned here at Oklahoma State.  Looking back over the years, there   s got to be some special memories  for you that stand out in your mind. What are some of your special,  favorite OSU memories, not about Alumni Association, just OSU  generally? One of them I   d have to say would be your record of how  many years since 1946, never missing a home football game. That   s got  to be one  (Laughs) What about other things?  Well, I enjoyed all my classes that I had with Mr. Iba and Ralph  Higgins. I learned a lot from both of them. I coached boys in basketball.  I used to take all the black kids in Guthrie and take them down to  Oklahoma City to play in the Salvation Army League on Saturday  mornings because the Guthrie coaches didn   t want them. It was before  we had integration as we know it today. I drove the old bus down there,  and I fed them hamburgers and stuff. It was just me giving back. A lot of  it was things that I had learned from Mr. Iba. I probably wasn   t the best  coach in the world, but a lot of the things that I applied came from him.  Then I coached baseball, too, for many years, twelve years I guess,  baseball. It   s giving back.  How do you feel about the future of OSU, and how do you feel about  Burns Hargis as president?  Well, I think Burns Hargis is an outstanding individual. I had him speak  at a United Way dinner that we had, and he did an outstanding job. I  think that his heart   s with OSU and he   s going to grow. The area that  he   s got to grow in is learning how to deal with the legislature and  getting the money that higher education needs to fulfill its program.  Kind of concluding here a little bit, do you have any hobbies, activities,  you   re involved in now? You talked about you   ve still got your hand in  real estate and some stuff.  My oldest son and I, we have a piece of ground that   s across the street  from us that was about forty-five acres that was just jungle. Oris Taylor  40  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  had his cattle in there. There were three owners, three individuals that  owned it. One died, and she left three heirs. Another one died and left  two heirs, and another one never did die. His mother left it to him, and  so I bought all three of them out. Then I took my son in as a partner, and  we   re going to have a development across the street from our house.  We   ll have about twenty-five houses, and that   s what I   m working on  right now.  Is that with Van?  No, this is Mark. Mark   s the one with money. He   s got more money than  his dad ever dreamed of having. (Laughter) He   s got all the Subway  franchises west of I-35 in Oklahoma. He makes more money than I ever  dreamed of.  Well, we   ve talked about an awful lot of things you   ve given to your  community, to your university, to Alumni Association. This is a serious  question. Looking back on your lifetime, how do you hope people will  remember Kenneth Mitchell?  Oh, I think most of them remember me incorrectly. A lot of them have  the mistaken opinion that I have a lot of money, which is not true. I   ve  had a tough time being an only child. My mother had a degree in fine  arts, piano playing. During the    30s, she couldn   t make a living teaching  piano. People didn   t have money to pay, and she had a very tough time.  She was mortar board and all of that stuff, but earning the dollars to put  on the table was very difficult for her. I came up through that, and I  didn   t start with anything. Nobody left me anything. My dad died, I  think I got thirty-five dollars out of it and a watch and a knife that are  attached. That   s all I got. When my mother died, she didn   t have  anything. She had my grandmother   s house, which I got, and that   s it.  Everything else I   ve done on my own and haven   t been very financially  successful, but I   ve earned a living, put six kids through school. But  people look at me as that I have a lot of money, and I don   t. That bothers  me that they think I have a lot of money and I don   t.  Ken, let me take it a different twist. I think you   re wealthy in a lot of  ways, in your friendships, your relationships, and it seems to me a lot of  people are going to remember you for all the service you   ve given, the  things you   ve done for your fellow man, your communities, to your  university.  Well, yes, certain people that know me.  I think you   re being a little modest about that.  41  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Gill  Mitchell  Well, maybe. I better go. My wife expects me to walk with her at a  nursing home tonight.  I was just going to conclude by saying thank you for taking the time,  Ken.  Well, sure. It   s been a great day.  Thank you for all you   ve done for this university and for the Alumni  Association.  I appreciate that, and it   s been a great day.  -------  -------   
