 Gill. Today is September 3, 2010. I   m visiting with Bill  Dragoo, here on the OSU campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This  interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Bill, thanks, I know you   ve got a lot going  on, and your business is really flourishing. I appreciate you taking time  out of your busy schedule to be with us.  You   re welcome, Jerry. Glad to be here.  Well, we   re going to talk about OSU. First of all, Bill, I want to back up.  Can you tell me where you grew up, a little bit about your family, your  parents?  Well, I was one of those strange kids that was born and raised in  Norman. I had an uncle who was the head of the Math Department and a  cousin who was the head of the Architectural Department at OU. I grew  up with OU. I was crimson and cream all the way. I attended Norman  High and all the public schools through that. I knew a girl in high school  who had a friend who lived in Tulsa who was getting ready to attend  OSU. I started out at Oklahoma Christian, which was called Oklahoma  Christian College, outside of Edmond, the first summer semester right  after I graduated from Norman High, and then the following semester.  This girl had asked me to come up and visit Oklahoma State. She was  attending here and living in Drummond, and I had never been to OSU.  What was so funny about growing up in Norman, you never even  thought about OSU. It wasn   t even discussed, and that   s what always  kind of struck me as strange. (Laughter) You just knew about this  obscure place that was up there somewhere on the prairie, (Laughs) so I  didn   t even know where Stillwater actually really was. I just knew it was  up I-35. So, I left Edmond and headed up here and I came in. I  remember coming in and seeing right there where Theta Pond is the  5  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo     Oklahoma State University.    I thought,    My, gosh, look at this place      I said,    This is phenomenal. This is a beautiful place,    because OU is  somewhat fragmented. Architectural design was all over the place.  Every guy that   d come in had had his own architect and built his own  monument in his style or the period styles or whatever. There was no  continuity in the architecture, and it was kind of spread out all over. I  began to see this architecture and how it all conformed, and I thought,     My goodness, this is a beautiful place      I was a little rambunctious in those days, to say the least, and it  happened to be a Thursday night. I went over to Drummond, picked this  girl up, and we went straight down to the Strip, down Washington Street.  It looked like Mardi Gras. In those days, the police literally blocked off  the streets so that no traffic could come up and down that street on a  Thursday night. It was a little different back then than it is now. They  were a little more permissive about things, a little more accepting, I  guess. I said,    Man, I   ve found home.    (Laughs) And everybody was  unbelievably friendly. I   d never seen anything like it because at OU, you  hung in cliques. I don   t know how it is today, but back then, if you  graduated Norman High, and even if you joined a fraternity or sorority,  you tended to stay with the same little group, even within the  organization. Everybody just seemed to stay in cliques, even throughout.  Up here, everybody was just out shaking hands,    Hey, I   m so-and-so.     I remember, I didn   t have anywhere to stay, and I didn   t want to really  drive back. It was getting late. I   d met a kid on the Strip, and he lived on  the Strip in what was kind of a little house back behind one of the  buildings there, next to where the Coachman was, which is now, I think  they call it the College Bar. He said,    Just stay with me.    I didn   t know  him from Adam. He turned out to be a great guy. I said,    Holy cow   What? I mean, what is this all about? I   ve never seen anything like it.    I  had a friend that was going to OU, and he was from Muskogee, and he  said,    Oh, man  OSU   s a great place.    So, we transferred up the very  next semester to OSU, and that   s how I got here. I lived in Kerr Hall and  then ended up joining the Lambda Chi fraternity. Then the rest is  history. It was a pretty wild and crazy time, I   ll tell you.  Let me back up and ask you, did you have any brothers or sisters?  I have one sister. She attended OU. She was six years older.  And what did your dad do as a profession?  He was civil service at Tinker Air Force Base. He had been in World  War II and in the Army Air Corps and B-17s. Then after that, he and two  other people formed the Oklahoma Air National Guard, and then from  6  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  there he went on to Tinker where he was a B-52 specialist.  Now, Norman just had one high school at the time, the Tigers?  Right.  So, were you involved in any school activities in high school?  Well, I wasn   t so much in high school as much as in junior high. I was  president of the student council. When I got to high school, I wasn   t  really involved. I mean, I played basketball and track and cross country,  things of that nature, but I wasn   t really involved in the student affairs.  So, it was a pretty neat deal because we were orange and black, and I  didn   t have to change any clothing. (Laughter)  You talked about your first experience coming up. What were some of  your impressions of the campus? You talked about the landscaping, the  architectural style. What do you remember about the campus? What  were some of your first impressions?  Well, the first impression was the Student Union. I   d never seen  anything like it. I was very familiar with the OU Student Union. This  was just a monstrosity, and then the library right across from it. And that  library mall was just unbelievable. Then, like I said, the architecture. I  didn   t realize at the time how it conformed, but one thing I really liked  was that I could get to class walking just about anywhere because it was  so centralized, whereas OU was very decentralized. You literally had to  have some transportation to get around that place.  You said that first year you lived in Kerr Hall?  Yes.  What was your major, Bill?  I started out in political science, and then I ended up in radio, TV, film,  in the radio side of it. I was going to be in broadcast sales, but that never  worked out. (Laughter)  You mentioned the Strip and some things. At that time, what were some  of the favorite student hangouts?  The Coachman and the Wet Olive were the two big hangouts down on  the Strip. Later in time, a place called the Jail, which is now Dirty   s, and  that was a very popular place. But the Strip was pretty much just a place  to go and congregate. The Whaler came along up there, and there was, I  7  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  think it was called the Slopes, which also was owned by Jim and Joe  Hodges that owned the Coachman, and it was quite a place. There was  one (I can   t ever remember the name of it) down there, but it was a guy  named Goose who owned it. It was just a little bar, and he was quite a  character. He was the local bookie, and so you   d go in there if you  wanted to place your bets. He served peanuts, and there were peanut  hulls all over the floor. The popular drink at that time was a red beer,  tomato juice in beer, so we   d go into Goose   s place and drink red beer.  He also owned, I think it was called the Anchor, which is now     On Knoblock?  Yes, down on Knoblock, next to  Eskimo  Joe   s there. It was a pretty  wild and crazy place. You could get the best of all worlds here.  Speaking, Bill, of wild and crazy, there was a student event in the mid-seventies  for a few years referred to by many as Streakers Night. Now,  this invokes a lot of positive memories and some not so positive to the  particular school administration. (Laughter)  Yes. Oh, yes. (Laughter) I had an encounter with an administrator that  night.  But I understand that you observed and personally participated in  Streakers Night events.  Yes, yes I did.  Not as a streaker, let   s get that out right now.  No, no, I was not a streaker.  So, the year you enrolled in Oklahoma State was the fall of what year?  I guess I came in    71. I guess that would be about right, yes.  Was it going on your first year as a student?  No, I think that was    73, if I   m not mistaken. We were trying to  remember last night. I was talking to Debbie Bair, Lon Bair   s wife, up in  Ponca, and she said,    I   m pretty sure it was    73.     Was streaking a national phenomenon at that time?  Yes.  8  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Kind of across the country.  Yes. You remember that one guy  Ray Stevens  had that song that, you  know,    The Streaker.    He always did some funny little songs, and yes, it  was a big deal right then, how people would streak across the baseball  fields and stuff. It was a phenomenon, yes.  It finally caught on at Oklahoma.  Yes. (Laughs)  We   re always a little bit behind the curve, but that   s okay.  I don   t know how it caught on, but it was kind of strange how it  occurred.  So, where did Streakers Night occur?  It was on Washington Street, on what we called the Strip, three blocks  there.  University down to Sixth?  Right.  And what time of the year did it occur?  I believe it was spring. It   s kind of fuzzy. I can   t remember about that.  (Laughter) I   m pretty sure it was in the spring, if I   m not mistaken.  Was it on Thursday night before the beginning of Spring Break? Do you  recall?  It might   ve been. I   m fuzzy on the dates.  I talked to one of the individuals, and they said they remember it being  then. Spring Break started officially on Saturday, but everybody left  town Friday, so it was Thursday night before Spring Break.  Yes, I think it probably was. It would have been about then, yes, because  I know it was in the spring, for sure.  How many people would participate in this event? Were they probably  OSU students?  Oh, yes.  9  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Or was there some out-of-town people, too?  No, no, it was all students that I recall. What had happened was some of  my fraternity brothers   well, I had a Farm House guy and another  fraternity brother, and we had been in West Texas buying a horse for  some reason. I have no idea. We were always doing something that was  off the wall. For some reason, one of them bought a horse, and we came  back into town. I don   t know what time it was, seven thirty, eight  o   clock at night, and we were coming back, up from Sixth Street, back  up Washington to turn back into the Lambda Chi house. We wanted to  know what was going on Thursday night, and so we come up through  there, and it was just packed. We were weaving, really having to drive  slow, hauling this trailer with a horse in it up there. (Laughter) I couldn   t  really tell what was going on. We were just hollering and waving at  everybody. We saw people we knew, and we thought it was strange  enough to be driving down the street with a horse.  We ran up and parked it up at the Lambda Chi, which is just right off the  Strip there, and we were heading back down there because it looked like  there was a lot going on. I got down there and realized there were some  guys on top of the buildings that were nude. They were naked up there,  straddling these signs, and it was mostly guys. I don   t remember any  girls streaking. Now, there might have been, but it was guys. We got  involved in it pretty quickly as far as getting down there and getting  amongst them, I should say, and it was quite fun. Then I overheard some  young boys talking about,    Let   s go down to the Sirloin Stockade.     Well, let me back up. I   m going to get to that story because that   s sort of  another tradition. You were talking about the students. I think at that  time in Oklahoma, the legal age for drinking 3.2 beer was actually  eighteen, wasn   t it?  It was.  It was legal.  Now, there was a time when it was twenty-one, but the Stillwater Police  Department turned their head on the deal and said that as long as a kid  had a college ID and stayed within the confines of that area, they were  okay with that. I had a friend who was a police officer here. Their logic  behind that was that the kids, if they could walk somewhere, they   d keep  them off the streets of Stillwater. That was prevalent for some time, that  if you had a student ID, you could drink, but I think the legal age was  twenty-one. For a while it was eighteen. That   s a whole other story, how  I got with the local Coors distributer here and was selected to be the  10  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  liaison or whatever you want to call it, to try to get majority rights and  get that back down to eighteen.  The other thing was they didn   t have an open-container law at the time.  You could actually be out  on the street with your beverage . So, when  you talk about people being out on the street or out on the sidewalk on  the Strip, it was legal.  Right. They carried on drinking right outside the bars. Nobody thought  anything about it. Everything was just in paper cups.  Could you just kind of paint the picture for as you looked down  Washington Street, the Strip, what it looked like?  It was packed. It looked like Mardi Gras, absolutely.  Wall to wall.  Yes, and periodically, one guy would come running down through there  naked, but most of them were on top of the buildings. They   d climbed  up there somehow, got on top of the buildings. Every once in a while,  you   d see another guy shooting down through there.  Some people I talked to said at times there   d be groups. There might be  two or three or four. Sometimes there might be one person.  Yes.  How would they run? Like, come off a side street and go for about a  block?  They   d just come out of nowhere. I don   t know where they   d come  from. You   d just see them. All of a sudden they   d just shoot by you.  They   d run down the street.  Yes. (Laughter) I never saw anybody stand still very long. (Laughs)  I didn   t realize. So, some of them were nude, up on top of the buildings?  Yes. There sure were, yes. In fact, if I   m not mistaken, I think the  yearbook of that time actually shows that.  And so, as you said earlier, you   d never seen any female streakers?  No, I don   t remember seeing any female streakers. There might have  11  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  been some, but I certainly didn   t see any. I would   ve remembered that.  So, in trying to summarize what you said, they   d come out of nowhere,  just out of a side alley, a door somewhere.  Yes. It wouldn   t be somebody that would just strip naked there and then  start running. It would be somebody that just came out of nowhere.  They   d probably go down about a block or two and then disappear  somewhere?  Yes. (Laughter)  What was the crowd   s reaction when one of the streakers  went by ?  Oh, everybody was all behind it. It was just so bizarre.  Hoots and cheers.  Yes, absolutely. That was kind of a strange period in American history.  That was all during the Vietnam stuff and all that, and there was a lot of  student rebellion. We didn   t have much of it here at OSU, a lot of  organized SDS  Students for a Democratic Society  stuff and all that, but  it was a different time when it was a free-spirit time.  So, you had people packed in the bars, you had them out on the  sidewalks, in the street, and so you   re just     Well, most everybody was out of the bars.  Out on the street.  Yes, on the street.  So, two thousand, three thousand or more students?  Gosh, I don   t know. I just remember it being packed, so there must have  been, easily.  Yes, because you   re talking four blocks?  Yes.  That   s basically what you   re talking about, four blocks on the Strip? So,  just the whole street for four blocks down.  12  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Yes, well, most of it was the half from down to where Bill   s Italian  Pizza was, down there on the corner. Most of it was down into that area  and confined to that one block area.  About a couple blocks there, just south of the campus?  Yes.  Well, now, let   s get back to your story, Bill. I want to ask you about  another tradition. In addition to streaking on Streakers Night was taking  the Sirloin Stockade bull and throwing it in Theta Pond.  Right.  What was the Sirloin Stockade bull? Can you tell me a little bit about  that?  Well, the Sirloin Stockade was one of these buffet-style places that is  very much like Golden Corral now, I guess you could say. You   d go in  there and get some little cheap steak and baked potato or whatever. They  had this big bull out in front that was on wheels. It was on a built-in  trailer so they could move it around, hitch it up to a pickup or whatever,  and move it around from location to location. It sat out in front of there.  That was on the south end of Washington there, back on the west side,  almost to Sixth Street. There was some discussion about,    Let   s go get  the bull and parade it up the street,    and that was really going to be the  only intention, was just to get the bull and get a hold of it and literally  hand pull it down the street. I don   t think there was ever any more  agenda than that.  How big was the bull?  It was sizable. I was trying to remember how tall that thing would be,  but it was probably anywhere between, probably, ten or twelve feet high,  and ten or twelve feet long. It was big. It was good sized, let me assure  you.  So, how does this all happen? Does it just happen, or is this planned?  No, it was   there was no forethought into it. It was just like,    We ought  to go get the bull.    Then,    Okay, let   s go.    So, we went down there and  got that. I was always kind of the one that could talk people into things,  so I didn   t pull the bull. I was just a spectator egging them on,    Get the  bull down the street, boy     Egging them on, egging them on.  Bill, let me back up and ask you, who was the group that came up with  13  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  the idea?  I don   t know them.  How did you get involved with them?  I didn   t know them. I didn   t know who they were.  You were just down on the Strip there?  Yes, yes.  A group of guys.  And it was very spontaneous. It just happened. There was no real  planning. It was very spontaneous. When this discussion started, we all  ran down there and got the bull, and a bunch of them got it. One old kid  got up on it, and he was on the bull, up on the head of the bull, waving at  the crowd. Now, I don   t know if this is true or not, but when we got  down around where the light was   there was a traffic light that hung in  the middle of the street, and it was just one single light. I don   t think the  bull was tall enough for this, but the kid either fell off or got knocked off  by the traffic light. I don   t know quite which one it was. I don   t think the  bull was tall enough for him to get knocked off, but we like to tell that  story, that he got knocked off. (Laughter)  Now, you   re directing this, so kind of give me what you   re doing.  Yes, well everything was going to end when we got down to the end of  the street, and then I convinced everybody, (it just kind of came about)     Let   s just keep going with it,    and so     So, it   s the end of the street, you   re there where the Strip, Washington  Street, T   s into University Avenue.  Exactly. Yes. We just turned left. Well, when I saw all this happening, I  ran up to the Lambda Chi house, which was directly across the street on  the south side of Theta Pond there on University, and I had a fraternity  brother that had a room right in the front. He had these loud speakers  that were stereo speakers that he had in his front window. At that time,  Led Zeppelin was real big, and    Stairway to Heaven    was the big song,  and he   d blast that all over campus during the day, the whole album,  through these big speakers. You could be walking around campus and  hear that album going off, and you could hook a microphone up to it. So,  I ran up there, and I said,    Help me     I said,    Look at this big crowd out  here.    He was in the house. He was unaware of all of it. I said     14  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  What   s his name, Bill?  His name was David Helmey. He was my big brother in the fraternity.  Anyway, I said,    Hook up that microphone     So, we had those speakers  blaring out there. They had gotten down that far, and the crowd was  huge down there. I got on there, and I said,    People, this is your leader   Throw the graven image into the pond     (Laughs) And I was going on  and on and on with this, and this was going on, and all of a sudden I feel  this hand touch me and say,    Dragoo, put the microphone down.    It was  the Dean of Men. I don   t remember what his name was, but he had come  into the room, and he said,    You know you   re inciting a riot out here?     (Laughs)  Tell me what you were thinking. You have this Dean of Men, his hand on  your shoulder     I mean, you look around, you think   I didn   t even know who he was,  okay. I   d never seen him before. I look around, and I find out this is the  Dean of Men.  What are you thinking? What was going through your mind?  Oh gosh  I can   t even remember, but I imagine I panicked. (Laughter)  Probably thought you were going to get kicked out of school.  I know I put the microphone down, (Laughs) but I never had any  repercussions from it. I didn   t have to show up in his office or anything.  That was just the end of it. I think after that night, he had a lot to deal  with, and I wasn   t all that  important .  So, where was the bull at this time? Had they thrown the bull in the  pond?  Yes, they had followed instructions and actually thrown it in. They had  just, literally, rolled it where it went in headfirst.  Was it your suggestion, then, to put it in the pond?  That was what I told them, yes. (Laughter) I had said,    This is your  leader, people, this is your leader,    you know.    Throw the graven image  into the pond.    (Laughter) Then, there was a lot more to it than that. I  kept them going, you know.  That   s great.  15  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Yes.  At that time, the curb was a little bit different. You actually could take  the bull and just roll it literally up the edge of the pond and put it in.  Yes. Yes, I remember.  You wouldn   t be able to now because they   ve redesigned it.  Yes.  So, just headfirst?  Headfirst.  So, what happens when it hits? Does it float? Does it sink? What  happened?  I don   t remember it all getting in there. As I remember, only about half  of it was in there, but they might have finally got it all in there. I don   t  know how they ever got it out.  So, did the crowd, as they see what   s happening, are they     Oh, they   re cheering and raising Cain     They   re cheering? Then they turned on University Avenue with you  and     Yes. Oh, yes. So, the crowd followed the whole thing.  How many people were in that crowd?  Oh my gosh  That whole street was packed.  Oh gosh  (Laughs)  Our fraternity house, the front yard was packed. Everybody was really  watching this thing.  So, Bill, what year was this for you in school? Was this your     Junior year.  Junior year?  16  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Yes.  This would have been in     I think it was    73.  Was that the first year? Because it became a tradition.  That was it.  That was the first year they   d thrown it in the pond.  That was it. It was all spontaneous. It was not anything that was ever  planned, to my knowledge. Now, I   m sure that whoever came up with  it   I don   t know if it was just some kid that decided to do it when he  was drunk, or if it was a planned thing by a group of guys.  And your story is you just happened to be there right when they started  talking about it?  Yes, I   m just driving up the street with a horse. (Laughs) I   d been in  West Texas skipping school all week.  Well, Bill, help me understand this. So, this was the first year. This was  all spontaneous, I mean, in terms of the streaking, about being down on  the Strip. It was a warm spring night.  Yes.  The Thursday night before Spring Break, everybody   s out drinking, so  just a crowd, nothing planned about this whole event.  No, not to my knowledge.  The bull, the streaking, anything, just     Yes, it was very spontaneous, to my knowledge. Back then, Thursday  night was the night. It was always quite eventful down there, regardless  of whether there were streakers or not.  How many streakers did you see, personally, that night, Bill? Do you  remember?  Oh, gosh  I don   t know, maybe ten or twelve different ones. Just  periodically, somebody would shoot through. You   d see two or three  17  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  guys, so there might have been twenty for all I know.  Are they totally naked, or do they have their shoes on?  Shoes, yes, I remember. I   m pretty sure all of them had shoes on, but  some of them probably didn   t. I wasn   t looking at their feet. (Laughter)  It   d just be kind of a blur.  Then did you participate in it next year, your senior year?  I don   t remember, Jerry, what transpired that next year on Streakers  Night. All I remember is this one. I don   t remember the next year.  Strange how it went on for three or four years, I think. Did it not?  It went on for years, for years, because when I had moved to Houston, I  remember hearing it on like CNN or NBC News, one of these. It was  actually on national news one night when I was watching a news  program, so it went into the    80s.  You were directly responsible for starting the     Well, I don   t know if I was directly responsible. I was just instrumental  in it all.  Instrumental in helping to start the tradition of throwing the Sirloin  Stockade bull into the pond, though.  Yes, yes, exactly.  What do you think about that, I mean, looking back in hindsight?  It was just another day, Jerry. We had many days like that. (Laughter)  We won   t pursue any of that.  No, no.  Well, Bill, let   s come back to this. So, you said they were trying to get  the legal drinking age lowered from twenty-one to eighteen?  Right.  You said you were involved with that. Can you share that story?  Yes. It had been eighteen, and we   d just gotten a new Coors distributor  18  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  in Stillwater that was out on Sixth Street. I don   t remember how this all  happened, but they had talked me into being their representative and  giving me all these little index cards. I would go into the Student Union,  set up a little table, and you   d fill this out, this card said,    We demand  our majority rights. If we   re old enough to go to Vietnam, we   re old  enough to drink.    Then, I   d take that big group, and I   d send them off to  the State Capitol. For that, they   d pay us in cases of beer and in kegs.  (Laughs) So, in fact, that year   that was about    72, I believe. That year  at the Homecoming parade, I was a giant Coors can. (Laughter)  How did you get this idea? Had they made it for you?  They had a big thing that was actually a display. It was a big Coors can  that stood up probably about four feet. We rigged arm straps in it, put  little holes in the front of that can where I could see out of it, and then I  walked the whole route as a Coors can.  Now, that   s about a two-mile route.  Yes, it was. We started downtown, went all the way.  Pretty hot and sweaty under there? (Laughs)  I don   t remember. When you   re a kid, you don   t think about stuff like  that.  So, what possessed you to do that? Did they ask you if you   d do that?  No, that was my idea.  Oh, okay.  Yes. They were certainly behind it.  So, you   re waving at the crowd and walking down the street?  Yes, they   ve got holes so my arms could get out of the little can, you  know.  Were your efforts rewarded?  No. No, we never overturned it, so     I guess the reward is you got your cases of beer, right?  Oh yes, absolutely  Yes.  19  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  So, you were pretty popular in the fraternity? Lots of friends?  Very popular, yes. (Laughter)  Streakers Night went on for a few years after you graduated?  It went on for, I   d say, over a decade because I remember hearing about  it in Houston, like I say, on some type of national news. It might have  gone into the late    80s, in fact.  Are there any other favorite memories of Streakers Night that you  recall?  No. It   s hard to recall a whole lot of it. (Laughs) I was amongst them,  not only in body, but I was amongst them in spirit, too. There were a lot  of spirits. (Laughs)  All right. Well, Bill, other than the activities we talked about, you were  engaged and active in your fraternity. Were there other organizations or  activities you were involved in?  Well, I was actively involved in the fraternity. I was Rush Chairman and  held some other offices, but I actually ran for Student Senate or was  getting ready to run, and then realized that was probably more than I  could handle. With some of the loads I had, it was just too much  responsibility.  So, what were some others?  So, David Trojan and this other girl ended up with it. (Laughs) I  remember Trojan was so nervous because he knew this guy would beat  him and this girl for president and vice president because of popularity.  So, they kind of talked us out of running, and they ended up getting  elected.  What are some other favorite memories of your undergraduate  experience, your times on the OSU campus, that stand out in your mind?  Well, there are just so many. I mean, a lot of them we don   t want to go  into, (Laughs) I   ll assure you. It was pretty fun. It really was. I guess I   d  have to say, from a social standpoint, those Thursday nights. Now, the  Gray Fox, which is a bookstore now, across from Joe   s, that was  Wednesday nights. They had picked out their own night, and that was  quite a place because it was two-story, and it was a wild place in those  days. I don   t know that I ever saw this, but Playboy magazine had this as  20  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  one of the top ten party schools in the United States. They would rate  party schools, and OSU was always ranked in there.  What year did you graduate, Bill?  Seventy-four.  Can you share briefly your professional career after you graduated?  I had gone to Tulsa, got married, and was pursuing a career there and  found nothing but a waiter   s job. I was waiting tables, and a gentleman  came who I was waiting on. He thought I was pretty sharp, I guess, and  asked me to come in to interview with him there in Tulsa. He had a  company that was involved in what they call process controls, which  were, basically   it was electrical engineering, of all things, instrumental  electrical engineering. He wanted me to transfer to Houston (he had a  division down there) to sell what   s called process instrumentation, or  control systems, for refineries in petrochemical plants. So, I went from a  radio and TV major directly into electrical engineering and stayed in that  for fifteen years. I was very successful in that, selling flow systems,  control systems, and pressure systems for these big petrochemical plants  that are all along the Gulf Coast.  I kind of started to get burned out on that. I figured I had inhaled so  many carcinogens down there that I probably wasn   t long for the world  if I didn   t get out of there. I had run into a friend who was in the medical  industry, and he got me an interview with Olympus, the camera people,  but they also have a medical instruments division. I went to work for  them in their optical division, which was microscopes and image  analysis systems for medical research and for clinical and reference  laboratories. That was very interesting. In that career, I got involved in  some things that only people dream about being around.  I had gotten involved through Baylor College of Medicine in Houston  with Dr. Thomas Caskey, who was one of the three researchers who did  the genome mapping of the body. We got involved in that. That was  extremely interesting. I got involved in University of Houston with the  professor there that did the first successful superconductivity  experiments and trained a NASA shuttle crew, one time, on a Saturday.  They were going on a mission and trained them how to use some  instruments one day for their astronauts to utilize some of our equipment  in the space shuttle.  What kind of instruments? Could you describe those?  Those were actually some microscopes that they were going to use up  21  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  there. I went through and showed them how to set that thing up, up  there, for maximum resolution. It was going as a part of their  experiments that they were going to be conducting, and I was in with a  lady at University of Texas. She wanted to see how cartilage grew in a  vacuum in outer space, and that was part of her experiment. They had to  use a microscope up there for part of this, and so I had four of their  payload specialists     Do you remember any of the names of the astronauts?  I don   t remember, and, probably, they weren   t the guys that were flying.  I guess they call them payload specialists. I got involved with NASA  when they were having trouble with the tiles on those. If you remember,  they had them falling off. They were wanting to measure the  temperatures of those tiles. They brought me in, and the problem was  there were no thermocouples, which are a temperature measuring device  that could take the heat that they needed to subject those to, that could  measure that high. You had to have dissimilar metals in these  thermocouples. We developed one out of rhodium and iridium that were  the two dissimilar metals that were enough to take the high temperatures  to be able to subject this thing to the test.  I got involved in unbelievable things like that, constantly, by just selling  these products and worked with Texas Instruments on the development  of semiconductors. Every day it was the most interesting job I had ever  had. Because it was so interesting, and there was so much stuff that you  did that was such ground-breaking research and technology, there was  never a dull day. It was constantly something that was just right on the  cutting edge of technology, so I felt very privileged to have been a part  of that, and I spent ten years there.  Do you ever really wonder, Bill, how you went from a broadcast  journalism major to this? Obviously, you must have been pretty quick on  the uptake to figure these things out. It   s a whole different scientific field  for you.  Totally. They were both totally scientific fields.  Did you have to do a lot of study and research?  No, I just caught on naturally to all of it. I don   t know. My father was  not an engineer, but he had an engineering mind. He basically was an  engineer with the Air Force. I guess I just picked up that mentality. My  uncle had been the head of the Math Department at OU, my cousin was  the head of the Architectural Department, so I guess I got some of those  genes. I don   t know. It just came natural. All of it just seemed to come  22  natural, but all of it was always so interesting to me. I have ADD,   Attention Deficit Disorder  and some might say ADHD  Attention  Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder  sometimes, but for me to really get into  something, it has to be interesting for me to be able to focus in on it.  Anyway, through that, I went to work for another company that was  called Owen Healthcare in Houston, and they owned about four hundred  hospital pharmacies nationwide. I was in what was called the Meditrol  division. What we did was, we had dispensing units that we had  developed that dispensed all your medications on the floors of hospitals.  We had a competitor called Pyxis out of California that was owned by  Cardinal Health, and they had a majority of the market share, but we  developed something that was very unique. We were starting to enter the  market with that, and Cardinal decided to come in and buy us out. What  they were really wanting was the four hundred pharmacies because that  just gave them much more of a customer base, but they also inherited the  Meditrol division and they gave us a severance package for a year, and  I   d only been there a year. I mean, what a windfall  I said,    If you   re  ever going to do it, you need to do it now.     I started off deciding to go into business for myself. I was going to get  several lines of medical equipment and become an independent medical  sales rep selling diagnostic equipment. I started picking up a few lines  here and there, and one line I picked up was a hematology analyzer, a  blood analyzer for blood counts. They also had contracted with a  company that made these little assays that were drug tests that you just  dipped in urine and it would tell what drug that someone was on. They  were 99.9 percent accurate, and they were only FDA approved for  professional use, in other words, at a clinic or at a doctor hospital  setting. So, you couldn   t sell them directly to the public. I got a hold of  that, got a hold of the guy who developed the assay out of Redwood  City, California, went out there, met with him, and we began to  manufacture those ourselves.  I went through the process with the FDA to get what   s called a 510(k),  which is FDA approval for over-the-counter, and we were the first to get  over-the-counter approval for those drug tests. My first customer was  Randalls Supermarkets in Houston who had pharmacies within their  supermarkets. Then I windfell real well on that one because Safeway  came and bought out Randalls, which had 135 stores. Their pharmacy  buyer incorporated it throughout all the Safeways nationwide. Then, we  ended up getting into about four or five hundred Wal-Marts. It just took  off, and we packaged it. It was a beautiful package. It was called the  Peace of Mind Home Drug Test. Then I sold that off to a group out of  Boise, Idaho, and then they in turn sold it to a bigger company. Now,  there   s really only about one test on the market. It   s all kind of  23  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  consolidated.  So, without a way to figure, that must have been a pretty significant  financial milestone in your life when you sold off the company.  Yes, it was. It was very interesting to have gotten the first over-the-counter  approval for that, and now it   s a very standard product on the  market. You can find it anywhere in Stillwater. I was in the pharmacy  yesterday, and, basically, there was the same product, sitting right there  on the shelf.  So, at this point in your life, you   re financially independent?  Well, somewhat, but I had decided to reinvest almost everything back  into a company that I had. At that time, it was called Southwest  Diagnostics, and we were doing neurological diagnostics for things like  carpal tunnel and the detection of what   s called radiculopathy, which is  radiating pain that generates from the spine. I   d come up with an idea  that these family practice and primary care physicians, internal  medicine, orthopedic surgeons, and pain management, that they were  referring all their patients out to specialists, like neurologists, to do these  tests. One of the biggest problems they had was when a primary care  doctor referred to a specialist, a lot of times they lost their patients. They  were just aggravated about that because the cardiologists or neurologists,  whatever the specialist was, would try to grab and capture that patient  and not return them back to primary care. He would lose that revenue.  By going into the office of a primary care doctor and offering these tests  in the office, it provided value. It was a value-added service for him  because it became a one-stop shop for diagnostics. So, he kind of had a  leg up on his competitive family practice doctors in the area because he  could provide all this testing that was convenient and in a familiar  environment for his patients. We began to go into, then, cardiovascular  diagnostics and autonomic neuropathy and set up just a whole mobile  diagnostic system to go into these offices. The doctors   we were able to  legally reimburse them so that they were actually making money off of  this service, as well as retaining their patients. So, it was a win-win, and  we started that in Houston and moved up all over Texas with that. That   s  how I ended up getting into the diabetes business.  Through study of neurology, I began to notice that there was a lot of  lower neuropathy that was being tested on the lower extremities by the  primary care docs. I went and talked to one, and I said,    What   s all this  lower testing that you   re doing?    He says,    Half of my patients are  diabetic.    I said,    Gee, whiz  You   ve got to be kidding     So, I began to  research and found out that 80 percent of all diabetics were treated by,  24  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  basically, family practice because there were just so many of them.  There   s currently 37 percent of the Texas population that   s diabetic. I  would hate to say what the percentage is of Oklahoma. But by that, I  began to realize and talk to diabetics that there was no continuity of care  for diabetes anywhere worldwide, that it was very fragmented. In order  for a diabetic to get effective treatment, he had to go to a multitude of  sources for the diagnostics, for specialties, and they became very  frustrated.  That   s really the reason there   s no compliance in diabetes is because  there   s no continuity of care. You can   t go somewhere and get the care  all in one place, and a lot of the elderly just give up.    I don   t have the  time to be running around.    They just kind of throw in the towel. I  decided,    Let   s look at building a comprehensive continuity of care  system.    I came up and talked to Burns Hargis here, and then he put me  in touch with the OSU Medical School in Tulsa. We began to create a  continuity of care comprehensive center that we called Diacare Centers.  We   re putting the first one in. It opens October 15 in Cleveland,  Oklahoma, of all places. You would think that would be strange, but  their demographics are perfect for it. We joined with the Cleveland Area  Hospital there. Cleveland, Oklahoma, is going to be the only place in the  world that has continuity of care for diabetes. We have some very  cutting-edge technology that can actually stop and reverse diabetes.  We   re the only company in the world that can effectively provide this  technology.  What an interesting and fascinating career you   ve built.  And that came from just an old OSU party boy, which is amazing.  (Laughter) All my old Lambda Chi buddies, the only thing that ever  saved us from being last in grade point average was the fraternity. Every  one of us guys, we all will meet up here tomorrow. We play Washington  State, the first game. We   ll all meet up at our tailgate over there, and  every one of those guys is highly successful. (Laughter)  What are some examples, I mean, without using any names?  Well, Lon Bair. Lon Bair is a dentist up in Ponca City. He has been very  successful in dentistry the last thirty-five years. Jim Miller and Richard  Carrington have a big mortgage company out of Tulsa, Oklahoma City,  and Dallas. Gosh, I   m just trying to think of all the guys that come. The  Allert brothers  Dave and Doug  will be there. One of them owns a big  company out of Tulsa that is what I started out in, process  instrumentation with petrochemical industries. His brother is a scratch  golfer and very successful. I am amazed  Like Jim Hess of the OSU  Medical School said, all those buildings on the OSU campus where you  25  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  see those names are C students. (Laughter) I believe that.  Bill, kind of turning a different direction, you remain closely connected  to Oklahoma State University and to the Alumni Association. You   ve  been an officer in the Association and served in Houston, were president  of the Houston chapter, and you were active in the Dallas chapter.  Yes, still am today.  And served on the national board of directors for several years in the  Alumni Association.  Back on it again.  From your perspective, how important is a strong Alumni Association at  Oklahoma State?  It   s very important. It is the most important segment of this university  after you graduate. I was always just a little bit aggravated that we were  treated somewhat as a stepchild sometimes, when in reality, the Alumni  Association is that connection between the student after they come out  and after they graduate and coming back in to be a part of the university.  So many times I think that it   s been other departments or other  bureaucracies in here that it   s almost been like the tail wagging the dog.  The Alumni Association was supposed to be responsible for keeping this  connection so that not only would they have that connection of the  loyalty, but also for financial support in donations. So much of the time  it   s been where, I   d have to say, the Foundation (and I   ve got a little bit  of a burr under my saddle about this) has run the show too many times,  and we   ve felt like a stepchild, especially back when I was a board  member fifteen years ago.  At that time, we had a great president by the name of Jerry Gill who had  the foresight to say,    Let   s be self-funding. Let   s endow ourselves.    For  that, I think that he was probably the most monumental figure in this  university, as far as I   m concerned, because he had the foresight to say,     Okay, if we   re not going to get the support that we need, let   s self-support.     I   ll never forget, I think the first  150,000 was Bill Harrison  and, oh, I was so impressed when he came up with that. At that time, I  wasn   t really in the financial position to put money into it, but I am now,  and I do give directly to the Alumni Association because I know how  important it is, as far as the connections and getting involvement back  from the graduates.  Bill, in your opinion, what Alumni Association programs and services  have been most successful and effective during your leadership tenure?  26  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Of course, the chapters have been most effective. The Houston chapter  where I was president, when I took over from Kay McKinney back  there, she was a very outstanding president. We had some really good  presidents down there and have had. It was floundering just a little bit,  and I took my marketing skills and decided,    Okay, let   s put those in  place down here.    We built a very nice chapter down there, a very big  chapter. We had extremely heavy involvement. We even endowed a  local scholarship at that time to be able to give a student so much money  a year. We were able to build that up from just a handful to where we   d  have meetings with several hundred and to the point where the deans  actually would even come in.  That is where the connections really are. All politics is local, and so the  chapter program   before I joined the board, Jerry Gill had come up with  this program of bringing in all the chapter presidents for a conference,  and that was huge. Then you were connected back to the university, and  there was a comprehensive program that all of us carried out. Then we  were all on the same page, so that was huge. That was the one biggest  thing that helped me promote Houston into the organization.  To continue to be effective, what areas would the Alumni Association  need to focus on going forward, do you think?  Really, it is about this connection, staying connected and getting a little  bit more power, as far as being able to contact these people more on the  fundraising side of it. Not have their hands tied as much in the  fundraising side. That   s really not our primary goal, but it would  certainly be a help to the university if their hands weren   t tied quite so  hard. But it really is the pursuit of bringing out and finding these  students and finding common interests that will bring them back into the  university and back onto the campus. If they   re not able to come back to  campus, whatever support they can give.  Bill, what are some of your favorite memories of the Alumni Association,  because I know for many years you   ve been strongly engaged? Do you  have some favorite memories, events, times, activities?  Oh, some of them, my most favorite memories were at the board  meetings. I mean, we had quite a group back then. We sat alphabetically,  and Wes Watkins sat up in the corner up there. Somebody would be  giving a speech, and he   d come up with some of the most hilarious little  quips. I would just be falling out. Dr. Kamm, Robert Kamm, who was  past president  of OSU , sat behind me, and he was just a great man. I  didn   t know him when I was here, but I got to know him, and he was a  stand-up guy. I   ll never forget, I   d given a speech on my committee up  27  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  there, and he reached over back behind me. He had this little voice, and  he said,    Bill, I am so proud that young men like you were here during  my tenure as president.    I thought,    Dr. Kamm, you just didn   t know  me.    (Laughter)  He wouldn   t have ever put his hand on your shoulder like that, would  he?  When all my friends found out I was on the board, they said,    They just  don   t know you, do they?    (Laughter)  Bill, how do you feel about the future of Oklahoma State University? Is  it moving in the right direction?  It   s absolutely moving in the right direction. Our student count is up. I  like the regents that are currently on. Calvin Anthony   s a good friend. I  like Calvin. I like his view of the way things should be, and he   s just a  good solid guy. I like the program that Burns Hargis has come up with  as far as trying to endow ourselves here. I think we   re moving in a really  good direction. I like the way that the university is beginning to get real  recognition within the state and in the nation. We were a stepchild for so  much of the time. I don   t feel like we are anymore. I no longer see that. I  don   t see us going anywhere but up.  I   m seeing great programs. I live in Texas. I see great programs in  Texas. I know that one of our alums recently gave ten million dollars for  West Texas students to come, and that would be something that would  take care of their out-of-state tuition fees. It   s things like that I   m  beginning to see us really outreach into other areas. We   ve become very  popular. OSU has become extremely popular in North Texas, and there  are significant percentages out of the Southlake area, Grapevine area,  McKinney area, where I live, that are going to OSU. I   m always  surprised if I have an Oklahoma State shirt if I go to anywhere within  the community, I   ll hear two or three people say their son or daughter is  currently at OSU.  Great.  I see as many Texas tags now in Stillwater as I do Oklahoma tags, I  think.  From your perspective, as a lifelong, active alumnus, what should OSU  retain and continue as it moves forward? What are those qualities?  What are those things it does well that it needs to continue to do?  It is that caring attitude, that non-egotistical attitude that just carries on,  28  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  that high character. We   ve got character. There   s no question. We   ve got  integrity, and we stand by those principles. In the face of when it does us  no good or appears to not be doing us any short-term harm, we maintain  our integrity and character, always.  What ways do you think the university really needs to evolve and to  change in the future, continue to be the cutting edge?  Well, I   m not sure from an academic standpoint. I   m not that involved in  it academically. I think we   ve got some solid programs here, but I think  that we do need to focus more (and I think Burns Hargis is) back on the  business college and just make sure that our academics are up to  extremely high standards. That   s what we   re really all about. I mean,  there   s a lot of extracurricular stuff that goes on, but it really is about  academics, and from what I can see from the various departments, we  really are excelling.  What has kept you connected and so loyal to Oklahoma State  University? Through the years, over thirty-plus years, you   ve put in so  much passion and energy and time and resources. Where does that come  from?  It   s the people. There   s no doubt. I can go up here to the stands, and I   ll  be sitting next to some old guy in overalls. I love that  Then, next to him  is a guy that   s just decked out, and we   re all getting along. We   re all  just   you wouldn   t know any difference whatsoever. Everybody is just  one. Now, coming from Norman, I can tell you it   s not like that. Coming  up here, what was amazing when I was here was you literally, not,  maybe, their name, but literally knew every face. I was amazed by that,  that you literally knew almost all twenty thousand of the kids up here.  You   d see somebody,    Oh, yes, I   ve seen them. I know that person,    and  that was just unheard of. That does not happen down south.  Bill, you   ve got a lot of your life still to live, but     I hope  (Laughs)  This is not like what you want on your obituary but just     I do want Pistol Pete on my tombstone. (Laughs)  How do you hope people remember Bill Dragoo? What do you want  them to remember about you?  Just that I was a fair guy and that I treated everybody equal. I was  always fair with everybody and saw the best in almost everyone. I could  29  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  always find those qualities. There would always be somebody who  would be nay-saying someone, and I   d always find,    Well, yes, but he   s  this or that.    So, as someone who put some positive spin on the world.  That   s what I like so much about this diabetes program. This has a major  impact on the lives of people. It truly, truly will save lives, and is saving  lives and is improving the quality of people   s lives. That means a lot to  me. That is what motivates me.  Bill, you   ve been on the executive team, the committee chair on the  board of the Alumni Association. Why is it so important to a university  to have a strong alumni association?  I keep going back to OU. You see a place there that has very little  alumni organization, and so everything rests around football. That   s  pretty shallow. Here, everything rests around people, and that   s why the  Alumni Association has always drawn me. It   s about the university. It   s  about the camaraderie, the spirit. It truly is connections. Everybody is  connected here, and that   s why the Alumni Association is so important  because there   s so much of the time that people get out of different  universities. I   ve got friends from other universities in Texas, and with  the exception of Texas A M, they don   t have that same connection. It  all rests around sports.  At Oklahoma State, it doesn   t rest around sports. Sure, we like sports,  and we want to have great teams, but there   s more to it when you come  up here. That   s why the Alumni Association has been so important to  OSU is because the people here have a different mentality. They want to  be a part of something, the big picture. They don   t want to be just a  sports community and football team. Over the years, you couldn   t have  really been a sports enthusiast. (Laughs) That   s what I always loved  about OSU. Everybody still showed up, and that tells you a lot.  Bill, looking back, it has probably been twenty years that you   ve been  active in the Alumni Association. What have been some of the key  programs, some of the key issues that they   ve had? You mentioned  funding as one issue that   s been problematic over the years. What other  issues has the Association grappled with that you remember? And I  mean positive as well as challenges.  Yes, gosh. I   m just trying to think what we have grappled with.  You talked about chapter relations and building chapters.  Yes. What we grappled with was getting support all the time. I have to  keep going back to that. It just seemed like we didn   t get the support that  we needed, and when it seemed, in my mind, that that was the focal  30  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  point of the university would be the Alumni Association, we didn   t get  that support and still don   t to this day sometimes. We   re just kind of  seen as this entity that sits over here and hope that we do well. I   m  hoping that Burns sees that differently, and I try to get in his ear about it  as much as possible. I can   t imagine that we   re not seen as the pivotal  organization of the university. I can   t imagine why we   re not because  everything stems from alumni relations. You can be Foundation, you can  be in the Engineering Department, whatever, and that connects some  people, but they still need to be connected to the overall picture. I just  have to go back to that, that    Let   s get more support for the Alumni  Association. Let   s look at what it really does instead of just taking it for  granted.     Bill, you   re reconnected again, in terms of a leadership role in the  Alumni Association. If you could fast forward ten years down the road,  or twenty, what kind of Alumni Association would you like to see?  I   d like to see a self-funding, self-supporting Alumni Association that  doesn   t have to worry about a budget, that has very active involvement  from the alumni out there like people like Robert Walker, who are now  involved in programs trying to provide funding, just administrative  funding, to the Alumni Association. Have more programs like that, that  actually get funding to that organization, so that we can outreach even  more and be able to afford to outreach into the world where our alums  are and beyond. It   s as much about high school relations as well as it is  about recruiting students who will eventually become alumni.  The Alumni Association is always underestimated as to what its value is  to the whole picture. I mean, when it starts out, we   re out there in the  community when these kids are in junior high, starting to bring them in  throughout the whole process. I know Jerry Gill started the program of  the student alumni program, so while they   re here they   re involved.  When they leave, they   re involved. How much more important could an  organization be to an institution?  The Legacy Program.  Yes, Legacy Program, exactly. We have connections for life, the Hire  OSU Grads now, the Orange Door program, which is if you have a  business anywhere in the United States, you can go into that. If you   re in  LA, find out who   s got a restaurant or a bicycle shop or whatever, and  you can deal with an OSU grad. I mean, that   s big-time stuff. That   s  connections. That was Jerry Gill and Larry Shell coming up with some  pretty remarkable ideas that were outside the box, and I   m kind of an  outside-the-box guy, so I appreciate that. (Laughter)  31  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Bill, do you feel comfortable talking about some business ventures?  You   ve talked about, here recently, your diabetes, working with local  physicians and clinics, and you   ve stepped up and dedicated some of  those resources to supporting the Alumni Association.  Right.  Do you feel comfortable talking about that?  Sure. One thing I became very aware of was that the Alumni Association  has done as much for me, much more for me, than I   ve done for them. I  mean, not only have they introduced me to an awful lot of people, when  I was in Houston, and now in Dallas, I made connections which have  been financially to my benefit. What I decided to do was   I began to see  that we didn   t have a lot of resources to do certain things, and there were  other bureaucracies within the universities that seemed to have those  resources, and they were able to connect better to our alumni than we  were. In talking to the current president of the Alumni Association, I  saw they were underfunded, dramatically, and there were so many  programs we couldn   t do that would be so beneficial just because of lack  of funds. One of the things I noticed was that even the medical school  had a suite in the stadium, and we had four fifty-yard-line tickets and  some box seats. The Alumni Association did. The Foundation had two  suites, for goodness    sakes   I got a little bit aggravated about it. I asked Larry Shell, I said,    Why  don   t we have a suite?    He said,    Well, we don   t have the money for a  suite.    So, last year, I just went and got us a suite, and this year I  renewed it again, and it says    OSU Alumni Association    right on that  door. That gives the Alumni Association, now, the ability to bring  people up to the games that they   d like to connect with and stay  connected with, to bring our distinguished alums up into the suites and  give them the respect that they deserve. It was a little embarrassing, to  say the least, to be sitting out in the stands and say,    Well, we   ve got  some       They were good tickets. Don   t get me wrong, but it just  aggravated me.  What I do now is with these Diacare Diabetes Centers, we give a  percentage of our profits back directly to the Alumni Association and  also, probably, to the medical school for some research. That   s what  we   ve done, and then coming up with that program, that inspired people  like Robert Walker and some others to do the same thing with their  companies. So, it was something that just kind of took off, and we   ve  been having meetings lately about that, about getting alumni that are  involved in their own companies to give a portion of that back because  it   s a great idea. You can give the donation to the Alumni Association  32  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  Gill  Dragoo  for your company and satisfy your tax burden. So, gosh  How easy is  that?  No brainer.  Yes, exactly.  Bill, what have we not covered? Is there anything in terms of the  university, your relationship, or the Alumni Association that you   d like  to talk about that we haven   t talked about?  No, I think we   ve pretty much covered it, Jerry. I just want everyone to  get involved in the Alumni Association and see how much fun it really  is. Give it a shot. Now, this is a good story. I found out that about half of  the Athletic Department was not members of the Alumni Association, so  I made Larry give me a whole pack, and I physically walked over there  and made them sign up. Larry Reece, Matt Grantham, all these guys,  made them, while I was standing there, sign up and join the Alumni  Association. (Laughs) So, that   s the involvement we have to get. I just  get aggravated that our own people won   t even join, and so I   m on this  mission. (Laughs)  Bill, you   ve been a great ambassador for Oklahoma State University and  for the Alumni Association.  Well, it   s a great school, Jerry.  You   re a very involved alumni. Thank you for all that you   ve done.  Sure. Well, thank OSU because I would not be sitting here today had I  not attended this school.  -------  -------   
