 Milligan. Today   s date is October 28, 2015. I   m here with  Elaine Smith in between Rattan and Antlers. Are we technically   we   re not  in the city of either one, right?  Smith No.  Milligan Yeah, out in the county. We are interviewing for the Cowboy in Every  County Project with O-STATE Stories, and we   re just going to talk a little  bit about Elaine   s experience at Oklahoma State, growing up in  southeastern Oklahoma, and what she   s been doing since her time at O-State.  Let   s start. Just tell me a little bit about yourself. Where are you  from? Where   d you grow up? Little bit about your family, all that good stuff.  Smith I   m from Rattan. I spent my first eighteen years there. My grandparents  were pioneers, along with two or three other families of Rattan.  Milligan When did they come to Rattan then?  Smith My grandparents came to Oklahoma around 1913. They came to Fort  Towson  Oklahoma  by train from Cass County, Texas, and from Fort  Towson, they came up to Spencerville, Oklahoma, in a covered wagon. My  grandfather owned a general store, two sawmills, and a cotton gin in Rattan.  I have one brother who is an Oklahoma State University graduate, master   s  in mechanical engineering. All four of my children graduated from high  school in Rattan, and I   m very proud to say all four graduated from OSU as  well.  Milligan Tell me a little bit about your kids. When did they graduate, and in what  field, out of curiosity?  Smith My son, Brian, graduated in 1991 with a bachelor   s in business, daughter,  Jane, in 1992 with a fire protection and safety management degree. It was in  the school of engineering. Seth graduated with a master   s in history from  5  OSU. I   m not sure what year it was, around  2005 , perhaps,  2006 . Shea  graduated, and I   m very proud to say, in the top ten business school  graduates in 2002. She is a human resource management graduate.  Milligan That is quite the lineup. (Laughs)  Smith I   m very proud.  Milligan Understandably. Longtime family connections to this area     Smith Yes, yes.  Milligan Tell me a little bit about growing up in Rattan, actually.  Smith A wonderful childhood. I   m sure I did not appreciate it as much as I should  have at the time. I regretted the lack of some opportunities, music, for  example, but growing up in a small school such as Rattan, had lots of  opportunities that I didn   t appreciate. I think maybe one or two of my  children appreciated them far more than I did because when you   re in a  small school like Rattan, you can be involved in everything. You don   t have  to choose one sport. You don   t have to choose one club. You can be an  officer in everything if you have the initiative. Both my daughters were  valedictorians. My second son, as I mentioned earlier to you privately, is an  OSSM  Oklahoma School of Science and Mathematics  graduate. They just  had lots of opportunities that someone in a large school might not have  because of the sheer numbers. It was a very, very, very happy time.  Milligan When you were growing up as well as raising the kids?  Smith Yes, yes, it was. My younger daughter says she had the ideal childhood.  Milligan (Laughs) What were some of the things that you were involved with then  when you were in school in Rattan?  Smith Oh, it was called, at that time, Future Homemakers of America, and I was a  sub-district officer. I played basketball, and we had a really good basketball  team. I might mention that now Rattan High School is so academically  recognized, their softball team has been academic state champions numerous  times.  Milligan Did not know that. What made you go to OSU, and what was your path to  get there?  Smith Well, actually, my brother was probably my path, in a way, my dad, most  definitely. My dad was power use manager for Choctaw Electric  Cooperative, and power use schools, at that time, were held on the campus  6  at OSU. My dad was a great believer in education, my mom as well, and my  dad felt that my brother should go into engineering because of the  employment opportunities. He strongly urged my brother to go into  engineering, which he did, and during my brother   s time at Stillwater, in  fact, our times overlapped, even though he was six years older than I am,  because he got a master   s degree in mechanical engineering. We were there  for a year at the same time, and I just loved the atmosphere. The football  games, the total atmosphere was just wonderful and still is.  Milligan What year did you start there?  Smith I started in the summer of    64, 1964. My mom and dad very wisely thought  that I should become acclimated a little bit by attending summer school, and  I took six hours that first summer. It was a very good decision. Making the  transition from such a small high school to the campus at OSU was made  much easier because I knew where all the buildings were, where all my  classes were going to be, that sort of thing.  Milligan Did you go up there to visit your brother while he was in school before you  went?  Smith Yes, that   s when we went to football games and other activities was when he  was in school.  Milligan How far of a drive   it   s about a three-and-a-half hour drive now, I   m sure.  Smith It was then as well. (Laughs) At that time, went through, had to go through  Atoka  Oklahoma  and Ada  Oklahoma . The Indian Nation Turnpike was  not in place, but it was still just about a three-and-a-half hour drive.  Milligan Got it. Well, maybe tell me a little bit about some of the things that you did  while you were on campus for entertainment. I mean, you went to some of  the sports functions, but are there other things that you did?  Smith Basketball games, of course. Loved the football games. I was not as  involved as I wish I had been now. Hindsight is twenty-twenty, but I was a  dorm officer.  Milligan What dorm did you live in?  Smith I lived in Murray. It was one of the older dorms and is now, I think, the  home of the history department, isn   t it?  Milligan Yes.  7  Smith Loved that dormitory. It was a real community feeling. I liked it a lot, and  one of the things that I did while I was a dorm officer was arrange for  Valerie Colvin to come and speak. We had forum hours where someone  influential around campus would come and tell us about their programs, and  I don   t know if you   re familiar with Valerie Colvin. She is the woman for  whom the Colvin Center is named. She was very inspirational to me because  she was a PE teacher. Remained very active in, even though she had severe  rheumatoid arthritis. She was an amazing woman and very proud the Colvin  Center is named for her.  Milligan How   d you get to know her?  Smith A class, through a class. I took one of her classes and thought,    Wow, what  a woman.     Milligan Explain to me what she did when she came to talk to you all.  Smith I suppose now she   d be referred to as an inspirational speaker. Just  encouraging young women to meet new challenges, take risks, the  productive kind of risks. (Laughter)  Milligan Was there a lot of, I guess, what was the feel of being a woman on campus  in the mid-    60s? Were you still somewhat   protected is not really the word  I   m thinking.  Smith Limited?  Milligan Maybe. (Laughter)  Smith Somewhat, I suppose, but only as much as we allowed ourselves to be. Of  course, it was a time of great transition. I could have been more active in  that direction, and now, looking back, wish I had ventured out more. I   m not  a person that enjoys a lot of change, and going from such a small campus to  such a large one was a lot of change. I think I pretty well stayed on track,  safe, not too adventurous.  Milligan I think you   re referring to the women   s liberation movement that was going  on. Is that what I   m reading?  Smith Yes, and I was frustrated, I think, by the fact that there was certain types of  behavior that was acceptable for men but not acceptable for women, double  standard.  Milligan Do you have an example of what that double standard would be?  8  Smith Probably socially more than any other, an example, it was fine for the guys  to go to Willies or George   s, but a young woman was frowned upon if she  frequented Willies or George   s or even some of the places on the Strip. I  thought that was very unfair. Still do. (Laughter)  Milligan What were some of the differences that struck you, as far as that sort of  thing, when moving from Rattan to Stillwater? Were there things that you  had to adjust to as far as what   I   m trying to think about how to ask that  more articulately. As far as the women being allowed to be a little bit more  adventurous, were there differences in what was expected of you as a young  woman in Rattan versus what you were experiencing in Stillwater?  Smith Somewhat, but not, I don   t think there was a great difference at that time.  We are very southern here in this area, in our thinking, perhaps more so  then. In one particular way, no one ever told me that I could be anything  other than a teacher or a nurse or a mom, and if I were going to be a teacher,  probably not a science teacher. I did start out as a math major and  discovered my sophomore year that I really didn   t have the background. I   d  had a wonderful, wonderful teacher, math teacher, the first two years of high  school. She became ill and did not come back for my junior and senior year,  and I just simply didn   t have the background. That was before the days of  MLRC on campus.  Milligan Math Learning Resource Center.  Smith Yes, yes. I think it was mostly a geographical issue. Women just were  expected to be one of those three, and that was really, those were the only  career opportunities that I knew about.  Milligan Was that expectation felt when you went to Stillwater? When you made it to  campus, did you still feel like that was what you were being pushed or  directed towards?  Smith It was probably my own fault that I stayed in those confines because I didn   t  venture out to see what else was out there. It was probably more my  responsibility rather than the campus responsibility, I think, or advisor   s  responsibility.  Milligan You mentioned that you were a math major.  Smith Yes.  Milligan Tell me a little bit about your choice for that and how your classes went.  Smith Oh, I loved math. Still do and it was easy for me in Algebra I and Algebra  II. Now that   s as far as I really got because of my teacher   s leaving, and we  9  just never did have, we didn   t have a good math teacher after that. I liked  working things out to a logical conclusion. That   s what math is to me, but I  changed my major later on to elementary education and have never been  sorry about that. Then later on I got a master   s degree in reading. That  allowed me to teach language arts in junior high, and that was so much fun.  Milligan Oh, good.  Smith (Laughs)  Milligan Did you change your major to elementary education while you were at  OSU?  Smith No.  Milligan It was later on.  Smith Yes. It was when I went back to school. I left OSU after my sophomore year  and married and had a child and decided when he was about two years old,     Hey, I better, I have the opportunity.    There was a really good school  twenty miles away from where I was living in Kansas, and decided,    I think  this might be a good idea to finish my education.    I went back in elementary  education, and I will say that I loved that, absolutely loved it. Did that for  seventeen years and enjoyed very much having the same vacations and  hours that my children had.  Milligan I want to come back to that in a minute. Back just a little bit more about the,  your two years spent at OSU. Do you remember things that you did  socially? You talked about Willies, for example, and the Strip and maybe not  being the most friendly for unescorted young women, but were there other  things? Were there campus clubs that you were involved with, or were you  still involved, for example, with FFA  Future Farmers of America  or any of  those sorts of     Smith FHA. No, that was for the home economics majors. No, but I was in, I  believe, Young Democrats, as well as, I wonder what the education  association would have been. I can   t remember the title, but I was involved  in Future Educators of America or something like that. That   s not the right  title. I   m going to also go on and say one of the greatest highlights of those  two years was that we beat OU both years. Those were the years of Walt  Garrison and, I think it was Charlie Durkee. I believe that   s the fellow who  kicked the field goal that beat OU. I remember in the Redskin, which was  the yearbook, there was a full-page picture, and it said,    Durkee, Mighty  Durkee     (Laughter) Showed him kicking that field goal.  10  Milligan Let me ask you if you remember the reaction on campus to OSU beating  OU, and I   m thinking about this in the context of today when that sort of  sports triumph happens, it carries on for weeks on campus. Was there any  celebration? Were there things that people did or events that happened or  things that carried over to the Strip or Theta Pond?  Smith Well, the Strip then was not the Strip now. There was the Honk-N-Holler on  the Strip, but yes, there was definitely celebration, great celebrations.  Everybody was outdoors, horns were honking, and both years, we did not  have Monday classes. Classes were cancelled for Monday. That was a time  of great celebration because until the days of Walt Garrison and that group,  OSU had struggled in football. During the time that my brother was in  school, was slim, very slim.  Milligan Basketball was a big sport.  Smith Yes, yes, it was, big sport. I don   t believe that Coach Iba was the coach.  Cannot remember when he retired.  Milligan Yeah, I don   t think it was then. I mean, yeah, I don   t think he was coaching  then.  Smith One very notable thing that happened that   s somewhat of a tragedy, perhaps,  but then very notable because of the achievement, one of the basketball  players was in the laundry, and he put his arm in a dryer to remove some  clothing. His arm was caught and pulled completely off, and his roommate  was there with him and had the presence of mind to wrap that arm in wet  towels. Was immediately flown to Oklahoma City, I believe, and the arm  was reattached. The roommate who had the forethought to wrap the arm  became a doctor.  Milligan Wow. That   s probably a good career choice. (Laughter)  Smith Isn   t that cool?  Milligan Wow. Was that something that was just abuzz on campus?  Smith Yes, yes, yes. One of the players was James King, I remember, but I don   t  think that   s the player whose arm was torn off.  Milligan Oh gosh. Did he go back to playing basketball?  Smith No, no. In fact, I think maybe he was a senior and the season was about  over, maybe even over, but it was amazing, one of the first reattachments of  which I had ever heard.  11  Milligan Wow. That   s pretty crazy. (Laughs)  Smith It was amazing, but yes, huge buzz. Of course the O   Colly was just read  avidly by everyone on campus, and everyone knew where the drops were.  They were there waiting for the O   Colly to be put out, and within minutes,  they were all gone.  Milligan Interesting. Did you know anyone who wrote for the O   Colly?  Smith No, I didn   t. I did not, but it was fun.  Milligan You talked about moving to Kansas. Maybe talk a little bit about, you got  married. Is that correct?  Smith Yes, yes.  Milligan To someone at OSU or     Smith Yes, yes, yes.  Milligan You want to talk a little bit about that?  Smith Not much. (Laughs)  Milligan It   s okay. You met somebody on campus and then you got married in your  early 20s.  Smith Yes, yes. In fact, I was nineteen.  Milligan That would   ve been, yep, your second year. You all moved to Kansas, and  you had a two-year-old when you decided to go to Emporia  State  University .  Smith Yes. Yes.  Milligan How long did you spend in Kansas?  Smith Let   s see. Was it twelve years? Okay. I left OSU in    66. Oh, it was longer  than that. Okay.    66,    80,    66,    76. Oh, let   s see. I was in Kansas seventeen  years, I guess. Yes, I was in Kansas seventeen years before coming back to  this area.  Milligan I think that   s one of the interesting parts of your story is that you came back  to southeastern Oklahoma, which, I think a lot of people, after being gone so  long and living in more urban areas, don   t always come back to places like  12  Antlers and Rattan. Just the size and, like you said, sometimes the amenities.  Maybe talk a little bit about your choice to come back here.  Smith Well, my choice was made partly because my   of my dad   s health. My only  brother has lived in Idaho now for many, many, many years, and it was not  an option for him to come back. My dad was having heart problems, issues.  Also my husband and I were farming, and I was teaching school. That was a  very, very tough time in agriculture.  Milligan What were you farming?  Smith We were farming wheat and   mainly wheat and cattle. There was an  embargo placed on wheat, and there were third, fourth, and fifth generation  farmers who went broke in Kansas. It was a very tough time. My husband  was offered a job researching brucellosis in cattle. Actually, it was the Wes  Watkins movement in southeast Oklahoma. He actually worked for the Kerr  Foundation, and I, fortunately, had that teaching degree.  Milligan You worked for the Kerr Foundation in the   doing research, primarily?  Smith Yes, yes.  Milligan Did you still have cattle, and do you still farm to a certain degree?  Smith Yes. No, we did not. We did not. This is not a farming area. This is a  logging   this is a forestry area. He has always had cattle, and he continued  to have cattle. He had cattle and then worked during the day as a researcher,  brucellosis researcher, and in the evenings or early mornings, he would feed  his own cattle.  Milligan Wow. I   m trying to think how   was that a switch for him to move from, and  you also moved from having to make your living primarily from ranching  and farming to this research area. What would   ve been the shift that  happened?  Smith It was a really big adjustment for both of us, in a way. He welcomed it. For  the most part, he welcomed it because it   s a terrific gamble to be a farmer,  terrific gamble. We had four children by this time, and he was very happy to  be able to have a regular income upon which he could count every month to  help take care of his family. It was an adjustment, somewhat, for me to  come back as well because there   s somewhat of a different lifestyle in  southeastern Oklahoma as opposed to Kansas. Not a great, vast difference.  Both are rural. Both areas where we lived were rural areas. It was not as if  we came back from a large metropolitan area to a country atmosphere again.  13  Milligan Do you remember or can you articulate some of the things you had to get  readjusted to, coming back down here?  Smith A different, perhaps a slower pace of life, somewhat. Other than that, it was  a good adjustment for me in many ways because I had longtime friends and  acquaintances and family here.  Milligan Did your husband have family or any ties to down here?  Smith Not at all. None, and it was the first time other than going to college in  Manhattan that he had lived anywhere other than southeast Kansas within,  say, a 100-mile radius of where he grew up. It was a big adjustment for him  but one that he made quite well.  Milligan What school did you   well, let me back up. I made an assumption, and  that   s probably false. You said that it   s good that you had your education  degree. It   s good you had teaching experience. How did you put that to use  when you came back here?  Smith I went to work teaching second grade in Antlers, and we lived at Rattan, on  the east side of Rattan, at that time. My children all went to school there. It  was very tough for my two older children, especially my son, who was in  high school, very, very difficult.  Milligan He was in high school when you moved from Kansas to here.  Smith Yes, he was going to be a sophomore, and he   d been with the same group of  friends from kindergarten on. It   s really, really tough for him, but he was a  very good athlete and won, I believe, three, his team won three state  championships in baseball while he was in high school. He went on to play  for Oklahoma State University and got to play in Hawaii and in the College  World Series. It worked out quite well.  Milligan (Laughs) Did your other kids   well, you said that they, for the most part,  they enjoyed being in a small area to go to school and, I guess, high school.  Was it easy for you to move to a school like Antlers from where you had  been teaching before?  Smith Yes, it was. I knew or quickly made friends with teachers there, and my  family has been in this area so long, everyone knew my dad. It was not  nearly the adjustment for me that it was, perhaps, for my two older children  and for Rob, although Rob didn   t seem to struggle with it at all. He said it  was actually a great relief not to have to plant winter wheat. (Laughs)  Milligan Bet there   s truth in that. What were some of the things that you   you taught  second grade, but I   m wondering if there were things that you saw that  14  changed, being as you were a teacher for that period of time while you   re in  Kansas and down here in Oklahoma, maybe teaching trends or things that  were easier or harder or lessons that you learned or people that helped you.  How was it being a teacher?  Smith Well, it was great when I taught first grade in Kansas and second grade in  Antlers. It was still great when I started teaching junior high in Rattan, and I  taught junior high there for fifteen years. I retired from Rattan. The biggest  change has been the trend toward so much testing. Far, far too much  pressure put on students and teachers. Teachers, I feel, are now forced to  teach the test, and I think a true teacher wants to teach the child, not the  subject, not the test, but the child. There   s so much that goes into that.  Character, manners, integrity should be the focus, I think.  Milligan Do you feel like when you were doing your training to become a teacher that  you were trained to teach the child?  Smith Oh yeah. I had a fabulous experience. I had a wonderful experience. I got to  do my student teaching in the lab school, and I taught with a Kansas master  teacher. I had a wonderful experience. Her philosophy was you don   t teach  just reading. You don   t teach just writing. You don   t teach just arithmetic.  You teach the whole child, and I think that   s the way teaching should be  approached.  Milligan Do you think they still train teachers with that in mind today? Do you have  any concept?  Smith I   ve been out of the classroom per se, well, actually, only about eight years  because after I retired, then I went to work for Eastern Oklahoma State  University on the ground floor of establishing the Antlers campus and loved  that because I got to see many of my former students. I really am not  familiar enough with teacher training now, but many of the young teachers  that I taught with before I retired said they felt unprepared, unprepared, even  though student teaching is now a full semester rather than just the nine  weeks that it was when I did mine. They just don   t feel ready to face some  of the challenges that they face, and I think that   s because of the change in  world poverty, technology, whatever. That was very much a   of course,  when I started teaching, that first year teaches you far more than you   ve ever  learned in any training program.  Milligan I want to come back to some of your earlier experiences, too, but while  we   re on the topic of current observations, I wonder if you have thoughts.  There   s a lot in the news recently about Oklahoma having to enact these  emergency teacher certifications and that our inability to retain teachers in  this state is an all-time low, and there   s all these things, right, going on. I   m  curious if you have a perspective on what is currently happening with  15  education on the state level or pervasive in the state level in Oklahoma  versus if there are times in the   over the course of the time that you   ve been  a teacher. Is that surprising? Is that new? Is it something that seems  cyclical? I   m just curious.  Smith Not cyclical, no, and frankly, I   m appalled. I am just beyond appalled that  the people who could make a difference in teachers    salaries seem so  indifferent. I wonder where they think they learned to read. I think it is  disgusting. I think it   s a blight on our state, and frankly, I   ll be perfectly  honest and tell you that I told all four of mine,    Over my dead body will you  go into teaching.    Of course I have one now who is going to be a professor,  and he is a very gifted teacher. I   ve watched him in the classroom. He has a  passion, but he knows that his income will not be what it could   ve been. His  bachelor   s is in computer engineering. Had he pursued that with his master   s  and his PhD, he could be earning maybe six figures. It   s just a terrible shame  because teachers spend far more time with children than parents and have  such influence, and the teachers need to be the cream of the crop.  Many bright, young people are choosing other careers or they   re leaving the  state. There   s a school district near Fort Worth, Fort Worth-Arlington   Texas  area, where the starting salary is twenty-thousand dollars a year  more than the starting salary in Oklahoma. I guess I   m a little passionate  about this, but I just think it is such a shame. The wonderful teachers that we  have are the people who are local, who want to live in the community, and  in Pushmataha County  Oklahoma , the schools are the largest employers.  The next employers are a large lumber company, the hospitals, and the  courthouse, and if a person wants to stay in this area, that   s one of the  choices. Fortunately, we have some people of great integrity who are still  going into education.  Milligan Do you think that it   s going to   do you think that they   ll get the support that  they need to be able to have a complete career in that, the way it stands  right now?  Smith That   s difficult to answer. I have friends who are working second and third  jobs because they are teaching couples, and they have children now who are  in college. In order to help their children go to school, they are taking on  second and third jobs. In fact, the teacher friend who gave me such  wonderful advice when my children were going to attend Oklahoma State  University was, at the time, was working at a grocery store after school was  out. He would leave school and go stock shelves in a local grocery store to  help his son. Then when his daughter went to school, the son became an  engineer, and he helped his sister go to school. I don   t know if that answered  your question or not.  16  Milligan Well, it definitely offered the perspective I was looking for. (Laughter) I  think it   s interesting, though, that you have this appreciation for your time  as a teacher, and you can articulate that it   s good that you had a teaching  degree when you decided to come back down here because you knew you  would have a job.  Smith Hopefully, yes.  Milligan On the other hand, did not wish that same experience for your kids.  Smith I realize by doing that I practically guaranteed that my grandchildren would  not be able to live near me. My children wouldn   t be here, but I wanted  them to have choices. I definitely wanted my girls to know (one is an  engineer; the other one is in business), I wanted them to know about the  opportunities of which I was not aware, and that was just probably lack of a  little push and also my tendency to like things to stay the same to avoid  change. (Laughs) Probably as much my fault as anyone else   s.  Milligan Do you think that your daughters have the same tendency to be afraid of  change that you did?  Smith Oh, no, no, no. Definitely not the younger one, no. She and her husband  packed up (he   s an attorney), they packed up and went to Germany for two  years, backpacked all over Europe. No, they are far more adventurous than I  am.  Milligan It sounds like they had a good, or at least your kids had good support or  good encouragement for that.  Smith I tried. We tried. We tried.  Milligan Well, let   s talk a little bit about your   you said you went back and got your  master   s in reading?  Smith Yes.  Milligan Is that a reading specialist?  Smith Yes, yes.  Milligan Then moved to junior high. What were some of the differences between  teaching in the elementary school and the junior high?  Smith Not nearly as much as you would think.  Milligan Really?  17  Smith Really. I   m glad I was a little older when I started teaching junior high. I   m  not sure I would have wanted to begin there as a twenty-two-year-old. Very,  very, very similar experiences, but junior high students are just as needy in  their own way as little ones are. They need structure. They need support.  They need to know you   re in their corner. They need to know they   ve got a  champion. The needs may be in a little different parameters, but they   re still  very, very needy.  Milligan I think that   s an interesting observation. I could see how that   s true. I   ve just  never thought about it in those terms.  Smith Oh, they   re wonderful. They are so wonderful. If they   re allowed to be  creative and allowed to speak their minds in a respectful way, oh, there   s so  much to be learned from them.  Milligan What was the difference, if any, from teaching in the Antlers school system  and the Rattan school system?  Smith Actually not a lot of differences. Both are rural, and the children were very  much the same. Of course, when I went back to Rattan, I was teaching with  old friends. It was very comfortable, very, very comfortable going back to  Rattan, but then I also did feel, I felt that I was observed and on trial a little  bit. Really, in all three places that I taught, the first year, you   re observed to,     Is she going to be a friend? Is she going to have methods that are different  than ours?    that sort of thing. Good experiences all three places.  Milligan That   s a peer observation, then?  Smith Yes, and students, too, but now, you wouldn   t have that in the primary  grades, first and second grade, the way you would in junior high.  Fortunately, I had a great mentor and friend in junior high that I was able to  emulate, but I still knew that all children love to be smiled at. (Laughs)  Milligan You   re very good at that. (Laughs)  Smith Well, thank you.  Milligan I can understand how that would be true. How long did you teach altogether  before you retired?  Smith Thirty-two years.  Milligan You would have an opinion about teaching then.  Smith (Laughs) Yes.  18  Milligan You mentioned that you had, you were involved on the ground floor to get  the Eastern campus here in Antlers. Do you want to talk a little bit about  that?  Smith Oh, I   d love to talk about that. We are very fortunate to have, as a friend and  neighbor, Dr. Bill Hill, who is an Antlers graduate and former president of  Eastern. Bill and I have been friends since I was at OSU. He was in graduate  school when I was an undergrad, and I met his wife years and years ago.  Then my dad was on the board of the regents at Eastern when Bill became  president. Bill and Representative R. C. Pruett worked together to bring  classes from Eastern out to the technology campus. That was in 2006. I  began working for them in July of 2006, I believe, and worked for three-and-  a-half years, and Bill   s wife, Anna Vee and I were coworkers. It   s just a  fabulous program because there are many people here who are unemployed  because of lack of education. They don   t think they can afford to go to  college. It   s a very friendly atmosphere, small class size. We are fortunate to  have wonderful teachers. Steve Smallwood teaches speech, and I might add  that his class, about an hour after enrollment opens, his class is full. That   s  how good he is.  Milligan That   s one of your friends, your longtime friends from Rattan?  Smith Yes, yes, yes. His whole family are friends of mine. We just began that  summer, and I can   t remember exactly. We had a history class and an  English class, a math class, a computer class. I think we had poli-sci, well,  not poli-sci. It was criminal justice, I believe it   s called now. We had local  instructors, as well as a couple from the campus at Eastern came down and  taught classes, and it has boomed. They have become an official campus  now.  Milligan Do they have their own building now?  Smith No, they don   t have their own building, although Eastern owns a building  across the street from the technology center. The technology campus had  room, and it   s been a win-win for them and for Eastern and for our students.  There are many, many, many concurrent students, which is a fantastic  program, in my opinion. Lots and lots of our young people are able to start  their freshman year as a second-semester freshman.  Milligan Concurrent meaning they   re in high school and they can take college-credit  courses at the same time.  Smith Yes, and as a senior, the tuition is paid by the state. They do not have to pay  tuition. When I began, it was both junior and senior year tuition paid. Later  on, I guess as funding dwindled, now just students who are seniors have  19  their tuition paid, but, for example, if they are taking English comp, it  receives high school credit as well as college credit.  Milligan That   s interesting. Is that a fairly new thing?  Smith Not to my knowledge. That   s the way it was when we began in 2006.  Milligan That   s a great idea.  Smith Fantastic idea.  Milligan What program through the state pays for that? Do you know?  Smith No, I don   t. They just talk about the regents for higher education are paying  the tuition.  Milligan Do you think that that translates to benefits for the overall community in the  county?  Smith Yes. I definitely do. Maybe not as much financially initially, even though,  because the teachers who are teaching those classes are not paid very well,  but it   s a little bit more money in their pocket to maybe be spent in the  community. In the long term, those young people find out,    Hey, I can do  this. I can go to college. I can. I can make the grades. I can do this.    They   re  encouraged to go on to Oklahoma State University or Southeastern or  Eastern and then transfer to Oklahoma State University. They find out that  they gain confidence that they can have a career that will contribute to  society and the economy as well.  Milligan If they want to finish their associate   s, they still have to go to Wilburton  to   .  Smith Actually, with online classes and maybe a little commuting down to Idabel   Oklahoma  or even up to McAlester  Oklahoma  where there are more  classes offered, they can obtain an associate   s degree. You have to be very  creative and take some online classes, but it can be done. Most ordinarily,  they will go to Eastern or Carl Albert  State College  to obtain an associate   s  degree if that   s the goal, even over to Tishomingo  Oklahoma .  Milligan Do you think that that leaves a lot of your young folks the opportunity to  stay in the area if they choose to?  Smith I do. For example, I just thought of one young woman, very bright young  woman who is now a physical therapy assistant, and she is back. Just bought  a home. Her little boy is in school at Rattan. She is working for a business in  20  Hugo  Oklahoma  and is able to live where she wanted to live, pay taxes,  and be a contributing member of the community. That was a win-win.  Milligan What are some of the things that have kept you here this long, way after  your children have graduated and moved away and long after you needed to  take care of your dad, I   m assuming?  Smith Friends. Friends, community, church, and my husband   s still working. He   s  still a Farm Bureau agent and a rancher, but friends would be a big part of  that. It   s a low-income or a low-expense-type place to live. Cost of living is  very reasonable here, and we   ve seen a great influx of retired people moving  into this area because of the cost of living.  Milligan Where are they moving from? Do you have an idea?  Smith Metropolitan areas. We have wonderful, a wonderful couple in our church  that came from Houston. Another one came from  Oklahoma  City. Since  my husband is in the insurance business, he insures homes for people. Two  new homes being built south of here. People from Dallas are retiring here.  People love the mountains, and they   re retiring from metropolitan areas for  peace and quiet.  Milligan Do you still have ties to OSU?  Smith Perhaps not as strong as I once did. Still like to go to football games. Love  to go and see the changes on campus, which are absolutely amazing. Of  course, I   m a life alum. Even though I didn   t graduate there, one of the first  things I did when I could afford it was buy a lifetime membership for both  me and my K-State husband. (Laughs) I have dear, dear friends here who  are also really strong alums. As a matter of fact, he   s on the alumni board.  For about ten years, I was a member of the Pushmataha County alumni  association. Unfortunately, we are now defunct. We could get people to  contribute, but we could not get, even though there are many wonderful  OSU alums, we couldn   t get them to help with our activities. We, for several  years, honored the top 10 percent and sometimes even 20 percent of the  sophomore class with a hot dog feed, and Pistol Pete came down. The  alumni office was just great in helping us with that, but there were about  three of us working it. A couple of years ago, we just said   we gave  scholarships as well. I don   t know if you knew that or not, but we, for  several years, gave numerous scholarships. In fact, Sarah Jane Smallwood  was our first recipient.  Milligan I see, and Sarah Jane Smallwood, you were telling me, is working really  closely, maybe is the liaison for the Promise Zone area, with Obama   s  Promise Zone area in southeastern Oklahoma through the Choctaw nation.  21  Smith Yes, and now working on her PhD at OSU.  Milligan Right, who I will be calling to make friends with. Sounds very interesting.  Smith Great. She is amazing.  Milligan If you   re defunct, I guess you   re not, you all were doing fundraisers, it  sounds like, and those were going towards scholarships. Was that a round  up like one of the, they have these Cowboy Round Up   s that happen around  the state. It wasn   t even an official     Smith No. No, no. Actually, OSU will pay for two mailings a year, and we just  simply sent out a letter asking for donations. We have generous alums,  generous with their money, not so much with their time. (Laughs)  Milligan Got it. Do you all still do scholarships with that funding, though?  Smith No, no. We gave the last of it away two years ago, last of our money away  two years ago in a scholarship.  Milligan Well, you never know. A new wave of people may move down here and pick  it back up.  Smith That would be lovely, would be lovely.  Milligan How often do you get up to Stillwater for games now?  Smith Now that we don   t have any children, they   re probably only once a year. For  a while, before the advent of grandchildren, we were going three or four  games a year. Now that we have grandchildren in Dallas, our weekends  were spent in that direction. (Laughter)  Milligan That   s football, right?  Smith Yes.  Milligan Maybe it   s just the topic we   re interviewing, but are you as enthusiastic an  alum for Emporia as you are for OSU?  Smith Not at all.  Milligan Really?  Smith No, no, and I think that   s because it was a different time in my life. I didn   t  live on campus. I was a non-traditional student. Had a child. I didn   t get  involved in anything except the Student Education Association. That was  22  the only thing I belonged to, and I never went to any activities other than a  few concerts or that sort of thing on campus, maybe a production or two,  theatre production or two. Didn   t live in Emporia  Kansas . Lived about  twenty miles away in a small town, and I just never had the connection at all  with Emporia. I   m very, very thankful to them for preparing me to be a  teacher. Fantastic school of education there. They were, at one point,   Kansas  State Teachers College just like Southeastern was a teachers  college. They have a fantastic education program, but there was just never  the connection. It could be it has a lot to do with the atmosphere, and I think  that was how I was   I couldn   t just start an O-Club the way Steve  Smallwood did at North Lamar  Independent School District . I couldn   t do  that at Rattan, but I could tell my students, my junior high students, that they  were going to be treated at OSU just the way I treated them in the  classroom. Shea would walk across the campus.  Yes, she was president of Mortar Board and very active in lots of activities,  but President Halligan would, they would run into each other. He would,     Hi, Shea. How are you doing?    That   s a wonderful experience. None of my  children that ever attended OSU were ever just a number. They were always  known by their names, and that   s so important, so very important. The  recruiting office, high school and college relations office, does a fantastic  job at Oklahoma State. I was able to tell my students, because of personal  experience of my own children and I had a scholarship to go to OSU,    There  are scholarships available. If you want to go to school up there, I   ll help you  find them.    I just feel that instead of Oklahoma State saying,    Oh, it   s a  privilege for you to come here,    yes, they did say that, but they also said,     We want you here.    It   s definitely a school for the students from small,  rural schools. Many of Shea   s friends were from western Oklahoma when  perhaps they only had twelve in their graduating classes. All of my children  just felt at home immediately, and I did as well. I think that   s why it wasn   t  such a big adjustment.  Milligan I think that   s true. I think the campus   .  Smith Very welcoming. They just bend over backwards to help the students find  ways to go to school, financially and mentally as well. (Laughs)  Milligan Well, I think I   m done with all the topics I had. Is there anything else that  you wanted to talk about or share?  Smith Oh, I am just so thankful for the opportunities that my children have had to  be adventurous, to meet challenges. My daughter is a minority in her field,  and doors have always opened for her, not because she   s a minority, not  because she   s a woman, because she has, the one that   s in the safety field,  the school is recognized as one of the top schools, if not the top school in the  23  nation. I   m just very, very thrilled that they all chose Oklahoma State. Not  that they had a lot of choice in the matter. (Laughs)  Milligan No, I saw the orange in your yard.  Smith Yes.  Milligan (Laughs) Well, thank you very much for your time.  Smith You   re welcome. You   re welcome. It   s been my pleasure.  Milligan Oh, fantastic. Mine more, I think.  Smith I doubt it. (Laughs)  -------  -------   
