 Gill. Today is April 18, 2009  and we are  here on the  Oklahoma State University campus interviewing Joel Horlen, who  played on the 1959 NCAA Championship baseball team at Oklahoma  State. This interview is  part of  the O-STATE Stories Oral History  Project, which is part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program.  Mr. Horlen, it   s sure good to have you back at Oklahoma State and I  understand you guys are back for a fifty year reunion of your  championship season.  That is correct, and it   s been a great time.  Is it pretty special to get back with all the guys?  Yeah, it is because I haven   t seen them in years. I mean, since we got  back from Omaha, I guess.  So some of them you haven   t seen for fifty years then.  Right.  Have they had some reunions before this?  I think so. I remember I was playing professional ball at the tenth year  and the fiftieth year is the first one I   ve heard about.  That   s great. I want to ask you some questions here in a little bit about  the season, the championship season and year, but first of all, could you  go back and tell us a little bit about your background, where you grew  up, about your family, some of your early life?  I was born and raised in San Antonio, Texas. From the time I was six or  seven years old I had a baseball and a bat, I remember that. I had a  5  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  younger brother, two years younger, and we   d play ball out in the street.  It seems like when football season came around we had a football and a  helmet and everything, I think. Actually, when we were young, before  eleven or twelve years old, we played football, we played basketball,  and we played baseball all year round.  Of course, in San Antonio you could play outdoors year round, couldn   t  you?  Yeah, just about. A few bad days.  In your high school sports career, did you participate in all those sports  in high school?  I played football, basketball, golf. We did not have baseball. We had an  American Legion program that started after school was out and I played  American Legion baseball.  Is there a story about how you found out about Oklahoma State  University, how you got here?  Well, one of the guys I played baseball with (YMCA baseball and  PONY league baseball) was Ben Bancroft and his father came to school  up here way back when, I think    29 or    30, somewhere like that. Both  Ben and I were looking for a place in college to play baseball so he  called Toby Greene and Toby Greene actually came to San Antonio to  watch us play.  Watched you play Legion ball?  Well, he came, playing Legion ball plus what we call the Sunday Beer  Leagues down there on Sundays. They got old guys there and young  guys and Ben and I both played in that, on the Sunday League games.  Kind of a local town league?  Yeah. He came down, the game Coach Greene was there I started at  shortstop and played there for about four innings or so and then our  pitcher got in trouble so I went to the mound there and I finished the  game. We ended up winning the game.  Were you primarily a pitcher at that time or were you an infielder and  pitched on the side?  Yeah, well pitching was my main thing. Before American Legion we  had YMCA baseball and I pitched there on one team (that was a midget  6  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  team) then we had a junior team and I played shortstop on it, it was older  kids. I also played PONY league baseball and American Legion at the  same time, after I graduated out of the YMCA league. And our PONY  league baseball team won the World Series of PONY league baseball.  What year was that? I want to say    52.  So what year did you graduate from high school?  I graduated in    55.  Did you have some offers other than Oklahoma State to play college  ball?  No, no.  Had you been on campus at OSU before you first came up that fall?  Never had been here.  What was your first impression, Joel? What did you think?  It was great. I mean the buildings were awesome to me. Of course, I  lived close to the University of Texas and their campus didn   t look like  much from the highway as you went by. That   s the only time, I never  did go visit it or anything. This was really something. And I kind of  wanted to get away a little further from home. I had played baseball for  my dad from the time I was eight years old to twenty-one. (Laughter) I  thought maybe I could see what it was like somewhere else. But I owe  everything to my father because he was a tough man to play for, but I  think it made me the player and the pitcher that I ended up being.  Was he a baseball player himself?  He played amateur ball there in San Antonio.  Speaking of OSU, not thinking about sports for just a minute, but during  your OSU experience at Oklahoma State University, were there some  special memories you have, some things that stand out in your mind of  your time here on campus?  Bancroft and I stayed in Bennett Hall over there and we had a couple of  roommates next door to us and one of them ended up being in Who   s  Who in America, the college division of that. Really a smart guy and I  had a class with him every morning two or three times a week, in the  morning of some government course or something. We studied together  and all the tests were essay type tests in blue books. We took our first  7  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  test and he made an A and I made a B-plus. We studied together for  every test and he made A   s and I made B-plus. (Laughter)  What was your major?  P.E.  Maybe getting ahead of us, because again I want to come back to the  championship year and kind of follow up with you and of course your  pro career, but when you graduated you went right into the pros, you  signed a contract. Did you play three years at OSU or     I played two years here.  And then signed a pro contract with the Chicago White Sox?  Chicago White Sox at about 2 o   clock in the morning after the College  World Series in Omaha.  That   s pretty quick after.  Yeah.  (Laughs) What was that like? Did you start off at Double A level or  where did they assign you?  No, I started, what was it? I guess it was called C ball. I remember  pitching my first game. We wore these old uniforms that they wore back  in the 1820s, and wool, was about a half-inch thick and sleeves hung  down past your elbows and the round hat with the flat tops. It was 105 or  110 degrees there and I   m sweating like a dog out there. About the sixth  inning a guy hits a line drive back at me, hits me right in the forearm of  my right arm. They took me out of the game. That   s what I remember  about my first game.  Your first experience in the pros. (Laughter)  Yeah. Oh and we rode to the ballpark in these old cars, is another thing.  Can you share how you worked your way up to the majors? This  would   ve been in    59?  In    59, yeah it was in June of    59, latter part of June. And I made another  start and went nine innings and won, made another start and made nine  innings but lost and then with one day   s rest I pitched an eleventh,  twelfth, and thirteenth inning of a fourteen inning ball game. With one  8  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  days rest I started again and I went fourteen innings. I left with the score  tied. I never won another game after that, that fourteen innings about  killed me, you know, plus with only one day   s rest there for three days  in a row. My first season I was one in nine, just horrible. I remember the  White Sox were scratching their heads. What   d they sign? (Laughter)  In those days they didn   t have big bonuses so they didn   t have a lot  invested in you, I guess, either.  Well they did. I did get a nice sized bonus when I signed.  Oh, did you?  Yes.  Which is a little unusual isn   t it for that era? To sign a nice bonus?  Yeah, I got a nice bonus from them. It spread out over six years though,  doled it out meagerly. (Laughs)  So your career hopefully went uphill from after     Yeah, I got home and I was home about three weeks and I went to the  very first Florida Instructional League program that they had down in  Florida. The White Sox were based in Sarasota, Florida and they really  monitored your innings there and everything and brought me along a  little more slowly. Let me recuperate from the experience I   d had during  the summer. And things started going really well down there, had good  coaching and everything. I went to my first minor league spring training  down in Hollywood, Florida. We had like seven or eight teams and those  seven or eight teams had spring training on two fields. (Laughter) I think  if you were scheduled to throw batting practice that day you just stood  way out in the outfield and just stood there for four or five hours or so  until your turn to throw. But I got through that alright and actually  advanced up to A ball and I had a winning record there.  Where were you signed that year?  I went to Charleston, South Carolina in the Sally League  South Atlantic  League . The White Sox didn   t have a double A team at that time.  Somehow, some way, I guess they saw something in me and I went to  the major league spring training that next year and got to pitch in some  spring training games and did well. I thought I   d be going back to  Charleston you know, but they sent me out to Triple A in San Diego. I  went out there and pitched every fourth day the whole season, no injury,  no anything and finished second in the league in earned run average and  9  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  won twelve or fourteen games.  This was in 1961?  Yes. No, I only won about eleven games then because August 20, in  there somewhere, they called me up to the big leagues, so I finished in  the big leagues.  Did you get a chance to start a game?  Yeah, I started as soon as I got there and I won my first game and I lost  three, I think it was, after that. Season ends, I go home for six days and  then I catch an airplane to Puerto Rico and I played for  Indios de   Mayag  ez (Mayag  ez Indians) down there and we   re playing against  some major league players, Orlando Cepeda, Roberto Clemente, and  Roman Gomez. The competition was actually stiffer than Triple A, but I  ended up winning sixteen games down there in the winter. I won like  twenty-nine or thirty games for the total year. (Laughter) These guys  now would refuse to do that.  Did you have your arm in a sling after any of those games?  No, I found out earlier that thanks to Herb Score, who was sent down  from the White Sox to San Diego, he got me on a training program of  running and stuff like that and lots of it. From that moment on, my legs  stayed strong. I made sure every year that I did the program that he put  me on and I stayed with it and it   s served me well.  You pitched eleven years for Chicago, is that right? Eleven seasons?  Eleven years for Chicago.  And do you recall what your record was over the span?  I think it was one game under 500. I   m not sure. I never really looked at  my records. I had a real low earned run average, I know. I think my  lifetime was 120, 118, and I lost 119. Had a 3.12 earned run average  lifetime and I had a lot of   I had a no-hitter, came with one out pitching  two no-hitters in a row, which has only been done once.  Wow. Which years was that, do you remember those games?     67.  Against? Do you remember the teams?  10  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  No-hitter was against Detroit in September. We were battling out. There  were four teams battling out to win the American League Pennant at that  time. We ended up third, I think.  Did you ever play in the playoffs with Chicago?  Back then they didn   t have playoffs.  They didn   t? You had to win the pennant to get to the World Series?  Yeah. We finished third, second and third I think one year.  As I recall, Joel, were you runner-up one year for a Cy Young Award?  Yeah, in 1967. I led the league in earned run average, I led the league in  innings pitched, I led the league in four or five other categories,  complete games, of course earned run average, complete games, second  in wins, and a couple other things   oh, batting average against me was  under .200.  Wow. How many games did you win that year?  Won nineteen.  Great year.  Yeah. I pitched the last game of the season for my twentieth, then they  took me out of the game after eight innings, I had a one run lead and we  ended up losing the game.  And lost it?  Lost it so I lost my twentieth.  Cost you your twenty win season. Oh, that hurt. I was trying to recall,  did you play then one year for Oakland?  Yeah, I played in 1972. At the end of spring training the White Sox put  me on waivers. I was a player rep and this was just before the player  strike and the general manager and I kind of got crosswise in a meeting.  He was lying to the players that were in the meeting, guaranteeing them  that they would get five years in to become vested and ten years in to get  their max, and it was completely false. They put me on waivers about  five minutes later. But it takes, I don   t know, thirty-six hours or some  forty-eight hours to clear waivers. Anyway, I go to the meeting in Dallas  and the first guy that comes running over to me was Reggie Jackson,  11  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  who was a player rep for the Oakland A   s and he said,    Joel, what   s  wrong with you?    I said,    Nothing, I think I made the White Sox angry.     And he said,    Well look, Charlie Finley   s been trying to get you all  spring training but the White Sox wouldn   t let you go,    and he says,     Here   s his personal number, call him right now collect.    I called Mr.  Finley up and spoke with him and he says,    Look, the strike is going to  last ten days.    And we hadn   t even met yet. (Laughter) That   s the way  baseball was at that time. And he said,    In five days, we   re meeting at  Oakland. I   ll have a plane ticket at your airport in San Antonio.    That   s  how I joined them.  Great story. Who are some of the players you played with on your White  Sox team in that era?  Nellie Fox, Sherm Lollar, Luis Aparicio, Moose Skowron was there.  That was a great defense to play behind you, wasn   t it?  Yeah, pretty good defenses. Outfield, gosh we had Jim Landis, one of  the great center fielders and Kenny Berry was one of the great  centerfielders there. Floyd Robinson, who I think won the league one  year in hitting. I had some good guys around me.  After you finished your career, did you stay in the major league  organization for a few years?  No, got completely out of it.  So when you ended you career, did you get into another profession then  and finish your career?  Actually, a couple of years before I retired, I   d built a new home in San  Antonio and just after the season I went back home and there was a lot  of brush to burn and everything, so I was out burning that one day and  this guy stops by. He said,    Well, I live caddy corner behind you here.     And he says,    What do you do in the winter time?    I said,    Well, I play  golf and hunt, fish.    He said,    Look, I do the same things whenever I get  a chance. I build houses, spec and custom.    And he said,    A bunch of us  builders meet up at this coffee house every morning. Why don   t you  come up there one morning?    So a couple of days later I went up there  and met all the home builders there and this guy said,    Well, come on  with me. I   ll go check my houses I got going.    He had eight or ten  houses going at a time and so we checked his houses. He went back, he  had a model home, went back to his model home, made calls to  contractors that he needed out for the next day and everything and  materials and all that. And he said,    Well let   s go play golf.    So we went  12  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  up to his Country Club, had a little lunch, played eighteen holes of golf,  I go back home with him, he takes me and drops me off at my house. He  said,    Well I   ll see you in the morning at nine.    So we did the same  thing all winter. He said,    Look, when you come home next year, we   ll  do some building together.    So I did that a number of years until the  housing market got bad there for awhile.  Every winter I was getting a call to coach, but I just was making good  money in them times, better than what coaches were being paid in the  minor leagues, especially. So I put it off until finally, let me think, my  dad had passed away, my mother was still alive but I had a younger  brother, two years younger than me who was a coach there in San  Antonio and was a Southwest Conference basketball official. He  refereed a game down in Arlington, Texas and he had the Baylor and  Texas game at noon the next day on a Saturday in Waco and a guy took  him down in an airplane, was bringing him back and they crashed.  Killed him. I just kind of went nuts after that for awhile, a few months.  Got it back together and finally my marriage ended, met another gal six  months, seven months later and went together for awhile and ended up  getting married. Got this call to coach again with the Mets organization  and talked it over with her and she said,    Well give it a try.    So I did it  and I really, really enjoyed it.  Where did you coach?  I coached with the Mets, I coached in   oh gosh, somewhere in  Tennessee, I coached a couple years in Florida at  Port St. Lucie , just  south of Fort Pierce, where the spring training camp is for the Mets.  Then I went to Double A at Williamsport and they wanted me to go back  to Williamsport the next year and I just didn   t want to. So I resigned and  got another job right away with the Giants and coached with the Giants a  number of years, mostly at Triple A, which I really loved the Triple A  level. Got to teach more than you would in the big leagues, because once  these guys get to the big leagues, they know everything. (Laughter)  Well, let   s go back to the championship year. Did you guys have any  idea that you had that good a ball club in the beginning of the year?  What were the expectations for that team in    59?  I don   t remember any expectations. We had no idea this would happen. I  didn   t. I knew we had some pretty good pitchers here and I knew we had  some guys that could play defense. But, you know, going as far as we  did, I didn   t even think about it. We played each game as it came, I  guess.  Well, one inkling within your pitching was when Dick Soergel was the  13  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  outstanding baseball player in the state of Oklahoma his senior year and  he signed to come up here and he was third in the rotation.  Right.  Kind of gives you an idea what a quality pitching staff you guys had.  Great defense behind you.  Right. Yeah, we had the Andrew brothers and Dobson played third and  Mersch played first and Bancroft played center, I believe it was, and  Jimmy Green played something out there in the outfield. Had a pretty  good defense.  And Ray Bond behind the plate.  Yeah, Ray Bond was the catcher.  And of course Toby Greene the coach. What do you remember about  Coach Greene?  He was grumpy. (Laughter) He didn   t say much, but when he said it you  better be listening. I remember one day we   d been working out  downstairs at Gallagher there in that red clay dust down there and had a  bright sunshiny day and it was at night and it   s mid-60s or so. So we   re  going outside, first time we   d been outside. We   re playing an inner-squad  game and whenever a guy got on base, there were several of us  pitchers that just put shorts on, we didn   t put our sweat suits on or  anything, we put on shorts. And as soon as somebody got on first base,  he   d look over at the pitcher and he   d say,    Go run for him.    He   d put  on to steal first base. (Laughter) So after we did this a couple times, we  ran back to Gallagher here and got some more clothes on. He just  laughed about it.  He was selected as Coach of the Year that year, so he must   ve known his  baseball pretty well.  Yeah.  Well let   s see, you were talking about, a lot of people don   t know now,  pre-season you practiced underneath in the basement of Gallagher Hall  there and it was pretty dusty.  Yeah, they had one batting cage up there and a couple of mounds. And  that dust was flying down there. Boy, you   d come out of there and you   d  blow your nose and it was just all red. (Laughter)  14  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  You guys were ready to get out on the playing field, weren   t you?  Oh man, were we.  So you played a couple years there and you pitched. Do you remember  in that    59 season what your ERA was that year, your win-loss record?  I was nine and one, I think. The only game I lost, the last game of the  season was to Iowa State. The pitcher on the Iowa State team was Bob  Locker who I played with with the White Sox. We got beat one to  nothing.  And I think  that was  the only series OSU lost that year, wasn   t it?  We won the other two games. It was the only game we lost, I think. I   m  not sure, I don   t think we lost.  Joel, I   ve heard some good stories about your travel experiences. This  wasn   t like in a private jet or it wasn   t even in a nice bus, you guys rode  in what, in cars?  In cars. And we got mileage. I had a little station wagon or something  my dad let me have when he got another car. It was enough to fill it up  with gas and I could use the gas to run around here when I was driving  around here.  Did you ever have any mishaps on the road?  No, the only thing, the guys reminded me, we were playing Colorado  and we were coming back from Colorado and we   re driving through  Kansas there and a pheasant ran out in front of me and I swerved over so  I could hit it. (Laughter) That   s the only accident we had all year   Oh mercy. Well you guys obviously had a great year that year. Was  there a series or a particular game or anything that was a turning point  in the season for that team?  You know, I don   t even know what our record was that year. I don   t  think we missed many series. I know we went down to Texas and played  the University of Houston and Rice University and I think we might  have played Sam Houston State, I   m not sure about that. But we really  beat everybody, I mean decisively.  Were there any special moments where you really came together as a  team or pivotal series? I know one player talked about the OU series  where you swept OU as being a pretty key series.  15  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Yeah, we did. That was the year that the only sporting event OU won  against Oklahoma State was the football game. They beat them in golf,  basketball, wrestling, tennis. They beat them in every sport except the  football game that year.  Pretty good feeling, wasn   t it?  Yeah, it was.  Was there for you a particular memorable game you had that year  where you had a really outstanding game or comeback? Does anything  stand out in your mind?  No. I never really dwelt on games very long. You know, you can drive  yourself crazy thinking about games.  I asked Dick Soergel earlier about the starting rotation, the three  pitchers, I said,    Who was the reliever?    And he just kind of laughed  and said you guys didn   t have relief pitchers in those days. Went nine  innings and that was it, huh?  I think so. I think I finished every game I started that year. Only game I  lost was the game with Bob Locker at Iowa State. What was really ironic  about that, there were scouts following him too, which is very  understandable. I didn   t realize how many were following me because I  was just trying to do the best I could and block everything else and just  think about pitching. We played the game and it was a seven inning  game, first game of the double-header. We played it in about ninety  minutes or something like that. It was just an ungodly short game. And  one of the scouts came up to me after the game and he says,    Damn,    he  says,    How long did it take you guys to play this game?    I said,    Not  very long.    He said,    Heck, I thought I had plenty of time. I got here as  early as the fifth inning.    (Laughter)  Well speaking of that, stepping back to your professional career, it was  a little unusual in those days for a real quality athlete, particularly a  pitcher, to come out of college ball, wasn   t it? Primarily they snapped  them up right after high school.  Right.  Was that an advantage do you think or disadvantage for you to have  pitched in college?  I don   t know. It   s just a decision each individual has to make, I think.  It   s easy to make the wrong decision there. I needed, I guess, to mature a  16  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  little bit more and get a little bit bigger and stronger.  Shortened your time in the minors by a couple of years too, didn   t it?  Yeah, probably did. Probably did.  So in the great season, you   re talking about in the playoffs now, my  understanding is there were eight districts, but you had to play best of  three series to get to the College World Series?  Right, yeah. We played Bradley and beat two straight. The one funny  incident happened after that. We stopped off at St. Louis on the way  back and again we   re driving our personal cars with guys in there and I  left one of the Soergels there.  Dick, he was telling me  (Laughter) Left the hotel and each car thought  he was in the other car and left.  Right.  Dick told me about that. He   s still complaining about that.  I thought it was him, I wasn   t sure.  I probably would   ve mentioned but I heard  there were  some other  extracurricular activities on the road in those days too, pretty good  times. We won   t go there.  Yeah, better not.  So the College World Series, it   s a big deal now but was it a big deal in  those days as well?  Yeah.  What was the atmosphere like there?  Well, they didn   t have that many people, but the stands were pretty well  packed. And they had some good teams there.  Do you have some special memories from the College World Series?  What were some highlights for you in that series?  Well, winning two ball games when my left wrist was broken. I never  told Toby, Coach Greene. Never told him about that.  17  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Did you know it was broken?  Yeah, I broke it at home about two days before I came back to school to  practice to go to the World Series.  Byron Bird just taped it up for you and went right on?  He said,    We   ll take care of it.    I   ll leave it at that.  So your two wins, what teams were those against?   Western Michigan  and Penn State.  Were they close games?  Yeah, the Pennsylvania game was. They had a real good pitcher, too. I  think I drove in the winning run in that game myself. I wouldn   t swear to  it though.  Of course, pitchers had to hit in those days. Were you a pretty good  hitter?  I could put the bat on the ball.  I know Dick Soergel was a pretty good hitter as well for a pitcher.  Roy Peterson was, too.  What do you remember about the championship game against Arizona?  Of course, you were, I guess, watching it from the     No, I didn   t get to see much of the game, I was warming up. I warmed  up for four or five innings and I just pitched the night before. (Laughter)  Well let   s see, forgot who started but Dick came in and relieved you,  didn   t he, about the fourth or fifth inning?  Toby Bensinger started the game. He hadn   t pitched in two weeks. He  was all we had left.  It was tough on pitching when you only had three pitchers in those days,  wasn   t it? So you played how many games? You lost the one game  earlier to Arizona, so you played a total of about five ballgames there?  Yeah, we played one more than that, I know.  18  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Was there any particular memorable moment that you have personally  from the College World Series?  I don   t remember that much about them. I remember I went three for six  hitting in two games I played in.  That   s supporting the pitcher, isn   t it?  Yeah.  Did you get an RBI?  Yeah, I did. I think one of them won the game against Pennsylvania   State .  Figured if the team wasn   t going to help you, just help yourself.  (Laughs)  I can   t remember the score of that game  8 to 6 , it was a few runs we  were ahead, I think.  Well Joel, looking back now, how special is it to you to have played on  the only OSU team to win the NCAA Championship in baseball?  It is. It really is. Surprising, but it   s special to us.  Think of all the great Gary Ward teams, Frank Anderson teams now.  Right. It completes my history a little bit because 1952 I played on a  World Championship PONY League team, and then I played on a  College Championship team, and then I played on a Professional  Championship team. So that   s three championship teams I   ve played on.  I   ve been very fortunate.  Never made it to the Big League World Series though, right?  Yeah, we won that.  When was that?  I was with Oakland.  That   s right, I forgot that, I was thinking about the White Sox. Let   s see,  Mr. October, Reggie Jackson.  Yeah, but he didn   t play in the World Series. He got hurt winning the  19  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  playoffs for us. Scored the winning run in the playoffs and messed his  leg up, never played, was on crutches the whole World Series.  Did you win a game in the World Series?  No. I finished up, warmed up a lot of times, but I finished up the sixth  game of the World Series. We were behind and I went in.  So you   re the pitcher of record then for the game?  No, I didn   t lose.  One thing I want to ask about, you watched the guys play a little bit of  the ballgame today, our OSU college team. What in your mind has  changed about college baseball since you played in the late    50s?  To me, it   s the bat. The metal bat. It   s just not baseball.  Makes it a lot tougher on the pitchers, doesn   t it?  Evidently it does. They say it does and I   m sure it does because anything  that makes that much noise is going to hit something further. It   s just  like golf clubs. Some of these new drivers they have out now, they  sound the same as those bats do and the golf ball goes further off of it.  And it   s little more dangerous, too, I would think.  What about the facilities now compared to what you played in?  This is like playing in a major league ball park now.  And a couple of guys were talking about Allie Reynolds Stadium. Of  course it was such an upgrade from when you played, but then they   re  talking about building a new stadium in their future plans.  Right. (Laughter) That   s great, you know. It will definitely bring better  ball players here and better prospects for the coaches here.  Have you followed the baseball program? I mean you   re way down in  San Antonio.  Yeah, I follow it some.  Followed Frank Anderson and the program? You think  he   s doing a   good job with the program?  Yeah. Yeah, I   ve talked to him. I was up here several years ago and I  20  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  Gill  Horlen  talked to him just after he got hired and they had some kind of function  and I came to it. O-Club or something.  I   ve just listened to some of you guys visit and share stories and you talk  about staying connected with OSU. What is it about Oklahoma State  University that   s special to graduates and alumni that they want to come  back and stay engaged?  It   s like a family up here. The facilities are great and I know I enjoy  coming back and seeing people that I played with and were friends with  here. And get to see that red dirt again. (Laughs)  Well Joel, thank you. I didn   t mean to wear you out but this was a lot of  great conversation. Is there anything that we   ve left out that you   d like  to share?  No, the facilities here have got to be tops in the world. I mean they   re  really something. You know, I don   t mind coming along at the wrong  time. A lot of guys say,    God, I wish I was playing now.    I   m glad I  played when I did. I   m happy with my life and have no regrets.  Good to have you back. Congratulations again on your championship  team, your professional Major League career, and it   s good to have you  back on campus.  It   s always good to be here.  -------  -------   
