 Wilson  Mowen  Today is April 15, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU Library. I am in  Santa Fe, New Mexico, in the beautiful home of Dr. John Mowen,  talking with Dr. Mowen today for the Creativity Initiative Series of O-State  Stories. Thank you for having me here.  My pleasure. Thanks for coming.  You have been interviewed by our program before, and we   ve already  asked you about your background, your career, your artwork, some of  these things. It was a pretty creative path that led you to your career, so  if you wouldn   t mind, would you give us a quick overview of how you  started out?  Okay, I   d be glad to. First, I   m from Virginia. I   m a Virginian, went to  the College of William and Mary and then received my bachelor   s in  psychology there. This was during the 1960s and the Vietnam era, so  ended up spending four years as a regular Army officer in the signal  corps, went to Vietnam and so forth. Then applied to grad school,  actually from Vietnam, as a matter of fact. My wife, I cannot tell you  how important she was in helping me navigate that process. Went into a  psychology program, actually a social psychology program at Arizona  State. I was in that program for four years and received my PhD in social  psych.  There were no jobs, and so I did a post-doc in marketing at Arizona  State. From there, I was hired at Oklahoma State University. This would  have been in 1978. I was at OSU for thirty-three years in the Marketing  Department, had a great time, great colleagues, enjoyed it very much.  My field of expertise, if you will, was consumer behavior. I wrote  textbooks in that area and also worked in the area of high stakes decision  making and wrote two different trade books in that. Retired last year, as  5  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  a matter of fact. My wife was also a professor at OSU in accounting. We  retired together and moved to Santa Fe, and that   s where we are now.  It seems like you have a great life here, a beautiful view, and a beautiful  home.  Well, thank you. It   s a big exciting trip, if you will, starting new things.  I   m back doing art again and doing some new things in art, as well.  Involved in the community and making friends. It   s a big exploration, a  big adventure.  When you arrived at OSU in 1978, what was your first position?  I was an assistant professor in the Marketing Department in the College  of Business. That   s where I started out, and they could not get rid of me  for thirty-three years. (Laughter)  What was Stillwater like in 1978?  Well, it was a lot different from what it is now. It has grown a whole lot  since then. One negative thing is that suddenly industries have left, given  the issues of the last ten years. OSU, I think, has changed even more  than Stillwater has, of course, with the huge new stadium and new  buildings and so forth, and then what   s in the future with President  Burns Hargis. OSU looks like it   s taking off. It   s doing well.  Do you feel like the climate has changed a lot over the years at OSU?  The climate has changed. The university has matured. There is a much  greater emphasis on research among the faculty than it was when I first  got there, for example. Students have changed. I   ve noticed that a lot.  They   re much more demanding. They are much more conscious about  grades and that type of thing. It has been a marked change since 1978.  Do you feel like, with them being more conscious about grades, are they  more into learning?  I   ll be very candid here. They   re less interested in learning, in my  opinion. The writing quality and the ability to write has decreased  substantially. Their willingness to study has decreased. Their willingness  to read has decreased. I think we   re seeing a lot of the effects of, frankly,  the technological revolution that   s occurred with Twitter and iPhones  and texting and so forth. The focus on high-quality writing has  decreased a lot.  Well, hopefully that can improve, but I don   t know. (Laughs)  6  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  It   s somewhat sad. It really is, yes.  What year did you become a Regents Professor?  I   m not sure of the exact year. I think it may have been 1997, something  like that, in that range.  And after you became Regents Professor is when the organization for  Regents Professors emerged?  Yes, there was a small group of us who came together and said,    The  Regents Professors are arguably the best researchers on campus. We  need to have a voice on campus.    The only way to do that was to form a  group, so the group of us put together, basically, a document explaining  who and what we were and so forth, got permission from the president  of the university at the time. We formed this group to provide input both  to the president of the university as well as the VP for research of the  university. We began holding presentations, not only by the Regents  Professors, ourselves, but also by others. It   s been, I think, overall, a  good success. It   s an ongoing process to be heard, though.  Has it increased collaboration at all, or just opened lines of  communication a little better?  I think it   s opened lines of communication, I would say. In terms of  collaboration, that   s difficult to document, quite honestly. There   s long  been an effort to create interdisciplinary teams and so forth at OSU, but  it is hard to break down those disciplinary boundaries in the silos across  the colleges. I know our new provost, Bob Sternberg, is very interested  in breaking down those barriers, but it   s difficult.  Back to how OSU has changed over the years, did you see the climate of  the university changing with each different president?  Well, it has. I   m trying to think how many presidents we   ve had. Larry  Boger was president when I first got there, who was   I would call him  sort of an Ike Eisenhower type of president, steadfast, steady as you go,  and so forth, that type of thing. Then when he stepped down, we had  another president, Larry Campbell, came in, and he had a rugged tenure,  quite honestly. It was tough.  Then he stepped down, and Jim Halligan came in. Jim Halligan did a  wonderful job, terrific man. Ann Halligan, his wife, is just a wonderful  representative, as well, of the university. His goal was to build bridges  back with the community, the Stillwater community, the state and so  7  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  forth, increase enrollment, and just did an incredible job. He had the  really unfortunate situation where we had the plane crash and ten of the  members of the men   s basketball team and associated people die, and  that just took an incredible amount out of Jim and Ann. You could see  them grow older in the couple of years right after that, so a very, very  tough time.  David Schmidly replaced Jim. David thought of himself as a faculty  member first, and he did a lot of wonderful things for the faculty,  including really helping our retirement a great deal. David   s a friend of  mine. He helped me personally. He is now just stepping down as the  President of the University of New Mexico, as a matter of fact. I visited  him here last summer. He   s looking forward to getting back to the  faculty.  Of course, Burns Hargis came in and replaced  David . Burns, I cannot  say enough about Burns. He came in with the idea of building a creative  campus. At that time, I was a chair of the Regents Professors. We had  him come in and give a talk (this would   ve been the spring of 2008, if I  recall correctly) to our meeting of the Regents Professors, and he talked  about creativity and so forth. At that point in time, I offered to help if I  could, to create a creativity initiative on campus, and that   s really how it  began. He took me up on it, and from that, it went forward.  What was the first step, besides agreeing to help out, that you took?  (Laughter)  You have to get buy-in from the campus and from the faculty, so the  very first step was to form, basically, a steering committee. Went out to  the colleges and identified faculty in each of the colleges, as well as  students at the undergraduate and graduate level, as well as staff. We  wanted to have the entire campus involved to form the steering  committee. Then the steering committee, that was what began to do the  planning for where it would go from that point. So the steering  committee was the very first item, if you will, to start the program and  the progress.  Were the different departments pretty receptive about including people?  Well, you know, it varies, quite honestly. There was actually a mistake  that I made, and that was rather than going to the deans and saying,     Would you identify someone to be on the steering committee?    we  identified people that we knew were interested in creativity from each of  the colleges and kind of bypassed the deans, which was not universally  approved of, if you will. So that was a little bit of a rocky start with a  couple of the deans.  8  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  But you didn   t have a problem finding individuals within the  departments?  No, no. There was a lot of interest among the faculty across the campus.  I can say that with a lot of confidence.  When did you start meeting?  It was that spring, that very same spring in 2008. I   m trying to recall  what was the first thing we   well, we decided we wanted to have,  basically, a couple-a-day meeting with the deans that next fall, basically  a retreat to talk about how to make OSU a creativity campus. That fall (it  would   ve been fall of 2008) we did have that meeting with the deans and  came up with some ideas for how to make changes across the campus to  increase creativity. So we did that. That was one of the plans. The  second thing was to hold a creativity festival. We went forward with a  separate smaller committee to help develop that festival and to develop  the ideas for that.  Both of those, the retreat and the festival, were successes?  The festival was an outstanding success. I was just enormously pleased  with it. The retreat, the deans appeared at the retreat. (Laughter) The  president was there, and several of the VPs were there and so forth. We  came up with some ideas in a classic retreat fashion where you break  into small groups and you do things on boards and so forth. To the  extent that the deans actually followed through on anything is very  difficult for me to say, but at least it got the idea of a creative university  in people   s minds, so that was important, as well.  Was there much questioning of the need for this at that point?  Well, each college (and I   m being very forthright here) is a little  fiefdom. The dean is the king of that fiefdom. They have their own  priorities, so whether or not they want to focus on creativity and what  that means, a priority, was up to each one of them. We did not go about  tracking it and doing some sort of evaluation research to check that out,  so it   s difficult to say what may have emerged.  Did you report to President Hargis about anything in the first     Of course, we would meet. Burns was incredibly supportive. I cannot  say enough positive things about Burns and the help and support he  gave. One of the things that was critical for setting up both the retreat  and particularly the festival was to raise some money. There had to be  9  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  funds for it, and so Burns came up with a substantial contribution. The  provost at the time came up with more funds. With that, I was able to go  to the deans, and some deans very willingly helped to support it. Others,  it took some persuasion to get them to support it. In the end, every dean  supported it. The VP for Research did. The dean of the libraries did. I  think it was nearly eighty thousand dollars that we raised predominately  for the festival.  That includes some scholarship money for the contest that was held at  the festival?  Right. The festival, in terms of planning that, we wanted to have a two-day  festival. There were a variety of aspects of it. We brought in national  speakers, which was a lot of fun. Bob  Mankoff  was one who works for  the New Yorker and does creativity things for them. A nationally-known  speaker on creativity, Chic Thompson, was there and some others. We  wanted to have a contest in which we got the campus interested in  coming up with ideas of how to make the campus creative. Part of the  funding that was developed was to create prizes, so we had prizes for  students, undergraduates, prizes for graduate students, prizes for faculty,  and prizes for staff. There would be a grand prize, and for the students,  their prizes would go into scholarships. For faculty and staff, it would be  cash that they could receive.  There was ten thousand dollars of prizes, and the winner was actually  staff members, which I was actually, in some ways, pleased to see, as a  matter of fact. It was    From Farm to Dining,    so the idea was kind of a  locavore idea of bringing food from the local area into the dining halls  and that type of thing. We also had a situation where we invited  departments, colleges, groups on campus to go to the Student Union and  put up booths and to identify the creative things that they were doing.  We invited the campus through to see these booths, which I think was  very successful, as well. It was a good time. We gave out the winners for  the prizes. I wore a tuxedo. We had a beautiful undergraduate who was a  co-host with me, and people were much more interested in her and her  long, flowing, Dancing With the Stars-type of gown. It was a good time.  It was very enjoyable.  Were you doing all this just as an extra assignment?  Yes. (Laughter) Like all committee assignments on campus, it   s just part  of the job. I wanted to do something for OSU and to help Burns. I just  felt so positive about him coming in, and so that was my contribution to  the effort.  How did you go about determining the speakers and bringing them in?  10  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Well, again, it was the committee for the conference, so we would visit  about who we could get. Of course, cost was a huge issue as well.  National speakers are very expensive, and so we had to be concerned  about costs and that type of thing. Again, it was a group effort. You have  to do it that way on a campus.  It   s nice you involved students and people across the campus. It   s  important.  Yes, absolutely. You   ve got to do that. A university is inclusive, and so  you have to have as many people as you can involved.  Well, after that successful creativity festival and competition, did you see  there being a future in this? Was there funding?  That   s the big question. You don   t want to have something just occur  one year and then die. We did have some funds left over, and so we did  have funding for the next year. What sort of emerged, at that point in  time we had the entrepreneurship program just getting started. Creativity  is a big aspect of entrepreneurship, and to creativity I should add  innovation, as well. We kept the steering committee. We did begin to  look for another conference for the next year. There was a group of  students (these were master   s students with the entrepreneurship  program) that took on the work, if you will, of basically developing the  conference for the following year. So that   s where then the extra  funds   these individuals from the entrepreneurship program then  developed the conference for the next year.  What had kind of emerged was, at that point in time I had been in it, I  guess, for a year and a half or so, and that   s long enough for one person  to be the leader. An individual, Melanie Page, had been participating  much more than other people. She was the one that set up the whole  Student Union booths and so forth and coordinated that and that part of  the conference. With the permission of the steering committee, she  became the new director. As it evolved, then, she then moved into,  became affiliated with the entrepreneurship program. In fact, the name  of it is a fellow of the entrepreneurship program.  With that, then, the Creativity Initiative became associated with the  entrepreneurship program. That pleased me a great deal. It was a natural  fit. It became institutionalized. There was funding for it.  Entrepreneurship has a very strong funding base. It had a department  head and faculty who embraced it. It was really part of, in a sense, their  mission. It sort of was a win-win for everyone. Melanie found the  fellowship position, which includes a summer stipend for her. It has a  11  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  home, and hopefully it will be around for many years.  I had read that in the early stages of getting all this going, you had  conducted a survey about creativity on OSU   s campus, or how well the  OSU campus fosters creativity.  Right. Yes.  What were your findings from that survey?  Well, let me begin by saying it was really a pilot survey, that the sample  size was not large enough to really draw any conclusions from it. I  haven   t looked at that in several years now. My recollection was that  from the faculty perspective, there were some hindrances to creativity.  The bureaucracy, in particular, some faculty felt was over-burdensome,  if you will. In some cases, the teaching loads were awfully high,  particularly if you   re thinking in terms of creativity and research. I don   t  want to make any strong statements about this because the sample size  was just not large enough that I would be confident in the statements I  make.  Since the Creativity Initiative was initially formed four years ago, in the  past four years, I   m wondering, if we can assume that all that has  happened, if it   s a much better environment on campus for creativity in  any way, or if that   s measurable?  Yes. First off, it   s very difficult to measure it. One approach would be to  take the pilot survey and do a full-fledged survey, and do it  longitudinally over time to see if there have been changes in,  particularly, faculty perceptions of what   s going on. Can I say that the  university or any particular college is showing greater innovation,  greater creativity efforts? It   s very difficult for me to say that.  But it does appear that what was at first the Creativity Initiative, and  now is the Institute for Creativity and Innovation, has been successful in  whatever way. It has a strong place on campus.  Right. It does. I   m very pleased that Melanie Page has taken on that role  as director. As I said before, I think it   s in the right place. How would  you measure whether creativity has increased on campus? It   s a difficult  question. You can begin to look in terms of journal publications, book  publications, grants. Those types of things might be appropriate, but  there   s many factors that also influence that, as well.  Have you kept up with all of the activities of the Institute for Creativity  and Innovation?  12  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  I have to say (and this is kind of my pattern, whether it   s positive or  negative) when I left the organization, the Creativity Institute, I got very  involved in the area of sustainable enterprise, which has its own creative  elements as well. I moved in that and started teaching courses in that and  chaired a conference, an OSU conference, on sustainable enterprise.  That   s where I put my efforts. I   m an individual that likes to start things  and get things going, and once they   re going, hand them off to a person  who can continue them, and then move on to something else. I have  never been a good administrator, if you will. I   m more of an initiator.  Well, we need good initiators.  But you need people to carry on, as well. It   s equally important.  How important do you think creativity is to OSU because of our land-grant  mission?  To me, any educational institution, creativity is part of it. In fact, of  course, the saying, OSU   s unique selling proposition, if you will, is     Create, Innovate, Educate,    and I am a firm believer in that. Faculty, in  terms of our research, creativity, and innovation is fundamental to it. As  far as part of the land-grant mission, I don   t regard that as either  assisting it or impeding it in any way. Our land-grant mission is, you  know, we have to take things that are creative and innovative, take them  out to the world so it makes a difference, but that can be a creative effort  in itself.  You also have creativity in the classroom. Faculty right now, many are  struggling to figure out how to integrate the new technologies that are  out there. That   s a creative effort in the classroom. A great deal is going  on in terms of online teaching. How do you creatively do that and make  new inroads and so forth? Our whole outreach programs, creativity is a  part of that, too. It is just embedded throughout the university  experience. We have to be willing to change, and the part of creativity  which makes it tough is that change is a part of it. There is this old  horrible joke about,    How many faculty does it take to change a light  bulb?    Then the answer is,    Change?    (Laughter) That   s one of the  issues that   s faced as well.  It   s exciting and probably related to Burns Hargis    leadership, but  Oklahoma, two years ago, hosted the World Creativity Forum in  Oklahoma City, and they   re doing a continuous annual Oklahoma  Creativity Forum.  Didn   t know that. That   s great.  13  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  Mowen  Wilson  November was officially declared Oklahoma   s Creativity Month.  This coming November?  Well, this past November.  Oh, past November, okay.  Our Oklahoma governor declared the whole month of November  Creativity Month in Oklahoma.  Okay, cool.  So it   s fun and exciting that OSU has all these efforts.  Right. Right.  They seem to be moving forward and continuing, and the state of  Oklahoma is, too.  Yes. Well, the looking for new solutions, it   s a world problem right now,  quite honestly, as you   re looking at world problems from the whole  issue of climate change, for example. How do you deal with that? How  do you deal with political issues, internationally, the Iran situation now?  So many of these things take new ways of looking at old problems and  coming up with new solutions. You cannot always fall back on what was  done before. I think it was Mark Twain   it was one of my favorite  sayings is that,    History doesn   t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.    That  takes the creative and the innovation to figure out, well, it just rhymes.  It   s not perfect, so you   re going to have to come up with a new solution  to deal with the problem.  Well, is there anything regarding the Creativity Initiative and what   s  happening at OSU that we haven   t talked about?  I just hope it continues forward. I think it   s important. I think that I  would like to see a little more buy-in from the colleges. One of the  things that   s difficult in academia is risk taking. With creativity, you  have to take risks. With taking risks, there is a chance of failure. I think  faculty need to be encouraged to take greater risks in their research,  greater risks in their teaching, and try out new things. If there was one  piece of advice I would give to OSU as a retired faculty member, that is  to encourage some thoughtful risk taking.  Well, thank you very much for all of your efforts with this and your  14  Mowen  interest in creativity and helping foster it on our campus.  Well, it was a great experience, and go Pokes   -------  -------   
