 Finchum Today is August 11, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma  State University. Today, I am in Marshall County, Madill, in Marshall  County to speak with Herschel Beard. This is part of our Cowboy in Every  County project. Thank you for having me today.  Beard Your welcome.  Finchum Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Beard Okay, I was born in Madill, here, August 6, 1950.  Finchum Happy belated birthday.  Beard I just had my birthday last Thursday, my sixty-fifth birthday. I have lived  here all of my life. My dad was born here in Madill as well. My grandfather  actually came on the Land Run of 1892 that settled the  Fox/Sac/Pottawattamie County area around Shawnee. He was a toddler I  guess, a young child, and so he did not get any allotments in that land run.  His brothers were teenagers and they got allotments there around Shawnee.  In fact, one of the brothers, Henry, staked a claim and a young girl, who had  ridden a horse, staked a claim right next to his. They eventually got married.  Her name was Etta Ray. Their house is preserved in the City Park in  Shawnee as the first home in Shawnee. They later moved to another town  and started it. It   s Henryetta, Oklahoma. The boys, then teenagers, got jobs  with the railroad. Their job was to travel up and down where the railroad  was going to be, survey towns, and start towns. The brother that got the  allotment in Shawnee, they moved up to Henryetta of course.  One of the other brothers, John, John Wade Beard, moved to a town called  Ada. In the Ada history book, it says that he is the founder of Ada. They  lived there and they had the first telephone in Ada. Then they had to get the  second telephone, so they would have somebody to call. The second phone  was at the livery station where they could call and order their buggy, and  5  have it brought up or ready, whatever. He and his wife, Leona, were the  founders of Ada.  Eventually, my great-grandfather ended up at a town called Woodville,  which is here in Marshall County, southern Marshall County. By that time,  my grandfather had grown up and was a young man, and so he met a lady  from around here whose family was just across the Red River in Texas who  had moved across the Red River to this town called Woodville, which is  now under Lake Texoma. It was the largest town in Marshall County, but  they took that in when they built Lake Texoma. Most of the people moved  to Madill, because by that time Madill had landed the county seat. Then my  grandfather, starting a young family, moved to Madill and got into the title  business. In 1920 he bought his first abstract company, in Madill. So my  company that I am running now is that same company.  Finchum Almost a hundred.  Beard Almost a hundred years old, pretty close.  Finchum And what was his name?  Beard His name is Ollie Logan Beard. Then my dad and his two brothers, two  surviving brothers and sisters all had worked here, at one time or another,  and were partners. Of course, they   re all deceased now, but my dad ended  up buying all of their interests. My grandfather had bought out all of the  companies that were here. All he had to do was have a typewriter and a car  in those days in order to do land titles and do title work. I   m running the  company now. I   m a third generation abstractor, and I have two boys. Both  of them have worked for me at different times in their lives too. They   re  fourth generation title people. Now we have a license for abstractors. Both  of them have had an abstractor   s license at different times.  Finchum For those who might not know, can you give us a brief definition of what an  abstractor is?  Beard Okay, an abstractor, abstracting title business, we do the research for  property sales and transactions where people buy and sell homes. We do the  research to provide an abstract, which is a history of that particular piece of  property. All the deeds, mortgages, divorce cases, probate cases, other  lawsuits that would be involved in telling you what the history of a piece of  property is. So in fact we write history books, we compile history books  every day of individual pieces of property that are being bought or sold or  mortgaged, for people. Those are called abstracts.  Oklahoma   s title system is based on having abstracts prepared and examined  by an attorney for an attorney   s opinion, which is now the basis of what our  6  title insurance policies are based on. It   s something that has been around  since statehood. I live in the Chickasaw Nation. All of the land in our county  was allotted to Chickasaw or Choctaw Indians, so our inception of title starts  with the Indian patents to those Indians. It tracks on down with what  happened to it since then. Who they sold it to and who they sold it to.  We have quite an oil and gas history here. In fact, my great grandfather  drilled the first oil well in Marshall County. Then my dad and his brothers  have been instrumental in setting up and helping oil companies develop  oilfields in our county through the years. A lot of the abstracts we used to  make, used to have oil and gas instruments in them too which made them  quite large sometimes. But now all the oil and gas mineral rights, pretty  much, have been severed from the surface rights. So there   s no point in  adding oil and gas documents when somebody   s not getting any mineral  rights to it. Anyway, that   s kind of a short version of what the abstracting  business is, and we close real estate transactions in our office now and write  title insurance, but we still build abstracts every day.  Finchum Gets complicated?  Beard Get very complicated, very complicated. We know a lot of family histories  by compiling all of these records.  Finchum It   s not all on computer now?  Beard Well, a lot of it is on computer.  Finchum Going back?  Beard Going backwards, most companies still have the old fashioned, hand-written,  track indices that are duplicates. They   re mirrors of the county  records. That   s part of the plant law in Oklahoma, is that we maintain an  independent set of records of the court recordings and filings, and the county  clerk   s indices where we actually index every deed and mortgage, write it  down on a book that anybody can go in there and search. We have our own  set. We have been computerized since 2000 with our records.  Finchum Found any nuggets that have surprised you?  Beard Oh, every day. (Laughs) Every day we find things.    Well, I didn   t know that  person was part of this family,    or    There   s a break in this chain of title,     you know. We have to go find them.    Where is this deed or how did this  person come into title?    It   s a search every day and a lot of it is sometimes a  mystery.  Finchum Some places have been in the family for a hundred years or more?  7  Beard Some have. We have very few families that still own their Indian allotments.  There are a few, but not very many left.  Finchum Almost like a librarian, digging and digging.  Beard Yes, I have my own set of library records here. (Laughter)  Finchum Genealogist come to see you?  Beard Yes they do. We have people that are trying, a lot of them have been trying  to track their Indian roots. There   s a lot of people, at one point in the early  1900s or the teens or    20s, didn   t want to be associated with having Indian  blood. They didn   t want anyone to know that. A lot of people passed up the  opportunities to get on the rolls. Now, they   re trying to get back on the rolls,  future generations have tried to get back on the rolls. They   ll come in and  try to find, you know,    I know what my great-grandfather   s name is. Can  you tell me what property he owned?    Some of that   s like looking for a  needle in a haystack. We have a set of the Dawes Rolls, where the Indians  were all in a roll and given numbers. We have an official set of those books.  We would look up, try to look up their relative in there and see if we can  find a roll number for them.  Finchum That   s pretty cool too. And what was your great-grandfather   s name?  Beard Alfred Barry Beard. He came from Illinois, brought his family here.  Finchum Then Ollie?  Beard Then Ollie. Then my dad   s name is Norvell, Norvell Ayres, his middle  name. My grandmother   s maiden name was Ayres, A-Y-R-E-S.  Finchum Okay.  Beard I have a lot of cousins. The Ayres family have a lot of descendants that are  still here. I have a lot of cousins that live here.  Finchum Well, when you were growing up, did you live in Madill?  Beard I lived in Madill. Yes.  Finchum You graduated from Madill High School?  Beard Yes, graduated from Madill High School in 1968.  Finchum What was your favorite subject?  8  Beard It could have been typing, business typing. I was a very good typist. As was  my dad, because there was a lot of typing involved in the abstracting  because you had to type the documents. Until we had the Xerox machine,  everything was almost all typed. There was some mimeograph procedures.  We had the first Xerox machine in the county because as soon as they came  on the market, we got one. (Laughs) So we could start reproducing our  documents for the abstracts instead of typing everything.  Finchum You had an old Underwood or whatever the earlier     Beard I think it was an Underwood. I learned on a manual typewriter. My dad and  I both had the same typing teacher. She would always tell me that, you  know, I was a lot easier student to teach than my dad because he was pretty  stubborn and she was pretty stubborn. I liked her. She taught me a lot. I was  a really good typing student. That was probably my favorite. That and  history, world history and American history. I had a really good teacher for  that.  Finchum That ties in pretty well, too.  Beard Yes.  Finchum How many words per minute?  Beard I don   t remember.  Finchum Back in the day     Beard I   m sure that was like seventy-five to ninety, somewhere in there. Especially  on an electric typewriter. I wasn   t as fast on a manual. We converted in-between  Typing I and Typing II. We switched over from manual to electric  typewriters so I got to learn on an electric typewriter.  Finchum Erase tape, that   s all I remember.  Beard Yes, we did have that. (Laughter)  Finchum At first it was Wite-Out. Kids today won   t know what that is. Did you work  for your dad during high school?  Beard No, I didn   t. I actually had two other jobs. I worked in a grocery store on  East Main Street on Saturday and sometimes after school, mostly on  Saturday, sacking groceries and stocking the shelves, cleaning up at night.  Then, I worked for an insurance company, Butler Insurance next door to my  9  dad   s office, as the janitor. I did that on nights and weekends. I had two jobs  from the eighth grade on through high school.  Finchum Just because or     Beard Uh     Finchum Were you saving for anything in particular?  Beard Well, I was saving. I don   t remember that I was saving for anything  particular. Probably college and probably a car, but I never did buy a car  myself in high school. I just drove  my parents    car . My parents had two  cars and so I drove one of theirs some, but I didn   t have my own car. I didn   t  even have my own car when I went to college. That was kind of different. It  was the first time that I didn   t have a vehicle available to me, but I just  saved money because that   s what my parents taught me, was saving for the  future.  Finchum Let me back up. What did your mother do? Did she work outside the home?  Beard Well, I have three younger sisters. One a year and sixteen days younger than  me, and then one a year and a half after her, so my mother had three kids in  diapers for a while. Then, I have a younger sister that is seven years younger  than I am, that came along a little bit later. My mother was a musician. She  had attended OCU (Oklahoma City University) in Oklahoma City, but then  when war came along she quit and went to work in one of the defense plants  in Galveston. Her parents moved around, and her parents were living in  Durant during that time. Then after she worked in Galveston a while, she  came back to Durant, and she met my dad at Southeastern (Oklahoma State  University) in vocal music. They fell in love and they got married three or  four years later. When they got married, they lived in Louisville for a while.  Then, my dad came back here to work for his dad after about a year and a  half. My mother worked at the Madill Record, our local weekly newspaper.  She was the publisher   s secretary, his assistant. She did a lot of different  things. It was a very small operation. She did that for a number of years. She  liked that really well. Then, she worked at the First United Methodist  Church, which is where we went to church, as the church secretary. She was  the choir director at the same time, for the church. Then, she started back to  Southeastern. She never did finish her degree.   When my youngest sister started to school, my mother  went to work at the  Madill Schools as the superintendent   s secretary. She and he ran the school  system. Back in the    60s, there were not a lot of secretarial work in schools.  It was a very few people who did a lot of jobs. She managed the cafeteria.  She managed the school activity fund. She was the school board clerk. She  10  managed all of their work and everything for a number of years. She finally  talked one of the superintendents into hiring someone else to help, to answer  the phone and do some typing and things like that. Then, the office begin to  grow and expand. She retired from being the school board clerk, from the  school system. She really, she loved that position. She had a number of  different types of jobs.  Finchum Well, did she teach you piano or voice or whatever?  Beard She did not teach me piano. I think she tried and it just didn   t work. All  three of my sisters play. She started them, but she also realized they needed  to study under someone else. She just didn   t make me do that. I   m the only  one that really does not know how to play the piano. We are a very musical  family. My dad plays saxophone. My mother plays violin and the piano. All  of us have played in the band, the Madill band.  Finchum What did you play?  Beard Trombone. Trombone. My dad was a high school drum major of the band.  He also was drum major at Murray State College for a semester and then he  transferred to Southeastern and he was a drum major at Southeastern. That   s  when they met, but they met in the Glee Club, in vocal music. And my dad  sings. Of course my mother sang. All of us can sing. We all sing. I   m really,  I grew up in the church choir.  Finchum Should I ask you, do you want to sing something?  Beard No, I don   t. (Laughs) I still sing in the choir. I actually married a musician.  My wife was Sue Jennings from Sulphur. Her parents owned the abstract  company in Sulphur. Our parents knew each other. She used to come to  Madill. She was a twirler in the band. I was a drum major. My next sister,  Mary Beth, was a twirler so they knew each other. She would come to  Madill and spend the weekends and date one of my friends in high school.  We later dated in college. She went to OCU as well, on a music scholarship.  We dated, went to fraternity and sorority parties some.  We got married a little bit later in life. We were thirty-two when we got  married. We had dated a long time and known each other for quite a while.  She is a musician. She took over my mother   s position as the choir director  of the church. She also is a pianist, an outstanding pianist, and an organist.  She was doing all three of those jobs every Sunday morning, going from the  piano to the organ and directing the choir. Then, she got her degree in  elementary music. She was an elementary music teacher here for twenty-three  years.  Finchum In the school system?  11  Beard In the school system. We are a very musical family. My dad was a drum  major. I was a drum major for two years. Then, our oldest son, Wade, was a  high school drum major, and then he went to OSU. He actually got the drum  major position the spring of his freshman year for the next year, and he was  the drum major at Oklahoma State for five years. One of those five-year  plan plus, then he worked on a different degree after he got his bachelors.  He has an interesting story about the band and relationships with different  band directors. The fifth year, he was in a different program, and the band  director called and said,    I met you and here I am new, and my drum majors  aren   t qualified. Can you come back and be a drum major one more year and  train these people to be drum majors so I can have an experience one?    He  went back for the fifth year. I don   t think they have ever had a drum major  for five years at Oklahoma State. He was very good. He was very good at  that. Loved it.  Finchum Well, did his mother teach him to play the piano?  Beard She started. That was another situation. We should have sent him  somewhere else to get piano lessons. Piano teachers were not very prevalent  around here. There just weren   t very many of them to do that. He doesn   t  know how to play the piano. He was a trumpet player.  Finchum You have one son?  Beard Have two sons.  Finchum Two sons.  Beard Wade, the oldest one and then J.T. is the youngest one. He was a drummer.  He was in the band as well.  Finchum Did he go to OSU as well?  Beard No, he went to OU.  Finchum That   s okay.  Beard Wade went to Oklahoma State but J.T. is four grades behind Wade. I think  he didn   t want to follow in his brother   s footsteps. His best friend was going  to be a football walk-on. He just wanted to go to OU, so he did. He pledged  to my fraternity at OU, so that made things better for me. (Laughs)  Finchum We need to back up and discuss how you came to go to OSU.  12  Beard Okay. I   m a typical OSU student, I guess. Small town, small high school, I  really didn   t know much about Oklahoma State. I really grew up around an  awful lot of Sooner fans, in this part of the country. But for some reason, my  senior year I just had this vision of going to Oklahoma State. I do have aunts  and uncles and cousins who have OSU degrees, but I really had not been up  there very many times for any events. I just decided that   s where I want to  go. I didn   t want to go to local colleges here, because I was too familiar with  going to scholastic meets and band camps and band contests. I wanted to go  somewhere else. I sent in my application and got accepted to OSU.  Well then, we have an alumni from Madill, Jack Drummond. Alfred  Drummond who is one of the Drummonds from Osage County, the  Drummond ranch, he also ventured away from Osage County. Ended up in  Marshall County and built a huge ranch and cattle operation down here.  When he found out that I was interested in OSU, he and my dad were really  good friends, he started talking to me about Oklahoma State. He wanted to  get me interested in his fraternity, Phi Gamma Delta, the Fijis. He was pretty  instrumental in helping me get the President   s Leadership Council  scholarship. That probably did as much for me right immediately, when I hit  campus of opening doors for me, than anything. I got that scholarship.  I just drove, we drove up to Stillwater. They dropped me off at the dorm.  (Laughs) I think my mother was pretty sad. She probably cried all the way  home, she left her oldest son three hours away at college.  Finchum Was that the first time you had been there?  Beard Not the first time. It might have been the second or third time. I just had not  really been to Oklahoma State. I don   t know why I picked that out and  decided to go there, other than I knew a lot of people who had been. Then,  my family members had degrees there, but I had equal numbers of family  members with degrees from OU as well.  Finchum So it wasn   t because you were interested in agriculture?  Beard No, it wasn   t. I was not an agriculture student. I was just an average student  at Madill High School, taking all different types of academics. I didn   t know  what I was going to study. I really kind of thought I wanted to be a banker. I  enrolled in the College of Business. I stayed in there for a while then I  switched to business education. I tried that out for a while. Then I went back  to general business. Then, I ended up getting a general business  management degree.  Finchum In what year?  13  Beard In    72, 1972. I had a very successful experience at Oklahoma State, really  from the time I got there. I had met people. The President   s Council met. I  think there were fifty, sixty people in that group who all became campus  leaders by the time we were seniors. Having been together that freshman  year, we knew each other. We did a lot of group activities. At that time Dr.  Kamm was the president of Oklahoma State. They would have receptions  and events at their home, and we would be the group that would go out there  as the hosts and hostesses. Opening the doors, helping people get out of the  cars, parking cars, serving refreshments and things like that, and just being  greeters. I was in the president   s home as a freshman, kind of starting out.  I  got to know  the Kamms. The next few years, he would recognize me on  campus and say hello. That   s a pretty unusual thing and not everybody has  that opportunities. That was a real unique thing for me to have that  President   s Council activity. Then, I just continued to get into more  activities. Then, I pledged Mr. Drummond   s fraternity. I was a Phi Gam. I  moved into the house the second semester of my freshman year. Actually  Saturday we demolished our fraternity house. We   re going to build a new  house on the same property this year. They had a big ceremony, I guess,  Saturday. I was not able to go Saturday. They tore down the house. We   re  going to build a nicer new house in its place, because we have prime  property there on University. There was no other place for us really to move  but right there.  Finchum Should have brought you a brick. If I had known that, I would have brought  you a brick.  Beard Yes, you should have. I didn   t think about that. Anyway, I lived in the  fraternity house and got involved in activities. I got two jobs at OSU. One  semester or two semesters, I had three jobs. I was the kitchen manager at our  fraternity house, and then I had gotten a job as an assistant to the assistant  dean of Arts and Sciences. Her name was Jeanne Wray, Jeanne Adams  Wray. She was  a very interesting person . She was editor of the Cimarron  Review which is a literary publication that Oklahoma State was doing at that  time. I   m not sure if they   re still publishing it or not. Then, she was very  active in community theatre and statewide community theater. I did a lot of  things for her with that. She was involved with International Studies. She  was always writing new plans for programs to start in Arts and Sciences that  were related to International Studies. I had to meet an awful lot of those  people. Actually a lot of them came from foreign countries over here to see  what OSU was doing in that area. We were kind of on the cutting edge of  programs for international studies and stuff like that at that time.  I wrote rejection letters for the Cimarron Review. That was what took an  awful lot of my time. We had so many submissions of poetry, short stories,  art work, and by far, most of them were rejected. We just couldn   t publish  14  everything, so I wrote rejection letters. She wanted personalized letters  written to every submission. I typed a personal letter to each one of those  and she would sign it.  Finchum She wouldn   t dictate it. You would   .  Beard No, she dictated phrases and paragraphs. She would give me an idea. This  stack, say this to them, and say this to them. And then, sometimes she   d  write personal notes on them. I spent an awful lot of time in the office  writing those rejection letters. I did a lot of other projects for her. She was  involved in so many things. Her husband was an English professor on  campus. She was just a very striking individual. Very tall. She always wore  a hat and gloves everywhere. If you saw her walking across campus, it was  like a fashion show.  Finchum In the    70s?  Beard Yes. In the    70s, so I enjoyed that job very much.  Finchum Always people oriented or customer service oriented, it sounds like.  Beard Yes, I   ve been doing that pretty much all of my life, (laughs) I guess.  Finchum Your first semester, where did you live?  Beard I lived in Kerr, Kerr Hall, which is one of the two high rises, the oldest, I  guess the only two that are left unless   I don   t think they   ve torn those  down.  Finchum Not yet.  Beard I think they   re scheduled, but they   re there. I lived in Kerr. It was a pretty  new dorm. It was very nice, I enjoyed it. I made some friends over there. I  had met some people through the state Student Council Convention my  senior year who were going to Oklahoma State. We all looked each other up  and ran around together for a little bit.  After I got into the fraternity, then it was kind of fraternity life. I started  meeting more people in the Greek system, sorority girls and guys from other  fraternities. That sort of became my world for a while. Except for, I was on  the Student Union Activities Board as one of their directors. That was a  group of people that I spent a lot of time with. We had the largest student  union in the world at that time. We had a bowling alley in the basement. We  had a lot of recreational activities that were going on. We had a lot of  competitions. We did programs and just a lot of things. I was involved with  that.  15  Finchum A bowling alley?  Beard Yes. I had to arrange bowling tournaments and things for students to do in  the Union. It was so big, and they wanted to make that the magnet for the  campus where everybody came to do things, to hang out, you know. Playing  cards, playing Bridge and Spades at lunch was a huge activity. In fact, one  of my favorite things I always remember is we would go in there, you hung  out between classes, and if you had a two-hour window between classes,  you stayed there and played cards.  When it got time for lunch, one of the cafeteria workers, her job was to walk  through the Union, the coffee shop there and say,    Time to clear. Time to  clear.    It was time for them to start serving lunch, and you had to stop  playing cards and give up your tables so they could have kids come in and  go through the cafeteria line and eat lunch. Although we all had cafeterias in  our dorms, they did a big food service program, business, at lunch there in  the cafeteria, and she had to clear out all those students that were just there  playing cards.  Finchum Was the cafeteria on the first, no     Beard It was on the first floor. It really is in the same place where the food court is  now. They   ve taken in some extra rooms there, but it was that space pretty  much.  Finchum Besides playing cards, what else did you do for fun? Sounds like you didn   t  have a whole lot of time.  Beard I didn   t have a whole lot of time. I played in the marching band my  freshman year too. That was another thing, I was going to play in the band. I  was in the band. I tried out for drum major. Actually when school started,  they had tryouts for drum major. I tried out, because they had lost their drum  major the year before. I lost to the Stillwater High School drum major,  whose father was the dean of Arts and Sciences, who was the band  director   s boss. (Laughs) I didn   t feel too bad after that. I liked playing in  the band. I enjoyed it and met a lot of people. And those were people that  were outside the Greek system, outside my sphere of friends and  acquaintances. I had areas, little pockets of people that I knew around  campus, that were totally unrelated to something else that I was doing.  Finchum Good network.  Beard Good networking. Of course, the fraternity actually provided the    fun     things to do. That   s where, I guess, we had more fun. I was busy all the  time. I was working or studying.  16  Finchum Did the band get to travel to away games?  Beard The band went to Houston, and we marched in the AstroDome, which was a  big thing. We played the University of Houston, and I think they were either  number one or number three in the country and we beat them that night.  Being in the middle of the AstroDome, just looking up at the dome from the  center of the field was just mind boggling.  Finchum It was probably pretty new at that time too?  Beard It was within twelve, well, probably within ten years anyway. It was a new  facility. It certainly wasn   t Lewis Field at that time. (Laughs)  Finchum How often would you come back to Madill?  Beard I don   t think I came back to Madill until homecoming, which would have  been sometime in late October, Madill   s homecoming, and then I came back  at Thanksgiving. I didn   t come back very much. I had too many things going  on. The football games, I was in the band for home games and then  fraternity things. It was a long way and I didn   t have a car. I either had to get  a ride with   about three or four other   two of my classmates were up there.  We never saw each other. One of them was in agriculture, who later became  our OSU extension director in Marshall County. Almost his entire career he  served here. I never did see him on campus unless I would ride home with  him or something occasionally. I pretty much stayed on campus. Most of the  time I was in Stillwater, I was there.  Finchum Visit the library very often?  Beard Yes, we had, our fraternity had study hour, and every night we had to take  our books and go to the library and study till pretty much the library closed.  We did, we studied. We had to study to make our grades. That was a really  big help for a lot of those kids who came up there to party, have a good  time, and maybe may or may not make any grades. They were forced to  study to a certain extent. It was a good thing.  Finchum Well, was Bedlam a big deal at that time?  Beard Yes, it was. We never won it. (Laughs) We, OSU, did not have a good  football team in those years at all. We had, by far, the better wrestling  program, because they were winning national championships in those years,  I think. At least the big twelve championships. I think we had a good  basketball team. I really didn   t go to a lot of basketball games. I think we  had a good team.  17  Finchum Golf was coming on board back then?  Beard It was coming up, but it was really wrestling. In fact, when Ray Murphy was  injured in the wrestling match and became a paraplegic, we were the first  group that started a fundraiser for him. We, one thing we did, we kidnaped  the football coach, and held him hostage at the Fiji house, and people had to  drive by and bring money to our house. We had to raise so much money  before we would let him go home. Then, one Saturday, we passed Kentucky  Fried Chicken Buckets in the football stadium. We organized that, which the  band picked up later. We were the first group to do that. I remember we  raised three thousand dollars that year for him.  Finchum That was pretty good in those days.  Beard Yes, it was. We got a lot of help once we started calling other groups and  said,    Will you help us pass the bucket?    We passed that in the stadium one  Saturday. Then, that kidnapping night, that was a lot of fun. It raised a lot of  money for a really worthwhile cause.  Finchum How was Homecoming during your time?  Beard Homecoming was as big as it is, not quite as big as it is, but it was the same  thing. It was great big house decs. The parade was big, there were a lot more  floats in the parade than there are now. Our fraternity, we never did have  any money to go out for the house decs. We did a sign. We did win first  place on a sign one year that I designed. Actually got it produced, built and  erected there in the yard. We never did the house dec competitions, because  we were not one of the top fraternities on campus at that time. Not like the  Fijis are now. We were, we had a lot of fun.  Finchum The yard decorations have gotten just, amazing   Beard Absolutely amazing. We participated in Homecoming. We just didn   t  participate at the highest level like some of the other fraternities did.  Finchum You went to class during Homecoming week?  Beard Yes, yes. I went to class. I figured out, I, someone gave me advice that if  you just go to class, you   ll do better than if you try to just study for tests. If  you   re there every day and the teacher knows that you   re there, you   re  bound to absorb something that will help you better on tests. You   ll do  better overall, that was something that stuck with me. I made it a point. I  always went to class. My parents expected me to go to class as well.  (Laughs)  Finchum Did they get sent your grades or did they come to you?  18  Beard No, they were sent home. Grades were sent to the parents in those days.  Finchum You don   t hear that much now.  Beard No, not at all. I was not happy when my son   s grades never came to me. I  call and they say,    We can   t release those to the parents because of the  Privacy Act so they go to the students.    It was like pulling teeth to get it out  of my son. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have a favorite professor or class?  Beard Well, one of the business professors, Dr. Hamm, Bob Hamm, we initiated  him in our fraternity. He was initiated with my pledge class as a faculty  initiate. We got to know him better than anyone else. I liked him a lot. I  really, they were all good teachers. He was probably my favorite I guess,  faculty person, and Mrs. Ray. She was not actually a teacher. She was an  assistant vice president of one of the colleges.  Finchum Have a class you struggled with?  Beard Cost Accounting and Finite Mathematics. I could not understand  combinations and permutations. It was just, you know, I got to a certain  level in math that I was comfortable with and after that, I just had a mental  block or something. Cost Accounting was very difficult for me. I took it in  summer school, and I had it at seven thirty in the morning. Probably, had I  not been in the class 100 percent of the time, I might not have passed that  class. (Laughs) It was understanding manufacturing accounting. It was too  foreign to me and I just never really grasped it.  Finchum Required class?  Beard Uh-huh. It was. The other one that I had a difficult time with was statistics. I  managed, you know, I made a decent grade in there, but I never understood  the purpose of it. Now, I have heard two or three other comments about this  on the radio or television, some interviews,    I took statistics and I did not  know what it was for or what use it was.     Well, then I went to graduate school after I graduated. I got my degree in  business, but I went to a master   s program in Mass Communications in the  School of Journalism. One of the first courses I had to take was statistics.  Well, the way it was presented, you used statistics in research in studying  outcomes and it made sense. Then, it all fell into place.  I made an A in statistics in graduate school, (laughs) because of the way it  was presented. It wasn   t just on how you do the formulas. That   s what they  19  taught us in beginning statistics, how you used the calculator to do the  formulas. Well,    What are the formulas for?    Well, they didn   t teach that. It  fell into place eventually.  Finchum Where did you get your master   s?  Beard At Oklahoma State. After I graduated in    72, I stayed two more years and  did the class work for a master   s, and then I ended up coming to Madill to  help my folks out one summer and I stayed. Then, I figured out that   I had  to write a thesis. I had started it, and it was a research project. I couldn   t get  it finished down here, so I went back to Stillwater and spent one school year  and finished my thesis. Got it published and got my degree in    76. I had  spent those two years on campus doing the course work.  Finchum Just wasn   t ready to leave?  Beard Just wasn   t ready to leave. I loved Stillwater. It was a great experience for  me. I was involved in a lot of campus activities. Well, my junior year, end of  my junior year, I ran for the student senate from business, College of  Business. I won. There were seven or eight candidates. I won that election. I  was really surprised. I ran against some people I thought were more well-known  than I was, but apparently not.  Finchum Did you have to campaign?  Beard We did campaign. My fraternity brothers put out signs for me. We had fliers  and walked around campus and talked to people. That was one of the unique  things about going to Oklahoma State. The sidewalk from University   Avenue , the Greek section of campus, through next to Theta Pond, over to  the Union, was where everybody went to and from classes. So you lined up  on one side of the sidewalk or the other every day and you just saw all your  friends or people you didn   t know, and everybody said hello. It wasn   t like,     You don   t speak to any of these people, strangers.    You just said hello to  everybody. We met people just that way, sometimes.  That was always, it was just kind of a little unique thing I think about  Oklahoma State is it is such a friendly campus. It still is. It really was a  friendly campus then. It was very easy to meet people and get to know them.  It was pretty easy to find people of common interests around campus.  Finchum You ever get thrown in Theta?  Beard No, I didn   t.  Finchum Were you there when streaking was such a big deal?  20  Beard Yes, I was there. I did see that one time on Washington Street, down the  Strip. You know from 1968 to    69 was a huge cultural shift in America, on  college campuses particularly. When I went the fall of    68, the fraternity  guys had to wear slacks and a shirt and a tie to the football games. People  dressed up. Girls all wore dresses. A lot of them had to wear gloves a lot of  places. Then, the fall of    69, it was jeans and t-shirts. Everything changed  culturally in America that year.  Finchum Do you know why?  Beard I don   t know why. Kent State had happened around there. There were just so  many different things culturally that happened in America that a lot of those  traditions   but that was like a carry-over from the    50s, the dress code and  everything. We were in the    60s, going into the    70s, and it just changed.  The Midwest was always the last place that change happens. Oklahoma was  one of those places that held on to a lot of traditions for a long time. That  just came to a screeching halt in that one school year, between those two  school years.  Finchum It would be interesting to go back and see what else was going on     Beard Just to look at the pictures of the fraternity and sorority composites of all the  members, to see those two years, how the hairstyles changed in one year.  It   s amazing.  Finchum I   ll go back and look. (Laughter) Do you remember graduation day?  Beard Yes, actually in    72, Richard Nixon came to Oklahoma State as the  commencement speaker, but I knew that I was going to be a few hours short  of graduating, so I was going to have to go to summer school during that  summer of    72. I didn   t graduate in May so I didn   t go to commencement  when he came as the speaker. Then, I graduated at the end of the summer. I  had one really good friend, and she lacked six hours as well, and so we hung  out a lot. One of those classes was the same class, it was a business class.  We would hang out together most of the summer. Then, our graduation was  in August. It was small, you know. It wasn   t a big deal. It was really hot.  Actually I don   t think she went through commencement. I did. My parents  wanted me to. I wanted to for them.  Finchum They came up?  Beard Yes, they came up. Everybody didn   t walk across the stage. You stood up  and then sat back down or something like that. It was kind of different. It  was really hot and it was in the stadium, at the football field, is where it was.  Outside, but I graduated.  21  Finchum Your plans at that time were to come back?  Beard No, I don   t think I really   I don   t know what I was going to do. That   s one  of the reasons I decided to go to graduate school. I didn   t know what to do. I  kind of had gotten disillusioned with banking, because they didn   t have a  degree for banking. You had to study finance. It wasn   t what I thought it  was going to be.  I was just one of those kids that was not sure what I was going to do. It was  real easy to say I will go to graduate school and get a different degree. Then,  I got to be interested in journalism somehow, I don   t know. I took a  journalism class as an elective my senior year maybe and thought,    This  would be really neat.    I wanted to be a magazine editor is what I wanted to  do. I went on the print side. I was not in broadcasting.  Finchum You wanted to write more rejection letters     Beard Yeah, write more rejection letters. (Laughs)  Finchum So in    74 you graduated again?  Beard No, I didn   t graduate until    76.  Finchum Seventy-six     Beard I hadn   t written my thesis, and it was a research project. I had gotten a job  my sophomore year, a summer job, in Oklahoma City. I wrote letters to  places all over Oklahoma City, some banks, looking for a banking job. I  wrote to the State Banking Department. I got a letter back that said come in  for an interview. I went down there, and I met the administrative assistant. It  was a really small department. It was like five people all together. They  supervised all the state charter banks and credit unions.  I went in and talked to her and she liked me. She figured out I had office  skills, and so she went in and she knocked on the commissioner   s door. She  walked in and kind of stood inside the door and grabbed my arm and kind of  pulled me in there and she said,    I just interviewed this young man from  Oklahoma State. He   s looking for a summer job, and I thought we might  could hire him. I   ve got all these other projects that we haven   t been able to  finish. I thought he could work on that.    The commissioner came and shook  my hand and said,    Do you think you want to work here?    I said,    Yes sir, I  would.    He said,    Well, okay. If Elizabeth thinks we   ve got work for you,  then that   ll be fine.    They just hired me on the spot.  That summer job lasted through the two years in graduate school, in the  summers, but they also would call me to come between semester breaks and  22  on spring break. I didn   t go to a lot of trips on spring break. I went to work. I  liked it for one thing. I had a really good time there. I learned a great deal  about banking, about the banking system, about regulation of banks.  The commissioner really was a nice man. He was from Wakita, a very small  town, small bank. He just, you know, was willing to talk to me about it. We  got to know each other pretty well. It was a small office. I just did anything  that they wanted me to do. Every day I would go take the bank deposits  down to the state treasurer   s office and would make the deposits. I would  file bank charter information with the secretary of state. I would go to new  bank charter hearings and set those up, the locations. I managed stuff that  was going on during the hearings and logistics and things like that. I really  learned a lot.  Filed, did an awful lot of filing. All the banks had to send in minutes from  their monthly board meetings. All those had to go in the individual files. I  would do that. I would read the minutes about what banks were doing and  who said what, what kind of motions were made, what kind of plans they  were making, and just interesting things. That was very much a learning  experience for me, in that type of a job.  They wanted me to be a bank examiner. He tried to get me to come take the  exam for that, but I   d seen what that job was like. It was people, mostly  men, there were as few women, mostly men, going to small towns, the  smallest towns in Oklahoma. That   s where the state banks were. Staying in a  motel for two or three weeks. Working all day auditing in the bank, and then  going back to the motel room and typing up the reports at night and going  home on the weekends. I thought,    That   s not for me. I don   t really want to  do that.    So I declined that opportunity to take the test. Most of those people  ended up as bank vice presidents. I could have done that. I just didn   t want  to do it, for some reason. That wasn   t the life I had imagined as a twenty,  twenty-five year old doing that, so I didn   t.  Finchum Pistol Pete would have been the mascot in those days, too.  Beard Yes.  Finchum Any stories about him?  Beard No, I didn   t know any Pistol Petes. Now, since Wade was in the band, one  of the Pistol Petes was in the band with Wade and then he tried out for Pistol  Pete, Josh Pulver. Then after graduation, he worked for the Alumni  Association a while. Now, he has a job as the camp manager at one of the  Oklahoma United Methodist camps in Tahlequah, at Camp Egan. He and I  are really good friends. I   m president of their board. We   ve kept up and  stayed in touch. I   m pretty active in the United Methodist church, even on  23  the international level, and Josh   s father is a Methodist minister. I   ve known  the family for a long time. It was neat when he got that Pistol Pete position.  He was very good at it.  Finchum He was.  Beard Then there was a young lady whose mother was in my graduating class, and  she went to Oklahoma State and she married a young man who was a Pistol  Pete, Matt Ralls. Now there   s a second one that I know. I really didn   t know  any when I was in school.  Finchum You still have a lot of connection to campus and people.  Beard Yes, I served on the alumni board back before I got married as the Marshall  County representative to the board. I enjoyed that. Of course, I   ve known a  number of the alumni presidents through professional affiliations or  different things.  Finchum How often do you get back to campus?  Beard I have season football tickets.  Finchum Pretty regular then.  Beard I go every season. When my son went to OSU, in 2001, I got on the waiting  list for basketball tickets. My name finally came up, my number came up,  and I got basketball tickets for a number of years. But I   m just too far away  to make a lot of those Wednesday night games and still be at work. The last  few years I dropped my tickets. He was not able to go anymore with me. It  was just too difficult to go up for that many games.  I keep my football tickets. My aunt lives in Stillwater. She   s an OSU  alumni. Her husband was on the faculty. He got his PhD there. They moved  there, I think in    69 for him to work on his PhD. Then, he was hired in the  agronomy department after he got his degree. She still lives in Stillwater.  She loves the games so she goes with me. We have four tickets. She sits  there and then my sister in Tulsa is a big OSU fan. She went to OSU, but  she didn   t graduate from there. She played in the band as well. She had as  good of an experience in the band as I did. That   s a chance for us to have  some family time, on game days.  Finchum Got a closet of orange?  Beard Have a closet of orange, but not nearly as big a closet as my son Wade. All  of the clothes that that kid owns are orange or black. He got a degree in  Business, Sports Management. Then, he got a degree in Hotel and  24  Restaurant Administration. We tried to get him to do that when he went up  there, because he had food service experience here. His several jobs that he  had in Madill, were in food service but he was not interested in that. He  finally decided that   s where he needed to be, so he went back after he had  his five years in undergraduate school. Went back and got a degree in Hotel  and Restaurant, was their top graduate when he graduated. Got a job with  Marriot Corporation, a management training program. Went to Phoenix and  enjoyed that, but it was really hot out there in the summer. They worked him  pretty long hours, because he was really good.  Then, he came back to Oklahoma City and got a job with Oklahoma State as  the high school recruiter. His territory was from Norman to Edmond. He had  all the area high schools. He was recruiting students. Perfect person for that  job. He did an outstanding job with that, because he loves Oklahoma State  so much. He can answer any questions or he could find the answers really  well, because he knows everybody on campus. Now he   s back in Stillwater.  He   s managing the new pizza place in Stillwater, Pie Five, that Josh Fields  and Billy Bajema hired him to be their general manager. He   s doing that,  and he   s having a great time.  Finchum It   s doing pretty well.  Beard Apparently it   s doing very well.  Finchum And school   s not even started yet.  Beard I know. He already told me he doesn   t think he   s going to be able to go to  the football games this fall. He   s going to be working, because they   re going  to be busy.  Finchum So, he won   t be coming back to take over when you retire from here?  Beard No, he   s not.  Finchum The other son     Beard Well, probably neither one of them will ever move back to Madill, because  the youngest son lives in Edmond. He   s married, her family lives in  Edmond. They   re kind of settled there. Small town living, it   s not the town  they even grew up in. Certainly not the town I grew up in. Things have  changed an awful lot in small towns. Luckily, we have a pretty strong  economy in Madill. We have a lot of manufacturing jobs, always had a lot of  home grown industries here.  I   m not sure if this is true now, but at one point we had the largest horse  trailer manufacturer in the world, and the second largest in the world.  25  There   s been some consolidations out there between that number two  company and another company, so I don   t know if those statistics are strong.  We just have a lot of manufacturing jobs. We have an economy that is job  based here. It   s manufacturing. We have tourism with Lake Texoma. The  flood has not helped us any this year. We   re not like a lot of small towns.  We   re growing. Our school system is growing.  Finchum About how many is in a graduating class?  Beard A hundred. Right at a hundred.  Finchum That   s a good size.  Beard There was sixty-eight in my class, now there   s a hundred. It   s growing.  We   ve grown from a 2A school to a 4A school.  Finchum And the water tower says they   re the wildcats?  Beard Wildcats, the Madill Wildcats, yes.  Finchum Any town history you want to share?  Beard Oh, we don   t have an exciting town history.  Finchum It   s the county seat.  Beard It   s the county seat. We have a town square with the courthouse in the  middle. The square has always been kind of the hub of downtown and  activity. People used to come to town on Thursday and Friday nights or  Saturday nights, and park their cars around the square and just sit and talk  and visit and shop. I guess the stores stayed open late on Saturday nights.  Finchum When you were in high school?  Beard No, it was probably in the    30s,    40s     Finchum Okay.  Beard When I was in high school, we just used to    make the drag.    Drive from one  end to the other and around the square and you honked at your friends. You  stopped and got a coke at one of the drive-ins. We had a drive-in at each end  of town. It was just cars constantly in this perpetual circle on Friday and  Saturday nights. That   s what we did. We had one movie theatre when I was  in high school. It was still open, barely.  Finchum Was the county fair here?  26  Beard Yes, we still have a county fair that   s going. It   s holding on. There   s not a  lot people that live on farms that can, and do all that, make quilts. We have a  really strong 4-H program. Our OSU extension directors do a really fine job  with the 4-H program. They   re very active. Our kids go to 4-H competitions  and win awards. As does our FFA group, we have an outstanding FFA  program here. We   re just building them a new building, at the high school.  Finchum Do they go up to 4-H Roundup?  Beard Yes, they do and they always come home with awards.  Finchum Well, is there an alumni group in the county, or in Madill?  Beard No, there isn   t. We used to have one, a number of years ago. Then there   s  been kind of an area one, but I don   t think it   s very active either.  Finchum Most folks know that you are an OSU alum, the circles you run in?  Beard Yes. We have a lot of OSU graduates in Madill. We have a lot of Sooner  graduates, so we have our own little Bedlam competitions for different  things. It   s fun.  Finchum Football will be interesting this year.  Beard It will be. Not sure how the season   s going to play out. I   m going to go up  there and support them anyway. That   s the thing about OSU fans. It really  doesn   t matter if we win or not. So many of us are used to having lost a lot  during the years. It   s just supporting the school and being there, and being  proud to be an OSU graduate, you know.  Finchum Why do you think that is?  Beard I think it   s probably because of the experience. You don   t just go to  Oklahoma State to get a degree. You go for the complete experience. That   s  what it ends up being for most people I think, is a total experience. Learning  a lot of leadership skills, social skills, making a lot of new friends,  networking, careers.  Finchum How about loyalty     Beard Absolutely. I think it   s just the neatest thing when we sing the alma mater. If  you notice, a lot of schools have copied OSU in singing the Alma Mater at  football games or basketball after the events. When I was going, we didn   t  do that. The band knew that song, but nobody else did it. When Oklahoma  State started that on a regular basis, kind of as a tradition, more and more  27  schools have picked up on that and started bringing that out as a way to  generate pride in your organization.  Finchum I could ask you to sing it. (Laughter) You know the words?  Beard I do know the words.  Finchum Do you want to sing it?  Beard No, I don   t really want to sing it.  Finchum Okay, we   ll pass on that then. (Laughter)  Beard Okay.  Finchum Going forward, what are you plans? You   re sixty-five, are you planning to  retire anytime soon?  Beard I am planning to retire sometime, but I don   t really have a retirement plan in  mind. I   m working on that and thinking about that. I didn   t ever think I  would be as attached to this business as I am. Now that it   s here, I really am  attached to it. I   m not sure what I want to do about it. I   d like to pass it on to  my kids. We   re trying to figure out if there   s a way for them to take it over  and keep it going without them having to move here, basically. We   re just  trying to play that a day at a time and figure it out.  Finchum Computers will help with that.  Beard Yes, we   re pretty automated with everything. Still, there   s something about  having a decision maker in the office every day that the employees can  come to, as well as customers, and say,    How do I figure this out? What do I  need to do to fix this, to be able to sell my property?    and things like that.  That   s a lot of what I do, is just trouble shoot and make those decisions.  When the buck stops here, somebody has to make that decision. It   s kind of  hard to make that on the phone sometimes.  Finchum Well, and do you have to go across the street to the courthouse to do much  of the work?  Beard We don   t do the research over there that we used to. We check out court  cases a lot. We have to copy those and put them in abstracts. We do file  documents for our closings over there. We go over there every day.  Finchum To check deeds and that sort of thing     28  Beard We don   t have to do that. We get our copies of our documents on a flash  drive every day. We go trade flash drives and then plug it into the computer.  It uploads. Somebody indexes that into our title plant. That   s what, my  youngest son does that for me, after hours.  Finchum For the kids that are coming up, what advice would you give them about  going to college or to OSU?  Beard Well, I   ll always recommend Oklahoma State. Even if you   re from the  smallest school, you can succeed at Oklahoma State. If you just have a  mindset that this is what I want to do, and that I can do this, don   t be  intimidated by being from such a small school. When I went to school there,  I think it was maybe an eleven thousand population. I thought, always,     Where are eleven thousand people? I see the same people every day in my  routine on my schedule, and there   s not that many people here.    To me, it  was never a huge campus. It was never overwhelming to me. I think, if you,  just go up there and be determined that,    I can do this.    You study. Studying  is the reason that you   re there, is for academics. Go to class and study,  participate, get to know the teachers, the professors, get to know other  students, get involved in campus life.  My oldest son didn   t pledge a fraternity. Band became his fraternity. He was  so connected. He   s in one of the band fraternities. He was so connected with  the band, that that was his fraternity. He lived on campus, and then his  sophomore year, he wanted to get an apartment and move off campus. I told  him no. He didn   t understand that and kind of got upset. He thought that I  didn   t trust him being off campus. I said,    Wade, that is not it at all. You   ve  never done anything for me not to trust you. It   s the fact that if you move off  campus, you   ll be away from campus, and you   ll miss a huge portion of  campus life. Just living on campus will make all the difference to your total  experience. I want you to have that. When you get to be a senior, and you  want to move off campus, that   s fine but not as a sophomore, really not even  as a junior. I want you to just be on campus.    He said,    Okay.    He moved  into one of those first apartment style living areas when they built those. He  understood what I was talking about after he was in there.  Finchum It   s a sense of community.  Beard It   s a sense of community that you miss. When you   re off campus, you   re  just living in an apartment. There   s a lot bigger tendency to not go to class  when you have to drive up there, find a parking place. Parking   s always  been at a premium at Oklahoma State just because we   re sort of landlocked.  A lot of off campus students have a difficult time finding a parking place,  and if you don   t find one, you miss class. He understood that after he stayed  on campus and he did, he stayed until his senior year. I guess, he lived in a  29  number of those apartment areas. Had a different kind of experience in each  one of them. By and large, he enjoyed that.  Finchum They   re getting ready to open the new ones soon, right there on Hall of  Fame.  Beard Uh-huh.  Finchum To me it   s almost off campus.  Beard It is, almost. You know, I think for high school students, if they   re really  serious about getting an education, Oklahoma State is a great place to go.  You can have success. If you study and try, the teachers are not there to fail  you. They   re there to help you succeed. I really believe that is the case at  Oklahoma State. I   ve not seen that at some other places or heard about that,  you know. Some schools don   t have that reputation. Oklahoma State does. I  believe that that is really what their mission is, to help students who want to  get an education to get one. I think you can get a lot of financial help at  Oklahoma State if you work at that as well. There are a lot of scholarships, I  know, that have gone unfunded because nobody applied for them over the  years. I   ve heard about those. I know that you can, if you want to stay on  campus, enroll in school, there are ways to stay, financially, and get that  degree.  Finchum Just ask someone.  Beard Just ask someone and there are plenty of people there who will help you do  that.  Finchum What part of your OSU experience contributed to your success? I know it  did, but is there some aspect in particular that you credit?  Beard I would say the fraternity did to a certain extent because of the  responsibility, learning responsibility. We had to manage that house, keep it  going, and as the kitchen manager, I had to keep a kitchen going. Develop  leadership styles and skills. Then, the campus activities and the leadership  opportunities there, being in the different clubs; the student senate, business  student council. Then I was in Who   s Who in American Colleges and  Universities, I was selected for that.  I was in the top twenty senior men. I didn   t make the top ten, but I made the  interviews for the top twenty. You know, that is a confidence building  situation and leadership. That   s just part of growing in leadership. That kind  of promoted me and jumpstarted me to being a young adult out on my own  working in a business.  30  Then, I became involved in my state abstractors association. All of that, just  transferred, I just felt comfortable. I had the confidence,    I could do this.    I  could be in any kind of leadership, leadership in my church, and then my  profession. Those were things I learned at Oklahoma State.  I was involved with things in high school, but it was the maturity aspect in  college of giving me the confidence and the responsibilities to carry out  those jobs, and work in those leadership positons that just carried forward  into a professional life. I   m past president of every organization that I   ve  been a part of in Madill, the Rotary Club. We have a community daycare  center that I   ve been president of that board. I   ve been a board member of  that for thirty-plus years. President of the Rotary Club, president of the Art  Club, every office in my church.  Then the Oklahoma Land Title Association is a trade organization for our  abstractors in Oklahoma. I   m a past president of that. Then, I   ve got  involved, because of that, in the National Title Association. I   ve rose,  through working on committees and chaired a committee for five years.  Then I served on their Board of Governors for four years and had the  opportunity to be president of that organization. I turned that down just  because I had too many, it was going to be too big of a job for somebody  with a small company like mine. I didn   t think I could do justice to my  company. I turned that down. Last year, both of those organizations gave me  honorary memberships which is the equivalent of lifetime achievement  awards. So all that, a lot of that happened, because of Oklahoma State, to  me. It   s just the confidence and knowing I could do anything I wanted.  Finchum You   ve got to have some kind of leadership skills or characteristics that  have     Beard Probably so, but sometimes those aren   t developed.  Finchum That   s true.  Beard If people don   t get to the right place, or don   t pay attention to that, they may  not get developed at the same level. Then some people, it takes a lot longer  for those to come out. Mine have been, (laughs) I guess mine have been  there ever since I was pretty young.  Finchum I say since you were working two jobs in high school   Beard Yes. I had two jobs for twenty five years of my working career, because I  owned a gift shop here in Madill too. It started out as a small picture-framing  business that I bought on the side, because I am a hobby artist. I  thought,    I   ll buy this equipment and frame my own artwork.    Then, we  became commercial, and it grew into gift lines, and a bridal registry, and  31  everything. I had that for twenty-five years. As I decided I needed to kind of  cut down on some things that was one of things that I decided to give up.  The retail market was changing in Madill anyway. It   s kind of hard to  compete with Walmart, small businesses. That was a lot of fun. I enjoyed  that part of it. There I had two jobs, two totally unrelated jobs. (Laughs)  Finchum Good balance I guess. With your art, did you learn anything with it at OSU?  Beard Yes, I actually did. I took, we did not have art in public schools in Madill  when I graduated. I have artistic, I guess, some talent. My grandmother used  to do crafts with us all the time. That was a good babysitting opportunity for  her, was to keep us busy with crafts so I knew how to make a lot of things. I  was in Boy Scouts.  I went to Oklahoma State and I guess my junior year I took a class in color  and design in the art department and I really liked it. I realized that you had  to be an art major to do very well in that, but I wasn   t. I was a business  major. I just took the one class, I think. The City of Stillwater had a program  called Multigraphics and it was in the city park. It was this enormous  building and it had a pottery kiln in it. They taught classes. The band  director   s wife was the executive director of that program. I took a class out  there. I don   t even remember what it was at first. I took a class.  I kind of got hooked on the art projects. She was kind of inspiring with the  things she was creating for people to take. It was a lot of community  residents that were doing this. It was the beginning of adult education,  community adult education. They ran that program. I did a little bit of  pottery. I learned batiks, how to do batiks. I would do them. That   s a very  old art form in India, Eastern art form that uses dye, wax, and fabrics to  create art pictures that are actually done with dyes and wax to create that. I  got hooked on that. I supported myself two years in graduate school quite a  bit by doing batiks out at Multigraphics at the park and then take them to the  student art shows and sell them.  In fact, the lady that I worked for, Jean Ray, she bought one of my paintings  one time to give to a friend of hers from England that had come over here.  She sent one of my pieces of art work over to England. Then, I had a  Russian student that was there on an exchange program. She bought one of  my pieces and took it home to Russia with her. I   m sure those are not around  anywhere. It was a lot of fun. I sold hundreds and hundreds of those batiks.  Finchum Do you still do it?  Beard I haven   t done that in a long time. Then, after I graduated, I took some more  art classes. I   ve taken some more watercolors, I got hooked on watercolors.  We had an artist here in Madill, who was from, she was from Madill, she  32  had studied in New York, had her career in New York, moved back home,  and she was teaching private lessons and group glasses. My mother started  taking from her. Then, I started taking from her. Then once I lived in  Oklahoma City finishing my thesis, I took a watercolor class. Loved the  watercolors. That   s what I painted in most of the time is watercolors.  I   ve taken a lot. When I was here, Murray State College had a really pretty  good arts programs in the evenings. I   ve always told people that I have  enough hours for an art degree from MIT. Murray and Tishomingo, but I   d  drive over there with friends that were painting. I   ve done a lot of different  things, a lot of watercolors. The teacher purchased one of my paintings for  the Murray Permanent Collection one time. That   s, maybe that   s still around  somewhere over at Murray. I won a best-in-show at the Tishomingo art  show one year. We have a really active art club and we   ve been having art  shows for fifty-four, fifty-three, fifty-four years here. A very nice, a very  good art show. I   ve won numerous ribbons through the years.  Finchum Is it abstract or is it more     Beard It used to be realistic, but last year I decided that I was going to start  painting again. I hadn   t been painting for ten or fifteen years. I decided that I  was going to start back and I started taking a class that was kind of abstract,  collage, multimedia things. I   m really into that now, that I really enjoy. A lot  of those skills that I   ve known in different art forms, putting them together  and doing that. I   m not painting as much as I would like, but I am trying,  Finchum You   ll have to do something OSU oriented.  Beard Actually I have. I did a collage for my son   s birthday last year. The  background was newspapers from the bowl game in Phoenix that we won  and the Bedlam game that we won. The headlines on the Oklahoman was  collaged on the background and it has a Pistol Pete head on top of that.  Finchum Can   t get away from it   Beard That was a lot of fun. No, you can   t get away from it.  Finchum Where do you consider home? Here?  Beard Madill, yes, oh yes.  Finchum Madill, because family was here or     Beard I mean I have lived here all my life, except those years that I lived in  Stillwater.  33  Finchum If you didn   t live here, you might live there?  Beard Well, our youngest son lives in Edmond. Wade, my older son, was living  there until just a few months ago when he moved back to Stillwater. We  have two grandsons in Edmond, a three-year-old and a ten-month-old.  Finchum About a forty-five minute drive.  Beard Yeah, Jack and Henry. We go up there an awful lot, and we stay up there a  quite a bit.  Finchum Hopefully they   ll trundle on up to OSU when it   s time.  Beard Their parents went to the other school. I   m not sure about that. I   d like to be  able to take them to Grandparent University in the summers. That   s what  I   m hoping, even if it   s just for an activity, not a brainwashing, (laughs)  recruiting effort. We   ll see.  Finchum We   ve covered quite a bit of ground. Anything else you want to add before I  ask my last?  Beard I   m not sure what it would be. (Laughs)  Finchum I usually end with asking how people want to be remembered. When  history   s written about you, what do you want it to say?  Beard I don   t think I   ve ever answered that question. Oh, it   s probably what a lot  of people would say, maybe I made a difference, either in somebody   s life  or in making this a better place to live. Whether it be any of the  organizations that I   ve been a part of, or my community or my church.  Hopefully I have raised good kids. I   m proud of them. They   re both really  outstanding young men, have a wonderful daughter-in-law, and two  wonderful grandsons. I   m very proud of them. I   m happy that life is good.  Just try to continue to help as many people as I can.  Finchum Things seem to have fallen into place just as you went, without any major  hurdles.  Beard That   s true. I mean it hasn   t been totally easy, but you forget the difficult  times. You know, God has blessed me in a lot of different ways, and given  me a lot opportunities and resources. I   m thankful for that. I know a lot of  people haven   t had life as good as mine, and I   m very aware of that. I think  that   s part of giving back.    Who much is given, much is expected.     Finchum Well, OSU is well represented where you   re concerned, so thank you very  much for sharing today.  34  Beard Thank you very much for coming down.  -------  -------   
