 Gill. Today is February 27, 2009. I   m interviewing  Steve Jorns here in the OSU library on the Oklahoma State University  campus as part of the O-STATE Stories Project, a part of the Oklahoma  Oral History Research Program. Steve, I appreciate you taking time to  be with us today and I understand this is a pretty special day for you.  It is. I   m excited. The family   s here, it   s going to be an interesting  evening.  Congratulations on your impending induction into the OSU Alumni Hall  of Fame.  Thank you, Jerry.  A great honor. Any special feelings you have about this recognition?  Well you never feel that you deserve it. I   m very humbled. I went and  looked at the list of all the past inductees and when you look at it you  think,    Well gosh, with all of these wonderful people, why me?    But  somebody felt I was deserving.  I think so. Maybe we can step back a little bit and talk about growing up.  I know you have deep Oklahoma and Oklahoma State University roots.  I do.  Can you share some information about your early life? About growing  up in Oklahoma and about your family?  I will. Well I   ll start with my family, my paternal great-grandfather  made the land run into Oklahoma in 1891. He settled near the little town  of Parkland. He was from Kansas, a farmer, good German stock, and  5  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  they settled near Parkland. I   ve actually been out there to see their old  homestead and the little schoolhouse he helped build. So it was kind of  fun to go see that.  Where is Parkland, Steve?  Lincoln County, near Chandler would be the closest place for you. He  was a farmer, of course, and injured his back and later became a  merchant. He had a store in Perkins; the building is still there, it   s called  Jorns and Thurman. And then after that he moved over to Yale and had a  store there that was called the Golden Rule Store, and that was the  forerunner of the J.C. Penney Company. He was a devout Methodist and  J.C. Penney was a Methodist and you bought your merchandise through  J.C. Penney and it was called the Golden Rule store. He died in the mid-  1920s.  My grandfather, his son, was a Methodist minister and preached all over  Oklahoma and ended up being very active at OCU in Oklahoma City.  He died in the 1980s. My father, his son, grew up here in Oklahoma. So  we are all from here. On my mother   s side, her family lived in Stillwater  and Hunter up near Enid. Their name was Kuhlmeyer and my  grandmother married a Pollard and they lived here. But everybody   s  buried in either Stillwater, Yale, or Perkins. So there   s lots of Jornses  and Kuhlmeyers and Pollards and they   re all right around here.  Kin to the Pollards over in Enid?  No, most everybody migrated to Texas, so not many of them are left  around in Oklahoma. But I was born here in Stillwater, my dad and my  mother went to school here. My dad graduated from Miami High School  in 1936 and he came to Oklahoma A M. My mother graduated from  Tulsa Central in 1939 and they both came here, met here, and got  married here. They both graduated in 1942. My dad, a poor preacher   s  son, had to work his way through school and he worked at the Stillwater  Milling Company for Haskell Cudd all those years. Went off to World  War II and he was in the Pacific, a Captain in the army. Then after the  war he came back to Stillwater and he worked for the Stillwater Milling  Company. My mother worked for Henry Bennett in his office. My dad  was a PiKA  Pi Kappa Alpha  and my mother was an Alpha Delta Pi.  Matter of fact, my dad was the first president of the PiKA chapter here at  OSU, so every year at initiation for years he   d go back and help initiate  the pledges and did that a long time.  I was born here in 1948, a little house over on Hester Street north of the  stadium is where we lived. Dr. Rippy delivered me and I went to school  with his daughter, Patsy, so it   s always kind of a little small world when  6  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  you meet up with all these people. But we grew up in Shawnee. My dad  went to work for the Shawnee Milling Company in the late 1940s so we  moved to Shawnee and that   s essentially where I grew up and graduated  from Shawnee High School in 1966.  Now you mentioned your grandfather played football at Oklahoma  State, is that right?  Well my mother   s dad, his name was Joe Pollard. Of course they were  from Stillwater and he graduated from Stillwater High School and went  to Oklahoma A M for a year or two and he ended up also at St.  Gregory   s College in Shawnee. I never   I was too little, I didn   t ask  him, but my mother said he   d played for the football team here, but he  was in high school and occasionally they   d get some of the high school  boys to come play with the college football team. I   ve always been  curious about that; one of these days I   ll take the time to go research it.  Steve, a fascinating background. Were there some early experiences that  molded you, some values you learned from your parents that influenced  the rest of your life?  Well yes, my parents were very modest, very frugal. So there was an  appreciation for money because we didn   t have any. We grew up in a  little house, I think it was about 900 square feet and there were three  boys and my parents. We had to work. I mean, they would do what they  could, but we always had to work summer times, Christmas holidays,  after school, and that went for both of my brothers. So I think it taught  us a lot of values in that context. Everyone in my family   s a big reader.  We read a lot. TV just wasn   t much of a big deal in our family, so we  read a lot and worked.  My dad was just the nicest man you   ll ever want to meet. He was a  salesman, everybody enjoyed being around him, everybody liked him.  My mom was a stay-at-home mom, so you know, a lot of values. Went  to church and Sunday school. So all of those things, kind of the Leave it  to Beaver lifestyle of the 1950s, that   s what we were. We were that kind  of a family. But just little things, we had one car. There are so many  excesses in today   s society. What we had was not much so we  appreciated what we had.  Steve you enrolled at OSU in 1966?  I did, I graduated from high school in    66 from Shawnee.  With a major in Hotel Restaurant Administration. Now what influenced  you to choose that major?  7  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  I was going to talk about that tonight also. It is almost a corny story.  When I got out of Shawnee High School and came to OSU, my older  brother and my parents went here and it was just kind of expected that  we   d go here, we just didn   t think about going any place else, this was  our life up here. But after my freshman year, Jerry, I didn   t have any real  direction and I had a summer job, I was working as a lifeguard at a pool  in Shawnee and I read the book Hotel. It was a good story, and the lead  character was named Peter McDermott. I remember talking about it and  my dad suggesting,    Well if you   re interested in that, Oklahoma State  has a Hotel and Restaurant program, so when you get back to school,  why don   t you go over and look into that program?     So I did. When I got back up here I looked into it and I came over to  what was Home Economics West at the time and met with the director  of the school. His name was John McAllister, a wonderful old fellow,  looked like Santa Claus without a beard, just a great guy and we enjoyed  him immensely. But he encouraged me to take an orientation course on  the lodging industry. I took that course and was intrigued and it was  fascinating, and when you coupled it with this fictitious character Peter  McDermott from Hotel I thought,    That   s who I   m going to be. I   m  going to grow up and run this great big hotel someday.    So that started  me.  I really just started majoring in it without any real work experience. But  as I went along in the summer time, I worked over at the Camelot Inn in  Tulsa. It was new and it was owned by a Tulsa family, but the manager  there was an OSU graduate, so he was very good about hiring kids to  come over and work in the summer time. And then I also worked at the  Union Club Hotel here on campus. So that was my experience while I  was in school, going to school, learning about the hotel business and got  some first-hand experience at the same time.  Now you   d obviously been to Oklahoma State many times before, but as  a student, what were some of your early impressions of OSU?  I remember the campus was always so pretty. I mean architecturally it is  so pretty. Of course I   d go over to OU occasionally. I had a cousin that  played football over there so we   d go watch games. But I just remember  the beauty of this campus. It felt so inviting and so different. It felt home  to me, I mean I knew my way around. And so having been around as a  kid, it felt like home. I think it   s the openness and the cleanliness and  friendliness of this campus. It just feels so different, particularly as I   ve  traveled the country and seen universities all over, this is a very different  feeling campus. It just feels good to kids. And I think that   s probably the  best first impression that you have is when they come see it.  8  Gill  Jorns  Well were there some faculty members, advisors that you worked with, I  know you mentioned one of them, who were influential in your student  development?  Yes, there were. One in particular, and he   s still living, Louis Tremonti.  Lou was one of my professors back then and he was fairly young. As a  student, I was in my teens and 20s, but Lou was probably late 20s, early  30s. But he had worked in the restaurant industry and in the summer  he   d go work on Mackinac Island when school was not in session. So  you kind of had this, you know, war stories from him but he was a great  professor. So he probably had as much influence on me, because I had  him for several courses over time. John McAllister was an older man  who was the head of the school, but it was like family. Going to the  hotel school back then was family, it was smaller. So those two I think  had a profound impact on me in terms of just keeping my interest level  up.  When I was a senior I was very fortunate to have a lot of job offers. I  think I had six job offers, which was pretty good to have choices back  then. The two that I had, one was a man by the name of Charles  Lanphere. Charles has since passed away, but at the time he was  working for Ramada Inns. He had married the founder   s daughter, so he  was in pretty good shape employment-wise. But he was a bright fellow  and went on and started the Registry Hotel Corporation and did a great  job at that. But Charles had come back to campus to speak at our  Hospitality Days, and while on campus he sat in on some of the  interviews, and sat in on mine and, of course, tried to persuade me to go  work for Ramada Inns in Phoenix.  But there was another graduate of Oklahoma State, a man by the name  of Don Campbell. Don   s still living and lives in Cleveland. He was  running a company called Hospitality Motor Inns, which was owned by  Standard Oil of Ohio. Now they only had 12 or 13 hotels at the time, but  Don was one of these very impressive men in his late 30s, I   d flown up  to Cleveland to interview. But I was impressed with him and the  organization, and also the fact that this hotel chain was owned by this  big oil company with lots of capital to grow. So that was very exciting to  look at the prospects of that. Particularly they were building hotels along  the interstate highway system in the Midwest. They   d have a gas station,  a 200-room motor lodge, and then a Dutch Pantry restaurant; a lot of  money behind them. So I was very excited about that, and went to work  for that company. I remember my starting salary was  700 a month,  which to me was a lot of money back then, particularly as a college kid  who   d had none. So I went to work for Hospitality and I stayed with  them for several years and I just had a great experience with them.  9  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Coming back to your OSU experience for a minute, was Dr. O   Toole the  dean?  Yes, Lela O   Toole.  Someone asked me to ask you about your relationship with Dean  O   Toole. Is there a story there?  Well I can   t tell you that I knew Dean O   Toole very well. I think like a  lot of students, you know, if you saw her coming down the hall and you  were coming, you   d think,    You know what, I think I   ll just turn around  and go the other way.    Not that I ever had any bad experiences with her.  She had reputation of just an absolutely outstanding, recognized dean.  But she also had a reputation of she could be pretty tough. (Laughs)  Again, I never got in trouble, so I didn   t have to face the music there.  Were you active in the Hotel Restaurant Administration Society?  Yes, my last two years. I took time out to go to the military when I was  in school like a lot of people did because that was the Vietnam War era.  So I went and joined the Army Reserve and had to take some time off to  go do my training and then come back. But my junior and senior year  after coming back I was very active in our Hotel and Restaurant Society,  which was a great way to start networking in preparation for going out in  the real world. We would put on an event every year, as the kids still do,  called Hospitality Days where the industry people would come in and  talk to us and we   d network. That is still here, after all these years, and it  is probably one of the wonderful things that program and the university  do for kids is to let them have interaction with people from the real  world because you   re all going to be there at some point in time, but it  helps you kind of figure out what you want to do. I think that   s so  important.  Were there some fellow students that you remember from your days  at  OSU  that you   ve maintained contact with?  Well yes, there   s certainly some that I have, one in particular, he was  also a fraternity brother, Charles Duty. Charlie was a hotel and  restaurant student also at the same time I was. He went into the country  club side of the hospitality business. He   s done very well running big  city clubs, currently in Dallas. Charlie and I have remained friends,  probably more than any of them. Over the years, you know, you lose  touch as you move around, but Charlie and I have remained friends.  10  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Can you share with us some of the organizations and activities you were  involved in and engaged with as a student?  Well really, just the Hotel and Restaurant Administration Society and  Hospitality Days. I was in a fraternity, Beta Theta Pi fraternity, played  intramural sports. So between school and intramurals and the fraternity  and hotel school, that was plenty. And I worked. So I remember thinking  back, I   m not sure we thought about stress back then, but I was probably  pretty stressed because before I worked at the Union I worked at  clothing store here called Harold   s. So I essentially worked most of my  time in college.  Were there some favorite hangouts that you had, Steve? On campus, off  campus, when you had time?  Well there actually was one, and it   s interesting you mention it. There  was a fellow by the name of Terry Brewer who had a place down on  Washington Street called The Patio. I don   t want my kids to ever think  that I had a glass of beer while I was in school, but we did. Terry had  that little signature thing where he   d put a green olive in the beer. I  maintained a relationship with Terry for 30 or 40 years after college  because he stayed in the restaurant business. But we   d go to The Patio.  And then down on Main Street, downtown we had a little place where  we   d go hang out and play shuffleboard called The Cozy Corner. I loved  the Union because the Union was, you know, you   d find a little quiet  place in the Union where you   d go and get a cup of coffee and do your  studying. So I was a big user of the Union as well as the library. I had  little niches in the library where I   d go and hide out and study.  So you actually knew where the library was? (Laughs)  I knew where the library was, yes.  Are there some favorite memories that you have of your time at  Oklahoma State? Highlights of your time as a student?  There is one class that I   over the years kids have asked me that,    What  do you remember that you enjoy?    I wish I remembered the name of the  class, but it was over in Home Economics East, which has since been  torn down. And our professors were Mrs.  Hazel  Baker and Ms.  Mary   Leidigh. I remember their names, I cannot remember their first names,  but they taught these classes over in Home Economics East. And this  particular class was one where each week you ran a restaurant, and you  would have a different job in that class. One week you   d be the  restaurant manager or you might be a waiter or you might be a  11  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  dishwasher or you might be a procure man, purchasing person. But  every week you had a different job.  That was probably the most fascinating class I had because you would  actually have to go out and market your meal to faculty or students, and  we   d sell 30 or 40 tickets. You   d have a budget and you   d plan for that,  and have to go buy your food. But you   d run a little mini-restaurant  every week. I think that   s the most fascinating and entertaining course I  ever took because it was a little bit of real life getting put in play and I  enjoyed that. We also had a course called Meat Technology, which was  a nice way of saying butchering. It was over in the agricultural school,  but that course served me so well in the hotel and restaurant business  because we would take whole carcasses, whether it be beef or pig or a  lamb or whatever it was, or poultry, and we would start with the carcass  and we would cut that into wholesale and retail cuts and use all the  products. At the time, and I loved it and made an A, but that   s the course  that I used all my life, talking with chefs or food and beverage directors.  Just being able to know all those cuts of meats. It was just a little simple  thing that served me well.  I   m trying to think of the professor   s name, Robert   ; he taught that  meat labs course for years, didn   t he?  Oh yeah, that does sound   Robert something, I can   t remember his  name. He was good though, we enjoyed him.  You graduated in 1971     I did. I did an extra year, yes.     but then you began your meteoric rise immediately in the industry.  Can you review your career, and mention some of your professional  highlights?  Well, professionally, Jerry, like all people when they start out, I was just  a low man on the totem pole in the hotel business working my way up.  As I mentioned, I worked for Hospitality Motor Inns. I started in the  marketing side of the business, which I always felt I had good people  skills so I migrated toward the marketing side and I enjoyed that. I  stayed with Hospitality for a number of years, and then I moved to a  large real estate company called General Growth Properties and they are  still around, although in this economic cycle they are struggling a bit,  but they are the largest mall company in the country. But at the time they  had 16 Holiday Inns. I went to work for that company and started  running one of their Holiday Inns and worked my way up until I was  running all of them for the company.  12  Gill  Jorns  But with that company, because it was a real estate-based company and  in the hotel business, there is the service component of the hotel  business, but there   s also the real estate side of the business. It is a very  expensive thing to build a hotel or a restaurant, very capital intensive.  But that   s what was interesting about the business because it takes a very  significant operating component coupled with knowledge of the real  estate business. So as I worked for General Growth it ingrained in me  that knowledge about the real estate component that really sparked that  seed, put a fire in me to go into business for myself, which I did. Really  went into business for myself in 1981 when we started the company but  later led to other things.  Accomplishments over the years, of course a lot of them are university-related,  but I remember in the early    80s the American Lodging  Association, back then it was called the American Hotel and Motel  Association, named me one of the four or five rising stars in the  industry. That was a big deal to have your national association select you  for that. But I had some little things like that over the years that were  nice accomplishments.  You   ve also owned or been partner, manager, part owner in about two  or three different companies. Can you elaborate a little bit after you  were at American General Hospitality, then you moved into some other  areas. Could you share a little bit about that?  I did. I started my company called American General Hospitality in  1981. It started with a Holiday Inn in Arlington, Texas. We acquired this  Holiday Inn and I   d arranged for equity, for people to invest in the  equity side, and we got a loan from a Canadian bank. And that was our  first one. Then one led to two, two led to four, four led to eight. And so  in the early years of my career, we would acquire and/or build Holiday  Inns, Embassy Suites hotels, and Hampton Inns, that   s what we did. In  the mid 1980s we had a major financial crisis that was spawned by the  tax law changes that President Reagan put in place in    86 and it changed  a lot of the rules. As a result it also created some financial chaos and we  had what we call the S L crisis. Out of that it became very difficult to  develop real estate all over the country.  We were managing our own hotels, but we were managing hotels for  third parties at the same time where they   d be partnerships or a financial  institution. But we felt that   s where we needed to take our business  model, rather than on a real estate side, because of this financial crisis.  Well we were good at running hotels, because we were running our own  hotels and there were not a lot of hotel management companies around,  they just didn   t exist. People were owner-operators of hotels. The  franchising industry was around where Holiday Inn would sell you a  13  franchise or Ramada, but those people would own or operate their hotels  as we did.  So we took this business model and we   d just feel our way through it.  We started to manage hotels for other people, charge them a fee, run the  business, employ the employees and take that liability off of the owner.  And Jerry, that model took off. And from kind of the mid 1980s until the  early 1990s, we got to the point we were running about 100 hotels for  people. So it got pretty large. In the mid 1990s after the fall of  Communism, we even went over and tried to buy a Hungarian hotel  company from the Hungarian government, which was a very interesting  experience, raising money in Europe. But it was very political and hard  to do. We also continued to buy hotels and had a real estate portfolio of  hotels that we owned and operated.  In 1996, in order to grow, it was very difficult to go out and raise equity  from Tom or Bill, so we decided to access the public markets and take  the company public. So we took the real estate component of our  business, at that time it was 13 hotels that we owned, and we went  public on the New York Stock Exchange as American General  Hospitality. Our public offering at the time was about  160 million in  equity. A lot of money, but in Wall Street that   s not a lot of money. But  over a period of years we continued to do stock offerings and debt  offerings and we grew to about 56 hotels that we owned with a market  value of about  1.2 billion. Now I continued to have my management  business that was private, and we were running about 120 hotels. So it  was overall a pretty good-sized company with thousands of employees.  The hotel business is cyclical. As the economy goes up, everyone is  travelling, taking vacations, it feels good. When the economy goes down  it suffers. Well we were getting ready to come into one of those cycles,  you could just feel it. There was just too much excess, similar to what  we   ve gone through of late. And I thought, you know, we   re a good size,  but there are a lot of other companies like myself out there. This would  be a good time to acquire someone, be acquired, or merge. So I hired an  investment banking firm and we went up to do that and I ended up  merging with a company called Capstar Hotel Company. They were a  similar sized company, they owned 50 or 60 hotels and we took the two  companies and merged them together, and that   s where the word  Meristar came from: the    Ameri    of American General and the    Star    of  Capstar.  So we had about 110 hotels that we owned in the real estate company,  and we also then took all of the operating company hotels and we went  public with that. So now we had two public companies: Meristar  Hospitality and Meristar Hotels and Resorts. And then ultimately the  14  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  real estate company was acquired by Black Stone, which is one of these  huge private equity firms in New York and our market cap was about   3.2 billion and they acquired the real estate component. We took the  operating company, which had about 200 hotels and we merged that  with another big operating company called Interstate Hotels. I   m  probably putting everybody to sleep.  But that became Interstate and Interstate is the largest hotel management  company in the world. It currently runs about 250 hotels in the U.S. and  across the world. I stayed on the board of that company several years.  And then in the 2003 the board asked me to come back and run it for  about a year and a half after we had a senior management change and I  did. I officially retired in 2005 from the hotel business. Now I say  retired, I still owned one little Marriott Courtyard up in Boise, Idaho  with the Simplot family up until about a year ago and we sold that. But  I   m 60 and enjoying playing golf and not running hotels.  (Laughs) That   s great. Did your experiences here at Oklahoma State  University as a student in HRAD help you prepare for your career?  It really did. I gave you a little example of the cuts of meat, it   s hard to  go back and say there   s any one thing. But an example would be that  through the college we were in, which at the time was called Home  Economics and now it   s Human Environment Sciences, had an Interior  Design course. Did I become an interior designer? Absolutely not, but  by going and having that course and then years later as we would  develop hotels and we would work with designers, it helped me  understand the lingo and the language. Chemistry courses that we took,  when it came time to understand the components of food and what you  should and shouldn   t do with food and why it did or did not spoil or  interact together, at the time you don   t appreciate all that. But as you  look back, all of those little foundations, whether they be business law  courses or accounting courses, all of those things are the little pieces and  parts of your building block that you use later in life. I mean there   s so  much you learn as you get out into the workplace, but you do have that  wonderful foundation that you can look back upon and it just gives you  this great platform from which to go out and have a career.  So this is a wonderful university, it   s a great program, the Hotel and  Restaurant program. It   s gotten better and better and better over the  years. I encourage kids to come here all the time.  Speaking of that, have you had an opportunity in your business years to  hire OSU graduates in your companies?  Jerry, we hired lots of kids.  15  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Had a good experience with them?  We do. We hired lots of kids. And I   ll tell you why. There is something  about kids that come out of this school. They   re grounded, they   re good  kids. They come from great families, good work ethics, good social  backgrounds. So we would recruit here a lot. I mean, we would recruit at  other hotel schools, but we would always hire a number of kids out of  Oklahoma State. And I know so many people in the business because  they used to work for me. Just like Rebecca Easton over at the Atherton,  Rebecca used to work for us. We did lots of recruiting here.  I   ve stayed active here for a lot of years, come back and spoken at  classes and have come back for meetings. So I   ve tried to give back a  lot, just to have   when you go back and talk with a class and you think,     These kids aren   t gonna       and they   re yawning, but you know what, I  know they   re paying attention. But it   s so important, because I  remember in my days when someone would come talk to us, and you   d  pick up little bits about the industry. So I knew that to be able to go back  and just talk to the kids, it was a big deal.  Speaking of students and going back and visiting with them, is there any  advice that you   d give to young people entering the hospitality industry  today?  I would. That   s a great question. When I graduated, my world revolved  around the interstate highway system. That   s how travelers, including a  lot of business people, got around. Air travel was a component, but  people still drove a lot. Well we don   t drive for vacations or for business  anymore, we get on airplanes and fly. And now that   s even compounded  more   we are in such a global economy. I can   t stress enough that the  lodging business is a global business anymore. Whether you are  marketing to travelers, hiring employees, it is completely global. So  even in the latter part of my career, I   d be in Russia, London, Hungary,  Portugal, I mean we had hotels all over   in Mexico, Canada. If I could  give kids one bit of advice, it is understand the global economy and  think outside the box. Just don   t confine yourself to thinking that I   m  going to work in Oklahoma because you are not. The world is changing  so rapidly that kids need to think globally.  You   ve maintained a close relationship with OSU and with the School of  Hotel and Restaurant Administration. What   s motivated you to give so  much of your time and resources to OSU through the years?  Well, I mean, this is home. As I   ve moved around to other states and  cities, this has always kind of been my anchor. So I don   t know that I  consciously thought about giving back, I mean, this is just, this is my  16  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  connection, this is my platform. I   ve given financially and I   ve given of  time, but I suppose as I think back, it   s just like my story of Charles  Lanphere interviewing me, or Don Campbell interviewing me. That   s an  important thing, to make sure you get a kid off on the right foot in the  right job. I get a real sense of accomplishment to come back and interact  with the school and the professors and try to help in whatever I can.  Financially, I know things have changed in the academic environment,  and I   m not a Boone Pickens but I sure try and help when I can when the  hotel school needs something or the hotel needs something. So I think  it   s very rewarding to have started here, not only been born here, but  went to school here, and done well in your career, in the field you  majored in because so many kids don   t stay in that field, but be able to  come back and if nothing else, be a role model to other people. That   s  important.  You were intimately involved in the initial campaign of the Atherton  Hotel.  Mm-hmm.  Can you describe your role in the campaign, and why you put so much  passion into it?  Well, I did. My role in the Union Club Hotel, I remember when it  started. Pat Knaub, who was the Dean of Human Environmental  Sciences, called me and said,    President Halligan would like to visit  with you about the hotel.    He came down to Dallas, I   m sure he had  other things to do, but he came to my office in Dallas and just one-on-one,  he said,    I need you to tell me something. I don   t know beans about  the hotel business. I know we   ve got this great hotel school, but they  want to make that hotel a larger component of the hotel school, but I  don   t know if it makes money, loses money, if we should put money in  it, or what.    I had tremendous admiration for that man to come open  himself up and say,    Help me understand about this thing. What would  you do?    But that was the catalyst because he asked me then, he said,     Would you mind taking an active role in the hotel renovation?    I said,     I   d be happy to.    So that   s where I got involved with the Dean of  Human Environmental Sciences, Pat Knaub, and the people that ran the  Union. At that time the hotel really did not have a connection to the  hotel school. It was not used as a teaching facility. It was just part of the  Union. So the first battles we had to fight were to carve that essentially  out of the Union as a component of the Union. There were complications  with bonds and so on     And there were some people that didn   t necessarily want to go that  17  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  direction.  They didn   t  No, there was this little fiefdom, that we were invading  their fiefdom. So there were some issues there that did get accomplished.  It is now a teaching component of the school as well as a real  complement to the campus. But we did a lot of planning in terms of what  improvements to make with the physical plant, because it is old, the  rooms are small, it has some limitations. So there was a finite amount  that we could really do without just knocking the thing down and  building something new   which we even thought about that, but we  were very fortunate to have some lead gifts. You know, Bill Atherton  gave some nice gifts, Jim Carriker gave a nice gift, I gave a gift, among  others. And so through that, we really have transformed not only the  hotel but the old State Room. It   s now the Rancher   s Club, and  integrated that into the hotel program where it should be because it is  now a laboratory for that hotel program. It is one of the best things that  has happened to this hotel school, was to get that pulled back over into  the hotel program and the renovation. I think enrollment in the hotel  school when I was here was 175 or 200 kids, and now they have 500 or  600 kids. It is a great program and I am so pleased to have been involved  in the Atherton and I   m so grateful to Bill Atherton for the gift that he  made because it has really taken it to a new level.  Carrying on with that theme, can you talk a little bit about the expansion  of the HRAD program, curriculum, facilities, since your student days?  Are you pleased with what   s happening?  Oh it   s wonderful. And I have to give kudos to someone named Jim  Anderson. You know Jim has been very active in the hotel school. He  was in private business and over time moved over and has helped  tremendously in the school. Jim was very instrumental in raising money  to have some facilities built. But when I was here, we had old Home  Economics West and Home Economics East. Our food labs were over in  Home Economics East, and we   d just take pieces of parts of the campus,  you might go make donuts in the Union, but we just had to figure out  ways where we got practical experience. But through the    70s and    80s,  with Jim Anderson and Baker Bokarney and Pat Knaub   s help, they  have built some wonderful facilities over in Home Ec West, the Taylor  Dining Room being one. They have wonderful demonstration labs,  kitchens, things that we just never had when I was in school.  And not that we   re trying to train culinary chefs here, that   s not the  point, but the kids have to be exposed to all of these things in order to be  able to run a business that has those components. The school has gotten  bigger and better and has these wonderful diverse facilities where the  kids can get a hands-on application, yet take their classroom knowledge  18  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  and put it into play, now, of course, with the Rancher   s Club and the  Atherton. So the facilities have just been expanded. There   s a move  afoot of course to build a new building over time, which I think will  happen, but the facilities that we had when I was here in the 1960s  versus now, 2009, is just night and day.  And has the curriculum kept up to pace with what   s really happening out  in industry to prepare them?  Well, yes and no. Now I can   t really say that I look at all the courses, but  I have a pretty good understanding. The one component, I referred to the  global economy, that I think could be added is more financial courses,  more business courses, and more whatever it might be. You know,  things that would prepare students for if they   re going to graduate from  school and they go to work for Hilton or Marriott, they might not go to  Des Moines. They might end up in Hong Kong or they might end up in  London. That   s where we need to think a little more globally, not only  with the kids but with our academic programs, because the hotel  business is a global business. So I think that   s one place where it   s hard  to implement that but I think it would be helpful.  Steve, you   ve also been very active in supporting Cowboy athletics.  Particularly can you share some of your experiences with Posse Club  and the Dallas area back in your early days?  Yes I can. And of course you were involved back then too. And this  goes back to the early 1980s, and I wish I could remember all the names,  of course I know you were involved in that, Jerry. But we were trying to  build a following in the Dallas area and a lot of it was revolved around  having a platform to get to know kids because the university was trying  to recruit kids, whether it be in football or basketball or baseball, from  Texas. Coaches would come down to recruit and of course, having that  nucleus of alums down there through the Posse Club, it gave the coaches  a platform. I remember George Walstead, people like that would come  down to recruit. They would come down and network with alums, and  we   d help them identify kids. But it really, I think, in those early years,  helped the university establish kind of a beach head if nothing else in the  Dallas area, those early years of the Posse Club. I don   t take any credit  for the Posse Club because there were lots of us who would go to those  meetings and we   d just think of ways that we could help the coaches in  the athletic program being here in Dallas, Texas, what can we do to help.  So it was a fun exciting time. There   d be five of us at the meeting or ten  of us at the meeting. Of course now there   s thousands. But it was fun  being in the early stages of that.  I recall the Embassy Suites property that you made available at a real  19  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  good rate.  Well we did. I, of course being in the hotel business, I had the Embassy  Suites in Dallas and others. And not only would we give the university  almost a nothing rate to help and that was a big thing, we   d comp a lot of  rooms when the coaches were down recruiting and we   d help get the  kids summer jobs in the hotels. So we did a lot of things trying to help  the program back then.  And it was very much appreciated. Old Posse days, and there are  probably some stories you couldn   t tell either, with some of the  coaches     That   s right.  Talking about being supportive of the Hotel and Restaurant School of  the college and the Posse, why is it important for alumni to stay engaged  with Oklahoma State University?  I mean, an example is going to a football game. You know that football  game, it   s not full of students, it   s full of the alumni. I mean, when  60,000 people show up in Boone Pickens stadium, 40,000 of them went  to school here, most likely, or their kids are in school. It is the backbone  of the university. I mean the network of alums around the country is the  backbone of the university. Yes, the students and the faculty and the  buildings, that   s one thing. But when you spread out and get away and  graduate, that   s like having long lost brothers and sisters. When you  encounter someone and you   re wearing your OSU cap to play golf in  Fort Worth and somebody else has an OSU cap on, there   s an instant  camaraderie. The backbone of the university is the Alumni Association.  As you know through your leadership there for years, how we access the  university is through the Alumni Association.  What do you think are some appropriate roles for alumni in supporting  the university?  Well first of all I think everybody ought to belong to the Association.  Whether it   s just your annual membership or a lifetime membership, I  think that   s the first step so the university knows where you are and you  know where they are. And in this age of the internet, it is so easy to do  that, go online and give them your credit card number and then you   re in  touch. You don   t have to read every email you get but you have a  connection. So I think it is just incumbent upon everyone, and look, you  can afford that  50 or  100, whatever it is, everyone can afford that. I  think it is incumbent upon you to do that and belong to the association.  20  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  I might have skipped a couple of things here but I want to get back and  ask you if you can share some information about your family with us?  I   m sure you   re proud that     Oh I am. I   m married, my wife Jennifer, she   s a UT, University of Texas  graduate, so we have to balance that. But I have four children: three girls  and a boy. My oldest girl has three children, so I   ve got three grandkids.  My others are all single, have two still in high school. And I have two  brothers who have done well, both are OSU graduates. My older brother,  David, got his undergraduate and graduate degree here and his Ph.D. at  UCLA and he became a university president. And then my younger  brother, Dan, got his undergraduate and graduate degree here and he  worked for me for a long time in the hotel business. He   s still in the  hotel business. So I   m very proud of all of them.  Your older brother is president of a university?  He was president of Eastern Illinois University.  Eastern Illinois.  Tony Romo land. (Laughter) Yeah, he was president there for many  years.  So you   re retired now?  I am.  At one time here until recently you were owner of a ranch. Is there a  story there?  Well a little bit of a story. I had always hunted and fished, I enjoyed that.  And when in the mid    90s I started looking for rural ranchland out west  of the Dallas/Fort Worth area. And then when I sold my company in  1998 I did have a lot of time on my hands, so I bought a ranch. I bought  an 8,000-acre ranch near Breckenridge, Texas, about 100 miles west of  Fort Worth. I raised Black Angus cattle, and I started just by buying 50  here and 100 here, but I raised both registered and commercial cattle.  The reason I raised Black Angus, having been in the hotel and restaurant  business, every menu was Angus beef. So I thought,    Well I   m not  going to raise Hereford, I   m going to raise Black Angus.    (Laughter) So  that   s why we raised them and the heat   s a little hard on them in the  south but we raised Black Angus. I did that for ten years, Jerry. And  we   d hold deer hunts, and it was just a wonderful place for my kids to  grow up. A great family place. Then this past year I made the decision to  sell it for a number of reasons. Part of me hated to let it go but it had  21  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  turned into a whole new career for me, so I just thought well, this is a  good time to sell it so I did. But I enjoyed it for ten years.  Steve, you   ve stayed in touch with the university. Are you excited about  the direction the university is going under the leadership of President  Burns Hargis?  I am. I knew of Burns from college, he was here when I was here. When  I say I knew him, he was kind of a big man on campus, very well  known. So I knew of Burns when he was here. Of course not having  lived in Oklahoma, I didn   t know about his political career and so on.  But when I found out that he was coming to OSU, I related that to Texas  Tech where they had put Kent Hance in as Chancellor. Kent had been on  one of my boards for many years and I know Kent very well. And to  take that business and political expertise and put it in and overlay it over  a university environment, I know it   s probably different for most people  who have come up through the academic side, but from an outsider  looking in, to have that skill set, that organizational skill and that  financial skill and business training to overlay what effectively is a  gigantic business, I thought, that has got to be great for this university.  Just interacting with him in the few times I have over the past year and a  half, he   s going to be a great leader for Oklahoma State and I think there  are just wonderful times ahead under his leadership.  If you   ve seen the campus Master Plan, all of the construction and  renovation going on, something like  700 or  800 million over the next  ten, fifteen years. What do you think about that?  It   s actually just transforming. Driving in today with my older brother in  the car, he has not been back in a number of years, and he was like a kid,  looking out the window he just couldn   t believe the changes. It   s  keeping up with the times, it   s improving itself, it   s a living, breathing  thing. It   s just so exciting to see this and I hope I live another 30 years to  see it continue this way.  Looking back, are there some memories that you have of your student  experiences, your involvement with OSU that are particularly special to  you?  I think they   re probably not different from a lot of kids. Saturday  football games and the excitement that   s created about that; going over  to Gallagher-Iba for a wrestling match against OU, the excitement that   s  created for that; getting initiated into a fraternity; catching, in my case,  an intramural touchdown pass. Of course you did it on the big field. But  you look back at all those wonderful little experiences that you have that  make up your university environment, and not just the academic  22  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  Gill  Jorns  component. I tell my kids and their kids, cherish that four or five years,  whatever it is, because it will most likely be the best years of your life.  You have freedom. You   re learning to become an adult. It   s just a  wonderful time.  I know you wouldn   t say this, you   d be too modest, but you   ve achieved  some really outstanding successes in the business world and, rightfully  so, received a lot of recognition. Looking back, how do you hope people  will remember Steve Jorns?  Well let me answer that in a different way. Whenever I would hire  people, I would tell them that you   re coming into a business where it   s  an immoral business in a funny way because there is alcohol involved,  there are hotel rooms, you know there are   you have to walk a straight  and narrow line, you   re going to be dealing with lots of pretty women  who work in your restaurants or lounges or what have you. And I don   t  ever want to have somebody that is dishonest, cheats, drinks   I mean I  don   t mind having a glass of wine   but I would go through this little  lecture about morality. So I think I imparted that feeling in my business  career of honesty and ethics and hard work. So as people look back at  me, I   d like them to think,    He was a hard-working guy, with high moral  standards and great business ethics.     Are there other comments that you   d like to make, something we haven   t  touched on that you   d like to share with us?  Oh gosh, if somebody looks at this 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 years from now,  I hope they   ve had the same experience that I have with OSU. It   s just  been my Rock of Gibraltar, and I   m sure it   s been that way for  thousands of kids. So I would just encourage them that when they   re  here or they send their kids here or their grandkids here, just make sure  they get to enjoy the full richness of the university life because there   s so  much that you can gain from your university experience and I hope  people do.  Steve, thank you and again, congratulations on your induction into the  Oklahoma State University Alumni Hall of Fame tonight.  Thank you, Jerry.  -------  -------   
