 Finchum Today is September 29, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum, I   m with Oklahoma State University, and today, I am in Beaver County, the town of Beaver in Beaver County, to interview Vera Pittman Floyd. This is part of our Cowboys in Every County project, so thank you for coming today.  Floyd Thank you. It   s a pleasure.  Finchum Let   s begin with having you tell us when and where you were born.  Floyd I was a leap year baby in 1940, but I didn   t realize that for many years, that my birthday was actually on the twenty-ninth. My mother would always say,    All that day   .    My mother Pittman would tell her, or my grandmother would tell her I was going to be born on leap year. My mother was so determined I wasn   t. That night when I was born, it was right after midnight, but since I was born at home on the farm, my father set the clock back. I didn   t know that for many years until an aunt told me that, because I always thought it would be so fun to be a leap year baby. I was born on the farm to Amos Pittman and Grace Wood Pittman in 1940.  Finchum Is your birthday February 29 or March 1?  Floyd February the 28th is what the birth certificate says, because Dad set it back a few. (Laughter)  Finchum Then you   re much younger, if you go every four years for your birthday.  Floyd Yes, it   s so much fun. I celebrate all month.  Finchum You were born on the farm at home?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum Was a doctor there? 5  Floyd Yes, there was a doctor, and a neighbor lady was the nurse.  Finchum Are you an only child?  Floyd No, I had a sister that was a year and a half older than me, and she was born in the hospital. I think they decided by the time I came along, Mother could do this at home on the farm. Then I have two younger sisters, one is nine years younger, and one is thirteen years younger.  Finchum Oh, quite a bit   Floyd There were four girls, and so we grew up working on the farm.  Finchum All of you had chores?  Floyd Yes, but I started driving a tractor when I was twelve years old, and I drove a tractor and a combine. My father loved to fly airplanes, but the only way he could afford it was to be in business, so he went into an aerial spraying business. I flagged for him. That   s where you carry a tall bamboo pole, and you have to move so many paces across the field, and the airplane lines up on you. That   s the way it used to be before they got GPS, so it was a good experience.  Finchum Did you get to fly yourself, learn how to be a pilot?  Floyd Yes. My father   s partner could license me. They planned on doing that, but then when I graduated from college, I got married instead. (Laughter) Moved away from the airplane.  Finchum Did he have his own plane?  Floyd My father had five airplanes, and he sprayed in Oklahoma, and Nebraska, and Texas, mainly.  Finchum What we would call a crop duster?  Floyd Yes, he was a crop duster.  Finchum Is he still living?  Floyd No, but when my mother called me and told me that he had died I said,    Oh, one of those airplanes?    She said,    No. He died riding a horse,    had a heart attack at the age of fifty-four.  Finchum Young. 6  Floyd Uh-hmm, but anyway.  Finchum So, if there were four girls, did you have to share a room in the farmhouse?  Floyd We had two bedrooms, and there were three bedrooms in the house. I slept between the two younger girls, and my older sister got the little bedroom by herself. Of course, they were so much younger than I was, they didn   t take up much room.  Finchum Describe the farmhouse to me. Was it two stories, one story?  Floyd It   s one story. It will be a hundred years old in 2019, but our land was bought on November the 8 of 1916. (Laughs) Get my centuries mixed up. I   m planning on declaring it a centennial farm and having a big birthday party for the house.  Finchum You still live in the house?  Floyd I live in the house I was born in, yes.  Finchum How did that come about?  Floyd I wasn   t living there when I was born. It was my grandparents    house, so we lived two miles down the road in a little house. When my grandfather had a heart attack in 1946, the doctor said he had to move to town, so we moved to the big house. Then after my husband and I were married, we moved around the country for several years, but when we came back home, we wanted to live in the farmhouse. By that time, Mother had moved to town, so we moved into the farmhouse.  Finchum The other three sisters didn   t complain?  Floyd No, of course, they were grown and married. No, they   re all happy that somebody lives there.  Finchum How big of acreage?  Floyd We had about a thousand acres, my folks. My sisters and I still own the land, we have a LLC (Limited Liability Company). My husband and I own 160 acres right where the house sits.  Finchum Probably the original?  Floyd Yes, it is the original 160 acres.  7  Finchum When your grandparents bought it back in those years, what was their primary crop?  Floyd I think it was wheat, but I just looked at the deed, and my grandfather paid  1,600 for that 160 acres. I don   t know what land went for, but I feel like that was a pretty good price, at ten dollars an acre.  Finchum Does it have water sources, ponds or creeks?  Floyd We have creeks, but the   . When he was building the house, my grandfather lived on the hill in a sod house. One day, when he went down to work on his new house, the well that he had drilled had turned to salt water. There had been something in the ground that broke through, and it was bad water. For years, he had a cistern where he caught the rainwater from the house, and drank the rain water. Then about fifteen years ago, my husband and the neighbors put in a rural water line. We buy our water from the town of Beaver and pipe it out seven miles. (Laughter) We still have   . There   s still wells on the property.  Finchum Do you remember when it got indoor plumbing?  Floyd We had indoor plumbing. When my grandfather built the house, he built a bathroom, but we do have an outhouse on the farm.  Finchum A functioning one?  Floyd Yes. In fact, I have a satellite dish on it, just for fun. (Laughter)  Finchum Then did it have electricity? I   m assuming it did, by the time you were born anyway.  Floyd He had a thirty-two-volt system, where he generated his own electricity either with a wind charger. There was a wind charger. When the wind blew, it would charge up and put energy in the batteries, or else we had a gasoline motor in the basement. If the wind didn   t blow, then that   s the way you made the electricity too, so we always had electricity. I remember when the rural electrification came through in the 1950s, and Dad had to rewire the house and put in a 110-volt system.  Finchum He did it himself?  Floyd Oh yes, yes.  Finchum Of course. (Laughter) I   m assuming the wind blows a lot out here?  8  Floyd It does. There was not very many times that they had to use the Delco charger or Delco motor to charge electricity.  Finchum Did you have a windmill?  Floyd Yes. It   s not anything the size these are that generate so much electricity. There is a windmill that sat on the top of a little building, and down in that little building then, was where the batteries were that it charged up.  Finchum Is it still standing?  Floyd No, it   s not there.  Finchum Did he have cattle and horses?  Floyd Yes, basically, we farmed wheat. Then about the time I went to college, he rented five thousand acres, so he expanded his cattle operation a lot. Then he got into the aerial spraying business, so we had lots of work to do. (Laughs)  Finchum Besides driving the tractor, what were some of your other chores growing up?  Floyd My sister, my older sister and I, milked cows. The only time we didn   t milk the cows was in the dead of winter, when Dad didn   t have farm work that he had to do, and then he would go out in the barn and milk cows. We usually milked in the evening, whatever the results. Mother raised chickens. She didn   t believe in spreading out the dates when she butchered the chickens. We would do like a hundred chickens a day, so we could put them in the locker, or put them in cold storage at town.  Finchum Did she have a method for killing them?  Floyd Yes, but you probably don   t want to know about that. (Laughs)  Finchum People have different ones, and we usually ask what it was.  Floyd She had a stick that she put over the head on the ground. You stood on it and pulled the head off. The first day she told my sister and I to go out and kill the chicken, we got us a nice rooster, and we couldn   t get his head off. He was just kind of hanging there with his head. One of us went in the house and told Mother that we couldn   t do it. She said,    You go back out and try it again,    so we went out, and tried it again, and that time, we got the head off. Then you had to put the chicken down into a pail of hot water to loosen the feathers. Then when we took this chicken in after we had plucked him, plucked the feathers off, Mother complained because it was a big rooster. 9  My father told her to be quiet, we had done the best we could. (Laughs) She didn   t intend on us getting that big a rooster. (Laughs)  Finchum That would have become your job or just on one occasion?  Floyd That was always our job, to pluck the chickens and take care of the chickens.  Finchum Would they keep the feathers for a mattress?  Floyd No, oh no. Those feathers wouldn   t do. We put those in the barrel where we burned our trash. (Laughs)  Finchum And so the cold storage was in town?  Floyd Yes, the locker, the frozen   at one of the grocery stores, they had a large room that people rented spaces in there. That   s where we had wrapped the chickens up, or put paper around them, and put them in there. We would have to go to town to take home the chickens, and we did the same thing with the beef, when we butchered the beef.  Finchum That was about seven miles?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum How often would you come to town?  Floyd We did not do your laundry at home. Mother always went to town on Monday to do the laundry. Then she would also go   . We always went on Saturdays because that was the social day when you went to town, and did grocery shopping, and saw everybody at town. My sisters and I would go to the movie, and it cost sixteen cents to go to the theater.  Finchum That   s an odd amount.  Floyd Yes, it was. (Laughs)  Finchum Did that cover just the movie, or did that cover popcorn?  Floyd That was the movie, I don   t remember the popcorn. It was probably a nickel, something like that.  Finchum Where was the theater? On Main Street, I   m assuming, but where?  Floyd It was on Main Street. It was on the east side of the street, in the middle of the downtown area. 10  Finchum It   s not there anymore?  Floyd It   s not there. One of the banks has a drive-in where the theater was. (Laughs)  Finchum What was the name of it? Do you remember?  Floyd Just the Beaver Theater. We also drove to Forgan  Oklahoma , which is seven miles away, and we   d go to the movies up there too.  Finchum Is it a bigger town?  Floyd No, it   s a smaller town. (Laughter) If they had a different movie on, and you wanted to go, you would drive there for the movie.  Finchum As teenagers, were you allowed to do that without parents along, to drive out of town?  Floyd Yes, we could only go as far as Forgan. I was fifteen before I was allowed to date, and had to be in by eleven o   clock, so that was enough time to go to the movie.  Finchum Besides the movie, what else did kids do for fun?  Floyd Basketball games or football games. Of course, we went home with friends. When we got a little older, we would have picnics and play down on the creek. We have a real nice creek bottom on our place with big trees. My sister, my older sister and I also played on that creek a lot. We had a horse, and Dad would not let us put a saddle on the horse because he didn   t want the saddle slipping, but we could put the bridle on, and both get on this big, fat horse, and go down to the creek bottom and play. Then when we got ready to come home, you had to really hold on because the horse would run to the barn. He was   and you had to duck when he would go in the barn because he was anxious to get home. (Laughter)  Finchum To get food?  Floyd To get food, yes.  Finchum Were there snakes and things in the creek?  Floyd No, there were not. We were fortunate. We have a large creek that is east of our house, and we didn   t have snakes on the west side of the creek. It wasn   t until the 1950s, whenever all the oil drilling was going on, that the snakes 11  came in, probably in some of the pipes. We had bull snakes, but we never had rattlesnakes or poisonous snakes.  Finchum No one thinks about that.  Floyd Our little creek didn   t have quicksand, and it was a small flowing little creek with minnows in it, so we could play down there without any worry.  Finchum Not deep enough to swim in?  Floyd That   s correct.  Finchum Would you do games like, I don   t know, hopscotch, or jump rope, or Annie Over?  Floyd We did at school, yes.  Finchum How far was that from your house?  Floyd It was here in Beaver, which was seven miles.  Finchum Were all twelve grades in one building?  Floyd No, there were   . Actually, we had three buildings to begin with. We had one building that was the grade school and one for the high school. When I was in the fourth grade, they built a new grade school building. The day that we moved from the old building to the new, oh it was about three blocks, we had to carry our books, and walk to the new school building, and find our school desk. We had new school equipment. Then when I was in high school, they built the junior high school and the new auditorium. Then after I graduated, they finished and built a new high school also.  Finchum Was it always Beaver Elementary, Beaver Junior, Beaver High?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum About how many children would be in your class, your age group?  Floyd There were forty-two to forty-five. That was with one teacher.  Finchum That   s pretty good-sized. How would you get to school?  Floyd On the school bus.  Finchum I was trying to think, you were born in    40 and the war  ended  in    45. Did you have any early memories of   . 12  Floyd I remember the day that armistice was declared. My mother was so excited, she heard it on the radio. She jumped up and down with excitement, because her younger brother was in the service, and she knew that he would be coming home. My father had not gone to the service because he was a farmer, and they needed the production too much.  Finchum He would have been born in the   20s?  Floyd He was born in 1914.  Finchum He was still too young to be in World War I then.  Floyd That   s correct. He could   ve been in World War II though.  Finchum Do you remember anything in town that they did when it was over, World War II?  Floyd No, I do not.  Finchum So your house had a radio?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum No TV yet, at that point?  Floyd That   s correct, right.  Finchum Do you remember getting your first TV?  Floyd Oh, yes. I was in high school. We live on a hill in a valley, so there   s high land all the way around us. My father had to put up a real tall antenna with a TV, what do you call the device that sits   antenna on top of it, and a tall tower with the antenna. We only got one station, which was Ensign, Kansas, and it was pretty fuzzy. When I started dating my boyfriend, who became my husband later, the time was always supposed to be at seven o   clock that he would pick me up. He would show up quite early so that he could watch Bonanza on TV. (Laughter) He would come in, and he would sit on one end of the couch, and I would sit on the other.  My little sister, Irma Lou, would sit between me. That was the one nine years younger. Then when we came home at night, if we sat in the yard at all, she would come out with her piggy bank, and he would have to put money into her piggy bank for her to go back into the house. (Laughter) I found out after years that she said our father would say,    Irma, the big girls are out in the yard.    She   d get the flashlight and come out with her 13  piggybank. (Laughs) That was one way for him to get us in the house. (Laughter)  Finchum How much would they have to put in, a dime, or a nickel, or what?  Floyd Whatever the money was. It didn   t matter, just some that fit her piggybank.  Finchum I take it you married your high school sweetheart?  Floyd Yes, I did.  Finchum What was his name?  Floyd Terry Floyd. I graduated from college on a Sunday, and we were married the following Thursday. Then we moved to Denver, Colorado, and he worked for Phillips Petroleum Company, and I went to work for Denver Public Schools. Our honeymoon was just that weekend, (laughs) on our traveling to Denver.  Finchum Then let   s back up. You graduated from high school in?  Floyd Nineteen fifty-eight.  Finchum Fifty-eight, and then you went   .  Floyd I went two years to college at Panhandle State University.  Finchum Majoring in what?  Floyd Home economics, but I wanted a vocational degree. I transferred to Oklahoma State University, because they didn   t have a vocational degree at Panhandle.  Finchum That was in    60?  Floyd Yes, and so the last two years were at Oklahoma State. My husband was going to school at Northwestern at Alva. He had graduated, so he came and spent a year working on his master   s while I finished my bachelor   s.  Finchum Did he finish his master   s?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum You graduated in    62 then from OSU?  Floyd Yes, I graduated in    62. 14  Finchum Then he would have graduated in   .  Floyd He graduated in    61 from   no, I take it back. He did not finish his master   s, but he went that year while I was going to school.  Finchum While you were in high school, was OSU even discussed as a possibility?  Floyd Oh yes. I had four aunts that went to school there, all of my father   s sisters. My grandfather worked for the AAA, the Agricultural Adjustment Act, so he went to Stillwater on many, many trips. Stillwater was always there, but when I graduated from high school, it was in the real lean years of the   50s, when the farmers didn   t have good crops. They sent me closer to home for the first two years, but it was always understood I would go to school at OSU and finish up.  Finchum Where did you live while you were there?  Floyd I lived in Willard Hall, right in the middle of campus, right by Theta Pond and close to the Library, and close to the Student Union. I felt like I had the best of the dorms.  Finchum Do you remember your room number or what floor even?  Floyd The first year, I lived on the third floor, and then my senior year, they opened the basement, which had been the recreation room. They built new rooms along the side. I lived in one of those larger rooms, and I had one roommate, and she was the president of the dorm. I enjoyed that year too.  Finchum Did they have panty raids then, or is that a little too early?  Floyd No, I wasn   t involved in any of the panty raids. (Laughs)  Finchum It may have been a little bit later.  Floyd I think probably most of that had to do with the sororities and fraternities. I don   t remember the dorms having the panty raids.  Finchum Did you get to cook in your room?  Floyd No.  Finchum It wasn   t allowed?  Floyd No, but we were fortunate, when I lived in the basement, that we did have our own private bathroom. 15  Finchum That   s a step up.  Floyd That was a step up, yes.  Finchum What about telephones?  Floyd No, it was out in the recreation room.  Finchum How often would you call home?  Floyd Not very often at all because I would   ve had to call collect, but we wrote letters. I didn   t come home very often, because I didn   t have a car, unless I caught a ride with someone that did.  Finchum Just for holidays?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum How would you do your laundry while you were there?  Floyd At OSU, they had a laundry room, but you had to pay to have it done. We couldn   t go in and use the machines. There was a lady that operated the laundry room in the basement of Willard Hall that did the laundry. We didn   t do our own laundry.  Finchum You couldn   t bring it home, so you   d have to pay. Was it very expensive?  Floyd I don   t remember. We had coupon books that we used for our meals. The coupon books would have denominations of five, ten, fifteen cents, and so I think I used a coupon book to pay. Of course, you had to be careful that you didn   t run out of coupons, or you would have to buy a new book. I remember that   s when I started eating custard for my dessert. It was lots cheaper than cakes or pies, so I ate custard for dessert most of the time.  Finchum Was there a cafeteria in Willard?  Floyd There was a cafeteria in Willard.  Finchum I have no idea where.  Floyd In the basement, everything was in the basement. (Laughs) No, I   m saying we lived in the basement, but then the cafeteria was there also. It was an open cafeteria, so other people could come eat there. My husband lived, in the year he was in Stillwater, he lived in a boarding house, a rooming house across the street from Eskimo Joe   s. There was a rooming house that he 16  lived in. Where Eskimo Joe   s is there was a boarding house, where he would go eat his meals, or he would come to the Union, or come to Willard and eat with me. I would never eat supper with him, because I wanted to eat with my girlfriends, so he had to eat somewhere else for supper. (Laughter)  Finchum What was your major while you were there?  Floyd Home economics.  Finchum Did you have a favorite professor?  Floyd One of my professors that I liked really well was Ms. Chapman. She had worked overseas, and she wore hippie-like sandals before anyone else wore them. (Laughs) She was a real favorite.  Finchum What did she teach?  Floyd Actually, I   m trying to remember. She was the teacher that came out when I did my student teaching at Okeene  Oklahoma . She was my sponsoring teacher. I don   t remember what else she taught. I know it wasn   t foods or clothing, so I   m not sure what she taught. (Laughs)  Finchum Would you have classes in sewing, or design, or whatever?  Floyd Oh yes, oh yes, had tailoring classes, and one class I really enjoyed was the furniture refinishing and upholstering. I enjoyed that class a lot. I liked all the classes though. Then when we took foods, many of the hotel and restaurant administrative boys were with us in our foods classes, so that made it different.  Finchum What was the hardest one? Do you remember if you had a   or did you struggle with any? Not really?  Floyd No, I didn   t struggle with any. (Laughs) I studied a lot. I graduated Phi Kappa Phi, which is the honorary sorority at OSU, of the top 10 percent, so I didn   t have   .  Finchum Then you were able to stay focused. (Laughs) Had you been in 4-H or FFA here?  Floyd I was when I was in elementary school, but then when I got in high school, there was too many other activities to do.  Finchum Did you play sports?  17  Floyd I played basketball, but not all through high school, but I had played basketball. Of course, I was in choir. My parents were actually too busy on the farm to     Finchum To run you here and there? (Laughs)  Floyd    right, to run us around.  Finchum At OSU, did you do intramural sports? Did Willard have anything?  Floyd I didn   t do intramural sports. I took   .Now, I remember one class that I made a B in, and that was badminton. I wasn   t very good. (Laughter)  Finchum That was when P.E. was required, so you had to have classes.  Floyd Yes, it was required.  Finchum What were your other ones that you did for P.E.?  Floyd I was in a body mechanics class, and I had already taken swimming. Those are the two that I remember.  Finchum Swimming was at Panhandle?  Floyd It was at Panhandle, yes.  Finchum Your core was like English and all that was probably at Panhandle too?  Floyd Yes, yes. I took all my chemistry classes at Panhandle. I remember I took organic chemistry in the summer before I transferred to OSU, thinking I would get that out of the way. Not knowing that I was taking the hardest of the organic classes with all the organic majors, with all the chemistry majors, instead of waiting for the chemistry class at OSU. (Laughs) It was a little harder.  Finchum You did it. When I came here, first got here, you said you had wanted to be a nurse?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum Can you tell that story a little?  Floyd When I told my father I would like to be a nurse, he said,    Nurses have to work so hard, and they   re on their feet all the time, and they don   t make much money.    Anything that Dad told me, I took it as the Gospel, so I changed. I said,    Okay, I   ll become a home economist then.    Then after my 18  daughters were born, and they went to college, my older daughter went to OSU three years, and then she changed to that other university to get her nursing degree. (Laughs)  Finchum Down south, okay.  Floyd Then she became a nurse practitioner, so she was one of the original nurse practitioners in the state of Oklahoma. She has a busy practice.  Finchum Her grandfather was okay with that?  Floyd He wasn   t here then. (Laughs)  Finchum Yes, that   s right, but he would have been.  Floyd Then our younger daughter also went to OSU, and she   s a veterinarian. We   ve had some nice ties to Stillwater, to OSU.  Finchum How many children do you have?  Floyd I have two daughters, or we have two daughters.  Finchum Two daughters, and both of them went through?  Floyd Both of them.  Finchum Orange, orange, orange, orange.  Floyd Yes, and I have a niece and nephew that bleed orange. My nephew lives in California, and he has an OSU chapter where he lives. He lives in San Francisco, and he has an OSU chapter. He did the same thing in Colorado when he lived there, so we bleed orange.  Finchum Other than it being an ag related, was there any other reasons why you liked OSU so well? People in your family chose it?  Floyd Yes, because it was a friendly town, a friendly college. I liked the campus, liked everything about it.  Finchum What   s your earliest memory of campus? Did you go before you were actually a student?  Floyd I had gone to OSU on 4-H business. I had gone to State down there, so I had been on the campus. The first time I drove by myself, it was the summer before my junior year. A friend that had gone to school down there offered to go with me, because she knew her way around campus, so we drove to 19  Stillwater. When we filled up with gas, the meter showed that I had put in forty gallons. Our car wouldn   t hold forty gallons, but of course, I didn   t know how much it held. My friend said,    Oh, there   s a mistake,    because they hadn   t turned back the meter. In those days, an attendant had to roll back the pump to zero. I didn   t know because I had always filled up at home, where we had gas on the farm. It just came out of the tank, and I didn   t have any gallons. I was glad my friend was along, or I would have paid for forty gallons.  Finchum At that time, it was probably fifty cents a gallon     Floyd Yes, probably. (Laughter)  Finchum    or less than a dollar anyway.  Floyd I hadn   t ever filled up at a station before.  Finchum That was part of the perk of being on the farm.  Floyd That was right, yes.  Finchum The same gas you put in the car, it could go in the tractors?  Floyd Well no. We used propane in most of the tractors, but it went in the farm trucks and probably the combine too. I also drove the combine and cut wheat when I was growing up.  Finchum Could you keep a straight line?  Floyd That   s not the hard thing. It was on terraced land, and there were large rocks. You didn   t want to get the header down so low that you picked up a rock, so that was the hard part of it. I didn   t like to do that as much as I did driving the tractor. I actually liked to work on the farm because my dad was always pleasant to work for. Mama was always yapping at us in the house, telling us what to do. (Laughter)  Finchum You primarily helped out. Did you help in the kitchen too, from time to time?  Floyd Oh yes, yes. My older sister and I always had to do the dishes. We weren   t very old, so my sister decided instead of washing those dishes, we would scrape all the plates out with bread. We used bread to wipe all the food off, and put the dishes up in the cabinet, not knowing that the bread crumbs would give us away. (Laughs) When Mother came along and there were bread crumbs on those dishes, we had to wash the entire cabinet full of dishes. (Laughter)  20  Finchum Was it homemade bread, or was it bought bread?  Floyd No, it was bought bread.  Finchum Which we always called it light bread, did you?  Floyd Yes, it was light bread.  Finchum Why, I don   t know, do you know?  Floyd Because it is lighter than homemade bread. Homemade bread is usually a heavier bread and richer.  Finchum I always wondered why light bread.  Floyd Of course, probably the manufacturers had something to do with spreading that idea that it was light, light as a feather.  Finchum What would you do on Sundays? Was church an important part of growing up?  Floyd Yes, yes. Church was an important part. We went to church every Sunday.  Finchum Then Sunday dinner?  Floyd Usually, we had roast because Mother would put a roast on before we went to church, and it would be done when we came home.  Finchum By putting it in the oven?  Floyd Yes     Finchum That was before crockpots.  Floyd    a beef roast. Yes, that was before crockpots, right. Unless we would had fried chicken, and then we had to fry it after we came home.  Finchum What denomination?  Floyd Baptist.  Finchum Then holidays growing up, what was Christmas like?  Floyd We went to our grandparents    house. That was my father   s parents because Mother   s father had died in 1934, and then her   . That was the beginning of the Depression, or during the middle of the Depression. Her mother had 21  moved off the farm and moved to Oregon, so Mother didn   t have relatives there, so we always went to my grandparents   . I remember one time, we were sitting on the couch, and my two aunts, we had aunts that were just ten and twelve years older than us. They had us little girls between them on the couch, and Grandfather came to the front door, or Santa Claus came to the front door, and he   d jingle the door and came in. That was the first dolls that we received was Sleepy Eyes that Santa brought. Of course, Santa was Grandpa, but we didn   t know that at the time.  Finchum Or if you did, you wouldn   t admit it? (Laughs)  Floyd No, we didn   t know. (Laughter) We were pretty na  ve.  Finchum Would have a Christmas tree, I would assume?  Floyd Oh yes.  Finchum Decorate early or the day of?  Floyd We always decorated early.  Finchum A real tree from   .  Floyd A real tree. I remember the first artificial tree that my mother bought, and then she bought a silver tree.  Finchum With the color rotator?  Floyd With the color, yes.  Finchum I love those. (Laughs) I remember those. There are not too many trees out here, that   s why I wondered if they were a cedar from the farm.  Floyd No, we bought   not from the farm. We bought the tree at town.  Finchum Where you have a tree lot at Christmas?  Floyd Yes, we didn   t have cedar trees on our farm.  Finchum There   s not many trees.  Floyd There   s not many here, yes. Since the water table has fallen, there   s a lot of big trees that have died.  Finchum Would the town do something special at Christmas?  22  Floyd Oh yes, they always had a Christmas parade. I was drum major of the band when I was a senior, and so I remember the parade really well. That was always the big occasion.  Finchum Was it usually cold?  Floyd Yes, (laughs) but you know our uniforms were wool uniforms too. We never went with the band unless we were in full uniforms. A lot of our parades now, the kids wear jeans and different clothing, but they didn   t in those days.  Finchum Would Santa be at the end of the parade?  Floyd Yes, and now all the participating band members received   I think it was a silver dollar. It was either fifty cents or a silver dollar that the town gave us for participating in the bands.  Finchum Would you save those, or would you spend them?  Floyd We would spend them. (Laughs)  Finchum People remember getting their first pay for something. Do you remember the first time you got paid?  Floyd Our father paid us for working on the farm, for driving the tractor. He didn   t for any of the other duties, but he did pay us for driving the tractor. Then I remembered the summer before I started to college, and I knew that the money that I had earned wasn   t going to pay for my college. I told him he didn   t need to pay me, that he was going to be sending me to college, (laughs) so I didn   t keep hours, and he didn   t pay me, but he put money in my account. He never told me how much he put in. I never knew how much money I had in there, so I didn   t write very big checks. He would keep up with it when he would go to the bank, and put more money in.  Finchum You didn   t have to call home and say,    I need this?     Floyd No, you   re right.  Finchum He trusted you with a checking account though?  Floyd Yes, and my husband and I did that with our daughters too. They had checking accounts. They had savings accounts, and he would transfer money from their savings. When he sold his mother   s house, he separated it out between the girls, put it in savings account. They knew that had to last them all through college, so it did. (Laughs)  23  Finchum Your parents paid your way through?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum You didn   t have to work while you were in college?  Floyd I did. I worked at Panhandle. I worked for the nurse, as her secretary or made beds, and carried food to the football boys when they were in the infirmary. (Laughs) After I transferred to OSU, I wasn   t able to get a job because your parents had to be under a certain income before you were eligible to work.  Finchum Do a work-study thing?  Floyd Right, yes.  Finchum That makes sense too. You didn   t have a car, so you didn   t come home much. Do you remember graduation day?  Floyd Oh yes, yes, because my parents were there, and it was at the stadium on the football field, outside, yes. It was a nice day.  Finchum Once you graduated, take us through your career and all that.  Floyd I graduated on a Sunday, and my husband and I got married on the following Thursday. We immediately moved to Denver, Colorado, where he had a job, and I taught school with Denver Public Schools. I taught at Kunsmiller Junior High School. I taught for three years, and then he was being transferred to Ca  on City, Colorado. The last few months we were there, I substituted for the school because we had to build a new house in Ca  on City. We weren   t able to find a place to live, so we were building a new house there. We moved to Ca  on City in December, and the girls were born. I had a baby the next March, and then two years later, I had another baby girl. Then the next December, we were there about three years, and my husband changed jobs, and he went to work for Ideal Cement Company. They moved us to Albuquerque, New Mexico     Finchum Had a change.  Floyd    and that was   yes. I loved Ca  on City because there was a New Neighbors Club, and I got to know so many people. When I moved to Albuquerque, I didn   t know anyone. I joined the American Association of University Women, and there were a lot of study groups. I also was substitute teaching during that time in Albuquerque. One of the experiences I had in New Mexico was they did not have public kindergartens, so through the American Association of University Women, we had study groups and 24  we interviewed or visited many kindergartens. They had all these private kindergartens, so we visited them at least three times. There was three different groups of people that would go to each one, and we had a survey, deciding which ones we thought were the best kindergartens. About that time, New Mexico decided they wanted to start kindergartens in their public schools. I hadn   t realized, but you can   t just start a public kindergarten without training your teachers.  The universities didn   t have a program for training their teachers. My friend was a child development specialist, and so she and I were invited to go to Santa Fe and meet with a group. Santa Fe is the capital of New Mexico, so we went to Santa Fe to the Capitol and sat with people. We explained what we thought was important in kindergarten, and we helped set the criteria up to train the teachers. Then we were still going to send our children to private because they couldn   t start it for three or four years until after they had that program to train teachers. We ended up sending our daughters   we had decided on the kindergarten, and then my husband was moved. (Laughs) We transferred to Baton Rouge, Louisiana, so we saw a lot of the country by our moves. There, they did not have public kindergartens either, so our daughter went to a small kindergarten in our neighborhood. It was a good experience.  Finchum What did you do while you were in Baton Rouge?  Floyd I went to work as a real estate agent. There was a broker who taught classes at Louisiana State University in real estate law, so we were required to attend his classes, and then he hired us in his agency. I sold real estate, but I also worked   . Then I worked for a broker that built houses. We had built our own house, and they   d been in our house, so the broker asked me if I would decorate his houses. I felt like I used some of my home economics training there, because I did decorate houses, and that was lots of fun. Except one time, one house was a modern design, and so I select all these modern light fixtures. Then there was a traditional house being built, and the builder mixed up the light fixtures and put them in the wrong houses. (Laughter) I remember the first time I went in this traditional house, and there were those real modern light fixtures, and had to get those changed around.  Finchum That seems like a mistake that should not have happened.  Floyd No, you wouldn   t think, but anyway. You would think it wouldn   t.  Finchum How long were you in Louisiana?  Floyd We were there about four years. Our younger daughter, she started in the private kindergarten when she was four years old. Then the next year, they had public kindergarten, so she went to public kindergarten then in Baton 25  Rouge. Then the following year, we moved back to Ca  on City, Colorado, and she went to second grade there. Then Terry   s mother was operating a hardware store, and she was thinking about selling it. We said,    Oh, we can   t sell the hardware store,    so we moved home and took the hardware store over. Then our daughter went to third grade here in Beaver, and the other daughter was in fifth grade. It was an easy move because everybody in town knew us, and they knew our children.  Finchum What year was that when you moved back?  Floyd That was in 1976.  Finchum You   ve been back a long time.  Floyd We   ve been back a long time.  Finchum Forty years.  Floyd Yes, but we sold our hardware store in October of 2004, and then we went on a twenty-two-day trip to Europe in May of 2005, because we had never had vacations. You just don   t take a vacation when you   re operating a business.  Finchum Was your goal always to come back home or come back to Beaver?  Floyd No, it wasn   t. After his father died, and his mother was operating the store, then when we thought we were going to be selling it, we thought,    Oh, we just can   t do that.    (Laughs)  Finchum Was the draw more the area or just more the family?  Floyd It was everything. It was the store, and then our families were both here. We moved out to the farm then when we moved back, so we moved to the farm.  Finchum Had Beaver changed much while you were away?  Floyd Not while we were away, but it has now. Before we moved home, we expected it to decline. We knew that small towns were going to decline, that there were businesses that were going to be leaving. There was a theater, and there were three dress shops, a TV store, and two hardware stores, and three grocery stores when we moved back. Now we have one grocery store. We still have two banks, but we had a savings and loan when we came back home too, and it   s no longer in existence. The town has gotten smaller.  Finchum Is the population     26  Floyd Decreased.  Finchum    decreased too?  Floyd Yes, it has decreased. It was a good move. We were real pleased to come back home.  Finchum When you want to go to a bigger town, where do you go?  Floyd We go to Liberal, Kansas, or we go to Perryton, Texas. Now, Perryton is 8,800 people, but we have a daughter that lives there. For going to the doctor   s, we go to Amarillo, Texas. That   s closer than Oklahoma City.  Finchum About how far is that from here?  Floyd It   s about 160 miles.  Finchum Not too bad.  Floyd We went to Amarillo yesterday for a doctor   s appointment.  Finchum Then how close is Liberal?  Floyd Liberal is thirty-five miles.  Finchum That   s not bad either.  Floyd It   s about forty miles to Perryton, and then Woodward is close to eighty miles the other direction.  Finchum Then Guymon is not   .  Floyd Sometimes, we go to Garden City, Kansas, to a doctor. We bought our car at Dodge City, Kansas, so we have to go there for it to be serviced. (Laughs) You put a lot of miles on a car when you live out here.  Finchum Do most of your business in Kansas, would you say?  Floyd No.  Finchum You   re kind of split between Kansas and Texas. There   s three states here.  Floyd We do all of our grocery shopping here, and we buy our appliances here. Everything we can, we keep here because we were in business for a lot of years. We understand how it feels.  27  Finchum If you were to break a bone or do something like that, where   s the closest medical care?  Floyd It would be Liberal, Kansas. We have a hospital here that would send an ambulance. If we have anything critical that has to be taken care of, they would take us to Liberal, Kansas. There is one more thing. After we moved back to Beaver, the first few years we were here, my husband and I drove the school bus. He would drive it in the morning, and I would drive it home in the afternoon, and therefore, I got to go home early with my little girls. I didn   t have to stay at the store until six o   clock, and so I would take the girls home, and get supper and things. After they graduated from high school and went to college, I became Election Board Secretary for Beaver County. I retired last May at the age of seventy-five, (laughs) and I had worked there for twenty-eight years.  Finchum Politics changed some in that twenty-eight years? That   s a loaded question, I guess.  Floyd To begin with, we were registered Republicans, and whenever I moved to Oklahoma, it was a Democratic state. When I was appointed in 1987, I was advised that to be appointed, that I had to change my politics to Democrat because you were appointed by the majority leader of the Senate. Since the majority leader was Democrat, I changed to Democrat. A few years ago, when Oklahoma went Republican then, I didn   t change because I thought,    You know, I changed once.    I felt like it kind of erased me from being politically-inclined, as far as I couldn   t show any favoritism at all. All the officers in Beaver County are Republican, so it took me out of that deal. I   m still a Democrat, and my husband is Republican.  Finchum Cancel each other   s vote, in theory. (Laughter) What would you have to do in that position, like a typical day?  Floyd Okay, it   s a six-hour job. Our hours were eight thirty to two thirty. We   re responsible for all the registrations, and sometimes I would go to the school and put on programs. Then when the National Voter Registration Act came along, the tag agency, and the social services department, anyone that offered help, and libraries, anyone that offered help to people had to have registration forms. That generates a lot of registration, and a lot of times, it   s duplicate registration, but you have to deal with   you have to change the registration whenever they come in.  Finchum Would you have to travel around the county?  Floyd Yes. I had polling places all over the county. I had to set up the polling places, and then recruit and train the workers. That was a job I enjoyed because I know lots of people in Beaver County. (Laughs) 28  Finchum In    86, that was before computers.  Floyd Eighty-seven, yes. It was right   I got into the business before Oklahoma started having computers. Our first voting devices, we had to train for the computers. We had to get computers, and we trained on it. The state has their own programs for training us. Then we had to learn the voting devices, and we had to teach our workers to use those devices. Then about three years ago, they changed voting devices three or four years ago, I don   t remember. We got new voting devices, so we had to learn new programs, and train our workers in the new programs. Oklahoma still uses the manual system of marking the ballots. We receive paper ballots, and have an ink pen to mark our ballots, and then it   s put through the machine. That way we have a paper ballot, we have a paper trail. I know they   re concerned with some of the machines in different states, but Oklahoma has received high marks on their type of ballots and on their voting system.  Finchum Would you have to go back and refer to the paper ones, have you had to?  Floyd Yes, if we have a recount. If it   s so close that a candidate has a recount, then you have to reserve a courtroom and have a judge. Then I had to train workers to count the ballots by hand, to answer the dispute. Most of the time, it will come out the same as the voting devices.  Finchum That   s good to know. I   m trying to think, back in, was in the   90s maybe, Governor Bellmon, was that during your time, when he   . Henry Bellmon, was in the early   90s? No, but he was the one that switched the state. He has something to do with it going from Democrat to Republican was when he was elected to governor the first time around in the   60s.  Floyd That   s probably right. Now in our county, it was when Tim Leonard ran for office for state senator that many people changed from Democrat to Republican.  Finchum Is the county today primarily Republican red?  Floyd Republican, right.  Finchum At seventy-five, did you just decide you   d had enough to retire?  Floyd At the age of seventy-five? Yes. (Laughs) I thought that it was time.  Finchum There   s not an age limit? You could have gone longer if you   d chose.  Floyd Right. I had received a new appointment, and you   re appointed for two years is the way that works. The secretary is reappointed every two years. 29  Finchum You didn   t have to run for office, it was   .  Floyd No, it   s a political appointment, but we have a clerk. I had a clerk that worked for me, so I recommended my clerk  to take my place .  Finchum Had your husband already retired as well?  Floyd Yes, we sold the store in 2004.  Finchum He didn   t go do something else?  Floyd We raised cattle on the farm     Finchum That   s a job in itself.  Floyd    and then we also owned a laundromat downtown. We sold the laundromat a couple years ago too.  Finchum I noticed the Dirty Beaver.  Floyd That   s where it was. That wasn   t our name, (laughs) but we were the Beaver Laundromat. We did sell it, yes. My good friend bought the laundromat, and named it the Dirty Beaver with tongue and cheek. (Laughs)  Finchum I thought it was pretty cute. Laundromats, the town   s always had one?  Floyd For years, yes, because you have all the oil workers that came in. Then they have a large machine and a large dryer, so any large comforters or things that need to be washed are taken there.  Finchum Did your mother finally get her own machines at her house?  Floyd After she moved to town. My husband and I   . Now, we have town water, we have a washing machine and dryer, yes. After my mother moved to town then, and bought a washing machine and dryer.  Finchum When you all were bringing them into town, would she just wash them, and then take them home and hang them on the line?  Floyd Hang them on the, yes, on that clothesline. I told my husband when we moved back to Beaver, I was not having a clothesline. (Laughs) I do have an old drying rack that I have set up in the laundry room for things that I don   t want to put in the dryer.  Finchum Clotheslines, clothespins, even in the winter? 30  Floyd Oh yes, especially in the winter when they freeze. Those clothes will freeze on the line.  Finchum It   s been a pretty good life?  Floyd It has been.  Finchum At these various places where you lived, did there happen to be other OSU alum around?  Floyd In Denver, there were. I taught school with someone, but I didn   t know any in Ca  on City or Albuquerque. We didn   t have the communication like they have now, like my nephew finds them in California, and so we didn   t have the communication for that.  Finchum When was the last time you were on campus?  Floyd Let   s see, I have a fifty-year pin, and I think that   s when it was. I attended Homecoming for my fifty year. Yes, so that would have been in 2012. I think that was the last time I was on campus. We don   t go to the ballgames.  Finchum Watch them on TV?  Floyd We watch them on TV. Our nieces and nephews are always there. My sister, who lives here in town, is always there. (Laughs) She goes. Her daughter and son-in-law have a tailgate party there. It   s called the Slowpoke. They used to have a big bus, well it   s all painted orange, but it was so slow driving it from Oklahoma City to Stillwater that they rented a garage to keep it in. This last year or so, they   ve built a trailer that they have their tailgate parties on.  Finchum They go from here to there, from Beaver?  Floyd No, they live in Oklahoma City, yes. They have a   . They   re always there. My older daughter says she   s going to Homecoming this year because all of her friends are turning fifty years old, (laughs) so they   re getting together. (Laughter)  Finchum That   ll be neat   Floyd Yes, they   re getting together for a big, fun party there.  Finchum Homecoming is a big deal. Was it when you were there in the   60s?  31  Floyd Oh yes, it was, it was. Not as much as it is now though. When my girls graduated, it was really big. Of course it, has been.  Finchum It   s gotten big. We moved in    96, and since then, it   s just bigger and bigger every year, the parade and everything.  Floyd Yes. It   s lots of fun.  Finchum When you were there, did you go to sporting events?  Floyd Yes, I did. I went to sporting events.  Finchum Prefer basketball over football or wrestling?  Floyd Yes, I do. Always did. (Laughs) I understood it better.  Finchum Basketball, I don   t know. Who was the coach in the   60s?  Floyd I don   t even remember, that tells you   . Iba?  Finchum He may have been. I don   t know my sports history.  Floyd I think maybe he was there, I   m not sure. I wouldn   t say. I really don   t know.  Finchum We   ll find out, and we   ll fix it if it   s not.  Floyd Right, okay. (Laughter) That   s a good idea.  Finchum It may have been him.  Floyd Yes, I just don   t remember who it was.  Finchum Eddie Sutton may have been playing, may have been on the team at that point. I don   t know. I   m getting off my   I don   t know, we   ll scratch that. You spent some time in the Library, at the OSU Library?  Floyd I did. I went to the Library every night. My husband had not gone to the Library every night. The last year, when he came to Stillwater, he had to go every night if he was going to be with me. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you go to the same spot or a favorite spot?  Floyd Usually, yes.  Finchum Where was it? 32  Floyd It was on third floor, and I don   t remember.  Finchum No, but third floor.  Floyd I went usually to the same spot in that area.  Finchum The card catalog was still there when you were. When you come in the big, go up the stairs and there   .  Floyd Yes, it was.  Finchum I miss those days.  Floyd Yes, but that   s a beautiful facility.  Finchum Did you spend much time in the Union?  Floyd Yes, I did. There   s all the neat shops in the Union, and     Finchum And a bowling alley too   Floyd    a bowling alley, and then there were dances held there, so we went there.  Finchum Would you wear pants, or was a skirt   was it still dresses at that point?  Floyd It was still dresses, usually.  Finchum No blue jeans, or     Floyd No.  Finchum    for women anyways?  Floyd That   s right, and even after I started teaching school in Denver, we had to wear dresses and heels. There was no such thing as casual Fridays. (Laughs) I remember going to a dance and wearing formals to the dances.  Finchum Would you make them?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum You   re a good seamstress?  Floyd I used to be. I don   t sew much any longer.  33  Finchum Growing up, how did you first learn to sew?  Floyd When I was growing up, I had to make my own clothing or not have clothing. My mother didn   t sew very much, and I actually learned most of it in school.  Finchum In high school?  Floyd Yes, in high school.  Finchum Would you buy patterns or make your own?  Floyd Oh yes, I bought patterns. Now, I did take one class that we had to make our own pattern, had to learn how to make the pattern and make adjustments and things. That was in college though.  Finchum You taught some of that when you were teaching home ec?  Floyd That   s what I did teach. I taught clothing in Denver. I had six classes a day, and we were in a double-session school. I went to school at six forty in the morning, and got out at two o   clock in the afternoon. Then another session came in at twelve twenty, and they got off at almost six o   clock. During the overlap time was spent in some preparation, but this was such a new growing area of Denver, that they had to go double-session to that school until they built a new junior high school.  Finchum That   s interesting, and so you sewed a lot?  Floyd I was fortunate. I was at a real nice junior high school. I wondered later why did I get such a nice school. Actually, when I went to interview, the lady that was the secretary to the placement director said,    Oh, you   re from Beaver County.    She asked me if I knew Charlie Zimmerman, and I said,    Well, yes. He   s my cousin,    and she said,    Well, he   s my cousin too     (Laughs) This lady   s name was Annabeth Guist, and she and her husband did not have children, so they would have my husband and I come over for dinner. I think she had a big influence on my placement, (laughs) that I was sent to a nice school. It kind of worked out.  Finchum What a small world.  Floyd It is.  Finchum For that, just happenstance. Your husband, does he have brothers and sisters?  34  Floyd He had one brother and he died in the Navy. He was in Alaska and had gone out on a bear hunting trip with   . There were five men that went out. They were caught in a storm, and he and another young man died of exposure. My husband just has all my sisters. (Laughs)  Finchum He still has to pay a quarter or something to get to see you?  Floyd Yes, we have a real close-knit family.  Finchum Does the sister still have the piggy bank she used to collect money?  Floyd Probably. (Laughter) That sister lives in town.  Finchum We should probably name the sisters.  Floyd VaLois.  Finchum Va Lois?  Floyd Capital V, A, capital L, O, I, S. VaLois, and then I   m the second one, and then Irma Lou, and Amy Grace.  Finchum That first one   s a very unusual name. Where did they come up with that?  Floyd My mother named her for her teacher. When my mother was in high school, and she was going to school at Balko  Oklahoma , there was a young woman, her first year of teaching, and she came from Northwestern at Alva. My mother admired her so much. That teacher took Mother home with her at Thanksgiving, or one of those occasions, so that   s who my mother named her for. VaLois lives at Goodwell  Oklahoma , and she   s married to Dr.  Serafin  Ramon, and he was a biology instructor at Panhandle for many years. That was one reason my father sent me to school there for the first two years. (Laughs)  Finchum She went to OSU?  Floyd No. She went to Panhandle State.  Finchum Okay, you said aunt, so   .  Floyd It   s all the aunts that went to school at OSU.  Finchum Then you went, and then    .  Floyd Then our two daughters, and the niece and nephew that lives in Oklahoma went. 35  Finchum What about the other two sisters? Since we covered the one, what   s   .  Floyd Then Irma Lou lives here in Beaver, and she was the librarian here at the Beaver School. She was named Outstanding Librarian in the state of Oklahoma the first year they offered that award. Then Amy Grace teaches business, and she retired from   . She lives at Brownfield ,Texas. She retired, but now she teaches homebound students. She works for the school district just as a contract teacher, and they have a lot of homebound students. That   s what she does.  Finchum A lot of you were very people-oriented in the occupations that you chose. Your father passed away early, what about your mother? How old was she?  Floyd She was eighty when she passed away.  Finchum And her grandparents, or her parents were the ones that had the farm?  Floyd No, this is my father   s farm that I live on. My mother also grew up on a farm at Balko  Oklahoma , but her father died in a car wreck during the   30s, and so they lost their farm. It was   .  Finchum Had they come into Oklahoma, or were they born here?  Floyd They had moved from Missouri. Now, my grandfather, when he moved to Beaver County, he came from Harper County, so he had lived longer in Oklahoma. He first came to Beaver County in 1904. He took over a relinquishment that was across the road from our house, and his cousin had lived there. My grandfather took it over, and he lived one winter in that bitterly cold, little shack. He said it was so cold the grease would set up around the potatoes when he fried potatoes. He was not married, so he went back to Laverne then. Then he went to a trade school, automotive school, in Wichita, Kansas. My grandfather worked as a blacksmith, and then he went to automotive school. He had the first car in Laverne. Then after he married my grandmother, he bought farmland and lived there. He came to Beaver County and bought land in 1916, so that   s when he moved then to Beaver County.  Finchum Been in Oklahoma a long time.  Floyd Yes, been in Oklahoma a long while. My husband   s family has lived in Oklahoma even longer. In fact, my husband and I attend the Presbyterian Church here in Beaver, which is the oldest church in the state of Oklahoma that has still been in continuous existence.  Finchum I   ll have to drive by and take a look. 36  Floyd Yes, you will.  Finchum Is it a white   .  Floyd It   s a little, white church.  Finchum That   s what you imagine from that time period.  Floyd It is, yes.  Finchum So Beaver County is home?  Floyd Yes, yes it is.  Finchum What   s the biggest draw? Why do people like the area?  Floyd Usually, it   s because of the people, that   s the cause. Once in a while, we have nice weather. (Laughs)  Finchum I saw a flag that said it   s the cow chip   .  Floyd Oh, it   s the cow chip capital of the world. In the early days, there weren   t enough trees to cut. So they picked up buffalo and cow chips, or manure after it dried, and that   s what they burned in their stoves. During the early   70s, they were looking for some gimmick. Someone in town, the newspaper editor, suggested the cow chip throws. Everybody went out, and picked up cow chips, and they would have a contest on how far they could throw it. In fact, after my husband and I moved back, we picked up cow chips for them one year, because you have to have nice ones that   cow chips that are on buffalo grass, and make a nice size, and don   t fall apart, so we picked those up for the town. (Laughs) They always say that you don   t want to lick your finger between throws. (Laughter)  Finchum Do they have a smell when they burn them? Does it   you wonder if they smell.  Floyd Not really. When they   ve dried out, they don   t.  Finchum Have you competed?  Floyd No, I haven   t competed. (Laughs)  Finchum Is that usually during the county fair?  Floyd No, that   s in April. 37  Finchum Early in the year.  Floyd Then the county fair was just in September. It   s just been over a couple of weeks.  Finchum Is it still pretty well visited, the fair?  Floyd Not like it used to be when I was growing up. In fact, my husband and I still go for   . We go to the parades, then go to the fair, but it   s not like it used to be.  Finchum Would your mother and grandmother enter things to it back in those days?  Floyd No. Well, my mother entered a little bit in the fair. In fact, recently, I was able to look through a home extension scrapbook that her club, my mother and grandmother   s club, had put mementos in. This scrapbook was so interesting. One of the projects was to clean up the dooryards. That   s the yard around the house, and so one Sunday, the ladies made a tour of the houses. Now, the first house they went to was my grandmother   s house because it was her birthday, so they took food there and all had lunch. Then they set out on their tours. It was the funniest things. One lady was so proud because she had redone the milk house, and the milk house was up close to the house. That was the big accomplishment in her dooryard.  Then another one had built a little fence with flowers behind it, and they would comment. Now, one lady   s house, they commented, they made a nice comment about each house. They said that the dooryard was so clean, and there wasn   t any trash or cans laying around. Knowing that dooryard, I   m sure that they had swept it. I think if the ground is really hard, they used to sweep the dirt off of it, and I   m sure it had been swept, but anyway, it was real interesting to read. Now, when my husband and I went to Europe, and we were going through some little towns, we saw the women sweeping their dirt off of their yards. That was a custom, and it used to be a custom.  Finchum What was the name of the club here?  Floyd It was the Riverside Extension Club.  Finchum Is there a river?  Floyd (Laughs) I don   t know. There   s a river that goes through town, but why they named it the Riverside Club, I don   t know.  Finchum But there is a river?  38  Floyd There is a river.  Finchum What river is it?  Floyd It   s the Beaver River, and then it changes into the North Canadian. It   s the North Canadian River, but in this area, it   s called the Beaver River.  Finchum Riverside Homemaker Club. Those have died away too. Does Beaver County even have one now?  Floyd Oh yes, they have two or three. Clear Lake  Oklahoma  has a good club, and then there   s one at Balko. They still have some activity.  Finchum Then they could be having things in the fair.  Floyd Yes, they have some things in the fairs.  Finchum Flower arrangements, or canning, or whatever?  Floyd Right. Then of course, the 4-H has all their exhibits in the fair, and then there   s art exhibits. There   s people that still enter their artwork. There   s flowers, and vegetables, and canning products, and pies.  Finchum What   s the main business in the town of Beaver these days?  Floyd It has been the oil income for most of the time that we   ve lived back here. There   s still some gas production and a little oil. Of course, this is the county seat, so that helps the town.  Finchum They have some attorneys around and bondsmen, I guess.  Floyd We have a livestock yard, and it   s a good sale barn.  Finchum Are you aware of any other OSU alums in the town of Beaver?  Floyd After I said I would do this, then I remembered my good friend, John Hessler. I thought,    Oh my goodness, he would   ve been a lot more entertaining.    (Laughs)  Finchum No, you   ve been great.  Floyd Then I have another good friend, Janelle, that graduated.  Finchum A few?  Floyd There   s a few. 39  Finchum You see some orange around.  Floyd Yes. In fact, the hardware store sells OU and OSU memorabilia, and they tell me they ran out of orange a lot faster than they do red.  Finchum That   s good to know. (Laughs)  Floyd Yes. I was surprised that they do. They say they run out of the OSU things quicker.  Finchum Do you have a favorite place on campus, a favorite spot? Like if you go, what you want to see?  Floyd There was a little park bench by Theta Pond that was in the bushes my husband and I liked, (laughter) so I suppose Theta Pond is probably. And of course, we loved the Union and the Library. I had classes in Old Central before they stopped having classes there. I have toured Old Central since then, since it   s just a museum now.  Finchum I think it would   ve been neat to have had a class in there.  Floyd It was, had to go upstairs.  Finchum Squeaky stairs too, if I remember correctly. (Laughs) I   ve been in it once in the last couple of years. It was a neat building, I   m glad they saved it.  Floyd I am too.  Finchum Campus has changed a lot, quite a bit since you left. Human Environmental Science, I don   t know what it was called when you were there, Home Economics, I guess?  Floyd It was called Home Economics, right, Human Environmental Sciences, yes.  Finchum Now, it   s just Human Sciences. They   ve taken out the Environmental. They   ve built a new part.  Floyd The first time I was really exposed to something besides homemaking skills was when I was in Denver, and I was asked to attend a workshop put on by the Institute of Life Insurance. There were a lot of different teachers that were involved in that, and we had separate groups, and they came in from the areas around. This was on investing money. Our group wrote a booklet called,    Dollars Demand Decisions.    That was the first time I was really exposed to that side of home economics, but there were business teachers and different people in it. That was a very helpful class. 40  Finchum You would   ve thought money would   ve been an issue within home ec.  Floyd It was not before that, yes.  Finchum Did you have to spend time at the practice house?  Floyd Oh yes, and we had to buy the groceries, and plan the meals and everything. But this is on long-term goals     Finchum Not just the budget for the week?  Floyd    not just the budget, it was on long-term goals. I hadn   t been exposed to that kind of thing.  Finchum Maybe it was a gender thing. Women just weren   t?  Floyd I don   t know.  Finchum That   s a good question.  Floyd That would be an interesting thing.  Finchum That would have been in the late   60s?  Floyd That was in the   60s. We had real interesting speakers. We had to put this booklet out, and it was patented by the Denver Public Schools.  Finchum I   ll have to see if it   s floating around out there on the internet.  Floyd It   s probably not. (Laughs)  Finchum I don   t know, you can find lots of things. (Laughter) Looking back over the last thirty or forty years, do you have a couple of favorite memories? It doesn   t have to be OSU-related necessarily.  Floyd Oh, my goodness.  Finchum Retiring and going on your trip, I   m sure, was one of them.  Floyd Yes, we also went, two years ago, we went on a tour of the Baltic Sea, and a lot of our family went at that time. We took our daughters, and some grandchildren, and a niece and nephew, and we went to Russia and all those countries. Of course, that was a highlight. Of course, when our daughters graduated from college, and then when they got married, since it   s family-oriented, we enjoyed that. My husband and I go on trips. We go on bus 41  tours, and we went to Pennsylvania. That was in the spring, and we went to Philadelphia and saw all the historical sites. We went to, oh my goodness, the place in Pennsylvania where the plane went down, and we saw some real interesting things. That   s just a bus tour, out of Hugoton, Kansas, and so it   s Kansas, and Texas, and Oklahoma people. We get to know a lot of those people on the trips.  Finchum It would be fun.  Floyd Yes, it was lots of fun.  Finchum Any hobbies? You still sew any?  Floyd No, I don   t. My back hurts too much to sit over a sewing machine. Through the years, I   ve decorated, I   ve wallpapered, I   ve painted, I   ve done all these things. I go to an exercise class every Tuesday and Thursday, and then I also play bridge once a week. My husband and I   what do you do around here, besides eat out? (Laughs) We spend the weekend with friends, going one place or another.  Finchum What   s your favorite place, close by, to eat?  Floyd Oh goodness, there   s not   we go   . There   s a little restaurant at Forgan  Oklahoma  that we   ve gone too, but the owner died. It   s supposed to be opening back up, so we go there a lot. We even go to Darrouzett, Texas, to eat fish on Friday nights.  Finchum Someone said there was a good Mexican place in Canton?  Floyd Oh yes. Our daughter and son-in-law have a house on Canton Lake. I   ve been to that Mexican food place in Canton. It is nice.  Finchum I heard it was good.  Floyd It is good.  Finchum Those little tucked-away places, you have to ask somebody.  Floyd Yes, it   s good. We went there.  Finchum Is there a place in Beaver?  Floyd We have a couple Mexican food restaurants and a Pizza Hut.  Finchum Pizza Hut, I did see that. That   s more than some places I   ve been to.  42  Floyd Yes, it is, so we   re pleased to have them.  Finchum Do you camp, or motorcycles, or anything like that?  Floyd Oh my, no. (Laughter)  Finchum None of that?  Floyd No.  Finchum Grandchildren?  Floyd Yes, we have our daughter that lives in Perryton, Texas, has three boys, and their names: Ryder, Rangle, and Range. Ryder is twenty-three, he will be twenty-three in October. He went to school a little while and that wasn   t for him, and so he is now a welder and has his own welding business. His brother, Rangle, is in his sophomore year at Tarleton  State University , that   s the college that   s at Stephenville, Texas. Rangle is going to become a lawyer. Then the youngest brother is still in Perryton, and he   s a sophomore in high school.  Finchum Is Rangler a W or an R?  Floyd It   s an R-A-N-G-L-E. His vo-ag teacher in high school always called him Wrongle because Rangle is a   . He   s a real likeable kid, but he just knows lots of facts, so his teacher would say,    You   re wrong,    and called him Wrongle. (Laughter) Then our daughter that lives in Albuquerque has a little girl that   s thirteen, and that   s the only granddaughter, and then a boy that   s twelve. She was the veterinarian and didn   t get married until she was thirty years old. (Laughs)  Finchum You grew up in a house full of girls, and then had girls, and now finally have boys.  Floyd Now have those boys, yes. They   re lots of fun.  Finchum None of those will be going to OSU, probably not?  Floyd Just really breaks my heart.  Finchum If all of you have, so can   t complain. They can still be supporters.  Floyd They are.  Finchum Can cheer on the,    Go Pokes      43  Floyd Our daughter says she   s going to Homecoming. She and her friends are getting together for their fifty-year party.  Finchum When did she graduate from   .  Floyd She graduated from high school in    84, and then she went three years to OSU, and then had to transfer for nursing school, so she was in    89. Then our other daughter graduated from high school in    86, and so she went seven years to OSU, graduated in    93. She got into vet school after her junior year, so she was able to cut off a year there.  Finchum Does she do large animals or small animals?  Floyd Small animals. She wanted to be a veterinarian since she was four years old.  Finchum Was she involved with 4-H?  Floyd No. We really didn   t have time because we opened the hardware store in the morning and closed. It was just my husband and I basically that operated the store.  Finchum You had had enough of chickens by that time?  Floyd (Laughs) Yes. No kidding. Oh, we had a few chickens after we moved back on the farm. We had chickens, and we had goats because my husband was a city boy, and so he wanted all those animals. We still have a horse and a donkey. (Laughs)  Finchum You didn   t send your daughters out to harvest the chickens?  Floyd No, they were   . Yes.  Finchum Any tractors left?  Floyd We have an old   yes, we have a real old tractor that sits out in front of our house.  Finchum Decoration? (Laughs)  Floyd It had the iron wheels, so it   s a decoration, right.  Finchum I have covered a lot. I was going to ask about music. Back in the day, did you have a favorite   because that was when Elvis was the in thing?  Floyd Yes. (Laughs) That was right after I graduated from college that Elvis was so popular. 44  Finchum I don   t know, they had some people come to campus, but I   m sure he wasn   t one of them.  Floyd No, he wasn   t one of them.  Finchum Do you remember when John F. Kennedy was killed?  Floyd Yes.  Finchum That would   ve been right not too long after.  Floyd I was teaching school in Denver. It was announced over the PA system, so that was really traumatic, of course.  Finchum Then Robert was soon after that. Major   . As far as events in American history since, I don   t know, from the   60s on, is there something that sticks out in your mind?  Floyd No, I don   t think so.  Finchum Your husband didn   t have to go to any of the wars?  Floyd That   s right, he didn   t.  Finchum Then being in politics, you were here when Obama was elected. I guess that was something to see. You always vote?  Floyd Yes. In fact, I   m the Democratic member on the county election board, so I   m here on election night. After I retired, the member that was on the board, he went off the board at the same time, so I became a member of the board.  Finchum This one   s going to be interesting.  Floyd It   s going to be interesting. I always get to   yes.  Finchum Really interesting. (Laughs) Anything else you want to add before I ask my last question?  Floyd I don   t think there   s a thing.  Finchum I usually end with asking how you want to be remembered. When history   s written, what do you want people to remember about you?  Floyd (Laughs) Oh my goodness, I haven   t thought about that. My husband always likes tombstones. We   d go to graveyards in Colorado and look at the old 45  tombstones and everything. A few years ago, we were talking. I made a remark about being cremated.    Well, no,    he said, because I know they have tombstones even for cremations, but anyway, he said, no, he wanted to have a stone. I said,    Well, you have to think of something interesting for our tombstone, because if you don   t, I   m going to put   and you pass away first. I will put    Pops and the Old Lady    on the stone.    (Laughs) That   s how we will be remembered, unless he comes up with something more creative. (Laughter)  Finchum Your daughters know that?  Floyd Yes, I   ve told the daughters. (Laughter)  Finchum Is there a favorite meal that you cook for them, a traditional type meal?  Floyd The nice thing   yes. The one meal that I really have every year is we have gumbo on Christmas Eve. Since we lived in Louisiana, and we learned to like the Cajun food, and that is the traditional food. They have to come to my house on Christmas Eve, and we have gumbo, and if they miss it, then I have to save gumbo to take to them.  Finchum That   s not your typical Oklahoma Christmas.  Floyd No, it   s not. (Laughter)  Finchum It   s not chicken fried steak. What were you going to say before you said that?  Floyd I was going to say a lot of times, the daughters cook for us. They grill steaks, et cetera, like that, but I always cook the Christmas meal.  Finchum Gumbo sounds good.  Floyd It is good.  Finchum If there   s nothing else, I   ll say thank you very much.  Floyd Thank you, it   s been a pleasure.  Finchum Go Pokes   Floyd All right, go Pokes. That   s right.  -------  -------  
