 Nykolaiszyn with the OSU library. Today is Tuesday,  July 21, 2015, and we   re in Ada, Oklahoma, Pontotoc County, as part of our  Cowboys in Every County oral history project. Today we   re meeting with  Jenny Cypert. Jenny, thank you so much for joining us today.  Cypert Absolutely. Thank you.  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   d like to learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell me the year  you were born and where you were born?  Cypert I was born in 1961, and I was born in Ardmore, Oklahoma.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about your parents.  Cypert My parents actually met at Oklahoma State, Oklahoma A M at the time.  My father was from Lone Grove  Oklahoma , which is not far from  Ardmore, in Carter County, and he hitchhiked up to Oklahoma State, A M.  My mother is from Stillwater. She grew up in Stillwater. She was born in  Stillwater. Mother went to Oklahoma A M. My father went to Oklahoma  A M, and that   s where they met. My grandparents lived in Stillwater, so  Stillwater is a very important part of all of my life.  Nykolaiszyn What were your parents studying?  Cypert My dad graduated with an agriculture degree, and then he actually came  back and was a teacher at Lone Grove High School when he graduated. My  mom just attended and did not end up graduating. Back in those days, that  was normal. They ended up in Ardmore for a couple years, where I was  born, and then actually moved to Ada when I was a young child. His  background was agriculture, and that   s how he got to Oklahoma State.  Nykolaiszyn Do you have any siblings?  5  Cypert I do. I have one older sister. She also went to Oklahoma State, and that   s  where she interacted with her husband. I did not meet my husband there. My  husband is from Texas, but his brother, my husband   s brother did go to  Oklahoma State and was Pistol Pete while he was at Stillwater. We have ties  on both sides.  Nykolaiszyn As a little girl, would you spend any time traveling to Stillwater?  Cypert My grandparents, as I said, were from Stillwater. Stillwater   s very important  to us because every Christmas and then also every holiday and whatever we  were in Stillwater with my grandparents. As well, since my grandparents  both worked for the university, and my parents would go on vacation in the  summers. My sister and I would stay with my grandparents in Stillwater,  and we would run back and forth all over that campus from my  grandfather   s office to my grandmother   s office. They were a little bit far on  campus, apart from each other. From a very early age, we got to know the  campus like the back of our hand. We grew up with that campus, and I think  it   s beautiful today, as it always has been.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me what your grandparents did on campus.  Cypert My grandfather was receiving clerk. He received everything in for the  university, and his office was where the transportation office is now. Then  my grandmother worked for residential housing. She was either in Kerr-  Drummond or the Union. Her office was probably in the Union. We would  run back and forth from the Student Union to the receiving station, and like I  said, we would go to wherever. We transported all over that Union and  knew every floor of that Union, and we knew the campus. As little children,  we knew that campus really, really well.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a favorite thing you   d like to do on campus?  Cypert My favorite thing to do on campus was to go in the basement in the candy  store and buy, they were like two-cent mints, but they were called ice cubes.  They were chocolate, and I remember those to this day. They were  wonderful. Yes, my favorite place in the Union as a child was the candy  store on the basement of the Union.  Nykolaiszyn Very cool. Talking about your time when you were a little girl, can you kind  of tell me a little bit about your early education, where you attended school?  Cypert Sure. I was actually here in Ada for my first elementary years through fifth  grade. In sixth grade, we moved to Sulphur  Oklahoma  in Murray County,  and I was at Sulphur from sixth grade to ninth grade basically. Well, I went  to the first half of my tenth grade year in Sulphur. Then we moved to  Putnam City. I went to Putnam City High School for my junior year, and I  6  went to Ardmore High School for my senior year. I went to three different  high schools, and actually that may also be one reason why Oklahoma State  is so important to me. When you go to three high schools three different  years, you don   t develop that synergism with a high school because you   re  only there one year. You just don   t have the connection. I did have the  connection with Stillwater and Oklahoma State because I   d been there since  I was a child. It wasn   t new to me. It wasn   t foreign to me. Going there as a  freshman, I was comfortable with it, and the loyalty that some people feel to  their high school I   ve always felt to Oklahoma State because it was the  constant in my life. I was there the whole time. I   m always there.  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m taking it education was very important in your family...  Cypert Yes, yes.  Nykolaiszyn    with your father as an educator. Did you always know you were going to  go to college?  Cypert I always knew I was going to Oklahoma State. Like I said, Daddy graduated  from Oklahoma A M. I never thought about not going to college. College  was always what I was going to do. There was never a question about where  I was going to college. People always joked with my parents and said,  because my parents bled orange, my grandparents bled orange, I bleed  orange, people would always joke with my parents and say,    What if your  daughters want to go someplace else?    It was just never a question of where  we were going. My sister and I both went to Oklahoma State. It was just  what we knew. It wasn   t like they said,    You can   t go anywhere else.    We  didn   t want to go anywhere else. That   s where we wanted to go. That was  home. That was comfortable. I always knew I was going to college, and  there was never a question that I wasn   t going to Oklahoma State.  Nykolaiszyn When your freshman year in college rolled around, what year was that?  Cypert I guess    79.  Nykolaiszyn Where did you live on campus?  Cypert Wentz. I was in Wentz.  Nykolaiszyn Describe campus for me back then.  Cypert Well, I mean, to me, it   s a lot like it is today. Of course, Scott-Parker-Wentz  was there. I know the dorm situations are a lot different now today than they  were then. Willham North and South were there. I know Kerr-Drummond   s  changing now. The dorm situations are different. There are a lot of newer  buildings on campus now, but I mean, I had classes in Classroom Building.  7  Of course, I was a business major. With the business building being torn  down, that   s going to change my world probably the most. That   ll be the  most dramatic change. I   m familiar with Wes Watkins Center. That, of  course, was not there when I was there. I did spend a lot of time in the  library. I was a studious student. I studied a lot, and the library was a good  place for me to study. Of course, when I visualize the student in my mind,  the first thing I see is that view from the Union in front of the library of the  flower beds and the campus, and that hasn   t changed. That   s as beautiful  today as it was thirty years ago, and I love that. I think OSU   s campus is  probably, I   ll put it up there with anybody. It   s beautiful.  Nykolaiszyn Did you live in Wentz all four years?  Cypert No. I lived in Wentz three years, though. I did live in Wentz three years, and  my senior year, I moved out and lived in an apartment, which was not too  far from campus and was still able to walk to campus. Parking hasn   t  changed, hasn   t improved too much over the years. Parking is still an issue,  but it was a good four-year experience. I was glad to get out to an apartment,  of course, but I enjoyed the cafeteria because you didn   t have to prepare  anything. Like any student, I guess, you got kind of tired of it. I do know the  food situation has changed, and it   s a lot more variety today and a lot more  name-brand things that you can buy. I have a daughter there now, and she  gets her regular Starbucks on her way to class.  Nykolaiszyn Well, talk to me how you chose business as a major.  Cypert It seemed rather natural for me. I had worked at a bank part of my high  school time, and both of my parents were in business. It was the natural  place for me to light. Business just came easy for me. I didn   t have much of  a choice on that. I never really gave any other college a consideration.  Nykolaiszyn Any classes or professors that really stick out in your mind?  Cypert Bob Hamm, marketing professor, was awesome and awesome person,  awesome guy. He probably is one of the ones. Bob Spurrier was there also,  awesome, awesome professor, an awesome teacher, interested in kids. Those  are the two. Lee Manzer was there as well, and I had him for some classes  and enjoyed his classes as well. Those guys were real influential in keeping  me engaged as a twenty-year-old college student.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a job while you were on campus?  Cypert I did. Freshman year, I didn   t work. Sophomore, junior year, I was a desk  clerk and an RA for Wentz. Desk clerk one year, RA one year. I just worked  there on campus at the University. My senior year, I branched out and  8  worked for Southwestern Bell there in Stillwater. I did have a little  experience with that my senior year.  Nykolaiszyn Talk to me about any organizations or clubs you were involved with during  your time.  Cypert Oh gosh, let me think back  I was involved in the marketing organization on  campus. I was somewhat involved in SGA  Student Government  Association . I was somewhat involved in the Republican committee, Young  Republicans, I guess. The marketing committee is what stands out the most.  There were some honor society committees. I don   t honestly remember their  names, but I did attend those meetings as well. Went to University Heights   Baptist Church , so was somewhat involved in some bible studies and some  church activities. That   s probably about where I was in that.  Nykolaiszyn We know you were very studious.  Cypert I was. I was.  Nykolaiszyn You spent time studying. What did you do for fun?  Cypert Friends. You know, at that time, your family became your dorm floor and  friends on your dorm floor, for me, and I   m still friends with some of those  folks today. They are lifelong friends, and I could call any one of them and  do whatever. They would help me with whatever I needed. I mean, what do  you do? You hang out. My group wasn   t much of a drinking crowd, so we  didn   t do a lot of the   yes, I was at Tumbleweed   s, but we didn   t do a lot of  that because that   s just not what we wanted to do. We just hung out.  Nykolaiszyn When you were an RA, how was that experience for you? I was an RA, and  dorm life, of course, is very interesting at times. How was that experience  for you?  Cypert The first part of being an RA I absolutely loved, because I had my room to  myself, and I hadn   t ever had, at college, a room to myself. Of course, at that  time, and still to this day, Wentz rooms were pretty small. If you   re in one of  those small rooms with a roommate, and I had interesting situations with  roommates like everyone does at college, some really, really, really good,  mostly really, really, really good.  The RA experience, then you do have situations that you need to help with.  At that time, it was not co-ed dorms at all, of course. All I really dealt with  were females. I didn   t really have to get onto any females about having boys  in or anything like that, but I do remember some noise issues. At that time,  you had to get people quieted whatever time you were supposed to get them  quiet and all those things.  9  Then there were some issues, especially with the younger girls, missing  home and being lonely and wanting to feel loved because they were feeling  pretty lonely in a group of twenty thousand of their best friends. That was  probably what I remember most about that. I loved it. I don   t remember too  many bad experiences at all. Mainly, for me, it was nice to have my own  room.  Nykolaiszyn How was Homecoming back in the day?  Cypert Homecoming was about like it is today. Probably not quite as big as it is  today, but it   s always been the World   s Best Homecoming. It still is. Loved  it. Of course, I remember I was in the parade a few times. Of course I did  house decorations for Wentz dorm and for Scott-Parker-Wentz. Yeah, I  loved Homecoming. Homecoming   s wonderful.  Nykolaiszyn Would you go home often, or would your parents visit?  Cypert My parents   and again, my grandparents lived in Stillwater still when I was  there. Did do a few loads of laundry at their house. Sometimes that was  easier than going downstairs to the basement. My parents would come to the  football games in the fall, so I never came home in the fall. Never did I go to  Ardmore in the fall to go home. I mean, I remember going home maybe  twice, maybe three times in the spring, but no, I didn   t go home a great deal.  Maybe I did have my grandparents there, and maybe that, I would go to their  house and have a meal or something. I had family in Stillwater. That might  have been part of the reason why I didn   t need to go home. My sister   s older  than I am. My sister was in Stillwater part of the time that I was in  Stillwater, so I could go to her house as well. No, I didn   t go home much at  all. Stillwater was home, and still to this day when I go there Stillwater is  home. It   s comfortable.  Nykolaiszyn As a student, did you have time to attend many sporting events?  Cypert Yes. I don   t know that I ever missed a football game. I   m sure I did, but it  was habit to go to football games. I didn   t go to as many basketball games,  but I did go to basketball games. We were really good in the years I was  there, so I did go to most of the basketball games. My grandfather loved  wrestling. I went to some wrestling matches with him, and of course, we  were very good at wrestling. I would go to the baseball games with him as  well because he was an avid baseball fan, and we would sit right behind  home plate. I remember lots and lots of baseball games with him as well.  Nykolaiszyn Thinking about Stillwater as a student, are there any businesses, restaurants  you would frequent, places you remember going to?  10  Cypert The bagel place on the Strip had a special on Wednesday nights. It was  bagel and cream cheese and ham. I don   t remember how much it cost, but I  know they had a special on Wednesday nights. We would go almost every  Wednesday night to get a bagel and cream cheese and ham, and it was  crowded, crowded. Of course, Coney Island was there at the time. We went  to Coney Island some, but every Wednesday night we went to that bagel  place. That   s the place. Now yes, we went to Hideaway, and we ate pizza  from Hideaway. We would order it. Really the first thing that stands out to  me was that bagel place because it was an event. Every Wednesday night,  you knew, at whatever time that was, you were going to go get a bagel. That  was fun.  Nykolaiszyn Any other traditions that come to mind from your time as a student? I think  the bagel is a good tradition to remember.  Cypert It was. It was. It was good. It was good. It tasted good, and it was good. No,  not off the top of my head that comes to mind right now. I can   t think of  anything else right now.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me about graduation day.  Cypert Graduation day was, I think, probably the prettiest day God   s ever created. It  was beautiful. At that time, for the business college, we had it at the stadium  on Lewis Field, and all the graduates were on Lewis Field. Then your  parents and family were in the stadium, and I do think it was the prettiest  day God ever created. It was gorgeous, and there wasn   t a cloud in the sky.  It wasn   t too hot. It was perfect. I was with my friends, also in the business  college, and yes, we had a speaker. No, I can   t tell you who it was, but it  was a fabulous day. That day is very distinctive, and I do remember that day  just as how wonderful it was, just the act of graduating.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me what happens after graduation.  Cypert Well, hopefully, for me, before graduation, I did have a job. Before  graduation, I had committed actually to go to work for a bank that is here in  Ada, and one of my majors was marketing. I was the marketing officer here  at that bank when I came to Ada. I had a job. I graduated on a Saturday, and  I started work on Monday because that   s what I thought you did. That   s  what I did. I started work on Monday as the marketing officer. Came to  learn really quickly that even though I had made straight A   s and I knew it  all, I didn   t know anything. When you go out to the real world, you really  find out that you don   t know anything, and I didn   t have any relationships  with anybody in Ada. I didn   t know any radio station. I didn   t know any  newspaper place. I didn   t know how to do research for a bank. I didn   t know  anything. I learned real quick that those five P   s of promotion of marketing,  I needed to relearn. The job was hard for me at first. It was a challenge, but I  11  did it. I stuck it out. I worked at that bank for twelve years until I got a  different job in Ada.  Of course, meanwhile, I kept going   that   s the one. For me, I   d been to  Stillwater all my life. I mean, I   ve had football tickets. I guess I went to my  first football game when I was an infant. I don   t know. I know I was little. I  kept going. I kept going to all the games. I mean, I even went back and  spoke to a few classes that year, my first year out, I remember. Possibly  even my second year out because of some of those professors that said,    Can  you come back and tell this class what it   s really like to graduate and be out  in the real world?   , which I appreciated. You complete, and then you start  all over. Hopefully you have a job that you eventually learn to like. I did  learn to like it. Like I said, I stayed there twelve years, and it was a good job  for me. OSU did prepare me well for it. It   s just a rude awakening when you  go to work, because it   s not class anymore, and it   s forty or fifty or sixty  hours a week of real life stuff. Profit motives do matter, and you do need to  have relationships with folks and develop those relationships. It is another  learning experience in your life.  Nykolaiszyn Kind of take me through your career. What happens after the bank?  Cypert I went to work for a computer memory chip company here for just a little  bit, for about a year, and then I started working here at this technology  center, Pontotoc Technology Center. I   ve been here fifteen, sixteen years  now, whatever it figures out to be. You do need new challenges in your life,  or I do. I wanted them. Of course, within that career and growing up, I got  married. I was here. I had graduated school. I didn   t get married in college  or out of college. I had already left college. You get married. You have a  family, and we have that discussion of,    Do we want to move to a big city,  or do we want to stay here?    We opted that both of us wanted to stay here,  my husband and I, and we   ve been here thirty years or whatever. It   s been a  very wonderful ride, and we love Oklahoma.  Like I said, his brother had been Pistol Pete. Even though he didn   t attend  OSU, he had some feelings, positive feelings toward OSU. He   s gone with  me to all those football games and basketball games, and he now bleeds as  orange as I do. It   s become our family affair as well. We have three  children. We   ve taken all of our children to all the OSU football games. It is  part of us, and I guess it will be. All three of my kids, they feel strongly  toward OSU. I have a daughter now that will be a senior this coming year,  her fourth year this year, and she probably bleeds more orange than I do.  She   s really involved in SGA, and she took the sorority route and is really  involved in Chi-O   s. It   s been a really good experience. I have a son that is  going to be a sophomore at Ada High School, but he   s already planning  when he goes to Oklahoma State. We all like Pistol Pete. It   s good.  12  Nykolaiszyn Tell me what you do here at Pontotoc Technology Center.  Cypert I work in what   s called the Business and Industry Division, which is the  division that works with companies. We train company employees,  primarily, and then we do adult education as well. If an adult needs to retool  for whatever reason, they want to learn a new challenge, or if the business  needs their employees to learn a certain skill, we do everything. We do  maintenance training, AC/DC  alternate current/direct current , PLC   s   programmable logic controllers . We do computer training. We do soft  skills training. We do mathematics. We do CAD  computer-aided design   systems. We do electrical. We do hydraulics, pneumatics, pretty much safety  training, a lot of safety training, fire training. We do any training that a  company needs to train their employees on. We hire trainers. We, of course,  don   t do it ourselves. We have a staff of about fifteen in our department, and  we work with companies in our school district.  Nykolaiszyn Wow. Looking at the city of Ada, could you kind of give us a little glance  into how the town has changed over the last thirty years?  Cypert Yeah, sure. Ada actually is a little bit like Stillwater in that we have a  university. It   s a regional university. It doesn   t have the population, but we  have East Central University here. East Central helps Ada maintain an  atmosphere of growing and young folks. Ada is very diversified in our  economy. We have some oil and gas. We have some mining. We have some  service industries. We have a plastics manufacturer. We have an automotive  manufacturer that feeds GM. We have the Ram Jack, which is a foundation  repair, and Power Lift, which is a foundation repair. Both of those are  nationwide, and their headquarters are here. Our biggest industry, which has  probably had the most dramatic effect on Ada in the last thirty years, has  been Chickasaw Nation. Chickasaw Nation   s headquarters is here, and thirty  years ago, they probably employed maybe three hundred. I could be wrong  on those numbers. Twenty years ago, they could   ve employed three  hundred.  Today, in the state, they   re a thirteen-county area, and they employ about  fourteen thousand. Next to the State of Oklahoma agencies, they are the  second largest employer for the state of Oklahoma, and their headquarters  are here in Ada. We, at this school, work with Chickasaw Nation greatly to  help train their employees. They have a training department, but with that  many employees, about three thousand of them are employed here in Ada at  their headquarters. We are lucky that Chickasaws work with us and we get  to train a lot of their folks. That   s probably had the most dramatic changes,  as far as how Ada has changed in the last fifteen years, because of their  growth. They bring people into our community. They move people in, so we  have new folks coming in all the time because of their growth. They are in  Oklahoma, but they are also outside of Oklahoma. They do a lot of  13  diversifications within themselves. They have helped Ada grow in the last  few years, and they will continue to. They   re a great business partner.  Nykolaiszyn How often do you make it down to Stillwater these days?  Cypert Regularly. Of course, I have a child there, and of course I make all the  football games. I   ve renewed my football tickets. My sister has three  children also, and two of her three are in Stillwater as well. I was there  Saturday, so I was there forty-eight hours ago or seventy-two hours ago,  whatever, because she just had a child who now she   ll bring up in the  Stillwater tradition. It is truly a family affair for us. We are all ingrained in  Oklahoma State.  Nykolaiszyn How do you show your OSU pride?  Cypert Anyone who knows me knows. Anyone, and you might want to get a  picture. Well, it   s outside. My son is fifteen, but there   s an orange truck on  the corner out here. He   s going to turn sixteen, so we recently acquired that  truck. I said,    Lincoln, what color do you want to paint it?    because it had  been sitting a while. It   s an older truck. He said,    I want to paint it orange,     and I said,    Okay.    We have three Pistol Pete stickers on the back. We have  an orange truck. People just know. I talk about OSU a lot. I do have a few  little OSU memorabilia sitting around. In the fall, I usually, I mean, Rickie  Fowler wears orange on Sunday. I wear orange on Fridays. OSU   s just part  of us.  Nykolaiszyn In your nomination for this oral history project, which your husband sent to  us, he mentioned your mother   s funeral.  Cypert Well, yeah. We had that, too.  Nykolaiszyn Could you talk a little bit about it?  Cypert Sure. My mom died about seven months ago now. It was November of last  year,    14, and my sister and I were in Ardmore. Mom lived in Ardmore. My  sister and I were in Ardmore, and we actually know real well the funeral  director because the funeral director and my father were at A M at the  same time together. I   ve known the family for a long time. His son was  showing us caskets, and of course, Mother, her parents and then her are part  of the reason why we   re all so strong Oklahoma State. We   ve seen all the  caskets. We see this wall, and we see that wall. Then we come to the third  wall, and then he has this notebook over here. He says,    Now I   m not trying  to push this off on you or anything,    but he knows us  He knows my family   He knew my dad went to A M. I mean, he knows us. He says,    I   m not  trying to tell you you need to do this, but there is a company in Oklahoma  that makes these,    and he turned to this page in this three-ring notebook.  14  Well, it   s brighter than that pickup sitting outside. It is an orange casket, and  you open it up, open the lid up. It   s white satin stuff, whatever that material  is, and there   s the big O in the middle of that lid that opens up.  I think Pistol Pete   s somewhere. Oh  It   s on that little piece of fabric that  folds back  Pistol Pete   s right down here in that little corner, you know. My  sister looks at me and just immediately said,    That   s it. That   s what we   re  going to do.    We had an orange, Pistol Pete, Oklahoma State casket. Then it  came time to figuring out what we   re going to put Mother in. She had had  made at Chris    University Spirit or Pistol Pete   s. Could   ve been either one  of them because we go to both frequently. She had had made a sweatshirt  that said    Alumni    across the top and then    OSU    embroidered on it. We  were going through her closet to find out what we thought we needed to put  her in. It was November, so a sweatshirt was appropriate. We put her in that  OSU alumni sweatshirt with her Pistol Pete gold necklace around her neck,  and there we go. Then we had the fight songs played as we were leaving the  church, all of them, and the Harvey-Douglas Funeral Home had those, of  course, recorded for us. We played those as we were going out, and we sang  the alma mater. It was good. It was good.  Nykolaiszyn What a great tribute.  Cypert Everybody was happy. I mean, don   t get me wrong, I   m all about there   s  more to life than Oklahoma State. I get that. It was appropriate for her.  There was no question. Everybody knew we celebrated my mother   s life,  which is what a funeral should be, and we did celebrate her life. She  would   ve been pleased. Of course the orange roses were the family flowers.  In fact, probably every bouquet there was orange, I would suspect. I don   t  really remember, but I would suspect because we   ve just been orange all our  life. That   s what we are. It   s who we are. That   s who we are. It   s in our  makeup.  Nykolaiszyn What advice would you give for students today?  Cypert Be in the present. Be in the moment. Do not think about high school and  what you did in high school or what you didn   t do in high school or what  you wished you had done in high school, and don   t worry too much about  the future. The future will come and you do have to prepare for the future,  but worrying about the future won   t do you any good. Be in the present. Be  a hundred percent in. That   s one thing both my girls have done at college is  they   ve been a hundred percent in. Participate in activities. Be as involved as  you possibly can. Make use of every minute of every day. I do think college  kids, they believe in that. They don   t sleep much, and that   s good because  they   re making use of every minute of every day.  15  Of course, there might be a little advice of maybe once in a while get a little  more sleep because you might be able to be in the moment a little bit better  the next day in class. Of course, I would have a lot of advice. Attend class.  Class is important. If you don   t attend class, you probably won   t get to stay  at Oklahoma State real long. You do need to attend class. I always told my  children,    Sit on the front row.    I don   t care if there is three hundred in  class. If you   re on the front row, it doesn   t matter how many are behind you.  You   re on the front row  That teacher   s going to see you, and it does matter.  That teacher does care  Be on the front row. Pay attention. Just be in the  present. Be in the moment. Participate every minute of every day.  Nykolaiszyn Have you seen an OSU impact in this county, in Pontotoc County?  Cypert Oh yeah. As I said, I was here in Ada from the age of two years old to  eleven years old. At that time, I think our car was the only car that had an  OSU bumper sticker on it. I mean, there were a few others, but not very  many. Now there   s a big impact. We have a lot more Oklahoma State folks  here than we did thirty years ago. We have a lot more Oklahoma State folks  here. OSU   s making inroads in Pontotoc County. Pontotoc County has  always had a big football county. Ada High School has strong tradition in  football. Ada   s won a lot of football championships. With my son now  playing at Ada High School this coming year, I hope we win another one.  Because of the football influence   football   s been important. Pontotoc  County has been kind of geared toward that other small school in Norman.  Oklahoma State has made a lot of inroads. There   s been some football  players from Ada attend Oklahoma State. That helps a little bit. I think our  graduates are infiltrating. We just have more influence now than we did  thirty years ago. I   ve definitely seen a difference in that, because I remember  it as a child. Now I know that today I see a whole lot more OSU bumper  stickers than I used to, so we have made a difference.  Nykolaiszyn Earlier in the interview, you spoke about your loyalty to the University.  What do you think it is about OSU that sparks this kind of loyalty in alumni?  Cypert I think it   s that OSU is so, and I mean this in every sense of the positive  word, it   s so downhome. There   s not a lot of pretense at OSU. Folks are  genuine. That was my experience. Folks are genuine, and that   s been my  daughters    experience. People do care. It is big, so you have to make an  effort as a student. You must make an effort as a student because with  twenty-five thousand or whatever   s there on campus, no, nobody knows  who   s first day there. You have to make an effort yourself to introduce  yourselves, but people do care. Faculty at Oklahoma State is interested in  you, and they certainly will help you. All nationalities, it   s always been a, it  was an international school when I was there. We like that, and we want to  stay that way. The employees of Oklahoma State want to make a difference  16  in people   s lives. I just believe that. Alumni of Oklahoma State want to  make differences in people   s lives. I think that   s one of the reasons why  Oklahoma State makes an effect on people. Hopefully most of us have had a  pretty good experience there.  Nykolaiszyn Kind of fast forwarded through your life quite a bit. Is there anything you   d  like to add that we haven   t spoken about today?  Cypert Not sure I can think of anything else. OSU is a great school. Obviously I  feel that way. We   re lucky that we have some good universities in the state  of Oklahoma, but I think if folks will visit and walk around the campus, you  can   t help but fall, if you like anything outside, you can   t help but fall in  love with that campus. The architecture that they   ve kept, that they   ve been  constant with, it is so uniform. I visited with a girl that   s about to be a senior  at Ada High School this coming fall, and she   s already visited. She   s visited  that small university in Norman, and she   s visited Oklahoma State. Her  preference was Oklahoma State, and her mom is an OU graduate. Her  mom   s kind of pulling for Norman, I   m afraid, but the daughter really  prefers, her initial visit was Oklahoma State. It   ll depend on scholarships  and what she gets where and all of that, and I get that. That is important.  Money is important. That   s where alumni can chip in and give a little bit  more. We get more scholarships, so we can give more.  Once you go, there   s an atmosphere of hominess. There   s twenty-five  thousand kids there, but there   s an atmosphere of hominess. She even said,     It   s like it   s a small community that encompasses Oklahoma State,    and  that   s it  Stillwater loves OSU. You don   t get that feeling in Norman  because Norman is Norman. Now OU   s there, but Norman is Norman.  Stillwater is OSU  That   s a difference  That   s a huge difference. This is  good, too, even though it may not come out that way. It   s more rural, so  we   re more down-to-earth. We just are  We like to play in the dirt. We like  country music. We   ve got a whole lot of country music celebrities that  we   ve born and bred there. I just think it   s more comfortable for me. It   s just  comfortable for folks. There   s a place for everybody, and you need to find  where you   re comfortable. For me and my household, we will continue to  yell,    Go Pokes      Nykolaiszyn As we get ready to end the interview, how many students do you think you   ve  recruited to attend OSU through the years?  Cypert I don   t know. I   ve been lucky. I   ve got to present a couple of times at Ada  High School, some scholarships and things. When somebody from the  University couldn   t come down at the last minute or whatever, they   ve  called and said,    Can you come step in?    That   s okay for me because I don   t  really mind doing that. With all three of my kids, we would take their  friends, if we had an extra football ticket or whatever, and I   ve always told  17  them,    The more people we can show Oklahoma State, the better off I   ll like  it.    I mean that. We try to take them to Homecoming. We make it a weekend  when we go to Homecoming. Of course, I   m glad my nieces and nephews  are there now because I have a place to stay. You still can   t get a hotel  reservation very easily. I do try to get as many kids up there as I can. I think  it   s a good place. Love it.  Nykolaiszyn There is no doubt that you bleed orange.  Cypert Yes, it   s part of us.  Nykolaiszyn Jenny, thank you so much for taking time out and sharing a little bit about  your history with us.  Cypert Sure. Thank you. Great project. Thank you.  -------  -------   
