 Peters and today is October 16, 2009. I   m visiting  with Jack Amyx in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Welcome back to the class reunion   the class of 1959.  Thank you.  Why did you decide to participate in the reunion?  Well, this is also our fiftieth wedding anniversary and we decided that  we would celebrate our fiftieth anniversary in a couple of ways, one of  which would be coming back to campus, for the first time in several  years, and so here we are.  Wonderful. Can you tell us where you grew up and a little bit about your  early life before attending OSU?  I grew up in southwest Oklahoma in a farming community near a little  town of Loveland, Oklahoma which is between Grandfield and  Frederick. My dad was a farmer. He had purchased the farm that my  grandfather, Henry Amyx, had homesteaded in 1907. He was the first  owner of the farm. The farm was a part of the big pasture area which  was owned by Comanche Indians and I think rented by Burnett, from  Texas, as a range for his cattle. It was opened in 1907, he bid on a place  and got it and they moved to Oklahoma in 1907, just a couple of months  before statehood.  I grew up on the farm and went to the small community of Loveland  High School. Played all the sports there were to play. Drove the tractor  and was active in 4-H and that   s how I became familiar with, at that  time, Oklahoma A M. In 4-H, several of us won trips to the annual  Round-up which was held in June on A M   s campus at that time. I was  5  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  up here for five or six years and became very familiar with the campus  and so after I graduated from high school, I decided to attend Oklahoma  A M instead of any other institution.  Where are you living now?  My wife and I live in Lawton, Oklahoma and we have lived there since  1960 off and on. I   ve made periodic trips back to OSU for further  schooling, but our home has been in Lawton, Oklahoma since 1960.  You mentioned the Round-ups influenced you and brought you to  campus.  Is there  anything else? Did any family members ever attend?  No. Some of my aunts had attended what is now UCO   Central State  College   a teacher   s college at that time. But no one had ever attended  Oklahoma State. I was the first member of the family to attend here.  So it was the strong Ag program then?  It was my Ag background and being influenced by the fact that I was  familiar with the campus and had been on campus here several times. I  knew the area and was familiar with the campus. At the time I enrolled  in school here in the fall of 1955, I knew one person on campus and he  was in a fraternity on the other side of campus and I never got to see  him. I came to campus knowing no one in affect when I arrived.  What was your major?  My major was Business Education. When I came, as I said, I  participated in all the athletics in Loveland High School. It was a small  high school so we only had two major sports for the boys. That was  basketball and baseball. I took business subjects and I decided when I  graduated from college I   d like to be a basketball coach and teach  business subjects, so I came up here and enrolled in the School of  Business as a Business Education major. That   s the reason I chose  Business Education.  So the Ag school attracted you and the Business College kept you.  Yes, my background was agriculture and I loved to farm, but I didn   t  particularly want to go into an area in agriculture other than farming. I  loved the agriculture and loved the farm, but I didn   t necessarily want to  be an Ag major. I never came with that intention even though my  agriculture background was probably what influenced me to come to  school at what was then Oklahoma A M.  6  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Any particular classes that you remember fondly or not so? (Laughter)  Any particular courses that were a challenge or a joy?  Well two or three areas   I said my area was Business Education and  you had the option of either choosing to take shorthand as one of the  areas or not to take shorthand. I decided that I wanted to be able to teach  in every area, so I took shorthand as an option and I took three or four  shorthand classes when I was a student up here. My first year, there were  three of us boys who were in the shorthand class and the rest of them  were females. My last two shorthand classes, I was the only male in the  entire shorthand class, which I think was a little bit of a unique class  situation for me. I remember that as being unique. I didn   t particularly  care for shorthand. In fact, I made the lowest grades of my college career  in my shorthand classes, one of them that I took.  Classes that I liked, in my undergraduate work, I liked my senior level  class, Methods of Teaching. We had a very energetic person, Dr. Gordon  Culver who went on to be a professor at the University of Nebraska  later, but he was a very energetic person. I enjoyed his classes. I enjoyed  Dr. Robert A. Lowry who was a bit of an unusual teacher. He was very  philosophical in his approach to teaching. I really didn   t appreciate his  classes until I got out and had about two or three years of teaching in my  background and I began to understand some of the philosophical things  that he was talking about that really didn   t gel with me until I got out.  Dr. Lloyd Garrison was one of my major professors and I always  enjoyed his class. He was very precise and his method of teaching had  the neatest writing on what was then the chalkboards that were used. I  remember him as having the neatest writing of any professor that I ever  had. It was almost as if it were written by a machine that would write. It  was very unique in nature and so I remember those people specifically.  I happened to go through four years of ROTC and was commissioned  after I graduated. At the time that we attended, all the males were  required to take the first two years of ROTC and I liked it so well that  even though I wasn   t required to, I went ahead and took ROTC my final  two years and then was commissioned into the Army. I enjoyed my  ROTC class as well. I don   t remember a particular officer or sergeant  that taught us, but I liked the classes that we had.  What buildings were some of your classes in?  Most of my classes were either in what was then the new classroom  building, which is, I understand, still in existence and still has classes in  it. And the College of Business was housed in Morrill Hall at that time  and I had a lot of classes in those buildings. The ROTC classes were in  the World War II Quonset huts. (Laughs) All of my ROTC classes were  7  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  in the tin huts which became a little warm in the late months of spring  and early months of fall. And it was cold in the winter. (Laughter) It was  a unique experience. Of course, coming from a farm and living in a farm  house my first thirteen years when the linoleum flooring would rise up  off the floor two or three inches when the northern blew in, it was not all  that uncommon for me to be cold in the winter, but it was certainly not a  desirable experience on my part to be there.  Now the Classroom Building was probably air conditioned.  The Classroom Building was great. It was air conditioned and it was  great. I don   t remember any uncomfortable situations in Morrill Hall,  although I don   t remember whether it was air conditioned at the time or  not.  Where did you live while you were in school?  I lived my entire four years of undergraduate work in East Bennett Hall.  I was not a fraternity member. Did not join a fraternity. So I spent all my  time in different rooms in East Bennett Hall.  East Bennett Hall. And it was not air conditioned?  It was not air conditioned, no.  So what was your room like at East Bennett Hall, or your various  rooms? I   m assuming they were very similar.  They were all similar in size. As a freshman, I was on the fourth floor on  the north wing of East Bennett Hall. It was very cold and I guess as true  as what may currently be the situation that at the end of the first  semester, there were fewer people in Bennett Hall than there were the  first day of classes in the fall semester. They began to shut the fourth  floor down after one semester. On the fourth floor of East Bennett, they  moved me down to a room on the south wing on the third floor and  that   s where I stayed for two and a half years, and it was quite frankly  quite comfortable. I had two or three different roommates there, but  stayed in the same room.  Do you pick your roommates at all?  They were assigned to me. Since I knew no one when I arrived, I  showed up and they assigned me a roommate. After my first year, then, I  picked my roommate, so my sophomore, junior, and senior year, we  mutually agreed on our roommates, yes.  8  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Can you describe the room itself? What kind of furniture was in there?  There was room for two people and each person had a single bed. There  were two small wooden study tables and two chairs and each person had  a small, built-in closet and then there was a small dressing area with a  dresser, a built-in dresser with four drawers with a mirror up behind it.  There was a bathroom down the hallway where everyone shared the  bathroom and shower areas.  Did they have a sink in the room?  There was no sink. There were two beds, two tables and two chairs and a  built-in closet and built-in drawers for the dresser. That was it. You  supplied everything else.  Did you have a fan?  If you brought one.  What kinds of activities did the residence hall provide? Were there  social activities that they sponsored?  I don   t remember the social activities. I   m sure they had some get  togethers. I don   t particularly remember many at all. There was one  room downstairs in East Bennett Hall that had one TV in it that we could  watch. I remember that I would try to be down there when the TV show  Maverick came on Sunday evening and that was my one hour of TV for  the week. Other than that, I really didn   t engage my first couple of years  in any social activities that East Bennett provided. There were some get  together dances at the beginning of the year, as I remember, but that was  about it. When I came to campus, I was a walk-on freshman basketball  player my freshman year. So if it didn   t happen on the basketball court  or in the classroom or studying, I didn   t participate too much in it my  freshman year.  Was there a curfew at all?  There were no curfews for the males. As I remember, there was a curfew  for the females and I forgot the time that it was. Females, that lived in  dorms at least, had to be back at ten o   clock or so during the week and I  think around midnight on the weekends.  But for the men there was...  There was no curfew.  9  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Did they ever lock the doors?  Not that I know of. (Laughs)  Was there a dorm matron?  There was East Bennett and West Bennett with the cafeteria area in  between and East Bennett had their dorm parents. It was a married  couple who lived downstairs in an apartment area right behind the  counter where you registered and did all of those things at the area.  Then, each floor had two student proctors, I guess, for lack of a better  word. They were paid to monitor their half of that floor, so with East  Bennett having a couple of wings with offshoots off of each one of  them, they had several young men and several rooms under their  supervision. So on each floor, there were two student proctors and then  the couple who lived downstairs on the main floor.  Do you remember their names at all? The couple that lived downstairs?  I do not remember their name. I could have told you that fifteen years  ago, but not today.  But they were there the whole time you were there?  I believe the same couple was there the whole four years I was there. I  happen to remember that for two years, I was there up on the third floor.  A fellow who was also about my age named Jerry Box happened to be  the floor proctor. He and I were in ROTC together also is why I  remember that.  Do you still have any contact with friends you made in Bennett Hall?  I have no ongoing contact with any of my friends that I had in Bennett  Hall. There were a couple of people that I kept up with. One has since  died and so I haven   t kept up with anyone else. I made contact with one  other person about four or five years ago, who lives in Denton  Texas   that lived on the same floor with me. We had math class together and  studied math every Monday, Wednesday and Friday night. After our  dinner hour, I knew what we were going to do and that was to study  math for a couple of hours and we were in ROTC together and both  graduated together. I had lost track of him until about six years ago and I  contacted him. Other than that I   ve not kept up with any of the people I  knew or had known in the dorms.  Do any favorite memories of living in Bennett Hall come to mind at all?  10  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  You mentioned curfew. There were no curfews, so we had people come  in at all times of the hour day and night. (Laughter) A couple of people  liked to procure extraneous front yard materials that they would bring up  to their dorm rooms on occasion (laughs) after a riotous night of living.  Then there was the usual aspect whether it was allowed or not. There  was always a friendly game of poker or whatever  the  radio was  playing, that sort of thing. You always had your sessions in the rooms of  the get together of one sort or another.  What kind of music   you said radios, was there a particular type of  music people liked to listen to?  Not really. Quite frankly, not that many people could afford good radios  or record players at that time. There really weren   t that many in the  dorms. A couple of people had record players and three or four had  radios and that was about it.  How many TV stations were there on  the  TVs?  I watched Maverick. I don   t really know. I think there were the three  major stations ABC, NBC and CBS. I think that the dorm got all of  those, but I   m not sure. I don   t remember what the stations were out of,  probably Tulsa, but I don   t remember.  Let   s see, you talked about being a freshman walk-on.  Yes.  And I   m assuming Coach Iba was the basketball coach?  Coach Iba was the basketball coach, yes.  Did he have an assistant for the freshmen?  Yes, his assistant was Sam Aubrey, who I believe was on the 1945  championship team as one of the players at that time. That   s about all I  know about his background except he was taller than me (laughs) so he  was a fairly tall man. I came from a small school and liked to play sports  and play basketball and considered myself a fairly decent basketball  player for my area, at least. The call went out, anyone that wants to  participate in freshman basketball show up at a certain time, at a certain  place in the field house. I had my tennis shoes and I showed up. Later on  I found out that all the freshman scholarship players had been out on the  court on their own, practicing and getting in shape and I had been going  to class (laughs) and not doing anything of the nature to stay in shape, so  it was a little bit of an eye opening experience the first day that we went  11  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  out for freshman basketball. At that time, freshmen could not play on the  varsity team and there was a freshmen only team.  So the call went out and as I remember it, there were something like 125  or 130 boys showed up for the first call on the day of freshman  basketball. The first day   s activity consisted of lining up and running up  and down the aisles of the field house for three hours. That   s what we  did the whole three hours of practice was run up and down the aisles  with timeouts occasionally for wind sprints back and forth up and down  the field house from one end to the other. I think that was probably on a  Monday. On Tuesday, there were seventy-five of us out for the practice  and it consisted of approximately the same thing of running for three  hours and by the end of the week, there were twenty-five of us still  coming up from practice. So the next day then we actually had some  plays we ran and some things other than wind sprints and running for the  time.  As I said, I had not really gotten in shape from my previous basketball  season in high school, so my legs, after I got through practice until I got  them limbered up for the next practice, I had to walk sideways up and  down the stairs at Bennett Hall because my muscles were so out of shape  and I had stressed them so much in the running. (Laughs) But at the end  of two weeks, they had weeded us down to fifteen. I was one of the  fifteen. I did not make the ten person traveling squad, but I was on the  third team of the freshman team at OSU that 1955-56 season.  You said Sam Aubrey was the coach?  Sam Aubrey was the coach.  Was there any interaction with Hank Iba?  He would occasionally come and sit up in the stands and watch the  practice, but he did not get involved with the actual interaction  personally with any of the practice sessions during the year. Now, I  don   t know what he did with the scholarship players. I know he had to  have visited with them in the recruitment process and all of that, but the  actual practice sessions on the court, Sam Aubrey and one or two of the  student assistants ran the freshman team and their practice sessions. That  happened to be the year that they had Arlen Clark as one of the freshman  players, Jerry Adair was another freshman player. He went on to play  baseball with the Baltimore Orioles, I believe was his professional   team  and they had another fellow whose last name was  Larry   Deutschendorf was one of their scholarship players. A very good player  on the freshman team. Quite frankly, I   ve forgotten the names of the  other scholarship players on the freshman team, but they had a good  12  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  freshman team of the scholarship players that year. A really good team.  Well February of 1957 is when they beat KU.  Yes.  Did you go to that game?  I was at that game. I gave up organized college basketball after my  freshman year, but I was at the game when they won.  So you still had an interest in basketball?  Oh, yes.  Would you attend most of the basketball games?  Yes, I did and at that time, students got free tickets   I guess it was paid  somewhere in student activity fees, but we got tickets to all of the  football games and we got tickets to one half of the basketball games. I  would try to find someone and we were either A or B or one or two,  some designation. And so a certain basketball game would be an A game  and a certain one would be B. If I had an A set of tickets, I would try to  find someone with a B set of tickets and do some trading so I could see  all the games, and I saw most of the basketball games during my  attendance of undergraduate school at OSU.  You said you attended that particular game in February of 1957.  Yes.  Any remembrances from that game at all?  (Laughs) Wilt Chamberlain was playing, I remember. We won in a very  close game, as I remember, and to the best of my remembrance, we  had   I don   t know whether it was given to us or we took a day off of  school after that. I was in my dorm. I had gone to the game and it was  over at 10 or 10:30 or so and I was in my dorm room about 11:30 and a  fellow I knew from the general area of where I lived, I had ridden back  and forth with him a time or two, he called me up and said,    Jack, let   s  go home for the weekend. We   ve got a free day after winning the game.     So about 11:30 we packed up and he came over and got me and we  drove home that night for the free day we would have after that  basketball game.  Some of the others referred to it as a    walk out.     13  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  I didn   t attend class is all I know, (laughter) so I went home.  Do you remember other    walk outs    at all or is that the only occasion?  That   s the only occasion that I took the liberty of taking a    walk out.    I  don   t remember any other particular ones. It seems as if there were a  couple of others, but that   s the only one that I specifically remember.  During your time here, you started at Oklahoma A M. By the time you  graduated, you graduated from Oklahoma State University.  That is correct.  We also joined the Big 8 Conference.  Big 8 Conference, yes.  How were these transitions viewed by students? Did they react or  respond to this at all?  In my area, I was completely unaware of, I guess, the political  background that may have been going on. As far as I personally was  concerned, it was the fact that my A M memorabilia was no longer any  good. I needed OSU memorabilia. I don   t remember any discontent on  any part of the students in Bennett Hall or the ROTC program. Those  were the two areas that I was involved in and I don   t remember any  discontent or any talking one way or the other, either happy or unhappy,  about the name changes. Or changing from the Missouri Valley  Conference to the Big 8. Again, I don   t remember any particular aspects  on that, either pro or con.  Do you remember Pistol Pete as the mascot?  Yes, yes.  Would he attend all sporting activities or mostly?  I don   t remember. I remember him at the football games specifically. I  don   t remember basketball, don   t remember it at all whether he attended  or not.  Did you attend wrestling matches also?  I attended many of the wrestling matches. My background was, prior to  coming to college, I had seen wrestling on TV (laughs) which as  everyone knows wrestling and wrestling on TV are entirely two different  14  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  things. When I went to my first wrestling match at OSU, it was an eye  opening experience to see what real athletes they were and how they  handle themselves and how the matches progressed and it was quite  interesting to me. I really enjoyed wrestling matches much to my  surprise, quite frankly.  Any other sporting activities? You mentioned football, basketball, now  wrestling.  Living in East Bennett, getting to my classes we would walk through  what was then the parking lot by the stadium. There was a walkway  between the field house and the stadium at that time. My route to classes  was through Bennett Hall through that walkway across the parking lot  by the tennis courts. I would see the tennis players practicing and  occasionally a match, but having never played tennis and knowing little  about it, I didn   t attend the tennis matches. The baseball field, at least  during part of my tenure as an undergraduate at OSU, was back on the  north side of Bennett Hall, so I did see a few baseball games, but not too  many.  I  did not really become familiar with who the baseball players  were at that time.  Do you remember Homecoming activities at all while you were in  school? Homecoming as a student?  As a student, yes. I don   t remember any particular Homecoming games.  I do know that we would try to see some of the parade that was going  on. Being an independent at Bennett Hall, we really didn   t get  involved   I didn   t get that involved in putting up any of the  paraphernalia  The house decorations?  The decorations. Those that we had were very minimal and I didn   t get  involved in that myself. I didn   t do a complete tour, but campus being  smaller than it is and basically the fraternity and sorority houses in many  of the same locations, I saw some of the house decorations, but didn   t  become involved in it. Tried to go and view some of the parade at least.  So you attended some of the parades. Some of the football games. Some  of the Walk-A-Round.  And attended the football game.  Were there other student activities throughout the year, traditions that  you would be involved with?  15  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Not really. My senior year, I was secretary of East Bennett Hall in the  governmental structure. I belonged to a couple of student organizations  and the primary one was my ROTC that I belonged to. Most of my  student activity involvement was in ROTC during really most of my  senior year. Didn   t really get involved in that many social activities.  So besides the    walk outs    that you took advantage of, that one time.  I heard of a couple of panty raids, but did not view them, nor participate  in them. Heard that they existed, but that   s about all I know about them.  So you talked about your activities, ROTC,  Yes.  Some resident hall.  Some resident activities.  What did you do for fun? You said you watched Maverick the one hour  of TV a week.  (Laughs) One hour of TV.  Anything else for fun at all, Jack?  Well the sessions in the room, it seems as if after supper, you   d have to  talk about something for awhile. You   d have those activities. Bennett  Hall had a drugstore type service for soft drinks, malts and that sort of  thing. You always had to go down and get a milkshake or something.  Then in my junior year, I started dating the lady who is still my wife, so  my junior and senior years, the dating aspect of my wife who was then  my girlfriend and later my fianc  e while I was in school was, quite  frankly, a lot of my social activity.  Would you go to movies? Or out to dinner? What kinds of things would  you do?  Well, she was not a student at OSU, so I had to drive to see her. She  lived out of town at a small town up just past Ponca City, so it was about  an hour drive from here. We would go to a movie. Go out to a drive-in  for a soft drink or a hamburger or go play miniature golf, go bowling,  several of those activities. After she agreed to marry me and we were  engaged, she would cook supper for me several times when I would go  see her, so those were primarily our activities and then occasionally, we  would have a date where we would come back on campus and we would  16  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  do some activities down here. Of course, we knew several people on  campus, so we   d either go to a movie here or to a basketball game,  primarily.  So your social life really blossomed your junior and senior year.  That   s correct.  And that was really outside of Stillwater more than locally.  The dating aspect was my junior and senior year outside of Stillwater  and then also my junior and senior year, primarily, was the ROTC  involvement and then the governmental aspect dealing with East Bennett  Hall. Those didn   t meet very often, a couple times a month, and it was  not really fun social activities. It was handling whatever internal things  had risen. If someone wanted to raise an issue, we ask for this from the  dorm parents. We would have this or this complaint about the food,  could we look into the cafeteria serving something different or  something more and so we would take up some of those fun activities of  problems that would be involved.  You mentioned driving. You had a car?  My junior year and senior year, I had a car. My first two years, I was on  foot. I had to rely on other people to get me to and from campus from  my home and any activities that happened downtown or off campus. I  would have to rely on other people   s vehicles to take me there.  You mentioned the fellows would gather in the rooms for conversation  and poker or whatever else.  Yeah, whatever else.  Were there other places, hangouts, the Student Union   would you go to  the Student Union at all or were there other locations in Stillwater  where you might gather as groups of guys?  Not with me. I   m sure there were with other people, but my main  gathering at the Student Union was a break from the library. I did spend  some time in the library and take breaks to go to the Student Union. I  tried to schedule my classes in the mornings pretty much straight  through, so I didn   t have time between class activities to go over to the  Student Union. I really didn   t get involved in gathering places that, I  think, other people might have taken advantage of, but the Hut really  didn   t get involved in going to     17  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  The Y Hut?  Yes. And didn   t take advantage that much, of the Student Union, except  for occasional coffee breaks or soft drink breaks then actually.  You did mention the library. How much time did you spend in the library  on an average week?  (Laughs) I   d like to brag.  Now this is being recorded. (Laughter)  I know. My wife is a witness here, too. Not as much as I would like to  think I did. It would depend on the time of the year. If I had a report to  do, I   d go do library research. On an average time I would probably  spend in the library, I   d say probably six or eight hours a week I would  catch in the library.  That   s above average.  Is it really?  I think so. (Laughter)  A couple of times I had my dorm room where I was the only occupant  because my roommate either decided to quit school or he moved off  campus or something, so I had a couple of semesters where I was the  occupant of my dorm room, so I had that as an effective individual study  place. Did have that advantage.  Your freshman and sophomore years you didn   t have a car.  No.  How often would you go home?  My freshman year when I was out for basketball, I went home only a  couple of times a semester and then at Thanksgiving break and  Christmas break and in between semesters and only a couple of times  then. Not very often.  Sophomore year about the same?  A little more often my sophomore year because I was not out for  athletics and whenever I could find someone going that way  I would   catch a ride.  18  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  And then your junior and senior year, you were heading north?  I was heading north more than I was heading southwest. (Laughter). My  senior year I carried quite a heavy load academically and was dating my  current wife and so my senior year, the participation  in  going to see my  parents fell off considerably.  Are there any special places you remember on campus? Some people  liked the library, some Theta Pond. Is there a special place for you on  campus that you remember?  I liked the library because it was such a nice place. Beautiful I guess is  the word I would use. The library has been expanded and extended since  then, but going up on the second or third floor looking out the south  window out into the grassy area and looking at the complex of all of the  geometric layouts of the shrubs and the flowers was just beautiful. Then  going outdoors to the Student Union and looking out west and seeing the  same thing from a different perspective, I liked that aspect of it. I guess I  remember being in the dorms and just being around the guys during that  time is one of the things that I remember most about it.  I remember that one of my first dates with my wife was a double date  with her and one of her girlfriends that she and her boyfriend who later  also became her husband and my wife was then my girlfriend. One of  our first dates, we went out to Lake Carl Blackwell and spent the  afternoon and so that, in retrospect, has become a very memorable time  for me because it was meaningful to me being the fact that it was one my  first dates with the current lady who is my wife.  Did you ever go up to Boomer Lake at all on the north side of  Stillwater?  Drove up there, but no, never did go up there.  I encourage you, if you have the chance, to go to the fourth floor of the  library, that same south view, there   s a little lounge area up there and  it   s still a very popular location for people to reflect and study, so if you  get a chance  you should .  I remember one particular incident around Theta Pond, I guess, that I  was initiated into, I guess for lack of a better term, the Honor Society for  the Advanced ROTC, the Scabbard and Blade. We went out to Lake  Carl Blackwell for the initiation ceremony and came back and our  meeting place had been Theta Pond and so we unloaded at Theta Pond.  They decided we would have a tug of war across Theta Pond at the time  (laughs), so I happened to not participate in the tug of war, but I was  19  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  there to observe it and I found it quite interesting to see people drug out  into at least the far edge of Theta Pond at the end of the tug of war  sessions. That was interesting and for some reason I still remember that.  It   s not very deep either.  It   s not that deep, no. (Laughs) People still did get drug out in there,  refusing to give up their end of the rope.  What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty in students and  alumni? Is there something about this place that is special?  I don   t know. To me, I just met a bunch of great people up here as far  as   and my opinion is that the fraternities probably have a closer bond  with the people that are in there, fraternity brothers and sorority sisters.  Even though I was an independent and have not kept up with the guys, I  just enjoyed being around and they were just a great bunch of guys to be  around. A lot of them had very different backgrounds from me. Some of  them came from Bartlesville and Tulsa   Bartlesville, their parents  worked for Phillips 66 or the oil industry, had very different experience,  but they were quite interesting people. Several of the guys came from  farm backgrounds like me or at least the rural setting and I enjoyed just  being around them. A great bunch of people.  Did you have a job at all while you were here?  I did not. I did not work for anybody for the time I was up here.  During summers would you stay up here or would you go home?  During the summers I went home and worked on the farm for my dad  and so he at the end of the summer would put an amount in my bank  account and say,    That   s to last you the rest of the year,    (laughs) and so  that was my pay and that was my job and that was another reason I went  into advanced ROTC is that at that time they were paying for the juniors  and seniors, they were paying ninety cents a day payment for the  advanced ROTC people, so for every day of the month, you get twenty-seven  dollars at the end of the month. That doesn   t sound like much, but  in the fall of 1957 and 1958, when tuition was probably twelve or  fourteen dollars an hour and you were earning a dollar an hour working,  that was pretty decent pay to have twenty-seven dollars at the end of the  month in your hand.  So you did get a stipend for the ROTC those last two years?  Yes. I don   t know what it was called, but I remember it was ninety cents  20  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  a day and I got paid in check, so it was wonderful.  How did attending OSU impact your life?  Oh, tremendously. I met my wife while I was here, would not have met  her otherwise. I came back for other degrees here and thought it was a  wonderful school and the faculty members that I met here in my major  area of business education were a positive influence on me and their  philosophy and the way they conduct themselves and the kind of people  they were as individuals. I got to know them in my advanced program as  individuals as well as faculty members. Influenced I guess my  philosophy of teaching. I became a teacher   influenced my philosophy  of teaching and I hope I was a good person to start with, but they were a  positive influence on me.  Do you remember much about the administration at all? President  Willham would have been president during your time.  I met him a couple of times, but I don   t remember anything about it. I  don   t remember any of his policies or pronouncements that particularly  impacted me one way or the other.  What advice would you give to a high school student or a current OSU  student on how to best experience college? Do you have words of  wisdom for them?  Oh, probably not words of wisdom that would apply to a lot of people,  but coming from a small school and a small background, being exposed  to a larger institution like OSU was a positive, eye opening experience  for me. I would say get to know the people around you, which I think I  did. Although I did not follow through with long term relationships, I  think they impacted me and impacted my life and the way I looked at  things. But I would say get to know the people around you, take your  classes seriously. The professors, they are knowledgeable in their areas  and if they haven   t changed too much, then they   re good people.  (Laughs) They know their subject areas  and  they   re willing to help  you.  My professional career wound up to be at the collegiate level, also. I  wound up teaching at Cameron University in Lawton, Oklahoma and  know that at least from my perspective that not enough people really  came around to see me on a personal basis who were students who  would have been willing to visit more on a one-to-one basis. So don   t be  afraid to go around and get to know your professors. I know sometimes  that   s difficult in large freshman and sophomore classes, but at the  junior, senior levels especially get to know the faculty. Even though I  21  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  didn   t have any particular social aspect I remember, I think the ROTC  experience I had was very beneficial to me as an individual. I came  from, as I said, a small school and being exposed to ROTC at the senior  level especially, they put you in responsible positions where you were  responsible for the other people in ROTC and had to make certain  decisions with their supervision. Take opportunities to avail yourselves  of responsibility that you can do because I think that gets you ready then  for going out when you graduate and getting on the job market, which I  assume most people would do.  That   s one of the questions about opportunities for leadership, and I  think ROTC provided that for you.  It did for me. Got me exposed to a lot more people and got me into  leadership positions. Otherwise, I either didn   t take advantage of or  didn   t have an opportunity to take advantage of ROTC; it did. It was  really positive for me.  Was there much ethnic diversity on campus when you were here in the  late 1950s?  No, there wasn   t. No, there wasn   t. In fact, the first black person that I  ever sat in class with, I believe I was a sophomore here at A M. I don   t  remember too many other ethnic varieties of backgrounds. I do know  that there were international students here, but I was not in an area  where I had classes with many international students in my  undergraduate years. Now graduate programs I had much more  opportunity to interact with diverse backgrounds and cultural  backgrounds, but really not until my junior year and some in my senior  year of college and not a great deal, at that.  We were just beginning a transition at that time period.  That   s correct.  I was just interested if there were any experiences you had. Sounds like  not very many opportunities.  Not very many opportunities. All of them were positive that, any person  with a diverse background, I thought, was a positive contributor to  whatever class I was in, but there weren   t that many people. There really  weren   t.  Is there anything else you   d like to add? A question I haven   t asked that  I should have asked? Some other remarks?  22  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  One more athletic. I participated in intramural basketball and intramural  flag football during the years I was up here.  So those were social activities.  Well yes, I guess that   s right. I did play on a flag football team every  year and I did play on an intramural basketball team every year. My  senior year, our intramural basketball team was the intramural champion  of the university. We named ourselves    The Shooting Stars.    (Laughs)  And we were an independent team, of course, and we won the  independent conference or league or whatever it was called and so we  played the champion of the fraternity league and we won that game.  One more interesting point about it, there were two of us guys on the  independent team who had been on the non-scholarship freshman team  together and there were two guys on the fraternity team who had been on  the freshman non-scholarship team also, so there were four of us playing  against each other in my senior year. I don   t remember the names of any  of the ones on my independent team. We were just a bunch of guys that  got together. My memory is not what it used to be. I cannot tell you the  names. I did not keep up with them, but I remember one name of one  guy that played on the fraternity team. He was Connie    Mac    McIlvoy. I  don   t even remember what fraternity it was, but as a result, since we  won the intramural championship, OSU still had the freshman team, and  so it was either the last or next to last game of the season, the freshman  team played our team,    The Shooting Stars,    in the preliminary game to  the game that OSU played. Of course, they beat us, but another  interesting point, Hank Iba   s son Moe Iba happened to be on the  freshman team that year, as I remember, and so I found that interesting  that we got to be playing against Moe Iba when he was a freshman that  year.  So you got to play in Gallagher Hall?  Yes.  Against the freshman team.  Against the freshman team.  What position did you play?  I played guard.  And that   s the position you played all the way through?  23  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  Peters  Amyx  All the way through, yes. Yes. In my high school, it was somewhat  unique. I was the tallest guy on the team and the second tallest guy in  our whole conference. We had extremely small schools, but at the  beginning of the game, I would play center to jump center to start the  game and then I would play guard and bring the ball down (laughs) the  rest of the game. That   s the position I went out for freshman team and  the position I played on the intramural team. I was guard.  Well thank you, Jack. Is there anything else that we need to include for  the record?  No, it was interesting talking with you. I hope it   s interesting listening to  me.  Thank you.  Alright.  -------  -------   
