 Neurohr and I   m a librarian at Oklahoma State  University Library. Today is Monday, October 8, 2007. We are in the  Angie Debo Room of the OSU Library and we   re here with two  gentlemen, Mr. Keith Judkins and Dr. Craig McKinley, and they   re here  today to record their stories for O-STATE Stories, an oral history  project of the OSU Library. Welcome to the library today.  Thank you, Karen.  Thank you.  We   ll start with you, Mr. Judkins. Tell us a little bit about yourself,  where you grew up, when you graduated   some information about that  if you would.  Okay. I grew up in Muskogee, Oklahoma and graduated from high  school there   Central High School   in 1963. High school was really  when I got my first opportunity to know something about forestry. There  used to be an old test called the Cooter Preference Exam where you  punched a hole with a pen in a sheet and then it told you what your  interests were. Mine came out forestry and the next thing I know I got a  catalog from OSU and looked at it. My father was a very strong  conservationist and pushed me in this direction, and that   s probably what  led me to come to Oklahoma State.  Okay. Dr. McKinley?  Well, I grew up on a cattle ranch down in Garvin County. I actually was  nine miles from the high school that I eventually attended. I went to  grade school in a little two-teacher school called Katie, and graduated  5  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  from high school from Elmore City in 1964. My dad was an OSU grad.  My mother was an OSU grad, and from the time I was six years old, I  knew I was going to be an OSU grad at some point in time.  I actually enjoyed going to Colorado during the summers. I thought I  would love to work in the trees. All you had to do is plant them and then  go hunting and fishing the rest of the week. (Laughter) It hasn   t quite  worked out that way, but that   s why I got interested in forestry to start  with. Came to OSU, spent four years, and then later went to Texas A M  for some graduate work.  You said that your parents came to OSU. Mr. Judkins, did you have  family members who came here?  No. In fact, my father was a family of nine and my mother was a family  of five, and I was the first one to really obtain a college education     formal, completed, graduate. There were some that attended but no,  neither one of them really had a formal education but they had a very  strong interest in their children and myself, specifically, to pursue this. I  think that was always very evident. And even though they didn   t have  that, that   s what they wanted me to pursue, and it worked out quite well.  As Craig mentioned, I guess, in looking beyond, I graduated in    68 the  same as Craig did and then really did not have as strong an interest in the  resource side of forestry. The other side is the product side produced by  the forest, and I sort of followed that track in the lumber industry and  spent 30-plus years dealing with lumber issues in Washington, D.C.  from more of a regulatory standpoint.  Did you live in Washington, D.C.?  Yes, I spent the last 20 years   just moving back to Oklahoma last  year   still working in the trade association business. It is not the forest  products industry right now, but before that I was in Washington for a  number of years in dealing with that in the area legislatively as well as  other regulations.  What changes have you seen in the amount of time that you   ve spent  there with the industry?  Well, I think that overall the thing that really the consumer sees, too, or  maybe doesn   t realize, and that   s the tremendous amount of  conservation that has gone into home building. I mean, it was very  traditional   well, actually from the saw mill to the   nothing is wasted  these days. Nothing is burned on-site, whether it be a home being built  or in a saw mill. Everything is used for either energy production at the  6  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  mill and/or product development. From sawdust to short pieces that used  to be burned or thrown away, everything is utilized. I think that   s really  one of the key things I   ve seen from the product side is better utilization  of our forests, whether it happens to be in the building trades or  whatever, it has made a major change in the last 30 years.  Dr. McKinley, you   ve been at the academic side of forestry department  with your career, and so what changes have you seen from your  perspective?  Well, I think we   ve gone a little bit in a cycle. Sometimes these sorts of  things happen. We   ll talk a little bit later about our OSU Forestry  Department, but in the late 60   s and early 70   s we started to see a lot of  students come in who were environmentally interested. The idea was not  necessarily for timber production, but maybe more natural resource  management. Now then, those types of activities have been taken by  other departments, such as environmental science departments   things  like that. So we   ve seen a decrease in the number of people who actually  wish to be forestry management oriented. On the other hand, there are a  number of folks who are now in a forestry arena saying,    Hey, it   s a  forest resource, not just a timber resource.    So I   ve seen those kinds of  changes. The pendulum swings a little bit back and forth, but on the  whole I think we   re going in the right direction.  You were here at OSU in the 1960   s, both of you, and from a historical  perspective, there were a lot of things going on in the United States  during that time period. So what was it like here at OSU when you were  here? You were here   you started in    65? Is that correct?     63.     63? Okay.  And    64.  So what kinds of things were going on in town or on campus?  Well, I might comment   and I   m sure Craig has other comments, but  the focus at that time globally was the Vietnam War, and I actually saw  my first war protest. I   d seen them on TV on Berkeley and other  campuses across the country which were much more strongly against the  war. It was the only major global focus, but it still wasn   t tearing the  campus apart and anything of that nature. That was something that was a  strong interest at that time because we did have the draft and it affected  all students significantly semester to semester.  7  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  How so?  Well, the Selective Service System had a numbering system and   the  draft boards, I guess it was   and if you didn   t make your grades   you  turned in grades   if I   m thinking correct, isn   t that right Craig? I mean,  every semester your grades were checked.  Every semester, if your grades were not up to that 2.0 bar, pretty soon  you were in basic training. It was just that simple.  Yes. Yes. We were seeing our friends go and some that are on the back  of this plaque didn   t come back so it was a major effect on us.  Did the media cover the protest that you saw here?  The one I saw, I was hiding behind a tree over by the fire department on  the corner because I didn   t want my father to see me on the news that  night but I was watching it. And yes, the media covered it and, you  know, there were professors and students participating in it   placards  and so forth   but just a parade down Main street down here.  Dr. McKinley, did you see     I don   t recall seeing any anti-war protest. We had a faculty member who  resigned, or at least offered to resign for lack of academic freedom, and  this caused a pretty good stir locally. It certainly didn   t make the  national news, but it made the state news, and so there was to be a  student meeting in front of the library   right out here in front   and  there were to be no protest signs. This was to be a student meeting. As I  recall, Tom Lucas was student association president and Bob Swaffer  was the vice-president. Well, there were probably ten to fifteen thousand  people out here on the library lawn and, of course, one person brought a  placard that said,    The university is for the students,    and so that   s what  got on TV. This meeting was to say what is going to happen here at  OSU relative to academic freedom. So most of the students showed up,  and I showed up. I got a call late that night from my father, he says,     Were you at that protest meeting?    (Laughter) And I said,    Yes, I was.     I thought, you know, that was going to be the end of it but it was not  supposed to be a protest. It was supposed to be a student meeting, and it  died down fairly quickly. But one sign, I think, is in one of the annuals if  you   ll look at it. (Laughter)  Do you have any memories of particular buildings where you lived when  you were a student here that you want to share?  No matter where you live, you   re going to have memories. That is for  8  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  sure. I spent my freshman year in Bennett Hall and I worked in the dorm  cafeteria over there. My job was to wash pots and pans every morning at  five o   clock. After one year, I moved into Farm House fraternity, which  is still located at North Washington, and spent three years there   a great  experience. I had some leadership responsibilities. Actually I was  business manager and had learned how to buy the food and hire and fire  the cooks. I   m the only guy I know of that ever sat up at 4:00 in the  morning tempering a grill so that the guys can have breakfast at 6:00  because we bought a new stove, but they ate breakfast. I made a 92 on a  Nat Walker management exam and it was a great day.  That was a good day.  Those are the kind of things that lead later in life when you   ve got to get  a job done, you say,    Well, we   ve done this before. We can do it again.     Do it again. Well I lived in Cordell, and I signed up late coming to OSU,  practically in the summer, which now would be unheard of if you didn   t  have your ducks in a line way before that, maybe years. So I was on the  fourth floor, no elevators. 425 Cordell Hall, which I   m glad is still  standing. I get to see it at football games. It   s long since not been a dorm  as I understand, but then I moved into apartments after that. One sort of  unique thing is that there were several of these   two or three that I know  of on campus at that time   there were places that were like boarding  houses, and you could go by there at noon or dinner and you bought an  entr  e   a piece of pounded steak, though you could barely call it steak,  and then it was all family style. One of these facilities was the Eskimo  Joe   s building. We   d stop by   I lived on Duck Street at that time, and  we   d stop by there and maybe grab lunch for  2.50 or something like  that. I   m sure those don   t exist now, but there were several around the  campus that you could stop by and do that.  I guess they had rooms also for people but you could stop by and eat a  hot lunch or whatever. I thought that was unique then and I had  mentioned that one time to a young lady when I had my children here,  back at their younger age   which they were embarrassed at everything  dad was asking around campus   but I asked the young waitress at  Eskimo Joe   s did she remember that and she said,    Yes, I remember my  parents telling me that,    so    (Laughs)  Is that one of those places we called    Mom   s   ?  Yes. Yes.  It seemed like every place was called    Mom   s.     9  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  That   s right. That   s right      Well, what types of activities were you involved in when you were  students here? Student organizations?  The one I remember being involved in the most was, of course, the  Forestry Club. It was a very unique organization in that it had some  activities that were just tremendous learning experiences. We cut  firewood. We had property that people would, I am assuming said,    Hey  guys, you can come out here and clear this post oak off my farm land.     We would cut firewood and sold this, delivered, in people   s back yards,  stacked and delivered for  7.00. We called it a rick; it wasn   t a whole  cord but it was quite a money maker. We would all show up on  Saturdays and had saws out there. OSHA would not even let anybody  near that place these days   I mean, open saws, but we had trucks and  we would load these up and sell wood around town. But the real money  maker was, we as a Forestry Club had a portion of the concessions on  the north side of the stadium on home games. A lot of clubs did that, but  that was quite a money maker for us to sell concessions at football  games.  About how much would you typically make     I don   t know, but     We could bring in  300 to  400     Yes.     in one football game, whereas selling firewood     At  7.00      You know, it would take two semesters to get that.  Yes.  We had a trick. Back in the old days, Lewis Field had a set of bleachers  under the scoreboard in the West End. Well, those people had to walk a  pretty good ways to get to a concession stand and so, particularly in the  early games, we wouldn   t go down there and serve them cokes until  right before halftime. Of course, they were afraid we would never come  back so they would buy lots of cokes and then during the second half  we   d make regular runs but we never gave them cokes in the first  quarter, (Laughter) just to dry them out a little bit. We made a lot of  sales that way.  10  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  Yes, I remember selling down there at that, watching Walt Garrison run  over the Nebraska line at that end zone was quite something to see.  The two. He got to the two.  Yes, he didn   t     He didn   t score.  I didn   t want to say that. (Laughter) I wanted to just leave that  impression     That was the Homecoming of 1965.  Was it five?  Homecoming    65, and Nebraska beat us, but Walt ended up on the two.  Walt ended up going on to the Dallas Cowboys, a great career there. But  our club was just tremendous and not only money making opportunities,  but we had an appearance on campus and having some competitions     forestry type competitions that we did on and off campus, but the one in  the spring which we called Log Jam?  Timber Carnival.  Timber Carnival. We did it out by Theta Pond, actually had logs out  floating, and in those years, one of those years, they actually drained  Theta Pond and dug it out. I mean, they dug dump trucks   there were  bulldozers down there that you couldn   t even see them it was so filled up  but they tried to renovate it. I   m sure they did a good job because it was  just so full of sediment but we put up all this Timber Carnival  competition around the campus that other students would come and  watch and sort of enjoy. I think that was sort of unique.  I think the Forestry Club was probably what we were both most  interested in. Obviously, I was in Farm House and I had some activities  there and I was in the Ag Student Council and some activities there, but  Forestry Club was a meeting that would have sixty people show up, and  we all wore our suit and ties.  How frequently did you meet?  Once a month?  Once a month.  11  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  Once a month, and it was an event for us. Obviously we don   t wear suit  and ties very often anymore, but that was a dress-up night. I will tell one  story about a fella who was nominated for president, and another fella  stood up and says,    Even though he is my friend, I think he   s the best  man for the job.    (Laughter) So we have some good memories there.  But it was a very active club. Of course, we had a queen contest, too,  with all the other clubs and fraternities and sororities around campus  which was a lot of fun which followed on with a Homecoming float  activities, which, we built some nice floats. I guess my most important  story concerning that was one year we were playing Nebraska and I  don   t think it was that particular year you   re talking about, Craig, but  our float was    Best Use of the Huskers,    which was a still to make  whiskey. (Laughter) Corn husks   big still   and we thought, well, we  have a still, we probably should have some alcoholic beverages on this  float, which probably was not the thing to do but we did. And coming  around the back side of the Library here, President Kamm and Governor  Bellmon reached up and said,    Hey you guys. Give me the jug      thinking it was just a jug. We didn   t hand it to them. (Laughter) Because  that would not have been a good thing. I remember the Governor and the  President of the university reached up like they wanted our   because we  had the old crock jugs on there and everything. We were distinguished  by being the only float that didn   t win anything, I mean, not even a  mention of anything   but it was a good float. (Laughter)  Did you spend a lot of time in getting the floats ready?  Oh, yes, evenings and we had a barn. We had some nice buildings and  stuff to work with because of the vehicles and everything we had for the  Forestry Department. So we had places to work inside and, those nights  of stuffing that crepe paper in that little chicken wire, but that was a lot  of fun. And we had a lot of help. We always had a good attendance at  anything we did it seemed like.  What is now the parking lot on the south side of the Kerr-Drummond  complex or the north side of what used to be the Home-Ec building     Human Environmental Sciences building   were a series of Quonset  huts. We would have one of those Quonset huts as our place to work on  the float. It was only across the parking lot from the department there, so  people would work there 20-24 hours a day, 24 hours a day. It was just  right there handy and that   s where we built our floats.  You met once a month with your club. Where were your club meetings  held?  In Ag Hall South, now it   s just the Ag     12  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Yes, it   s all Ag Hall. We still kind of refer to it as Ag Hall South  because   a little bit of a sidebar. They built Ag Hall in three different  sections. They built Ag Hall North. Then about three years later they  built Ag Hall South. About three or four years later they put the middle  connecting point. So it   s kind of Ag Hall North, South and Middle. Now  it   s all Ag Hall and it   s in the same room we still have classes in   it   s  room 014.  Yes. I think that was part of the tradition that was so nice about forestry  because you sort of were together most of the day for four years. I mean,  yes, in freshman year maybe and sophomore not as much, with  chemistry and other courses, but once you started into your core  curriculum, you were just there with everybody. We had the whole first  floor, I think, was all ours, wasn   t it, Craig? So you were there seeing  everybody. It was really a collegial group to go through with, a little  different than just being all over campus. That was scholastically, not  counting the club activities and so forth, but academically you were  together most of the time.  In looking at the yearbook pictures, it looked like you had a large  organization. I counted just in that four-year period anywhere from 40  to 80 members in the yearbook pictures. That   s a pretty large student  organization.  I couldn   t tell you exactly what the largest number of enrollees ever was,  but I would expect about 160 to 180 during our time here in the Forestry  Department.  Yes. We were in that top of that bell-shaped curve probably in our  60   s   late 60   s years. That was a peak of the students.  Because we would take 40 to 50 students to summer camp every year,  and that was basically a fourth of the enrollment.  And that was a semester of work. Eight credit hours in a nine-week  period and that was mandatory, usually after your sophomore year.  Many forestry schools across the country that are in more forested areas  than we are here in Stillwater have their own permanent camps. OSU  didn   t so we did a roving camp. We would use other schools    facilities,  so that was another nice thing is our students would get to go all over the  country   Alaska, everywhere. I went to Kentucky. I think Craig went to  Tom, Oklahoma.  I went to southeast Oklahoma.  We did have a little place in Tom, Oklahoma.  13  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  It was called a high school building, is what it was.  Yes. It   s burned down. But that was sort of unique. I went to, as I say,  eastern Kentucky and we had 42 students there plus professors, for nine  weeks. We used the University of Kentucky Engineering School facility  out there. That was a really unique thing for forestry to be able to do  that, I think. And again, it just brought us closer together living together  like that. Our professors set it up just like the Army. I guess one of the  guys had been in the military and you had your chores. I mean, we ran  the camp, too. There was nobody there in the empty buildings, hired  cooks.  We all had chores which we rotated, from heating the burner so we   d  have hot showers. You had to turn on these gas things and   5:00 in the  morning your friend   they might be your friends, but 42 guys that had  cold showers were not your friends (Laughter) if you didn   t heat that  water up. It was a unique experience to travel out there and do the  coursework in the woods for all those weeks and head back to summer  jobs and whatever else we had to do before we came back to campus.  That was another unique, we wear that word    unique    out a lot, but it  was something different. I think the civil engineering group had a  summer camp, sort of a surveying thing but otherwise, not too many  other departments or colleges had those kinds of programs.  So did you have to pay your own expenses for the summer camp?  Absolutely, including tuition.  Tuition   everything, yes. And room and board   everything   and get  there.  Do you remember how much it cost to do that?  I don   t.  I don   t either.  I know that it was  7.00 a credit hour when I started here for in-state  students. It probably wasn   t much different from that.  Not for tuition. We spent the summer at Tom, Oklahoma   in the high  school gymnasium is where we slept. We had 42 bunks   cots, around  the room. We left one end open. That was where the basketball goal was  so we could shoot baskets. (Laughter) And, of course, we didn   t spend  all day there. We were out in the woods, but that   s where we spent the  night. Part of our pay for that was we had to repaint the high school, so  14  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  on weekends some guys had cars that worked (Laughter)   but those of  us who couldn   t go anywhere, couldn   t afford it or what not, would help  paint the school. We had an eight-week camp so over the course of the  eight weeks, we painted the school at Tom, Oklahoma.  My gosh.  And that was part of our duty.  I had an old car at that time which, in those days   which most people  don   t even know what recaps were   but a lot of times they recapped  tires. You could buy tires that had new treads put on them. They were  called recaps and much cheaper than a regular tire. So I had new recaps  on, and two weeks before we were to leave, somebody stole all my  recaps and left my car sitting on the ground. So I had to put old used  tires on. I had five blow-outs going out to eastern Kentucky. So now I   m  in dire straits because I had to buy a tire out there. I pulled a trailer out  there and took a bunch of   everybody put stuff in footlockers   so one  of my good friends, he still holds me to this, but I charged freight to take  those (Laughter) footlockers back to Oklahoma because I needed gas  money (Laughter) to get back. They haven   t forgotten that. I think I  charged them  9.00 or  10.00 to carry their footlocker.  Well, the average cost of a retread or recap back then was about  10.00.  Yes. Yes.  Because we both bought them.  Yes, so      Do they still make them?  I don   t think so.  Now big truck tires   that   s why you see all these treads laying on the  road. A lot of those are still recapped and they sling the tread off, so  that   s where that comes from.  Steel-belted radials cannot be retreaded. I think that   s the issue. It   s a  technological thing.  Yes. Otherwise, they   d probably do it.  The old bias tires you could.  15  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Yes. Yes.  Okay. I understand there   s a story about the Bedlam Bell.  The Bedlam Bell   one of my fondest memories, Karen. At that time, the  history goes way back and I think most people know the history that we  had the bell at Old Central and some OU  University of Oklahoma  fans  stole it and that kind of went on for a few years. And the story was, if we  ever beat them in football, we could have our bell clapper back. They  didn   t take the whole bell, just the clapper.  Clapper.  So we could have our bell clapper back. And at that time, they had an  Indian mascot   Native American mascot   who had a big headdress,  and they said,    If you win at football, you can get your bell clapper back  and we   ll give you the Indian headdress.    Well, we didn   t beat them  between 1945 and 1965. Finally in 1965, which was during our tenure  here, OSU beat OU at Norman, and so there was a big ceremony at the  50-yard line where our student association government president  received the bell clapper and the headdress.  Well, it just so happened that the student association president was my  roommate, and so he brings the bell clapper back   and this is on  Saturday. We decided we wanted to ring the bell in celebration of the  victory on Sunday. But, Old Central   s belfry, apparently, was so weak  they didn   t want to do it over there. So they put it in the bell tower at the  Union   the Student Union bell tower, you go to the fifth floor. We went  up there, and Sunday morning we begin ringing the bell. And so we rang  the bell all day Sunday morning. I think Monday somebody else rang  it   and I don   t know who   but Monday we were given the day off  because we had beat OU, and that   s the only time that   s ever happened.  Yes.  But the fun thing was being able to ring that bell in celebration of the  victory and being one of those kids that got to do that, and that was a fun  thing.  Yes, and we actually beat them the next year, too. That was two years  back-to-back. I don   t know that that   s ever been done probably again,  has it, Craig?     97-   98 and 2001-2002.  Oh, okay.  16  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Back to back. Yes, we beat them in    65. Then in    66 we beat them here.  And as I walked out of the stadium in    66, I heard the bell being rung at  the ending again.  Oh, yeah?  And, of course, I wasn   t involved in that ringing, but I do remember that  sound.  So did the clapper stay at the bell in the Student Union then?  I think they   ve taken it down and the last I heard   and this was  something through the Daily O   Colly   was that they were going to put  it in Old Central.  Back in Old Central?  But that business of taking and giving memorabilia like that I think has  ceased. I don   t think we owe it back to them if they ever beat us again.  (Laughter)  Wonder what happened to the headdress?  I have no idea. I don   t have any idea since they don   t use that mascot  anymore. Obviously they beat us in   whenever the next year would  have been      67.  So you would have had to give it back then?  We   d have had to give it back if we had it.  Yes.  And both those games were won by one point. We had a great field goal  kicker, Charlie Durkee.  Charlie Durkee.  Went on to play professional ball, and he kicked this ball. And that   s  when   Oklahoma license plates had always been black and white, I  think it was   white with black numbers   well, they started doing  orange tags and red   for OU and OSU.  They did a green tag, too.  Did they do that at first though?  17  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Yes. The first three, I think, were orange, red and green.  For Northeastern or somebody?  Central State, I think was the one they were     But he  the kicker  got the score of the game put on, it was like 15-14 or  whatever it was.  That was the second one. The first one was 17-16.  Yes.  The second was 15-14 because they went for two and didn   t make it.  Right. Another significant thing in that second game though that might  be interesting to check out historically was   Craig mentioned leaving  the game and hearing the clapper. Well, I lived out in a brand new  apartment complex at that time, probably the newest thing in town,  called Forty North, and it   s still standing. There were some parties out  there, obviously, after winning the game. Well, for some reason, we got  called on the carpet with the   and I can   t remember the dean   s name, I  wish I did   Dean of Men   but the bottom line was he put us on social  probation. Probably never been done again and he said it would be taken  off after a year. I bet it   s still on the books somewhere (Laughter)  because I don   t remember getting a release but we were placed on social  probation.  What did that mean?  Nothing, I guess.  It was just a     It was just to scare us, I guess. We had one guy getting ready to go to  law school, he was scared to death, and another guy was going to  graduate school   or, no, in the service to be a pilot, but the dean said,     I   m going to put you on social probation, boys,    because evidently he  was at the apartment complex also and saw this party. (Laughter) I don   t  remember that part of it.  He wasn   t invited  (Laughter)  But I always thought that was unique. I   ve never heard of anybody being  placed on social probation, but it didn   t really have any effect on us, I  guess, so     18  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Who do you remember as being an influence on you academically, of  your professors, when you were here?  I bet we name the same person.  Yes. Dr.   well, I don   t think he was a Dr. at that particular time, but Ed  Wheeler is mine. Is that who you would say?  No.  Okay.  We   ve got different people, and that   s good.  Yes, I walked in and the thing he did is very simple. I told you I took a  different track than resource products, and I told Mr. Wheeler, I said,     I   m really not interested in going that route. I   d really like to do  something more in the product sales area,    and he said,    You should go  to work for this company. It   s called Southern Pine Association.    It was  a trade association which I didn   t even know what that was or what it  meant, and I did and the rest is history. I loved that type of work and  have stayed in it now for 30, almost 40 years. But he was very straight  and to the point, and he knew exactly what I meant and I   ll tell him that  this weekend. I always tell him the same story but he said,    That   s what  you need to do,    and it was a great piece of guidance.  My person, he may not have influenced me as much as other people, but  he was the person I wanted to be most like. He was a Mr. at that time     later got his Ph.D.   and that was Nat Walker. And Nat Walker was one  of the most intelligent and nicest people I   ve ever met in my life   and  that   s not to put anybody else down, but just Nat Walker was special.  And my story goes that I was broke, as most college kids are most times,  and I was getting ready to graduate and I had to go to the U.S. Army  down at Fort Benning to take basic training. I walked into Mr. Walker   s  office and I said,    Mr. Walker, does the department have a fund that I  can borrow some money from? I am broke. I don   t have enough money  to even get on the bus to go to the Army. I just need some help. I just  don   t have any money.    He said,    Yes, we do have a fund.    He says,     Come by tomorrow and I   ll have some money for you. How much do  you need?    And I said,    Well,  75 dollars ought to do it.     So the next day I went by and, as I recall, he gave me cash. He gave me   75.00 and I got my bus ticket and I went to the Army and made basic  training and went to Texas A M. I got an assistantship down there. My  first check, I sent  80 back and I said,    Mr. Walker, here   s  80 dollars      75 dollars plus interest. I hope this is right.    He writes a little note back  and says,    This is just right. Thank you very much.    Well, 31 years later  19  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  I come back to OSU in the department   the department does not have a  fund to loan students. That was Nat Walker   s personal money, and he  was just that kind of person, and that   s just the kind of person I wish we  all could be.  He was a great individual.  Yes. That   s a wonderful story   memory. Yes. You both mentioned earlier  when we were visiting before we started recording, someone that had a  particular research project that you had a little experience with   so if  you want to talk about that, it might be good.  Craig might have more of details about that with Dr. Posey     Dr. Clayton Posey, who was an OSU grad, had gone to school at N.C.  State University and came back, and he was fairly young at this time,  maybe thirty years old or so     Probably.  We called him the    Oklahoma Tornado    because he was very energetic.  And he was a forest geneticist, which is what I later became in one of  my duties   was a forest geneticist. So I was interested in what he was  doing, but more than that I was hungry and I needed some work. He  hired five of us young kids   juniors, seniors and first-year graduate  students   to help him plant trees. And we would plant trees, generally in  southeast Oklahoma, over Spring Break, we would plant them over  Christmas break, and in those days we had a between-semester break.  We actually finished the semester after Christmas instead of before.  Right.  We would go for the Christmas break, come back for about two weeks,  take finals, and then have another week and then come back for the  spring semester.  It did not make Christmas vacation happy.  No. You were supposed to take your books home and study. But at each  of those times, we would go to southeast Oklahoma and plant trees. We  would start about 4:00 in the morning. Clayton Posey would allow us to  all stay in a motel room, but it was the one room and there would be five  or six of us in there, he was saving money. Then we would hit the local  motel restaurant about 4:30 in the morning, and we would be out in the  field at five o   clock. We would watch the thermometer until it got to 32  degrees because, see, this is in the winter. When it was no longer below  20  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  32, we   d start planting trees. If it was 28, 29, we   d stand there and wait  until it got warm, and I swear he would stand there and breathe on the  thermometer to warm it up. (Laughter) When it got to 32, we   d go to the  field. Basically it was generally dark at that time and we would plant  trees all day long until dark. We would plant by headlight of pick-up  truck, back to the motel and the next morning start it all over again. We  didn   t make very much, we made a couple of dollars an hour, but there  were five of us and four later became forest geneticists, so I guess he  didn   t run us totally off.  (Laughs) No.  But it was an experience to do that for two or three years.  What kind of trees were you planting?  Generally they were loblolly pine trees, short leaf pine trees, and we did  put in a couple of cottonwood plantations.  That   s interesting.  You know, Karen, one comment before we get too far away from the  club, I thought we might want to call attention to this little plaque. That  was something unique to campus life, too, in that if you were joining a  club, whether or not it was the aeronautical engineers or the Forestry  Club or whatever, usually you were required to wear something around  your neck and obtain signatures or something. And this was ours, we  wore this plaque and you see a pinecone attached to it, and you had to  get 25 signatures on the back, which are all back here by students and  professors, or club members and professors. And they could ask you  forestry questions about your pine cone species or whatever and, you  know, maybe harass you a little bit as you walked across in front of the  library with your plaque on. And like I say, the aeronautical guys would  have an airplane hanging from that or whatever it happened to be but it  was a bonding type of thing, I think, too and that was sort of unique     which I   m sure they do not do today probably for that kind of initiations  or joining of clubs, but it was a fun thing.  So was it just the freshman that did this?  No. Just   you might get somebody transferring in     Anybody who was new to the club?  Anybody that was new to the club. You had to join the club, go through  initiation period, and you were a pledge   sort of like a fraternity. You  21  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  were a pledge in this and you had to do certain things during that time,  but it could be all levels of classmen. You might have people that hadn   t  joined as a freshman or whatever. I didn   t really join until I guess I was  at least a sophomore when I joined, so     So how long was the initiation period?  Oh, I think it was probably just a couple of weeks.  It wasn   t very long. I remember we had to have the plaques ready one  Saturday and then that Saturday in maybe two weeks we   d wear it  around campus     You had to make your plaque.  You had to make your own plaque?  You had to make your own.  With a stencil.  And I probably made two or three before I got it right.  Oh.  But as far as harassment, that was about it. It was a nice initiation.  Yes.  It was a fun initiation.  They didn   t make you stand up by the fountain.  There was no physical or mental damage done.  No. No.  It was just,    Why don   t you do this?      and it made another bonding  experience.  So you wore those every day for that period?  Yes, when you were on campus.  When you were out on campus?  22  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Yes. Yes.  And the pine cones   did you have to come up with your own pine cone  to attach?  Yes. You could pick your own pine cone and attach it and, know a little  bit about it in case they ask you some questions or whatever. But that  was the way it was done. It was a unique thing to walk around campus  with that around your neck.  We have a forestry arboretum out here west of town, and so we could  collect enough cones so that everybody had one. It wasn   t a big problem  to come up with materials.  We were very apparent around the campus with trees because one of the  classes was dendrology, which was tree identification. They assigned  you a tree and you had to sort of follow that tree through its progress  throughout the semester. But still, even then, there were rules, which I   m  sure are still there now. You weren   t supposed to be cutting limbs and  everything. And mine was a big bur oak that I was almost as tall as it. It  wasn   t a whole lot taller than me, and it still sits over there across the  corner by   used to be by the old Life Science building   and now it   s  probably 50 feet tall and probably 20 inches in diameter, so it   s grown  quite a bit. But you just followed it and took measurements of the  growth and everything. Foresters were always doing something around  campus or running a survey line from the Engineering building across  the campus to learn how to do grades and so forth.  My dendrology tree was a redbud tree over at the corner of Willard Hall  that at that time was a female dorm   so I had a lot of explaining to do  when I   m watching my tree. (Laughter)  Yes. (Laughter)  It   s really my tree.  I   m watching the tree grow.  The tree grow.  Sure, sure. (Laughter)  Okay, well let   s talk about the Forestry Club some more. One of the  things that I   m curious about is if there were any women members or  any women students in the program when you were here?  23  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  I recall our first female forestry student. The year would have to have  been around 1967, maybe    68   that memory fades a little bit. But she  came as a freshman and I recall she did not complete her degree here.  She, I think, stayed about two years and part of that probably was just  the culture of the forestry profession at that time. Our department head  was not much in favor of women being foresters, not because of lack of  ability but because of his experience of having to live 20-30 miles out in  the woods by himself kind of thing. He just didn   t believe that women  should be faced with those kind of difficulties, so I don   t think the  culture was right. We can   t re-write history. That   s just the way it was.  Since that time, I would say now our forestry organization and our  department is about 40 percent female and about 60 percent male, so that  has changed over the course of time for the good. We   ve had some  outstanding male and female graduates, and we   re real pleased of all of  them. But back in those days, it was still a male profession.  Okay, and then let   s get back to some of the traditions that you had with  the Forestry Club and let   s start with fall and talk a little more about  this   we touched on this, but I   d like to know a little more about some of  the traditions that the club had   and you had, in the fall, was that when  you had the Log Jam tradition?  That was Log Jam. It was probably   and I   m trying to put the timing  together, but at this time it was probably about the end of the pledge  period, something like that.  Yes.  And we would go generally off campus. I remember going down by  Cushing a time or two to a lake. At the Log Jam, there was always  barbequed chicken and whatever else and Nat Walker and his wife,  Helen, would show up in their old Model-T (Laughter) or whatever they  drove as a car. It was just a fun day, and it was a time that all the club  would be there along with the spouses and girlfriends     And it just preceded homecoming because also the queen candidates     They were there.     would come there. The guys would have a date to pick up different  queen candidates and bring them and sort of let them know a little bit  about the campus and this was before the voting was actually done, so  sort of a preview of that activity as well.  Did you bring dates to this or were the only females there just the  candidates?  24  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  No, we   d bring dates and spouses.  Spouses and dates.  A number of the fellas were married.  And then it was an official date, there was a phone call made, somebody  shows up at some place, and two people go someplace. (Laughter) Not  like today where a gang moves around   but it was an official date type  of thing.  And we   d hold some contests generally for fun.  Yes.  I remember     Skillet throwing.  ...the ladies had skillet throwing and roller pin throwing and whoever  won   I think it was Wayne Elmore   s wife that always won.  She did.  She always won.  Very strong. (Laughter)  Cast iron skillets, I assume?  Yes.  Oh, yes.  Cast iron skillets, yes.  We   d stand out of the way. But we   d have ax throwing and knife  throwing and a few other contests that might go along with just  lumberjacks. Then we   d have the floats for Homecoming, and that was  in a one-month time frame, we   re trying to put together floats for the  Homecoming activities.  And that   s when we actually elected the queen, wasn   t it?  Right around that time, yes.  25  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Right around that time, so it would be tied into Homecoming groups,  and she would be in a car behind our float or in front of our float, one of  those situations. Yes, it was an active time on campus, for sure, so many  people did this. I mean, there were numerous floats in that parade. It  would fill up the track then   there was a track around the football field  like most schools had at that point in time, and they would all come in  there for the final judging. I guess maybe half of that track would be full  of floats, so there was quite a few. And there were still house  decorations, but not as elaborate     Yes. I think people have gone more toward the house decorations now     Oh, yes.     and less toward the floats.  Yes.  We built a float one year, and we had it all put together and, of course,  you finish it about five minutes before it   s supposed to be in the parade.  Nobody is ahead of time and the truck wouldn   t start.  Truck wouldn   t start.  We had an old big green truck the Forestry Department owned, and so  we were using it and we   d done all of this work and we forgot one thing.  We forgot to put gas in the truck, so we had to tear all the float apart  right quick, put a gallon of gas in it, and put it all back together in about  15 minutes. Trucks do need gasoline. (Laughter)  And then what kind of spring activities did you have in the Forestry  Club?  Go ahead Craig.  Conclave?  We had really three or four major activities. One was what we called our  Timber Carnival, and I think Keith has mentioned this already, on the  Willard lawn   various events, some which took quite a bit of effort. For  example, we had pole felling where we   d have to bring in poles and set  them in the ground, and they   re 30 feet tall and the idea is to chop them  very slowly and have them fall and hit a stake. When they hit the stake,  you were the winner. It took more than just showing up. Then we had  the knife throw and the ax throw and the sawing things and the log  burling out on Theta Pond. The winners there then went to a southern  26  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  forestry clubs Conclave, which was held somewhere in the south, hosted  by some school which rotated year to year, and in 1966 that was our  moment of glory. We went to Stephen F. Austin University and won  Conclave. It   s the only time in history that OSU has ever won this event.  There were about fifteen other schools competing.  And this went all the way from Virginia, Virginia Tech all the way  around the southern states to Texas and Oklahoma.  So what were some of the schools that were involved?  Well, Virginia Tech, Georgia, North Carolina State, Clemson     Clemson, Mississippi State.  Every state around that   Auburn   that had a forestry curriculum and in  Texas, it was Stephen F. Austin and then Oklahoma State. So there were  numerous people there and it moved around to each one of the other  schools each year, and we would have quite a turnout to travel. I went to  Georgia one year and then to Stephen F. Austin, so two I attended but  they were quite an affair. And some of the awards were more of the  logging activity but some were more technical, dealing with instruments,  compass and pacing and different things like this that were a little more  technical than just identifying or sawing a log.  The sawing contests, were those chain saws or hand saws?  Hand saws. All hand saws.  Two-person crosscuts or one-person bow saws.  Yes. No motorized, no chain saws competition at that time   all hand.  Yes, everything was by hand and as Keith says, there   s about twelve  contests that you watch. In other words, the knife throwing, the ax  throwing     Yes.     and the sawing, but     Log rolling     Those things   there   s 12-14 others occur somewhere back in a room  that you don   t watch, and this is tree identification...  27  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Yes.  There is timber estimation, which we actually go out in the woods and  try to figure out how much timber is out there, aerial photogrammetry.  Things like that that aren   t quite as much show, but they   re a whole lot  more, really scientific in nature.  And the compass and pacing, which now you could do with a GPS. This  was you had to follow a compass bearing and then know your pace, to  go from point A to point B. So it was a little more technical than just  pulling up a GPS instrument and going over there. But, yes, nobody  came to watch that. That   s what I did. It was out in the woods  somewhere.  You were all by yourself. (Laughter)  Yes.  Yes, I did timber estimation. You were the Lone Ranger   nobody was  near you.  Yes, that wasn   t one of the spectator sports, but     So the people who went to the regional competition, were you qualified  for that in the event here?  You qualified. Of course, anybody from the club could go.  Yes.  Anybody in the department could go, but if you were going to compete  in the Conclave, you had to have won it here locally.  Yes. We wanted to send our best people to it.  So did people generally follow you and go watch when you had  Conclave? Did other people come or did you go watch if you weren   t  competing?  Yes.  From the forestry club, we would probably take 30 to 40 that would go,  and there might be 12-15 contestants. We had a good time.  At Stephen F. Austin, too, we had finished it on Saturday and then we  were sleeping in. They had some stuff set up on campus there where we  28  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  could stay. There came a torrential rain and we decided that we   re going  to head back, this is crazy. And so we were crossing the Sabine River, I  think it is, down there in east Texas and this is at night, and a friend had  borrowed his aunt   s brand new car and the river was on the highway.  Well, we said,    That   s probably no problem. It   s probably not very deep.  (Laughter) Let   s just go across it. Well, we   d better send one of the guys  out ahead of us to see how deep it is.    So one of our classmates, Tom  Cappella, walked out there and about the time a log went by him like  this, he said,    I think I   d better get back in the car.    And then we were  noticing our feet were getting very, very wet and the car was filling with  water. We did proceed across there, later to find that there had been  several cars swept off that later that night. It   s just miraculous that we  made it in trying crazy things like that as students. But we all are very  appreciative that we did. That aunt of this other student, I don   t think she  ever loaned him her car anymore. (Laughter)  The ones who stayed had their sleeping bags in a tent, and about three in  the morning if you went out there you could see students in sleeping  bags floating     Yes.     downstream out of that.  On air mattresses. Torrential rain.  It was one of the worst ever.  Yes.  Do they still have those Conclaves?  Every year. And it   s not as much fun now when you   re a faculty  member to go as it was when you were a student. I   ll put it that way.  There   s a lot of concern, obviously the liability risk and things like  that     Sure.      make you look at it in a different light than when you   re a student but  when you   re a 20-year-old student, it   s one of the great times, one of the  great memories.  Another quick story about going to Georgia. We were going in two cars,  the group I was with, and the last thing we said when we left Stillwater  or   I think we spent the night at my home in Muskogee and then headed  29  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  out from there   was we   d meet at the   we were going across to  Memphis and that way   and that we   d meet at the Mississippi River  bridge. We failed to say which side of the bridge we   d meet at.  (Laughter) Yes, and one car   s on one side and one car   s on the other side  for several hours until we said let   s walk across the bridge   which that  bridge is almost a mile across there, and they were doing the same. So  we met in the middle of the bridge and we finally got back together. We  just stopped in at Memphis State and just asked if we could stay in the  dorm and then, the students said,    Oh, sure. This guy doesn   t have a  roommate,    or something. We spent the night there on that campus and  then headed on down to Georgia for the Conclave, but a lot of  experiences like that happened. You get a bunch of guys traveling in a  car on a road trip cross country.  So what did the winners receive? What were the prizes for the  Conclave?  Generally, the winner received a plaque that looked like the state in  which the Conclave was held, and then there was a little brass plaque  that said,    First Place Timber Estimation    or    First Place Knife  Throwing.    Your name wasn   t on it because they already had those  prepared. They didn   t know who was going to win, so I   ve got a couple  of Georgia   s and I   ve got a South Carolina and it   s got a little plaque,  but it looks like the state that held Conclave.  Each winner got one.  I bet that was a great networking opportunity also, just to meet the other  students and   you probably encountered them later on?  Yes, because not only from the Conclave, but foresters had another very  special opportunity in that there were numerous jobs in the summer  across the country with the U.S. Forest Service, other public agencies,  the Bureau of Land Management, National Parks, and we could just  about pick wherever we wanted to go and work so you met guys there. I  spent two summers in Arkansas and two summers in Wyoming and met  students there that we kept our relationship going forever. That was  another interesting opportunity and it was great for your career because a  lot of people went on to work for the Forest Service or whatever agency  they worked for following graduation.  There   s no doubt that in any endeavor, it   s the people that make the  difference and certainly our memories are very fond of the people we  were able to go to school with and the names that Keith has shown me  that signed his plaque bring back a lot of memories.  30  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  Can you turn that around     Sure.     for the camera? It would be great to see that.  It shows the names of professors and this gentleman right here which  you can   t read, but his name is Bob Reed   Dr. Reed   and he was an  agronomy professor, which Craig indicated he   s still on campus   that  had a photographic memory. Once he learned your name, he probably  remembers my name today.  Yes.  It was just amazing what this guy could do.  I had been gone from this campus for twelve years and was over at the  Student Union one day. Dr. Reed walked by and said,    Craig, how are  you doing?    Wow. Just unbelievable.  Yes, he also had the great memory of   he was one of the professors that  stood up   freshmen   and I don   t know if they do it today, but usually  freshmen met and professors talked about your freshman year   this is  like the first week   but he was one of the guys that stood up there and  said,    Look at the guy beside you, on either side of you.    And he said,     One of you won   t be here in four years,    and that was, sort of shocking  experiences, only one of you is going to make it. (Laughter) That was  Dr. Reed that said that. I still remember that. Both   the guy on my left,  we both made it   so we blew his statistics.  Somebody didn   t.  Somebody didn   t on the other side though. (Laughter)  We talked about the   would you call that a plaque that you wore?  Yes.  Is that called a plaque? Okay. We talked about the plaque, so what else  have you got there?  Well, one thing we   ve got is a copy of a couple of our annuals that we  had for the Forestry Department and the Forestry Club put together. This  is actually a wood veneer cover and back on both sides, just full of  pictures of everybody, the students, all the graduates. And we were  fortunate to have some students that really championed this effort. Jim  31  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  and John Ramey were really two people that stimulated it the most. They  had a committee of other students, but it   s just a tremendous amount of  information and knowledge about the particular year that it covers, all of  our activities from again each student class   seniors and juniors and  sophomores and freshmen   all of our activities through our spring  banquet which was something we hadn   t mentioned but we do have a  spring banquet   even continues today, where we present awards to  students primarily scholarships and other recognition of students. They  did a super job of putting this together and we all cherish these very  much. It was a very nice job that they did.  Did you all have to purchase those or were they given to every club  member? Do you remember?  I don   t remember.  I think we had to buy them, but it wasn   t more than  2 or  3 dollars.  Yes. It was very reasonable.  I   ve got four of them. I   ve got one from each year and that means more  to me than probably any other thing from that era, just because I can  look back and see the names, see what we did, and have the fond  memories and, as Keith said, they   re more valuable now than they were  then.  Yes. This is a very special week, too, in that sort of leading in to your  other subjects, with our club. We are having a reunion this weekend, so  it   s always nice to have these and I guess we can talk about that later  because you may want to continue with your materials, I guess   or did  you have something else?  I   ve got a couple   these were written more by faculty members. One is  called    A History of the Early Years, the OSU Forestry Department.     This was primarily put together by Dr. Nat Walker. I have a hard time     he was Mr. Nat Walker when I was in school   and so to me, it   s always  going to be Mr. Walker   but he did earn his Ph.D.  We even called him Nat. That was his name, his first name.  I never did.  Oh. (Laughter)  It talks about, has pictures of the club, and some of these are in the old  Redskin annual and then talks about some of the reasons why we think  32  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  we   re really good. There   s one article in here by Glenn Durrell as to why  the Forestry Department has been successful. Here   s a picture of when  they dedicated the arboretum out here west of town. So that goes to  about 1980, something like that. The other one is really interesting for  those folks who went to summer camp and to my knowledge, only one  person out of all of OSU   s history in forestry did not go to summer  camp. Everybody else was forced to go. That one person was given  enough credit for knowing enough that he didn   t have to go, but  everybody else had gone through a summer camp. It   s a year by year  with a few skips I should say, I guess, but pretty much year by year,  edited by, again, Mr. Walker.  The one thing I wanted to point out were the sketches. These are pictures  which were drawn by Dr. Michael Afanasiev. Dr. Mike, as he was  affectionately called, was one of the first members of the Forestry  Department which began in 1946. He was a Russian by birth. He had  escaped from the Revolution in about 1917 from Russia and was one of  the founding fathers of our department. His quote that is often attributed  to him is,    Let us go to the voods, boys.    (Laughter) And that   s what  they would do. So Dr. Mike had the sketches, Mr. Walker wrote most of  the material, and both of these are very interesting, to include pictures of  bunks on roofs at summer camp and things like that.  And when did the program begin at OSU?  1946. First head was Mr. Glen Durrell. Glen Durrell at that time, prior to  coming to OSU   or OAMC in 1946, was the State Forester for the state  of Oklahoma, which at that time also had the state parks under his  purview, so he was a forestry major running state parks as well. But he  was the second State Forester. He came in 1946 and stayed as  department head until 1966.  So how has it changed as far as the department and the program?  Well, we   ve had a dramatic change within the last year. July 1 of 2006,  we became merged into what is known now as the Natural Resource  Ecology and Management Department so there is no longer a Forestry  Department, per se. The entire department moved into this new unit.  We   re going to keep the same courses. We   re going to keep the same  curricula. We intend to maintain our Society of American Foresters  accreditation. The thing that has changed is the name. There   s a real  advantage to the new group because we also now have range  management, wildlife and fisheries, so now it   s more of a natural  resource based department.  We went from 12 faculty members to 26. We went from 40 students to  150-something. It   s now, I think, the second largest department in the  33  Neurohr  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  College of Agriculture, with Animal Science being first. And it   s a  change, I think in the way that we look at our natural resources, which is  not bad. On the other hand, us old guys are having a little bit of a hard  time putting our hands around a department that doesn   t have    forestry     in the name, and that   s just because of our background. It doesn   t mean  it   s a bad change. It just means that we have to become accustomed to it.  I will say that our alumni and our faculty and our students have looked  at this in a most positive route and, because of that, I have great hopes  for the new department.  How do you think this will impact the students as far as their career  options coming through were   I guess, in my mind it maybe has  broadened things out a little bit. You said the classes aren   t going to  change.  The courses.  The courses won   t really change, so do you see any difference as far as  having that degree with that different name on it or anything?  I think the advantage will be probably in a sense of perception. Over the  course of time, the word    forestry    has implied primarily forest  management, which is not bad   I mean, we want to manage our  resources. To be in this new department, I think does broaden the  potential scope of these students. A number of years ago, an employee in  the U.S. Forest Service indicated to a group of us at a national meeting  that the Forest Service, the federal Forest Service, was going to be hiring  more   and he called them    ologists      ecologists, biologists   that sort  of thing. I think coming out of a natural resource ecology management  department gives you a little bit more of that    ologist    opportunity.  We   re not looking only at forest management. We do have an urban  forestry curricula. We do have a forest science and conservation  curricula. But just the word    forestry    has kind of narrowed the  perception, and I think with the new department we can broaden that.  Mr. Judkins, with your experience and the type of work that you   ve been  doing and the career that you   ve had, what kind of impact can you see  from your perspective with the departmental change in things?  I think it pretty well parallels what Craig has said in people have had to  become more    green    if you will, whether you   re making lumber or  products of any sort, paper. And I think that the industry that I  represented, and most other industries that I was associated with, will  look very favorable on this type of student as getting a little broader  base. As Craig mentioned earlier on,    It   s a people business.    It goes  without saying the more you can have a broad base to talk from  34  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  intellectually, I think the better you   ll do in your job. You can   t be too  narrow in today   s world economy   global economy. You   ve got to be  able to look at a lot of other issues, and I think this is going to help it  tremendously. And, as Craig also said, we as past students, classmates,  graduates, alumni, whatever, are really looking at this to broaden our  forestry association. We   re going to continue that. The department heads  that have been involved with this want us to do that, so they   re  encouraging that. So I think it   s going to be a win-win for all of us.  Are there graduate degrees offered with the department?  Yes, there are.  Do most of the undergraduates come from Oklahoma?  Probably 80 percent come from Oklahoma. In our time, 60 percent came  from the Engineering Department. (Laughs) It was sort of a standing  joke that those that couldn   t make it in engineering would take pre-tree  for a year or two and then come over to forestry. We don   t see that now.  Generally the students we get are the ones who wanted to come into the  program early on. We don   t get as many transfer   either from across  campus or from other universities as we once did. That   s probably just a  matter that there   s a lot more information out there. One of my concerns  has always been that we ask an 18-year-old what they want to do for the  rest of their life, and I think we   ve had an advantage in forestry because  of our requirements over the years of the summer camp and then a few  years back of having that summer of work. By the time students got out  of school in four or five years, they pretty much knew what they liked  and didn   t like because they had the opportunity to experience it. I think  that was important.  Very much so. Gave you more practical and vocational look at it as well  as a scholastic look at the curriculum.  I think our people are very dedicated. We don   t see people getting out of  the forestry arena very far after they leave the school here. He   s   Judkins  about as far as you go  (Laughter)  Well let   s talk a little bit about the loyalty, the alumni association   I   d  like to hear a little bit about that.  Well, the Forestry Alumni Association was developed back probably in  the 50   s if I remember when the actual paperwork was signed and set up  as they call it now a 501(c)(3) and it   s of course just a term from the  Internal Revenue Service that puts it into a non-profit association.  Primarily it was set up, I think, and Craig, correct me if I   m wrong   but  35  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  it was more just to keep in touch. In fact, it was intentionally not aimed  at putting too much burden on activities and so forth, but more to keep in  touch. We did a newsletter, and that kept everybody in touch at a very  nominal fee, and we collected some registration fees.  About 10 years ago or 12 years ago, I sort of decided that I   d like to see  a little more and came and talked to the department head about doing  something a little more, maybe having a meeting and this type of thing.  We started just having a social at Homecoming, doughnuts and coffee  over in our department, and then got some other guys involved, which  Craig has been a great provider and leader in this activity. Another  couple of guys who live down in southeast Oklahoma really took on to  this project, and we   ve had several   I think five to date, four or five     major gatherings. We found that it was fun to get together on campus  Homecoming weekend traditionally, but not everybody travels back to  football games so we decided let   s go where the most of our people are,  a lot of them, southeast Oklahoma, and we   ve had a tremendous  gathering down there.  We   ll be down there this weekend at the Forest Heritage Center at  Beavers Bend State Park and we   ll have 75-plus people attending so we  have a longstanding   a lot of support from past students and faculty. I  think that   s going to be something we want to continue in the future. But  we   re going to have to encompass and get our arms around the new  department, too, and get them involved as well, and that   s what we plan  to do.  We   ve had some 1,300 or 1,400 students graduate from the OSU  forestry program. We currently have a mailing list that is accurate of  about 800 of those graduates. We   ve certainly had some that we   ve lost  over the course of time. There are some that passed away. We still have  those records as best as we can, but as far as a department keeping track  of its graduates, we probably are as good as anybody around simply  because we have a good network of people keeping up with other folks  and we   ve just made that effort to maintain those contacts and those  records.  And have you held a leadership position with the alumni association?  Yes, I am now serving and have served for the last few years as  president of the association and Craig has served as our treasurer, and  we have another gentleman   Winton Ross   who serves as our vice-president.  We   ve held these positions for some time and trying to  generate the activity to take it on into the next step. So I should say I   m  interim president   I think that   s how I put it down technically because  I   m looking for a replacement at any time so    (Laughs)  36  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  One of the reasons I handle the treasury duties is it   s handy to have  somebody here on campus who can handle that because the majority of  our monies go through the OSU Foundation. The contributions to the  scholarship accounts and those sort of things all goes through the  foundation, and my job is to collect all the checks and make sure they go  to where the people want them to go. We have about eight different  accounts and   for example, if I gave some money and wanted to  contribute, I might put it in the Ted Silker Fund or the Nat Walker     other people might want to put it in the Dave Robinson or the Glen  Durrell Fund   so they designate where they want the money to go and I  make sure it goes in that direction.  Have you had any noteworthy campaigns to raise money for the  scholarship funds or anything in particular?  I wouldn   t say anything on a large scale. We probably are trying to write  a better newsletter to promote this   unless you can think of something  else, Craig. I don   t think we   ve really set a sight on     We   ve never gone through a campaign. With the OSU Foundation, as  you know, it requires  10,000 to set up an endowed account. Those have  been generally set up within five to seven years of when we   ve  announced that they   re going to be there available, so our contributions  have been self-motivated so to speak, and they   ve really done a nice job  with our forestry alumni. The idea of how much money do we have and  how much do you need, we just always take the contributions but we   ve  not pushed anybody. We   ve not really tried to bend their arms too much  to contribute. I will say over the course of history that generally those  graduates in the 50   s and 60   s and early 70   s have been most active in  contributing. Now is that a result of their memories and they can still  remember, or is it a fact that that was an activist kind of a time frame in  the United States or whatever it is, but those are the ones who have  really contributed over the course of time.  Who are some of the noteworthy people who have come through the  program over the years? Who are some of the alumni that come to your  minds when you think about the number of years that the association   s  been active or the program   s been here that, people might recognize or  that should be aware of   we should be aware of?  We probably don   t have anybody that has gone into the political arena,  and that   s where you get most of the awareness, but we   ve had a great  number of folks who have excelled in their profession, be it academic,  be it industry, et cetera. We had two or three deans of major universities,  deans of agriculture. We   ve had     37  Neurohr  McKinley  Neurohr  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Can you say names or universities     Well, if you don   t mind, yes.  That would be great to have that.  Emmett Thompson at Auburn University is there. Chuck Gay is  currently an associate dean at Utah State University. We   ve had at  least   I know of two department heads in forestry departments. One is  Harold Burkhardt at Virginia Tech and the other is me, who stepped  down about a couple of years ago, but I was department head here for  five years. We   ve had industry folks   the name there is Rex  McCullough, who served as vice president for research for  Weyerhaeuser Corporation. Keith, help me.  Well, we   ve also had quite a few working with public agencies like the  U.S. Forest Service. In the hierarchy of the Forest Service in  Washington there   s a chief of the U.S. Forest Service and then below  that there are regional directors and then below that   s called  supervisors   and we   ve had numerous classmates   Mike Lunn, John  Ramey, George Kelly are some that come to mind right off that have  served in these supervisory positions which encompass   it used to be at  a minimum a single forest, which could be varying size. Now the Forest  Service has sort of grouped their forests within a state and John Ramey  who is one of our classmates, just recently retired as head of all of the  national forests in the State of North Carolina. Where they used to have  an individual at each one of them, they sort of consolidated that activity,  so we   ve had probably several we   ve left out that we didn   t know about  but these are ones that went through school with us and have served in  pretty high-level positions within the Forest Service. And I think one  other one that has gained some notoriety is Wayne Elmore as a   the  stream side   what is the term now for     Best management practices?  No.  Streamside management zones?  The area along the   any drainage     Riparian?  Riparian   he was one of the key riparians. He   s retired from Bureau of  Land Management, but I think still serves as a spokesman for several  groups concerning riparian activities, which is basically edge along  38  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  McKinley  streams and drainages. So we have had some impact out there with some  positions of notoriety.  A number of years ago I was working in southeast Arkansas for  industry, and I asked one of the supervisors there if they   ve ever had any  OSU students. And he says,    Yes, we   ve had several OSU graduate  students, then graduates come to work.    I said,    Well, what do you think  of them?    And I think he was honest with me and he said,    Well, you  know, technically they   re about the same as everybody else. Everybody  else gets the same technical training, so technically they   re certainly  good but they   re not above or below.    He says,    But they   ll work hard.     And I thought that was a pretty good compliment that they   ll work hard,  and I think that comes from the summer camp experience and it also  comes from the fact if you want to be in forestry at Oklahoma State,  you   ve already admitted that it won   t be easy.  Yes, as I mentioned earlier about my first job with this group called the  Southern Pine Association, which quickly became known as the  Southern Forest Products Association   it still exists today. When I went  to work there, there was a field staff in the field of 20-22 people and  seven of those were OSU graduates and probably that   s why this  professor aimed me in that direction, too. But it was interesting, we  continued to have OSU guys come in there, and they went out to many,  many positions after serving with that organization. So it was quite an  interesting thing to see. We were very much in a majority of any other  single school in doing that job, so they must have liked the graduates  here because they continued to hire them.  Well, OSU is a pretty special place, and your fondness for the university  is evident by your being interested in sharing your stories here, so do  you have anything else that you might say about Oklahoma State  University and what it has meant to you across the years?  Well, I guess with my dad being a graduate and my mother, I   d better  not forget my sister either   she   s a graduate of OSU   but my earliest  memory is my father coming up here in the mid-50   s to go to football  games. The one thing we would do when we went to a football game is  we always walked through the Library. We would come up those big  steps and we would go into   it now has a name   it was a reading room  for years   we   d walk in that magnificent reading room and that memory  has just stuck with me. When I was a student here, I made every  opportunity to study in that particular reading room because it goes all  the way back to when I was seven, eight, nine years of age. Those are  the kind of things you can   t replace, and certainly OSU has been an  important part of our family. And Stillwater, more than anyplace else, is  my home because my dad and mother moved around some. I   ve lived in  39  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Judkins  Neurohr  Judkins  various places, and when I had the chance to come back to OSU in  Stillwater, it was coming home to me. So, you can   t beat home.  And I think probably just the image of the university. When you see it  written up or photographed   the Library, the Union   and seeing that, as  a high school student coming over to take my ACTs here on campus. A  bunch of us came over to take our test here and I just sort of fell in love  with it and now after being gone and working on a career for all these  30-plus years, to be back now and see it still walking down the halls in  the Union or the Library today, it   s still very much the same. And the  architecture has stayed pretty consistent, which I think is very important.  You don   t see that on a lot of campuses, especially with their expansion  and cost of construction, etc. I think that   s my fondest memory is just the  look of the campus and when I see it used in some other form or my own  memories. I   m so glad to be back to be able to use it and visit it now on  a more frequent basis.  Do you have any particular Library memories?  Oh, yes. There   s an area where we seemed to all meet   again, forestry  guys   it was an area in the magazine or periodical section, and they had  the American Forest magazines   the ones we might read   in that area.  It seemed like it was in that northwest quadrant somewhere, but that was  where a bunch of us would always come and study at the tables and  everything there. Of course, in those days, we   re talking much stricter  regulations. Everybody was required to study, especially the sorority  girls and we always made sure that we were here during those  mandatory study hours (Laughter) to see all the girls. But everybody had  to come for certain hours, and that   s probably what brought me to the  Library mostly.  Wasn   t Mr. Walker   s evaluation test?  No. No. (Laughs)  What advice would you give to OSU students today?  Well, without question I think I wish I   I   m going to stop short of  saying regret, but I surely wish I would have put more effort into the  scholastic   academic and scholastic opportunities than I did. So I think  they can   t go without putting as much effort into their classroom work  because when you still get out there in the job market, it   s still, there   s  nobody that subsidizes you at that point whether you   scholarship or  whatever   at that time, you have to prove yourself, and that   s where all  that comes back to help you. The professors always said,    We   re not  here to teach you a vocation. We   re here to give you an education.    But  40  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  Neurohr  Judkins  McKinley  the stuff that we gathered there, I mean, helped me in many roundtable  discussions or boardroom meetings and so forth   that all came from  right here and you just can   t slight that at all. You need to have that  classroom time and experience and put an effort into it, not take it as the  second reason you are here on campus.  When I talk to students about what they would   I teach the senior level,  sort of the last course before they go out the door   it   s a senior level  policy administration course   and I ask them, I say,    What would you  have done different?    And I usually get one answer, and that   s time  management. They feel like they just, they   ve learned, or wish they had  learned, more about time management. My advice is to enjoy the time in  this college. I was very fortunate. I was working. I was always tired. I  was always hungry, but I knew I was enjoying it. I knew this was a great  opportunity, and so many students look at it as drudgery.    Oh, it   s just  something to get through and then I   ll go get rich.    Just enjoy the time.  Enjoy the people you   re around. They   ll be your lifelong friends. They   ll  be your lifelong memories and if you just learn to enjoy the time here, I  think you   ll have a better time of it forever.  Do you have any final thoughts to share with us today?  I just want to thank you for the opportunity to be able to share all this  information with the Library program here at Oklahoma State. Thank  you for doing such an excellent job in guiding us through this process.  So, thank you, Karen.  Echo that as well. Thank you very much.  Well, I just want to say thank you very much for taking the time to come  and share your stories here at the Library. I was very excited to learn  more about the forestry program and the club and your alumni  association. And I think and hope that maybe this might inspire some  other groups to share their stories with us because this is part of our  institutional history at Oklahoma State University and I think we can   t  lose that. We want to move forward and we want to look ahead, but in  the process of doing that, we do need to look back and see how we got to  where we are today. Thank you once again.  Thank you.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
