 Gill. Today is February 19, 2010. I   m visiting with  Nancy Bennett Noxon in her home in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. This  interview is for the O- STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Nancy, I appreciate your taking time to do  the interview this morning and inviting me into your home and sharing  your hospitality with me.  You   re very welcome.  You are a member of a family that   s very special to Oklahoma State  University, the Bennett Family. Dr. Henry G. Bennett, your grandfather,  was the president of Oklahoma State University from 1928 until 1951,   when he met  his untimely death. Dr. Bennett and his wife Vera had five  children, Henry Jr., Phil, Liberty, Mary and Thomas. I understand  you   re the daughter of Henry Bennett Jr.   .  That   s correct.  And Josephine Saint Clair was your mother. And you   re the second  oldest living grandchild of Henry and Vera, is that right?  That   s correct.  Your sister, Jacque, is the oldest.  That   s right.  First of all, we want to visit a little bit, certainly, about the Bennetts and  your family, but I   d like to start off with you personally, about your life,  if that   s okay. Could you share a little bit of information about your  early life, where you grew up, your family, about your parents?  Okay. Well, I was born in Baltimore while my dad was in medical  5  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  school. We lived there until I was about four. We came to Oklahoma  City, which is where he intended to practice medicine. We lived in  Oklahoma City until my father died. I was married, I went to OSU and  got married while I was in school and started my family. My husband  was a physician. We followed the same path and we lived in Oklahoma  City. My children grew up in Oklahoma City. I have three daughters.  They all went to school in Oklahoma City. Two of them went to  Oklahoma State University.  Let   s see, I went to Oklahoma State, which was Oklahoma A M  College, of course, my first year and a half and then through the next  eighteen years I took courses at different colleges, depending on the  circumstances and I was busy raising my children. Finally, in 1982,  when I had three grandchildren, I graduated from the University of  Central Oklahoma here in Edmond. I always knew I would graduate  from college, because that   s just the tradition in our family. It was just a  matter of when was I going to do that. (Laughs) I was a little late doing  that but fortunately I graduated and became a CPA and began a career at  that time, after my children were grown. I   m still doing that. I have a  part-time job and enjoy my career very much, and am married to a  wonderful man. We   ve only been married four years, so this is a new  relationship and a very happy one.  Backing up and maybe taking a little piece of your biography here, your  early life, where did you go to high school here in Oklahoma City?  I went to Classen High School.  I  went to Nichols Hills Grade School,  Harding Junior High School and Classen High School, where I  graduated.  Were you active in high school   organizations or activities that you  were in?  I was in a few little organizations   a social club, a math club, Honors  Society and a few things like that. But I wasn   t into sports or anything     there weren   t any organized sports at that time for girls. I would have  been if I could have been. I liked sports.  You had, as we said earlier, one sister, Jacque   an older sister.  How  much older was she?   Four and a half years older. She was four years ahead of me in school.  After high school, did you go directly to Oklahoma State University?  Yes.  6  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  For one year?  Yes, and then I got married that summer and went back to Oklahoma  State. I got married the summer after my freshman year and then I went  to school the next semester and then the next semester I had a baby girl.  That delayed my education for a little while.  Your first husband, did you meet him at Oklahoma State?  No, I knew him in high school.  And what was his name?  Stanton Witter. W-I-T-T-E-R, Witter.  What are some values you learned from your family growing up that  helped shape you and influence your later life, could you share some of  those?  Education was always number one in our life just because of our  heritage, with our grandparents. It was never talked about so much, it  was just a part of our life. I always knew that education would be the  key to success. I always put a lot of emphasis on that with myself and  my children, as well. So that of course, and I don   t know, just the moral  codes and all that we learned from being around our family. We had a  wonderful family and we were very proud to be our grandparent   s  grandchildren. (Laughs) Because in Oklahoma, everybody knew our  grandparents at that time when we were growing up.  I guess when it came time for college there really wasn   t much other  choice than Oklahoma State.  No, but I didn   t want there to be a choice. That   s where I wanted to go.  (Laughs)  Did you say what year you enrolled?  I enrolled in    54.  Fall of 1954?  Yes.  What was your major?  At that time, I really didn   t have a major. I couldn   t decide. It was only  7  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  later that I became interested in accounting. I did know one thing, I did  not want to be a teacher. Even though education was important, teaching  was not my forte. So the normal thing to do in that day and age if you  were a girl and you didn   t have a major, they wanted to put you in  education. I said,    No, not for me.    (Laughter)    Let somebody else be  the teacher.     You were there just a year, but did any faculty members resonate that  you met that were meaningful to you   any faculty members or  administrators that you recall?  At OSU?  Yes.  Not in particular while I was at school. I had met a lot of faculty  members through Grandmother and Granddaddy of course, in their  home. I remember Dean  Zelma  Patchin. She was the Dean of Women  at the time.  I hear she was pretty tough.  Yes, she was very tough. (Laughter) Actually, one of the funny things     I had a shorthand course and my teacher was Labron Harris, the golf pro.  Oh, yes.  That was interesting. He   s a big old husky guy teaching shorthand. It  just didn   t seem to quite fit. (Laughter) Though I did enjoy his class.  I guess the Harris   s married into your family.  Exactly, yeah   married my cousin. Labron Harris, Jr. married my  cousin.  Where did you live that year, Nancy?  I lived in the dorm. I lived in Stout Hall and joined a sorority, was a  Kappa  Kappa Gamma . I don   t know how it is now, but at that time,  freshmen had to live in the dorm, not in the house. I never did live in the  Kappa house, because I got married that summer. We had an apartment  on Bennett Drive, as a matter of fact. (Laughs)  Was that kind of a Bennett women tradition of being in the Kappa  sorority?  8  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  No. As a matter of fact, it was totally against tradition. All of my (except  my mother was a Kappa Delta but all of my dad   s family) sisters,  cousins, everybody in my dad   s family were Pi Phi   s and my sister was a  Pi  Beta  Phi. I kind of was one that went against tradition. I always did.  If my sister was a Pi Phi, I was going to be something else. That   s what I  did. I was very happy. I knew a lot more Kappa   s than I did Pi Phi   s.  (Laughter)  Did you catch some grief over that?  Oh yeah, did I ever. (Laughter)  Are there some special memories you had at Oklahoma State University,  some highlights from that year that you were there?  Oh, we just had a lot of fun. I loved living in the dorm. Had a lot of  friends from Oklahoma City that were there with me and also met some  really neat people through school and the dorm and classes and the  sorority. Just had a really good time   made good grades, loved my  classes. Always enjoyed learning and going to school. It was just  generally a very good experience.  Did you have some favorite student hangouts on campus and off  campus?  We spent a lot of time in the Student Union. That was our meeting place  most of the time.  It was relatively new then, wasn   t it?  Relatively, yeah. And we used to hang out down on Washington   or  Sixth Street/Washington. There were some drive-ins down there. I  remember we used to go down there and get hot chocolate. I don   t  remember the names of them.  Was Aggie B one of them?  Probably.  Aggie B BBQ?  Aggie B, yeah, I remember that. And, of course, the Campus Corner, we  hung out over there.  Swim   s maybe.  9  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  The Swim   s yeah.  Again, another family tie with the Swim family.  That   s right, it turned out to be a family tie, yeah. It was a family tie  then. My aunt Emma Adele was, of course, a Swim.  Was it special for you that your grandfather had been president of  Oklahoma State University?  Oh, sure. Yeah. I kind of thought it was my place. I mean, I felt like I  owned the place. (Laughter)  Were there any advantages or disadvantages of being the granddaughter  of the former president?  No. I don   t remember that being the case at all. Except that Dean Patchin  kind of kept an eye on me. I had a feeling she had me under her thumb.  (Laughter)  Now, if she had you under her thumb, you were under the     I was confined.  After the one year, you moved back to Oklahoma City and got married.  I married in Oklahoma City but I came back to Stillwater. My husband  was also starting his sophomore year of college. So we both went to  college and he continued on and went to medical school later. But I then  began raising our family.  Where did you live?  We lived in some apartments out on Bennett Drive. I can   t tell you  exactly where that is now, but they were nice, relatively new apartments.  So then, you left Oklahoma State and your husband went to medical  school     Medical school here in Oklahoma City.  Then after he got out, he continued to practice, so you lived then most of  your life here in Oklahoma City.  Right, I did.  10  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Could you share a little bit about some of your professional activities  and civic organizations, activities you   ve been a part of here in  Oklahoma City through the years?  In Oklahoma City, I was very involved with my kids in school and I was  in the Junior League of Oklahoma City and did a lot of volunteer work. I  was one of probably twenty-five families that were instrumental in  starting Heritage Hall Private School when my oldest daughter was  going to be in the eighth grade. They were mixing up our schools and  bussing our children and we didn   t want that. We started Heritage Hall,  which, at that time we were meeting in church classrooms. But it   s  grown into quite a nice, very well thought of private school here in  Oklahoma City. That was an interesting experience.  You said you have three daughters?  Three daughters.  And their names?  Julie   s the oldest and then Kimberly and then Robyn. Julie and Robyn  both went to Oklahoma State. Actually, neither graduated there. One got  married before her senior year and went out to Flagstaff, Arizona where  her husband was going to be doing his master   s degree. She graduated  there at Arizona State in Flagstaff. Then, my youngest daughter, Robyn,  went to OSU for several years and then she ended up back in Oklahoma  City and she graduated from UCO  University of Central Oklahoma  as  valedictorian of her class. At that time, she had two children. She  worked and went to school and still graduated as valedictorian of her  class, so I was pretty proud.  Did the three daughters have professional careers of their own?  The oldest daughter is a biologist, actually. But she ended up, she has a  wildflower farm in Arkansas. Her husband has his master   s degree in  plant pathology and she   s always been interested in plants and animals.  She has a wildflower farm that she   s had now for twenty-five years. She  still sells seeds and then she now has what is named The Doggie Dude  Ranch   she has dog kennels. She has stuck to her major, plants and  animals. That   s her love.  This is Julie, the oldest daughter. Then your second daughter is     Kimberly. Kimberly did not go to college. She did not want to go to  college. She is an artist. She wanted to get into something to do with art.  As soon as she got out of high school, she went to work as an apprentice  11  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  to learn to be a jeweler. She has done that ever since. She graduated  from high school in 1976 and she   s been a jeweler ever since   a free-lance  jeweler. She   s worked for every jeweler in Oklahoma City to gain  experience. That   s how they learn the jewelry business is just  apprenticing. She lives in Arkansas now   all three of my daughters live  in Arkansas now. But she still is a jeweler. That   s been her livelihood all  of her adult life.  Now Robyn, is that the youngest?  Robyn is the youngest. She majored in computer science. She has  worked for a couple of different companies, but for the last probably  fifteen years she has been a computer programmer for Burlington  Railroad. She lived in Fort Worth, which is where their computer  headquarters is but now she telecommutes. She lives on a lake in  Arkansas and sits and looks out her window as she telecommutes and  runs the railroads. (Laughter)  Tough job, isn   t it? (Laughter) Well, Nancy, can we change a little and  talk about your parents for a minute? Your father would have been  Henry Jr. Can you talk a little bit about him, what he was like, his  personality, some of his personal traits?  Oh, well, he was wonderful. I just always had a lot of respect for my  dad. He was very wise. One thing I remember especially about him as I  was growing up, he was very easy to talk to and if you had a question,  whether it be about school or personal or whatever it was, he always  tried to make you figure it out yourself. If you asked him a question, you  got a question back. Consequently, he taught us how to think through  things and to come up with our own solution. I felt like that was a very  valuable asset that he gave us. But, of course, he was a doctor and he  was gone a lot. He was a doctor that went to the hospital in the morning  and went to the hospital after work in the evening. But we always  waited. We always had dinner with Daddy growing up. We never even  thought about eating dinner before Daddy got home. Dinner was family  time, as was breakfast. We spent as much time as we could with him.  And on weekends, when our grandparents were alive, we almost always  would go to church. Then, we   d drive up to Stillwater and have lunch  with our grandparents and all of his family that lived nearby would be  there. It was just sort of a tradition. He and Mother were wonderful  parents and provided us with a very nice, but not extravagant, lifestyle.  He was a very frugal person and taught us the same.  What kind of practice did he have?  He was a gynecologist. He was very well-known in his field of  12  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  gynecology. As well, he became the chief of staff at Baptist Hospital  here in Oklahoma City. Before even it was built, he was chosen to be the  chief of staff. He was in on the groundbreaking and on the board and  was very, very actively involved in that until he died. In fact, he was still  chief of staff when he died. He   d been the only chief of staff for like  twenty-six years.  How old were you when he died?  Let   s see, Daddy died in    84, so I was forty-seven I guess when he died.  I was very close to him. But having lived here in Oklahoma City and  they lived in Oklahoma City, we continued our relationship with him  and my children were very involved with them. I was with my parents a  lot.  You mentioned briefly your mother. What can you tell me about your  mother? What do you remember most about her?  Mother was always Daddy   s partner. She never worked but she was  always there and always supportive of him in every way. Of course, a  good homemaker and she certainly   she was actually our caretaker  because Daddy was not there most of the time and she was the one that  directed our activities. She was very involved in our school and all that.  She was a wonderful person, as well.  A little bit about your mother   s family history   where did she grow up?  In Perry. And went to OSU and that   s where my father met her. They  were married. My father was fourteen when he started at Oklahoma  State, which was Oklahoma A M. He graduated in four years when he  was eighteen.  Wow.  He and mother got married   they were both eighteen when they got  married. Mother had only had one year of college. Then, they moved to  Baltimore and my dad was the youngest applicant to ever be accepted at  Johns Hopkins Medical School. They lived in Baltimore then for the  next nine years and that   s where I was born; my sister was born there  also.  Can you share some stories of, perhaps, you   d heard from your father  about his parents and life when he was growing up as a child in the  Bennett Family. Are there some stories you remember that are vivid in  your mind?  13  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Well, not especially, other than he said it was not fun being the eldest  because you always got blamed for everything. (Laughter) He was the  oldest of five. I don   t remember a whole lot about that. I guess he must  have gone to summer school every summer because otherwise he could  not have gone to college by the time he was fourteen. I think education  was an ongoing process year-round for the family. He was pretty busy.  Though he did remember some stories that he did work in a drugstore in  Durant, when they lived in Durant. He would wrap packages, it seems  like. I don   t know how old he was. It was before they moved to  Stillwater, so he was pretty young. Anyway, I don   t remember a lot  about references to his childhood, but they were a very close family. All  of them   all of the brothers and sisters and parents and remain that way.  As long as our grandparents were alive, they were the central point of  our lives and all of the families gathered there. Then Mother   all of the  daughters-in-law became totally embraced by the Bennett Family. They  were all a part of the family. I don   t remember any kinds of problems  within the family. The Bennett seniors were so all-inclusive   just loved  everybody. (Laughs)  How old was your father when the family moved to Stillwater in 1928?  He was born in 1913 so he must have been close to fifteen, but I think he  started to OSU when they first moved there, so he was fourteen, fifteen.  Nancy, one more time, any family lore stories you remember back from  Durant, from Hugo, family stories from back in Arkansas that you  remember?  Not too much, just knowing that he was born in Hugo and grew up for  part of his childhood in Durant and then into Stillwater. But other than  that, I don   t remember a whole lot about those stories.  One other question about your dad, did he have any activities he really  enjoyed, any hobbies? It sounded like work was his hobby, but did he  have any     He didn   t have any hobbies, except he loved to read just like my  grandfather. He read obsessively and he had a collection of books like  my grandfather did. He just   that was his hobby, was reading.  He was   very well-informed about a lot of things, very well-rounded in that  respect. But he didn   t have any hobbies like golf or anything like that.  Did you and your sister, Jacque, keep any of the books from his library?  Oh, yes. We have a lot of them. In fact, after he died, of course, we had  all of his books. We donated a lot of it   all of his medical books  went   14  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  to the Baptist Hospital and they have a special display of those. Then,  we kept all of the other books and part of those then were my  grandparents   all of the different family   daughters and sons took what  they wanted of my grandfather   s book collection, so we had a lot of  those too. When my mother (who lived another seven years after Daddy  died) began to scale down and move to a smaller location, we realized  we had to do something with these books because there were so many.  She had all the family members, ours and my dad   s brothers and sister   s  family members come and take whatever they wanted and all of my  children and my sister   s children took what they wanted. Then we had  some family friends that we invited to come and take the rest. So yes, I  have a lot of his books here in my home. They mean a lot to me.  Did your dad ever share his experiences living in the president   s home  on campus as a teenager? That must have been interesting.  That must have been. I don   t remember, I don   t know. I kind of think  when you   re there in the family, this is just a normal family.  And he lived at home when he was going to college?  Yes. I mean, when you   re in that situation, you think that   s normal. I  don   t think that he felt special or singled out or anything like that. I  never had the feeling he felt that way. Whether he got special privileges,  he may have. But I don   t think that he had tried to. I don   t think he  aspired to taking advantage of his position. (Laughs)  Maybe we can shift gears and talk a little bit about your grandparents,  Henry G. and Vera. You indicated earlier in our conversation that the  family often times on Sundays, especially, traveled there and on special  events like Thanksgiving and Christmas     Oh, yes. Always.  What do you remember about the president   s home?  I loved it. I remember a lot about it. I mean to me, at least my  recollection, I can remember it. I remember there was a big living room  and there was kind of like a velvet curtain that hung at the entrance to  the living room from the hallway and the stairway. Like on Christmas  morning, you would come down the stairs and the curtain would be  pulled so you couldn   t see in the living room. (Laughs) I remember  peeking around the corner. I loved that house. It was such a homey  house; a friendly house and always full of people. I remember the  kitchen   there was always in the morning a pot of oatmeal, of course,  lots of coffee, biscuits, all that every morning. People would just come  15  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  in the back door in the kitchen   anybody, everybody that walked across  campus came in and sat down and had a cup of coffee and went on.  Everybody was welcome. Big dining room   it seemed big to me. There  was always room for everybody. It didn   t matter who was there, all the  family plus anybody else that happened to happen in were invited to  have food and it was always available.  I heard it wasn   t unusual for someone to just drop in and also to spend  the night and then put them up somewhere.  No, not at all, no. They were so in touch with all the students and the  faculty and everybody. Treated them all the same. They were just really  wonderful people and everybody felt welcome. Nobody felt intimidated  at all by my grandparents. They were always so friendly and sincere  with every walk of life.  Nancy, you were talking about breakfast and biscuits earlier   I  understand that Dr. Bennett himself would get up sometimes and fix  breakfast and he liked to make biscuits.  I   m sure he did. I   m not sure who made those biscuits  but  they were  always ready when I got up. (Laughter)  The layout  of the house,  the entrance would be looking to the east, on  the east side I guess.  Don   t ask me directions. I don   t know directions.  When you come in the front door, come in the living room     The dining room is on the left and the living room is on the right and the  stairway was up here.  Kitchen in the back   you   d go straight on     Behind the dining room. And then there were bedrooms upstairs.  Was there a study area   ?  A study, yes. He had a study and then Grandmother had a room we  called the silver room where she kept her collection of silver   antique  silver. She had a beautiful collection of silver. After all the children were  gone, she had a room especially with cabinets built for the silver and  they were all lined with Pacific cloths so that they wouldn   t tarnish. It  was just a beautiful   she loved her silver, loved her collection. We all  loved it, too.  16  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  You remember some of the family get-togethers, what was it like to sit  down for the family get-together and sit down to meals? Could you  describe what a typical day would have been like in the family?  Oh well, busy, busy. In the kitchen would always be Dora, who was the  cook. Dora was five by five. She was a very large lady, a happy,  wonderful cook. I remember her being there all the time. She didn   t do  any cleaning or anything because she was too heavy. Her husband  worked there also and his name was Y.C. They were kind of like  the  nursery rhyme  Jack Sprat, who ate no fat and all that. He was lean and  she was very large.  What was his name again?  YC. Y-C as in two initials.  Initials Y and C.  They were just a wonderful couple. They were there for as long as I  could remember. Dora always was doing all the cooking and cooked  anything we wanted pretty much. Dora was always in the kitchen  cooking when we   d get there on a holiday or on a Sunday or whenever.  Y.C. would take care of everything else around the house and the cars  and all that. He was just kind of there if you needed him, kind of thing.  Then, they had someone else that came in and cleaned, I think. But  anyway, usually there were always other children there; all the cousins  would be there. We immediately would all go outside and play.  When you sat down for a formal meal, were you all around the table?  Was there a large table in the dining room?  Yeah, there was a very large table   it seemed very large to me. I don   t  remember how many it sat   probably twelve at least. But then on  holidays when everybody was there Grandmother would put up little  card tables any place she could find to put them, so that we   d all be in  the same room together. She didn   t want to put us in another room  because she wanted us to all be part of the family. It was always fun and  the food was wonderful, of course. The hospitality and everybody  talking, talking, talking. (Laughs)  Would Dr. Bennett and Vera sort of lead the conversation?  Oh, yes. But there was a lot of laughter. I don   t remember them ever  talking about any business things. Just talking about current events and  family and things like that. It wasn   t centered on anything serious. It was  just a happy time.  17  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Were they attentive grandparents?  Oh wow, yes.  Did they enjoy being grandparents?  Absolutely. We loved going there because they would include us in  everything they did. It was never like,    Oh, well Nancy can   t come  because we   re too busy.    They   d just pick us up and take us with them. I  remember going wherever my grandmother went, I went. Granddaddy  had business to take care of that we weren   t maybe quite as welcome at.  Although, I remember going over to his office and just walking right in  and climbing up on his lap.  Tell me about that, that   s got to be interesting.  When we were old enough to be   and I don   t know what Grandmother  thought was old enough, maybe seven or eight   in that day and age we  didn   t think of any danger of being    I mean she   d let us go out and  walk around on the campus by ourselves. I remember walking over to     and she may have been around, she may have been with me, I don   t  know. I just remember walking in his office and walking right in.  Just unannounced   walk right in.  Just walk right in there and talk to Granddaddy if he wasn   t busy.  Would he take time to visit with you there in his office?  Yes, if he didn   t have someone in there and I wouldn   t have gone in if  he had. We had a lot of freedom, which was wonderful. We got to roam  around on the campus and    Grandmother would let us   I was just  telling Jacque yesterday, I said,    I can   t believe that Grandmother, it  seemed to me just let us do anything we wanted to.    I remember as a  child going up to the fire station, which was walking distance easy. I   d  go up to the fire station and they knew me. I felt like I could do anything  I wanted to because Granddaddy was president. I would go up and slide  down the pole in the fire station. (Laughter) I loved to do that. They  treated me so nice. We would walk up to Campus Corner and there was  a drugstore up there and of course a movie. We didn   t go to a movie by  ourselves but my Aunt Mary would take us to the movie up there  sometimes. Anyway, we just had fun. We just kind of had the run of the  campus. That   s what I remember.  There must have been some understanding with Dr. Bennett   s secretary  that when one of the grandkids came in that if no one was in there, it  18  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  was okay to send them in.  I don   t know. Well he did   that   s what we did, so I don   t know what his  understanding was. (Laughter)  What do you remember about his office?  I   m not sure I have a correct memory of his office. I just remember a big  desk with him sitting behind it. I don   t remember much about the other  surroundings. Was it in   what, Whitehurst?  Whitehurst.  Yeah. Is it still there, the president   s office?  Yes. First floor, Whitehurst.  I wasn   t sure. Yeah. I just felt like I had the run of the place. When the  Student Union was finished, I must have been about thirteen, twelve,  thirteen maybe. I took one of my friends with me and we went and  stayed with Grandmother for several days. She just let us go and we  went over to the Student Union and stayed the entire day. Went in every  room in the Student Union. (Laughter) I remember the French Room, the  French Lounge, the Chinese Lounge, all the lounges   We just made it  our business to cover the whole Student Union and it   s big. But  Grandmother never worried about us, not for a minute. We didn   t have  cell phones or anything else. We just knew what time to get home and  we did.  Speaking to your Grandmother, I understand she was a strong Christian  lady.  Absolutely. One of the most spiritual women I   ve ever known.  Did she ever share her faith with you or read the Bible to you?  Oh, yes. In fact, I started playing the piano. She always had a piano. I  started picking around at the piano and she could see I had an interest in  it. She bought me a piano   not bought me a piano, she rented a piano  for me while my dad was overseas. She rented a piano at Jenkins Music  here in Oklahoma City   rented me a piano for five dollars a month so  that I could take piano lessons. And I did, from then on until I was in  high school. She eventually paid for the piano at five dollars a month.  She loved to hear me play. She wanted me to learn every hymn in the  Baptist hymnal. That was quite an undertaking. She wanted me to be  able to play it if I was called upon to do so. I made it my business to do  19  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  that. Also, she wanted us to read the Bible and I remember that she  would pay me fifty dollars if I would read the New Testament.  Fifty dollars?  Fifty. That was a lot of money at that time. This had to be when I was  between ten and fourteen because they died after that. So I did. I read the  whole New Testament. I would go to Sunday school with them anytime  we were there on Sunday morning, if I was staying with them. We   d  always go to Sunday school. Of course, Grandmother taught the girls  and Granddaddy taught the boys.  Did you go to her class?  Yes.  What kind of teacher was she?  I don   t remember. She was just my grandmother. You know? (Laughs) I  don   t remember too much about her teaching. But I went on a Baptist  retreat with her one time. My sister and I were talking about that because  I think she went, too.  Was it Falls Creek?  No. It wasn   t here in Oklahoma; I think it was in Asheville. We went on  the train. I loved to go with her to Baptist things because I loved the  music. That was the main thing that attracted me. I may not listen to the  rest of it but I listened to the music. She loved music. She would have  me play the piano for teas and things that she had at the house. They had  a music room off of the living room. They had a big grand piano and  then they had a harp. Mary played the harp, so the harp was always in  the music room. I remember she   d have her little old lady teas and all  these people dressed up and I would be playing the piano in the music  room.  I think it was maybe Vera that was telling me that she was one of the  founders of Falls Creek church camp.  I don   t know.  You never knew anything about that?  I remember about Falls Creek but I never went there so I don   t know.  But they were both very spiritual people in the sense that you just knew  it. It wasn   t like they were always talking about it; it was just so much a  20  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  part of their life. It was something that you just realized that they had  such a deep faith. Everything they did was based on their faith, I think.  Did your grandmother have any hobbies like quilting or needlework or  anything?  Oh, no. She was a busy lady. I don   t remember her doing those things at  all. She was a go-er and a do-er. She was always busy. She always had  things going on   meetings   she had a lot of meetings going on, a lot of  social events going on. She came to Oklahoma City frequently by  herself because Granddaddy was always busy with his work. She   d just  get in the car and come down here. I remember when I was young and  during the war, of course, all three of her sons were overseas. She would  come to Oklahoma City and I would go downtown with her and we  would shop. Then she would go to all of the movie houses in downtown  Oklahoma City and find out what time the newsreels were on. We would  then go   just for the newsreel, maybe the comics   usually just the  newsreel because she wanted to see what was going on in the war.  She paid admission just to see the newsreel.  Yes, and we would go to more than one. We   d go to one and then later  on in the afternoon, we   d go to another one because they would have  newsreels of the war. Of course, in that day and age, there was no  television. It was weeks before you got a letter or anything else. She  always wanted to do that   we always did that. We always had so much  fun. She liked to dress up; she liked us to dress up. We   d dress up and  we   d go downtown and shop and go to lunch. She was just a busy lady. I  think my dad worried about her. I was too young to realize how  dangerous it was. She would drive back to Stillwater and pick up  hitchhikers on the way. At that time it was during the war and a lot of  them were servicemen or students. She didn   t ask who they were, just  picked them up and took them. She liked the company. Of course,  nowadays we wouldn   t think of doing that. She had no fear. She was  absolutely, totally self-assured   a very strong woman. I said she was the  original women   s libber. If she wanted to go somewhere, she just got up  and went. (Laughter) If Granddaddy couldn   t go, that was okay because  she was going anyway.  I think it was Lela that was telling me that she was quite a shopper, that  she was a power-shopper.  Oh, she was. Yes, I think that would be a good description. Yeah.  Of course, we talked about silver, but were there other things that she  enjoyed buying?  21  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  She loved silver. That was her main thing to look for. But she also loved  linens and handkerchiefs and things like that.  Embroidered handkerchiefs ?  Jacque and I still have a lot of     Was she a great gift-giver?  Oh, yes.  Was she proud about giving gifts?  Yes, yes. She was always giving us things. Jacque can tell you more  about that than I, because she   d experienced it for more years. But our  Granddad would pick out things to fit us and he didn   t have any idea  about what size we wore. He would just go in a store   he liked to shop,  too   and see a dress and he   d,    That ought to fit Nancy, I   ll take it.     And it would; it always fit. (Laughter)  He just had a good eye for them, huh?  He did. So yes, they both liked to shop and they bought nice things and  we always remembered those and I have many things they bought for  me still. (Laughs)  After some of the interviews I thought that if  someone was  going to  write a book about the Bennetts, maybe it   s Vera that we should write a  book about. She must have been quite a lady.  Oh, yes. She was.  A very special individual.  She was quite a lady. Yes, she was very much an individual in her own  right. But, of course, she was also a wonderful mate for Granddaddy and  as a representative of the university. She was so much involved in all of  that.  Early in her career, when your grandparents met, wasn   t she a school  teacher?  Yes. They were both school     So education was part of her life?  22  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Yes. In fact, she got her master   s degree later. I don   t remember where,  but she got a master   s degree. But to have had a college degree, in that  day and age,  as  a woman was quite an achievement. When she was  young, straight out of high school, going to college. Yes, she was very  well educated.  Talking about your grandfather, Henry G. Bennett, a little bit, what do  you remember? We   ll talk about some other things but when you say,     Grandpa Bennett,    what comes to your mind? What are the first  images? What do you remember the most?  I just remember that he was just such a warm individual. I mean, he was  kind   I just always wanted to go climb up on his lap. That   s what I did.  He was just so kind and interested in what we were doing. He was a  wonderful grandfather. Both my grandparents were what you would  want for grandparents. They were very involved with us personally and  they didn   t let their professional obligations get in the way of their  relationships with their family. The family was number one.  You indicated earlier, Nancy, that when he would come home   of course  a lot of days I   m sure he was out making speeches   he would take time  for the grandkids and spend time with them.  Absolutely. Yes, I remember him sitting out in the lawn chairs. We  loved to play outside and run in the sprinklers on the campus. (Laughter)   There are  some stories that I heard about your granddad. One is, I  heard that he really didn   t need a lot of sleep     I heard that, too.  He often worked late into the night and then would be up early in the  morning. He may work until one or two and be up by five.  I don   t remember him ever going to bed. I don   t ever remember him  getting up or going to bed. He was always there. (Laughter)  Were there other qualities or characteristics that you remember about  your grandfather? Like, one for example, I heard he was really good  with names   he rarely ever forgot a name.  Yes, I remember hearing that, too.  But what are things that you remember about him personally?  Well, I don   t know. He was such a good example. His life was such a  23  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  good example without him actually saying,    Remember this; remember  that.    You just watched how he lived and you knew that was a model for  something you   d want to do. He loved other people. He loved the  students. He wanted everybody to get an education that possibly could  and he would make it possible for them to do that, which I always  thought was such an outstanding character trait. He knew that would  give them an opportunity to succeed. If they wanted to go to school and  were willing to work at it, he was going to make sure they got to do it.  That   s why I just had it inbred in me that I would always finish school. I  remember him saying that you can   t sit in a classroom without learning  something. Even if you   re half asleep, you   re going to learn something  no matter where you are. (Laughter) But be in the class.  Like his wife Vera, he was a strong Christian. I think he taught the  men   s Sunday school class and Vera taught the women   s class at the  First Baptist Church.  Right. Right. They were there always.  Did you see him, in terms of by example, did he read the Bible? Did you  see him in prayer?  Yes. And he always said grace at dinner and lunch and breakfast  wherever we were. He practiced his faith. He didn   t just go to church on  Sundays.  You were alluding to the fact that he sort of led by example in his life but  did he ever give you any practical advice or philosophy about how to  live your life or life traits and qualities? Did you ever have any  conversations about those?  Not that I remember. I don   t remember any particular conversations like  that. But I took a lot from his life and the way he led it. But it wasn   t so  much in direct talking as it was in just looking. (Laughs)  What ways did he influence your life, looking back? You might not have  even known at the time but thinking back on it, how did he influence  your life?  The importance of education is probably the thing I learned the most. I  was very proud of having that as a heritage. I still am. I still am very  proud about my grandparents. I always find myself telling people about  them even now. There   s fewer and fewer people now who know them or  knew them. They just set such a good example. Of course, when you   re  living that, you assume everybody   s like that. I mean, this is my family,  I assume your family is the same as mine. Not until later did I realize  24  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  what an outstanding family I did have. Not just because he was president  of OSU but because he just was such an influential man in so many  people   s lives. I am very proud of that.  Maybe a little different way of asking that, before long, because you  indicated there   s going to be very few people who remember him  personally who are alive, what would you hope that future generations  would remember about him? Is there anything you could tell us that  would help us, say,    I hope people remember these things about him.     Well, I think the Point Four Program was probably the epitome of his  philosophy, which was helping other people. But also helping other  people to help themselves, which I think is so important today as it is  every bit as important as it was then. I wish that he could have carried  that Point Four program further. But that   s the type of thing he did all of  his life, was to teach people how to help themselves. Same with  education   that   s why he wanted everyone to have the opportunity, so  that everyone could make the best of what they had. I think that   s the  most important thing, and his kindness and generosity and all-inclusiveness.  Never being a snob or anything like that. Everybody was  his friend   their friend, both of them. I think that   s a wonderful  example.  We all know how special he was. Of course, president of the university,  like you said, director of the U.S. Point Four Program. Growing up, was  he just Granddad to you?  He was mostly just Granddad to me but I had some teachers in high  school who really admired my grandfather so they would bring it up  occasionally in my classes and things. They just thought it was  wonderful, everything he did. I realized he was special, but to me, he  was just Granddaddy. (Laughs)  I think Lela told the story about this gentleman after Dr. Bennett died, he  said  he was  one of the three greatest people that ever lived. He said,     Jesus Christ, FDR  Franklin Delano Roosevelt  and Henry Bennett.     Yes, that   s what Lela was telling me last night. I thought,    That   s right.     That   s pretty strong.  That really is pretty strong.  You were talking about his philosophy of the Point Four and  international education systems. You were saying that was an outgrowth  of his belief in the value of education and teaching people to help  25  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  themselves.  Right. As well as his specific knowledge about agriculture. He was so  influential in that area. To me, that philosophy holds true today. If we,  instead of spending so much money on just giving money to people and  giving food to people, they   ve got to learn how to do it themselves and  giving them the tools to do that is what his philosophy was   to show  them how and the beginnings of the equipment they need to do it, so that  they can sustain their life. We don   t tend to do that. We tend to just give  away, give away. That doesn   t help people help themselves.  You made a good point, Nancy, about his agricultural background,  would be president of a land-grant agricultural university. Did that help  make him more effective, do you think, in his role as director of Point  Four?  Absolutely. Yes, I think he was very knowledgeable in that area and I  think that   s probably the reason he was chosen to do that. Because every  land has its potential and that was something he was really good at  identifying, the potential of the land to grow things and he knew how to  help people learn how to do that. So yes, I   m more and more interested  in the Point Four Program, the more I think about it and read about it. I  think that that   s something that would be just as applicable today as it  was then.  Nancy, were you aware of his travels abroad in those two years? I  understand that Vera went on most of the trips with him.  I   m not sure of that. Jacque was saying that she didn   t think  Grandmother normally did travel with him. I know of course she did go  to South America with him, earlier that year in 1951 when he first  started the Point Four traveling. I think there was one trip before that and  I don   t think she went. Jacque will be more aware of that. They did  travel some, but usually for business purposes. And of course, that last  trip   she had always wanted to go to the Holy Land. They had both.  That was included in this trip that they took. Fortunately they had been  there before their plane crashed. I was so glad that they had, and I was so  glad that she was with him when all this took place, that they were  together.  Together until the end. How did you first learn about the crash and their  death?  My recollection was that   I don   t know for sure how my dad found out  about it but it was early in the morning and he got a phone call about it. I  just remember I really couldn   t believe it for a long time. It   s just one of  26  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  those things, it   s just so intangible. You can   t really believe it happened.  And it didn   t feel real to me until we had the memorial service and the  burial.  The service was in Gallagher Hall?  Yes.  You attended the service?  Yes. Then we went on to Durant where they were buried. That was the  finality of it. That finally hit me that they were really gone. But it was  just an indescribable experience, finding out that it happened and how it  happened.  How did your dad react to it?  He was terrible depressed for a very long time after that. For a year  probably, at least. I felt I could see it. It was just   because they were  such a close family. Of course, anybody would be depressed over losing  both their parents like that. It was very hard on him.  Nancy, we were talking about the memorial service there in Gallagher  Hall. What do you remember about the service?  Lots of people. (Laughs) I don   t remember. I think I was kind of in a  fog. I just remember all the family and all the people and the speakers. It  was quite a wonderful tribute to them. I think maybe I realized how  important they were to so many people. It wasn   t just as grandparents  that they really had such significant lives and both had such significant  lives and had affected so many people. They were really   it was just  kind of hard to believe that they wouldn   t be there.  From your perspective, Nancy, with your personal knowledge about Dr.  Bennett, what do you feel is his legacy that he left as an educator and a  statesman?  Well, I don   t know. I   m not real good at analyzing that. I just feel, like I  said, his work in agriculture and the Point Four Program has been very  significant and I wish that it were still and I wish that it had been carried  on. I think he was a man before his time. His ideas were almost  premature and yet they were lasting. But it took someone like him to  carry them out to fruition and that no one else picked up the ball at that  point. His influence will be recognized, I think, for many years and for a  long, long time the imprint he made on the whole idea of helping people  in the area of agriculture.  27  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Nancy, can I ask you to maybe speculate a little bit, of course he was  just there a couple years in the position, unfortunately,  due to his   untimely death, but the program that he was part of is the forerunner  now of USAID     It is?  It is. The direct forerunner of the program, which some say has gone in  a different direction from what Dr. Bennett would have taken it. You  indicated earlier in the conversation about perhaps more giveaways as  opposed to teaching and helping people with agriculture and learning  how to invest in building infrastructure, et cetera.  What are  your  thoughts about that? Do you think if Dr. Bennett had been able to  continue and if his legacy had been carried on, would our foreign  relations and international tactical systems program, USAID, be  different today?  I would think so.  In what ways do you think it would be different?  I don   t know, because I very honestly don   t know that much about the  program today, but I would just say that he had a good idea and he was  able to carry forward with it and I wish they had continued that. But I  don   t know now what they   re doing in that area, so I don   t have an  opinion on that.  From your early memories and what you learned later about your  grandfather, what stands out in your mind about him as a person, as a  public figure   what values guided him and influenced him as a family  man and as a public official?  I don   t know. I think it was just his character.  His character would be   ?  Honesty. I know he didn   t want to get involved in politics because he  felt that it brought out the worst in people and he did not want to go that  route. I   m glad he didn   t because I know that that   s happened in so many  instances. He would not compromise his integrity. I think he had a very  good point, even though he would have been very good at representing  our state or our country in any political office. He was not interested in  that lifestyle, although he was very good friends with many politicians  such as Bob Kerr and many others. I felt like those people were very  honest, but then again the political environment has always been     tending to be   you have to compromise your values and he was not  28  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  going to do that. I admire him for that.  Nancy, you said earlier you still feel like probably the source of his well  spring of his personal strength was his religious faith.  Yes. I think both of them, that the faith was the basis of all of their  behavior and all of their values. That was where it started and that   s  where it ended.  Do you have some favorite Henry G. Bennett stories? Just family stories,  your personal memories, memories and stories that   I   m sure there   s  sort of a collective of Henry G. Bennett stories circulating amongst the  family. Are there some favorite stories you have?  Well, not really. I just remember it being so pleasurable to be with them.  They always made everything fun. I don   t remember any unhappy  incidents that involved my grandparents. It was always fun. We could  always do what we wanted to, play   We weren   t bad kids and it may  have been they were a little stricter as more grandchildren came along.  They probably were. When Jacque and I were the only two, we kind of  had free rein. (Laughter) But they did things with us that were fun, too. I  remember going to the supermarket with my granddad. There was a  market down on Sixth   or was it Washington? I get that mixed up.  There was an open market down there   I mean, like a store that had a  sliding door maybe, that they closed up at night but when we went it was  always open. I would go down there with Granddaddy to get  watermelon. He loved watermelon. And the way he picked one out was  he would thump his boot (he always wore high top boots) and then he   d  thump the watermelon. There was some connection between how it  sounded. (Laughter) I always thought that was interesting. I never was  able to pick out a watermelon. I guess I didn   t have the right boot.  (Laughter)  So he did a double move, a boot thump and a finger thump.  And then the watermelon thump. (Laughs) That was one of the fun  things we did. I don   t know, we just had a good time. They would take  us places and do things we liked to do. We had a lot of fun with them  and had a wonderful relationship with them.  Other family members that I   ve talked to, Nancy, shared a sense of  specialness about being part of the Bennett family and about the legacy  that Dr. Bennett left. Do you share that feeling and why is that so?  I don   t know, I definitely feel that. I feel that being a part of that family  is very special and I   m always proud to   any time the occasion comes  29  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  up, I always have to tell them about my grandparents. Most people,  especially people that have ever been to OSU, know the name. If  nothing else, they know Bennett Hall. (Laughs) I mean, I   m very proud  of him and I   m very proud of my heritage and I tell everybody that I can.  My husband is also always going around shouting about my  grandparents. He just thinks it   s wonderful. (Laughs) He   s from  Michigan. He went to Michigan State, which is also a land-grant  university, so he knows about that kind of thing. He   s very proud about  my family. Sometimes I think I take it for granted but he reminds me  how special they are. And they are.  I   m trying to think how many years ago  it was  when they put the statue  of President Bennett up.  I can   t remember either when that was but I was there and my mother  was there. My dad had passed away by then and he passed away in    84.  She passed away in    91 so it was some time in between. Yes, I was there  at that time. I always tell my friends   I have a lot of friends who are  younger than I who have children maybe thinking of going to OSU and  they   ll go take the tours and I   ll say,    Now be sure, remember there   s a  statue of my grandfather right there.    (Laughs) They come back and say,     You   re really important.    (Laughter) I say,    Well, he was a pretty  important man at OSU.     Is it appropriate they have him right there, of course east of Whitehurst  Hall where the president   s office is, but they have him looking out over  the library mall. The library is to the left and the Union is to the right,  which were the centerpieces or probably the crown jewels of his twenty-five  year plan, and you have right behind you, as a matter of fact, on the  wall, a framed picture of his first original twenty-five year plan. What do  you think he sees if he could look out there from that position today,  what would he say? What would he think?  He   d be thrilled. He   d love it. That library was his real favorite dream. I  remember I was there when they dedicated the library. I lived in  Stillwater at the time, I had a little baby girl and President Truman came  to the dedication. I remember that because the library wasn   t   I don   t  know if it was started when they died. I don   t know when it was started;  you may know that.  They laid the foundation for it and started some work but it was in the  very early stages     Before they died? But he didn   t get to see it finished. He would have  been proud, I   m sure.  30  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Gill  Noxon  Nancy, is there anything we   ve left out? Part of our conversation was  about trying to remember Dr. Bennett and certainly Vera, his wife, as  well   for people to listen to and get to know him twenty, thirty, fifty  years from now. What else would we want to capture about him that we  haven   t covered? Are there any comments you would want to make that  we haven   t touched on?  I   ll probably think of it tomorrow. (Laughter) Call me back. But I think  we   ve pretty well covered   we covered a lot of territory and a lot about  their lives and how they affected me. I just don   t know of anything else  that I would bring out.  Nancy, personally, have you stayed connected to Oklahoma State  University through the years?  Not really. I haven   t. I   ve never been active in the Alumni Association. I  really haven   t. I wish I had. I   m always amazed when I go there at  what   s going on on the campus   the development. In fact, David  Bennett showed me around some on the campus this last year when we  went up for a football game in a very brief time. I   m just amazed when I  see it. There are a lot of nice tributes to my grandfather there that I   d like  to know more about. Since I still work, one day when I retire, maybe I   ll  spend more time there. (Laughs)  Don   t wait too long.  I know, I know.  Thank you very much again. I appreciate visiting with you.  Thank you, Jerry.  -------  -------   
