 Finchum Today is June 2, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University, and today, I am in Marietta, Oklahoma, which is in Love County. This is part of our Cowboys in Every County project, and I   m here with Bruce Brooks. Thank you for having me today. Before we get started, what years were you at OSU?  Brooks Tanya, I started in OSU in 1966 and graduated in 1970.  Finchum Okay, so let   s back up then, and begin with having you tell me when and where you were born.  Brooks I was born in a small town in southwest Iowa, in Shenandoah, Iowa, the name of the city, in 1948. I was born in 1948. My parents farmed just southwest of town, and so I was raised on a farm. A little town that I grew up in had five hundred people, so it was a very small town. Ironically, I   m going to celebrate my fiftieth, I guess, anniversary of graduating from high school this coming summer. I   m going to go back for the reunion, and it   ll be the fiftieth reunion, where I grew up and the high school that I went to.  Finchum And about how many kids were in your class?  Brooks My senior year, I think we had forty-eight people, so at that time, we had a pretty good-sized school. I hate to say it, but they tell me that they   re going to shut that school down. In fact, this will be the last year that they have the school up and running. They   re going to shut it down and consolidate our little community with some other schools. Ironically, that   s kind of the way farming and agriculture is going. These small towns are just drying up. People are moving to the bigger cities, and more and more people are getting out of farming, and so the families are smaller.  Don   t have as many families in the county as they once did, and the folks that are farming can farm so many more acres today than they could back fifty years ago. Consequently, it   s sad to say, but the little school I grew up in, which is really the heart of our community, is going to shut the doors 5  this   in fact, this past year was the last year for it. Kind of sad, but that   s just the way times are these days.  Finchum Was it grades one through twelve, all in one building?  Brooks Yes, it was. Yeah, we had one building, and of course, they kept adding on to that building until the population started going the other way. Yeah, it was one through twelve. We all went right there the whole time.  Finchum How would you get there?  Brooks Early on, would ride a bus. The bus would come to the house, and it   d be about an hour   s drive on the bus, and it   d drop us off there, and then, of course, bring us home at night. Then later on, I think when I turned fifteen, they allowed us to drive back and forth with a driver   s permit. Then when I turned sixteen, I had my own car, and I could drive back and forth at that time. I   m sure my parents appreciated that. (Laughter)  Finchum Well with having to ride the school bus, did that prohibit you from participating in afterschool activities like sports?  Brooks No, it didn   t. I played football, played baseball, played basketball, and I was in FFA. I wasn   t very good at any of the sports, but I enjoyed agriculture very much. Like I said, raised on a farm, and loved driving a tractor, and we had cattle also, and had raised show cattle for my 4-H and FFA projects.  Finchum Okay, and did you have brothers and sisters?  Brooks I did have. I   ve got a brother that   s still there on the farm, farming the hundred-plus-year farm that my descendants started well over a hundred years ago. Him and his two sons, they farm quite a few acres up there now. Then I   ve also got a sister and her husband that are still back there, and they farmed just up to a couple, three years ago, and then they retired.  Finchum Where were you in the order?  Brooks I was right in the middle, had an older sister and a younger brother.  Finchum Did you have certain chores you were responsible for?  Brooks Oh, we had a lot of chores on the farm, of course. Back when I was growing up, we   d milk cows, we had sheep, we had cattle. Of course, we had to do all the chores, feeding and taking care of the livestock, and then of course, helped Dad with the farming projects.  Finchum Some of that you did before you got on the bus for school? 6  Brooks (Laughs) No, my parents weren   t that tough on us. I think we caught the bus about seven o   clock in the morning, but we were required to do the chores in the evening for sure.  Finchum Well, describe the house that you grew up in.  Brooks It was a farm house, just a typical farm house, nothing elaborate at all. Like I say, there were three of us, and as I do recall, there was two bedrooms. I think my sister, they converted kind of a living area downstairs for my sister to live in, and I shared one of the upstairs bedrooms with my brother. The times have just completely changed. I mean, we didn   t have cupboards. We kind of hung our clothes on just whatever we could. Then my parents, they stayed in the bedroom opposite from ours, and then downstairs, we just had one living area, and then a kitchen. Then later on, my parents added on to the house and added a bigger living area, but we still just ended up with two bedrooms. (Laughs)  My sister graduated by that time, and I was still sharing a bed with my brother, and I guess we made it work somehow. Like I say, southwest Iowa it was cold as can be in the wintertime. We didn   t have any heat upstairs, and I can remember taking my clothes off downstairs, and racing upstairs, and crawling in that bed, and covering up, trying to get as many covers on me as I could. (Laughs) Looking back at it now, it seems like a kind of medieval way to live, but it   s just the way we all did it, and everybody made it fine, you know.  Finchum Did you have indoor plumbing at least? (Laughs)  Brooks Oh, we did have indoor plumbing, and I had a wonderful set of parents. My father and mother were very caring, and they raised us right. They raised us to work, and have responsibilities, and to be accountable, and just couldn   t ask for better parents.  Finchum What were their names?  Brooks My dad was Harold, and my mother was Darlene. Yeah, they never did have anybody in their family go to college, so for me to go to OSU, it was a pretty big deal for us.  Finchum And out-of-state too   Brooks Yeah, and out-of-state, yeah.  Finchum How did OSU even become a possibility?  7  Brooks Well, it   s ironic to get me to OSU. I had no idea, no inkling of going to a major university at all. I was pretty much a C and B student all the way through high school, and mostly a C student. I was a terrible student in high school. I just didn   t apply myself. I was more interested in farming, and getting back to the farm, and taking care of the animals, and that sort of thing. Anyhow, after I graduated from high school, that summer I took some steers over to the county fair in Sidney, Iowa, and keep in mind, this was in late July, almost the first of August. School started end of August, early September, and again, at that time, I had no idea where I was going. It was right in the heat of the Vietnam War, and I knew if I didn   t go to school, or didn   t go to college, or a tech school or something, that I   d be off to Vietnam, and I really wasn   t wanting to do that very bad.  I ran into a friend of mine, his name was Jim Shirley from Sidney, Iowa, who was going to OSU. He was on the judging team, animal science major at Stillwater at that time. He talked to me, and he asked me what I was going to do. I told him I didn   t know, and he said,    Well, why don   t you apply at OSU? You   ll love it down there.    I said    Oh, they won   t take me. I   m just an average student.    I mean, why would they take me? I   ve never applied myself, never done anything special at all, and he said,    Well, you might just write down there, and try to get an application form, and see what happens.    Next week, I went into my high school, and got my grades, and talked it over with the principal, and he gave me everything that I needed, and I sent it down there.  Just on a whim, didn   t think that they   d accept me because I hadn   t even thought about Iowa State or the University of Iowa, hadn   t even thought about a major college. In fact, at that time, I was thinking more towards a junior college, or a voc-tech school. About a week   s time, I get this letter back from OSU saying that I had been accepted to go to OSU and that orientation would be in two days. Here I am, up in Iowa, cultivating corn, and I get this notice, so I   ve got to make a decision. What am I going to do? Am I going to go off to Stillwater? Am I going to stay here? What am I going to do? Well, my parents, they were encouraging to me. They said,    Why don   t you go down there, and just see what it   s like, and see how you like it. Kind of get your bearings straight down there, and see what   s there to offer.     So I jumped in my car, had a 1965 GTO. My brother-in-law jumped in there with me. We had no idea where Stillwater, Oklahoma, was, didn   t even know where Oklahoma was. We had to get a map out, and of course, didn   t have GPS back then. Anyhow, make a long story short, we jumped in the car, and came on down the road, and came down the Kansas turnpike, and made it to Stillwater, and I absolutely fell in love with the campus. I   d never seen anything like that, coming from a small town. It just blew me away. Of course, went to orientation then, and they talked about the pros and cons, 8  and all this and that. When I left orientation, I just told my parents,    This is where I   d like to go to school,    and it   s a weird story to begin with, but it   s all worked out fine. It   s really worked out great, and I   m tickled to death that I took the step, coming down to Stillwater and going to school down here. I   ve been in Oklahoma ever since, never did go back.  Finchum Well, how did you finance your   .  Brooks My parents were   at the time, I felt like we were rich, and we weren   t at all, but we just had that kind of upbringing. We didn   t know we were poor, we didn   t know we were middle class. We always had plenty of food, had a garden, and at that time, my mother had gone to work in the bank, there in our little town. She was drawing a little bit of an income to offset some expenses, and of course, my dad was still farming. He got a little bigger as far as farming land, got some more acres to farm, and this and that. They just found a way to take care of it. They took care of my education, and at that time, out-of-state education was   tuition rather, out-of-state tuition was   oh, it was   gosh, I can   t remember now, but it seemed like, and this is cheap in regards to now, but I think it was maybe thirty dollars an hour, and in-state was like fifteen to eighteen dollars. There was a significant difference in out-of-state, so it cost. I know it cost them, I know it was a hindrance to them, financially, but I never heard them complain a bit about it.  Finchum You didn   t have to work?  Brooks I didn   t work, no. I did take a couple jobs. I worked at the beef farm for a semester, and at the steer shed a semester, and kind of did some odd jobs around Stillwater. My parents educated myself and my sister, and helped my brother get in farming, so they were very, very instrumental in all three of us, getting on with our lives.  Finchum How often would you go home?  Brooks Well, when I was in college, I   d go home on holidays, pretty much. I was on the OSU livestock judging team my junior and senior years. Sometimes we   d be out judging on a particular holiday, like Christmas, New Year   s, that sort of, so I couldn   t go home then. I   d go home maybe, three to four times a year, until my junior and senior year, then probably a couple of times. Then in the summertime   see, my freshman year, I worked on a ranch, up south of Topeka, Kansas, a pure-bred shorthorn ranch, and made fifty dollars a week. Between my sophomore and junior year, I worked on a ranch up in north-central Kansas, on a registered Hereford outfit, and I think I made seventy-five dollars a week at that particular ranch. Worked in the summertime, and then when I wasn   t working, I   d go home and help Dad with the farm, that sort of thing. 9  Finchum Well you mentioned you drove a tractor early. Do you remember how old you were the first time you got on one to drive?  Brooks Yeah, it would have been, I know it was before I entered high school, probably in junior high. Yeah, I remember driving a John Deere A that had a hand clutch. I don   t know how old I was then, but I wasn   t old enough to be on that tractor, guarantee you that. I was pulling through a gate, and I forgot I was supposed to pull back on that hand clutch, and I was on the brakes with both feet, and the tractor just kept going and went right through a fence. (Laughs) I do remember that, that was when I was pretty young. It was probably about sixth, seventh grade I would imagine.  Finchum Anybody watching when you were doing that? (Laughs)  Brooks Oh, Dad was, yeah. He wasn   t very happy about it either. (Laughter)  Finchum I   ve heard it referred to as    Poppin    Johnnies,    right?  Brooks Yeah, that   s right.    Poppin    Johnnies,    the old A Model tractors, yeah.  Finchum Well, when you came into Stillwater, where did you live? Did you live on campus?  Brooks Yeah, I lived in Bennett Hall the first semester, and then I pledged AGRs the second semester, Alpha Gamma Rho. I lived in the house my sophomore year, and then half a semester my junior year, and then moved out into a   a friend of mine had a trailer house south of town. He was in vet school, so I shared the trailer house with him, and then my senior year, I lived in an apartment there in Stillwater.  Finchum Did you have a favorite professor, or two?  Brooks I enjoyed all the animal science professors for sure. Dr. Totusek, of course, was probably right at the top of the list. My judging team coach, Dr. Don Pinney, passed away a few years ago. I thought the world of him. He was from the Midwest, he was from Illinois, so we could kind of relate a little bit, but he was a good instructor. Mr. Walters that taught meats courses, carcass courses, that sort of thing, he was very interesting. There was a lot of very interesting professors back in the day.  Finchum Did your Cs turn into Bs and As?  Brooks They did  I knew I was raised   again, this is how I was raised is to be responsible. I knew my parents, this wasn   t easy for them, to educate me, to send me down to Stillwater. I applied myself for the first time in my life. I 10  applied myself, and I ended up after four years, graduated in four years, with, I think, a 3.2. I had never taken chemistry, I just   in high school. I think I had one semester of algebra before I came to OSU. Like I say, I was in for a rude awakening, especially with chemistry, and algebra, and stuff like that I hadn   t been taught in high school.  Finchum Any classes you come close to not passing?  Brooks (Laughs) Yeah, microbiology. That was pretty tough on me, yeah. I think I slide by with a low C. Yeah, I made it through it, but I really enjoyed my animal science courses. That   s why I was down there, and I really enjoyed my judging courses, anything to do with livestock.  Finchum Well, back in high school, when you were thinking career, you weren   t really thinking what that might be?  Brooks Had no idea, I just had no idea. I   m sure nowadays people are more up with what they want to do     Finchum Not necessarily. (Laughs)  Brooks    but when I was in high school, I just looked to get through each class, you know. (Laughs) Move onto the next semester, and I really   the two things that really had me kind of going their way was junior college in Clarinda, Iowa, which wouldn   t have accounted for anything, been just like an extension of high school. Then a diesel mechanic school up in Council Bluffs, Iowa. When I tell people that now, about the diesel mechanic school, nobody can believe that because I   m about as mechanically-inclined as   I   m just not mechanically-inclined for sure. (Laughs) I don   t like getting grease on my hands or fingers either, so if I can stay away from tools and stuff like that, I   m better off.  Finchum So your dad primarily raised corn and     Brooks Corn and soybeans.  Finchum    and cattle? Where would he have to take that to market?  Brooks Back then, they had a terminal market in Omaha, and also St. Joe  St. Joseph, Missouri , and where I was raised was right in between those two cities. Sometimes, we   d take it to Omaha, and sometimes we   d take it to St. Joe.  Finchum What would you do for fun, when you weren   t working so hard?  11  Brooks Oh, we always went out on the weekends. A lot of times when I got to be a junior or senior, we   d go out some during the week too. It predominantly centered around girls. We   d run to Shenandoah, and go to movies, or go to dances. There was always a good dance up at Red Oak, Iowa, and we   d always go up there on the weekends, and on Sundays we   d go to movies. That was pretty much it.  Finchum Well, on weekends when you were younger, would your parents take you into the town for like Saturday night or something?  Brooks Yeah, and that   s how things are so much different today than what they were back then. I can remember our biggest town that was around us was Shenandoah. I went to school in a little town called Farragut, but Shenandoah probably was three times as big as Farragut, and they had a Main Street. On Saturday night, that main street, it   d be filled with cars. The families would come to town, and they   d shop, and they   d go to movies, and do everything. I know this little town Marietta was the same way because I see pictures of back in the   50s,   60s, and   70s, and they had drugstores, where you   d go in, and get a soda or a malt or something, you know.  Now, I know it   s not like that. Families don   t come in on the weekend, they   re mobile, they   re going all the time. Anyhow, yeah, my parents would take me in, and let me walk the streets with me friends and buddies. We had county fairs. We had a nice rodeo at Sidney, Iowa. I think it was the largest outdoor rodeo in the United States, and it was big time. When I was in 4-H, we would   we had a concession stand there as a money-making venture for our 4-H club. We   d work in that concession stand, and go to the rodeos and the carnivals, and we   d take our girlfriends to the carnivals, and this and that. It was a great time, great area to grow up in.  Finchum You would get paid for some of your chores, or your parents would just give you an allowance?  Brooks They would give us an allowance, yeah. I guess it was enough to get by. It wasn   t much, but back in those days, I forget what you could buy a gallon of gas with, but it was probably twenty, thirty cents a gallon.  Finchum I can remember fifty cents.  Brooks Can you? There you go. Yeah, time. I guess inflation has just run wild.  Finchum And carnival rides were ten cents. I can remember that. There   s one today here in town.  Brooks Yeah, we   ve got   they call it Frontier Days, and bless their hearts, seems like every year when they have Frontier Days, it rains. They kind of forecast 12  for it to be better this weekend, hopefully it will be. Looks like they   ve got some really nice rides set up there, and they   ll have a parade, and there will be a bunch of riders on horseback come into town. It   s a big deal for the local people here, and it   ll bring a lot of people to town, especially if the weather will straighten out. They   ll have a dance, street dance, and that   s another thing. We had a lot of dances when I was young growing up. People were just learning how to dance, I guess. (Laughs) It was just a few years after Elvis made his impression, I think.  Finchum So more than just square dancing?  Brooks Yeah, that   s right.  Finchum Just a little bit more. (Laughs) Well, when you came to OSU, did you continue to do dances?  Brooks Oh, I always enjoyed dancing. Yeah, our fraternity house would have dances. Then some different people would put on dances, there in Stillwater, and we   d partake in them, yeah.  Finchum So you don   t have two left feet?  Brooks Well, I probably do, but I didn   t think so at the time. (Laughs) Yeah.  Finchum Well, do you remember what all you packed in your car to come, how many suitcases?  Brooks I do. I remember it like it was yesterday. I had one of these plastic laundry  baskets    what do they call it, just a plastic laundry container, and that   s all I had. I don   t think I even had a suitcase. Yeah, I think I had a couple pairs of jeans, and a couple pairs of shirts, maybe a pair of slacks, and shoes. I did not have any boots. I did not have any boots. I don   t think I bought my first pair of cowboy boots until, maybe I was a junior in college. I was so envious of all the Okies and Texas students that wore cowboy boots and Wranglers. Yeah, I just I thought that was the coolest thing there ever was, but it wasn   t quite in my budget at the time.  Finchum Even in the   60s and   70s?  Brooks Yeah. Like I say, I think I was a junior before   I had a fraternity brother that loaned me his boots. We both wore the same size, and he let me wear his to certain functions where boots were kind of required.  Finchum And you still wear them? (Laughs)  Brooks That   s all I wear anymore, yeah. 13  Finchum I can ask how many pairs you have in your closet.  Brooks Oh, I   d hate to tell you.  Finchum (Laughs) More than a dozen.  Brooks No, I don   t have that many, but I   ve got more than I need. (Laughs)  Finchum A choice, anyway. Well, for graduation, did your parents come down?  Brooks They did, yeah, they did. My mother and father, my brother-in-law, my sister, my brother came, and my grandmother came. Yeah, and it was a neat experience.  Finchum Had they been to campus before?  Brooks My dad and mother had been down a time or two. We   d go to football games, basketball games, and functions there at the fraternity house.  Finchum You were in Alpha Gamma Rho, and you were in livestock judging. Any other activities?  Brooks Block and Bridle, which is a kind of agriculture social fraternity. I was a member of Block and Bridle. Alpha Zeta, I don   t know if they have it now, but that was, I think, you had to carry a certain grade point to be in Alpha Zeta.  Finchum Spend any time in the Library?  Brooks I did spend some time there, yeah. Of course, when you join a fraternity, you   ve got all those kids that are in the same class and what not. We   d spend a lot of time together, going over questions and studying our material, that sort of thing. When I wasn   t living in the house, I spent more time over there, I sure did.  Finchum When you were living in the house, did you help with Homecoming decorations?  Brooks Back then, it wasn   t quite as serious as it   s become, and I don   t ever recall helping out on Homecoming celebration. I may not have been at the house at a certain time, or maybe they waited. Maybe all that started, the decorations and that might have started after I left, but I don   t ever recall.  Finchum Well, it might have been since the war was going, the Vietnam War, maybe they toned it down. 14  Brooks They might have, they sure might have, yeah. That was a very turbulent time, very turbulent time.  Finchum Any memories about campus regarding that?  Brooks Well, I do remember the protesters of the war. I remember that, and about that same time, the hippie generation was coming on. Of course, us aggies, we   d all like to be clean-cut, and we   just because they had long hair, we couldn   t agree with them, you know. We just took a stand, but that was the same time, and with Vietnam going on, and all the bombing and everything, it was just a turbulent time. Yeah, on-campus as well as off.  Finchum And you had your own vehicle while you were there...  Brooks I did.  Finchum    so you had some freedom.  Brooks I did. I didn   t have to depend on anybody else to drive me around, so that was good.  Finchum Who did what little laundry you had?  Brooks What little laundry I did, I took care of it myself, and it didn   t take long. Go to the laundry mats, and put your quarters in, and yeah, somehow I survived that. Then later on, I got addicted to having starch in my shirts. I started taking my clothes to the cleaners, and somehow, I don   t know how I was able to afford it, but I   d get my shirts and jeans starched.  Finchum While you were still in college?  Brooks Yeah, I was in college. Junior and senior year.  Finchum Your jeans had to have that starch.  Brooks Oh, I had to have that starch down there. Still do, still have to have that starch, yeah.  Finchum That   s not something that your mother did?  Brooks Well, she did, but she did it with the iron. My mother, she spoiled the heck out of me, but every Saturday night, she   d take my shirt and jeans, and she   d spray on that starch, and iron it in. She had me looking good come Saturday night. (Laughs)  15  Finchum Did she have a washing machine?  Brooks Oh, yeah   Finchum Was it from Maytag, typical Maytag for that time?  Brooks Yeah, sure. Had a washing machine, and I believe, also a dryer.  Finchum Not a clothesline?  Brooks Well, she did the clothesline thing for several years, I know, but I think by the time I become a senior in high school, she got a dryer, yeah.  Finchum Well, did she have chickens?  Brooks We didn   t have chickens.  Finchum So you didn   t have to kill chickens?  Brooks Now I say that. When I was younger, I do remember Dad brought in some chickens, and I do remember having fresh chickens to eat on Sunday. Yeah, fried chicken, gravy.  Finchum But how they got from the barnyard to the table, you didn   t have any part in that? (Laughs)  Brooks I didn   t take any part in that, no. I   d had a hard time with that.  Finchum What was the favorite meal that your mother cooked, your favorite?  Brooks Oh, I guess meatloaf, fried chicken, anything that was bad for you, taste good for you. Taste good to me anyhow, but she was a great cook. She could bake the greatest pies there ever was, and I loved eating sweet corn out of the fields. We raised a lot of that, so we always had corn. Mashed potatoes and gravy, but she was really good at cooking meatloaf, fried chicken.  Finchum Were both of them born in Iowa?  Brooks Yeah. In fact, my dad was raised on that same farm.  Finchum Oh, that   s right. You said that it had been in the family. Well, where had your grandparents come from, or great-grandparents, I guess, too?  Brooks They were all southwest Iowa folks, yeah. They came over, course, I guess migrated in from the East Coast somewhere. I know my grandparents and my great-grandparents had all settled in the southwest Iowa area. 16  Finchum Was church an important part?  Brooks Church was a very important part to me in growing up, through my grade school and high school years. I   m a Methodist, they had a nice Methodist church there, and the area that I was raised in was predominately Methodist. We went to church, Sunday school, every Sunday, yeah.  Finchum And then Sunday dinner was   .  Brooks That Sunday dinner, we   d eat Sunday dinner, and then go take a nap. (Laughs) Oh, yeah.  Finchum Didn   t have to work, or do chores?  Brooks No. Well, we had some chores to do that evening, but we didn   t work too much on Sundays, no.  Finchum Well did she sew, make your clothes, or   .  Brooks She didn   t make my clothes. I think she made my sister some clothes at times, but we weren   t extravagant. Back then, I don   t think too many people were.  Finchum Did she quilt?  Brooks I don   t   my mother didn   t quilt, I don   t think.  Finchum You mentioned so many covers, so I wondered if they were     Brooks Yeah, well, we   d gather up the covers, I tell you, for sure in the wintertime.  Finchum    but they weren   t quilts she   d made.  Brooks No. I don   t think so. If she did, I wasn   t aware of it.  Finchum What were holidays like?  Brooks Oh, in the wintertime, Christmas, New Year   s and that sort of thing, sometimes you   d get snowed in up there. The roads would get so   you   d have so much snow, the roads were just impassable. You couldn   t get from point A to point B. Sometimes you   d spend days on end just in the house, waiting for them to get the roads opened up to where you could get to town. Holidays were mostly around a table, kitchen table, dining room table, eating nice meals with family members. That was pretty much   we always got together. My grandfather, grandmother on my dad   s side lived just right 17  down the road, a half a mile, and my grandfather and grandmother on my mother   s side lived ten miles away. We were all a very close-knit family, and we   d always get together on holidays.  Finchum Thanksgiving too, I guess?  Brooks Oh, yeah, Thanksgiving, Christmas, birthdays, you name it. Any holiday, we   d be sitting around the table. (Laughs)  Finchum Any musicians or music involved?  Brooks No, nobody. You know what   s funny, I   ve got two grand-daughters right now that live in Guthrie, and they   d been taking violin lessons for, oh my goodness, probably five, six years now, and they   re doing wonderful work. We go to their recitals up there, they just had one, and they   ve got a wonderful teacher up there that knows what she   s doing.  Finchum Well, since you   re talking about grandchildren, we should back up and talk about wife. Who, and where did you meet her?  Brooks I met my wife, Kathy. She was raised on a farm, registered Limousin farm, a cattle farm with Quarter Horses and also chickens, in southwest Missouri, a little town called Pineville, Missouri, and her family raised registered Limousin cattle. By this time, I was with a partner of mine, by the name of Ken Holloway, over in Chattanooga, Oklahoma. We were managing a lot of Limousin sales, and so we would manage their sale, and that   s how I met Kathy, who   s my wife. We got married, and we   ve got two children, two daughters, and I   ve got a son by a previous marriage, and they   re all doing really good.  My son lives in Charleston, and is in   works for Meade Asphalt Company, and he has a son. We   ve got two daughters, Kathy and I do, and they   re both graduates of OSU. They were both Thetas up there, and my son graduated from OU. I didn   t have quite as much influence on him as his mother did. Our daughters both graduated from OSU, and are both currently working, and have worked since graduation for Eli Lilly, a corporation out of Indianapolis, Indiana. They specialize in selling pharmaceutical drugs.  Finchum Did they have a choice?  Brooks Oh, I suppose they would have, but they   d probably had to pay for it themselves. No, we indoctrinated them into OSU over the years. They showed cattle, and they   re very involved in showing cattle in the Junior Cattleman   s program, here in the state of Oklahoma. We had various activities at Stillwater over the years, and there wasn   t any doubt in their minds, or our minds, where they were going to go to college. 18  Finchum They grew up with orange.  Brooks They grew up with orange, you bet they did. Orange and black, yeah. Gosh almighty, it just seems like yesterday, and now they   re both in their late thirties. They had a wonderful experience up there.  Finchum They were involved with FFA and 4-H too?  Brooks FFA and 4-H, here in the county. Yeah.  Finchum And they   re not involved with livestock groups now?  Brooks Well, it   s funny. Both of them now have got their own children, that   d be our grandchildren. They   re just now, the oldest   well, both of them their kids are just starting showing. I   ve got a daughter down here at Collinsville, Texas that   s got a son that   s eight, and this will be his second year showing. My daughter that lives in Guthrie, Kristy, she has got two little girls, and her oldest daughter is nine, and she   s been showing for two years.  Finchum Grandad has some influence there.  Brooks Yeah  Amy that lives in Collinsville, her husband, Levi, he   s also an OSU graduate. He grew up on a ranch out at Freedom, Oklahoma, and he showed cattle. His parents were very involved in the showing of cattle, so they   ve taken really good interest in it with his family. We   ve helped our daughter up at Stillwater, or at Guthrie rather, and we   re all trying to help everybody out, and pursue their dreams. They like showing cattle, and they   ve started out fairly successful, short period of time. I don   t know if that   s good or bad, but they seem like the kids really enjoy it.  Finchum Then once you graduated from OSU, can you just take us through your career from that point?  Brooks Okay, I graduated in 1970, and just soon as I graduated from college, I took a job with the American Shorthorn Association, which is a breed association that was headquartered out of Omaha, Nebraska. I traveled, I was a field rep for them, travelled to Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and New Mexico for them for a year and a half. Then after that, I went to work for the Drovers Journal out at Kansas City, and it was an all-breed livestock publication. In other words, for the shorthorns, it was just one breed, the Shorthorn breed. With Drovers Journal, I was able to travel and sell advertisement to all breeds: Angus, or for Charolais, Shorthorn, Brangus, you name it. I was selling advertising, and also at the time, if you sold enough advertising on a specific sale, when you would go and work, we called it    working the ring,    taking bids at the auctions. 19  You mentioned you went to an auction in Fairview, there was probably a guy in the ring that was taking bids. Well, at purebred sales, you have about anywhere from three to four guys standing on the outside of the ring, taking bids from the crowd, and that   s what I did. I sold advertising, tried to sell enough for where I could go work the sales, take bids, and I did that for another year and a half. Then after that venture, I teamed up with a fellow OSU grad by the name of Ken Holloway. He had just started a company called American Cattle Services  which  primarily managed cattle sales, and primarily Limousin sales, Limousin cattle sales. He   d just gotten started, and we formed a friendship in college.  He was older than me, but I knew him through OSU and through the Shorthorn business. We stayed together as partners in American Cattle Service for a number of years, managing registered sales. Then in the meantime, I always had a fascination for the auction way of going, and I learned how to become an auctioneer. From about the late   70s, early   80s, I started selling registered cattle sales. Not only were we managing them, but I was selling some too along. Then about twelve years ago, an outfit out of Tulsa, Oklahoma, called Williams and Williams Real Estate hired me to sell houses for them at auction. I   m still doing that today as well as my cattle sales.  Finchum How do you learn to be an auctioneer?  Brooks Well, back when I was with the Drovers Journal, I traveled to all these sales. I would work with some of the real top auctioneers of the day, and I just picked up things from them. They have schools that you can go to. I elected not to. I   m a pretty stubborn person, I thought I could do it on my own, and I regret that to this day. I wished I   d gone to school. You can   t get too much education, but anyhow, I went out on my own, and did it on my own, and was able to feed my family.  Finchum Can you give us an example? (Laughter) Your spiel     Brooks My spiel?  Finchum    do something?  Brooks I   m at ten here, now twenty. I   m at twenty dollars, is the bid, now thirty. Now I   m at thirty. Anyone bid forty? I hear forty. Now anyone bid fifty? I hear sixty, seventy. Now eighty. Do I hear ninety? I hear ninety. Now a hundred dollar bill. I   m one-hundred. One-hundred ten, do I hear one-hundred ten? One-hundred ten? One-hundred ten? Sold it your way, one hundred dollars on it. (Auctioneer cadence)  20  Finchum You have to listen quick.  Brooks Yeah, pay attention.  Finchum Do you practice, or you just get up there and go?  Brooks Oh, you   re always   I guess when you   re driving down the road by yourself, you   re always kind of practicing a little bit.  Finchum Any people put up their hands and they not mean to?  Brooks Oh that happens occasionally. Yeah, or they scratch their nose, or they swat a fly, or whatever.  Finchum Yeah, I was instructed to sit on my hands. (Laughter)  Brooks Yeah, right. We   re always looking for some kind of movement out there.  Finchum How often do you do that, once a week?  Brooks From January to about the first of June, you   re gone nearly every week, and you   re having one, or two, or three sales a week, so it   s pretty hectic. In the fall of the year, from first of September through to about Christmas time, you   re once or twice a week.  Finchum Go all over the state?  Brooks All over the country. Yeah, I imagine I   ve sold cattle or real estate in nearly every state in the Union.  Finchum Well, that was a twist that you hadn   t expected?  Brooks Oh yeah, definitely  I mean, it just evolved.  Finchum Any plans to retire from it, from that part?  Brooks They   ll let us know when we retire. They   ll quit calling. You know how that goes.  Finchum Okay. Your voice doesn   t give out?  Brooks Well, anytime you get to be seventy, one, or two, or three, I   ll be sixty-eight tomorrow, so I   ve had a great career. I   m not looking to slow down or retire anytime soon, but if it happens, when it happens, I couldn   t have been happier with the career that I   ve had. I   ve been very fortunate.  21  Finchum Besides being an auctioneer now, do you still run cattle?  Brooks We do. We   ve got land here, and my wife and I are very involved in a ranching operation here, where we live. We used to run cows, we   ve still got some cows, but we primarily run yearling cattle. We buy cattle weighing anywhere from five and a half to 650 pounds. We   ll run them from the first of April through to the first of August, and just put pounds on them. Then those cattle  will  go to the feed lots, feed yards, where they   re fed out to make fat cattle to be harvested. That   s kind of our program right now. Kathy   s also got a farm up in Missouri, and we run cows up there on that farm. We   ve got a guy that kind of looks over those cows for us up there.  Finchum At any given time, you have a thousand or more?  Brooks Oh yeah. No, we run anywhere from eight hundred to a thousand head of yearlings here, and then we   ll have sixty cows. We   re not big into the cows. We found that the yearling deal   s a little easier for us to take care of.  Finchum Not Shorthorn still?  Brooks We don   t run any Shorthorn cattle. Our kids, at certain times, showed some Shorthorn cattle, but the cattle that we get primarily come from southeast Oklahoma   or excuse me, southeast United States, out of Florida, Alabama, Georgia. We like getting those cattle out of there. All those cattle eventually have got to come into this area, where they   re grown from calves to yearlings, and then they   re shipped to the feed yards.  Finchum Do you go out and purchase those, or do you have people who do that?  Brooks Have people that buy them for us, or back when the market was a little better for us as buyers, I liked buying cattle on the video. Superior, I like buying cattle off the video. That   s when you could buy cattle out of Florida, and Georgia, and Alabama, and Kentucky, and get them shipped. They   re kind of worth the money, but this market has been so volatile the last couple of years. It   s pretty tough. I like buying cattle that have been straightened out, that have been weaned, that have had all of their management shots. A lot of those good producers down in the southeast are doing that.  You can buy truckload lots of cattle that have been pre-weaned, had all their vaccination shots, are right and ready to go. Consequently, our death loss would be a lot less. Not taking anything away from sale barns, but the cattle that we get out of sale barns, a lot of times, come from all kinds of management practices and all kinds of different operations. You don   t know if they   ve had their shots or anything, so consequently you   ve got to re-vaccinate and do all that work once you get them in. They   re a little harder 22  to get straightened out than cattle that have already been pre-weaned and have had all their vaccination shots.  Finchum Do you keep track of all of that on a computer?  Brooks Well, I don   t.  Finchum It   s not up here anyway.  Brooks No, I   ve got it here in my filing cabinet.  Finchum It   s still paper  (Laughs)  Brooks I keep records, but I do it all with a pen and pencil, yeah. My wife, she   s kind of the computer lady, and she understands all that. I   ve got my cell phone, and I can check the markets, and check the weather, and that sort of thing. As far as the cattle operation, I   ve got my files right down here, and write it all out on paper.  Finchum Well, has the drought impacted some of this in the last few years?  Brooks Yeah, what   s it been, three, four years ago when it was so terrible down here. Had so many straight days of a hundred degrees or more, and it was terrible. It was absolute   I   ve never seen anything like it in my lifetime. The ground was just parched, scorched. There wasn   t anything green to be had. A lot of cattle producers at that time had to cut back on their inventory, on their cow herds, yearlings or whatever. It didn   t seem to affect us that bad because we were running yearlings.  Seemed like I   d had enough forage here, and grass that had been stockpiled, where I was able to ship them out before it really got bad. I know from here, southwest into Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, it was just a terrible situation. Now, the last two years, it   s been the complete opposite. We just   here it is, June 2, seventy something degrees, and it   s raining sideways outside. The weather pattern   s sure been fickle.  Finchum When did you land in Marietta?  Brooks When I first got out of college, my first wife was from Ringling, Oklahoma. Her father ranched out at Ringling, and had a good operation. I married her, and at that time, I was living in Oklahoma City, and we thought it   d be better to get back to southern Oklahoma and settle down here. Things didn   t work out, but I love southern Oklahoma. I loved it at the time, and I love it today. I decided to stay down here and lived in Ardmore, lived in a little apartment there, trying to get my feet back under me. After I got married to Kathy, we were able to buy a hundred and sixty acres at Springer, 23  Oklahoma, just north of here, north of Ardmore. We built a house up there, and again, at that time, we didn   t hardly have two nickels to rub together.  We were just scraping, trying to make it work, and the oil deal got pretty wild at that time, and a guy came by, and wanted to buy our house and I think nine acres, because he wanted to stack his oil rig. We reared back and priced it way more than we thought he   d give, and doggone if he didn   t buy it  Then we had to scramble, we moved. We bought, I think, five acres, just right across the road from where we still had our land, and built another house there. (Thunder clack) Boy  That was lightning. Then we stayed there probably, maybe four or five years. In the meantime, we bought some other land around Springer. That was kind of our home base, there in Springer.  We bought a hundred and sixty acres north of Ardmore, another hundred and sixty east of Springer. In the meantime, another guy came by, and wanted to buy our house and our land. We priced it and sold out, not knowing where we were going to go next. We knew we wanted land, we enjoyed land. We came to Marietta, down here in Love County, and they had a good school system at the time. Our kids were just starting out in grade school at that time, and we found this land, kind of fit together here. We bought it and settled down here.  Finchum About when was that?  Brooks That would have been   we   ve been here twenty-eight years.  Finchum Oh, okay  Quite awhile.  Brooks We   ve been here twenty-eight years, and yeah   .we started out with, let   s see, five hundred and fifty acres. We   re up to over seventeen hundred acres now, of owned land. It   s been a good move for us.  Finchum Takes a while to check all the fences, doesn   t it?  Brooks Oh, well, it does, and then we   ve got some lease land. We   ve got a ranch that joins us to the north that we   ve had leased for several years and run cattle on it. Anyhow, it   s been a good move for us.  Finchum Well, you   re pretty close to thirty-five  I-35 , so you could get     Brooks Exactly right   Finchum    to Dallas in an hour and a half.  Brooks We love living   we love this location because we   re rural, we   re cattle people, we   re grass people. We   ve got exactly what we want, but if we want to go urban, we   re an hour fifteen to the Dallas/Fort Worth airport and an 24  hour and a half to Oklahoma City. We   ve got the best of both worlds down here, and a great climate. Normally, the winters don   t get that bad. Sometimes we get some ice and snow, but it won   t last long. Of course, we   re still in Oklahoma. We   re Okies. (Laughs)  Finchum Both transplanted-Okies.  Brooks Both transplanted-Okies. That   s right.  Finchum You said she was from Missouri. Don   t envision living anywhere else?  Brooks Don   t envision living anywhere else.  Finchum You consider Marietta home?  Brooks That   s it, yeah. We travel a lot. Kathy travels with me on our, we call them real estate runs, where we go out and sell these houses, or real estate, or whatever we sell at auction. Anyhow, she travels with me, and she does the contracts. She   s traveled with me, I think, for the last nine years, and we   ve seen so much of the United States. Every time we   re in L.A., or Denver, or Chicago, or Dallas and these bigger cities, we just can   t wait to get back to Marietta, where there   s only two street lights. Half the time, one of them doesn   t even work. (Laughter)  Finchum It   s just a different pace.  Brooks It   s a different pace, it really is. We love it down here.  Finchum How often do you go up the road to Stillwater?  Brooks Well, we were up there   we love going to football games when we can. We   ve got season tickets to the OSU Cowboy Football Program. I don   t get a chance to go to hardly any, because most of the time, I have sales on the weekends. Our daughters use the tickets, and anybody that wants to use them, if we   re not using them, can. We   re very loyal to OSU and to their programs, and I wished I could go to more of them because it   s great entertainment up there. They have a lot of cattle shows up there also, and now that the kids are showing again   in fact, my little grandson, who just did turn eight, he had the Supreme Champion Heifer over all breeds there. It   s been about three or four weeks ago.  We were up there for that show, and we all like going   after the show   s over, we like going to Eskimo Joe   s and living large. We really enjoy Stillwater, it   s a wonderful city. You talk to people all over the United States that have gone there, kids that have gone there over the years, they just love their experience there at Stillwater. It   s changed so much in the last fifty 25  years. I can remember I couldn   t wait to get out. I just wasn   t too wild about school, and didn   t have the entertainment venues that they have up there now. Now, you talk to kids from all over the United States, they just love their experiences at Stillwater.  Finchum Did you have a favorite spot, a favorite place to.     Brooks To hang out? Well, it   s funny. The cowboy bar, back then, was Millie   s Bar and Grill, which was directly across the street from Eskimo Joe   s. If you look right across the street, north from Eskimo Joe   s, I forget what they call   the Stables  They call it the Stables now, but back then, it was Millie   s Bar and Grill. It was just a bar with a couple pool tables, but that   s where all the cowboys hung out. On the Strip, there used to be the Coachman. I don   t know, you probably haven   t heard of that, it   s not there any longer. The Getaway, no, the Hideaway. It   s still there, but the main cowboy bar was Millie   s. That   s where all the cowboys hung out.  I   m not saying   I wasn   t a cowboy, don   t get me wrong. I was an Iowegian farm boy, but the true life cowboys, they hung out at Millie   s. I   d stop in there for a beer every once in a while. It   s funny, what is now Eskimo Joe   s, at that time, was a kind of a boarding house. A rooming house, where people would rent rooms upstairs, and the lower level was a buffet, where you could go and eat meals, eat lunch, a cafeteria-type deal. I could remember going through that buffet, I think for two dollars, you could eat all you wanted, and they served the best rolls. That was Eskimo Joe   s back when I was in college, and of course   ..  Finchum The Hideaway had just gotten started right around in that time period.  Brooks Hideaway had just gotten started about that time. That   s right, and they served a good pizza. It was   and they had the Pizza Hut, just kind of   pizzas were just kind of coming into the equation, and I   ll never forget, and I think they advertised this way. The Sonic, there in Stillwater, was one of the first ones, if not the first one in the state of Oklahoma. I can remember, my brother-in-law, when we first made our visit down here, we stopped and ate there at that Sonic. I   d never eaten a hamburger with lettuce, tomato, and mayonnaise on it before. I thought,    Man,    because we had always just got a bun and a hamburger, put ketchup or mustard on it. That was it. All this other stuff, all these other trimmings, that was foreign to me, but course, I   ve learned to live with it.  Finchum Add a little onion, and you   re good. (Laughs)  Brooks That   s right  Yeah. That   s right.  Finchum Well, it   s probably the first pizza you   d had too. 26  Brooks Well, pizzas were just   like I say, just coming on the scene. I remember the little town I grew up in, they made some pizzas up there.  Finchum Looking back at your four years at OSU, do you have a highlight or two?  Brooks Well, I really enjoyed being on the judging team. Livestock judging team, that was a highlight of my career, really was. That and the fact that I hooked up and applied myself, and was able to make the grades to not embarrass my family, who I know was going through some tough times to educate me. I made it out in four years. I didn   t hang around for another year or two, but as far as a highlight, I   d have to say   and meeting the people. Sure, you get an education, but the main education is the friends and the people that you meet while you   re at Stillwater.  They   re friends today, and you see them today. You see many of them not only here in Oklahoma, but in other states. Boy, that   s a big thing to me, is the people that I   ve encountered, and rubbed shoulders with, and got to know   like meeting Ken Holloway,  working at  American Cattle Services with him, working with him. He taught me so much, and without his grubstake and start in life, we wouldn   t be here today. OSU is everything to me, it means a great deal.  Finchum Do you have a closet full of orange?  Brooks Oh, I do  Yeah, I got sweatshirts and hats. It   s funny, my daughter, Amy, that lives in Collinsville, Texas   (sounds like our grandsons are walking in the house right now). Anyhow, they   ll go to shows down there, cattle shows down in Texas. I   ll show up in my orange sweatshirt and orange hat and everything because that   s all I got. They all look at me like,    What in the world? What are you doing down here,    but oh yeah, we bleed orange. We sure do.  Finchum (Laughs) I guess we better wrap up, hadn   t we? I   ll usually end with the question as how do you want to be remembered. When history is written about you, what do you want it to say?  Brooks Well, there won   t be much history written about me, but I   d just like for people to know that I hope I treated them, people, friends, whatever, like I   d like to be treated. Hope that I always was fair in my business transactions, and I always tried to go through life with a smile on my face and enjoy life, you know, because we   re not here very long really, when it all comes down to it. We   re all going to leave with the same amount of real estate. Doesn   t matter if you own ten thousand acres of land or five hundred acres of land, we   re all going to leave with the same amount of real estate. Main thing is I hope that I have treated people with respect, and when I   ve done a job, I 27  hope that people realize that I   ve worked 100 percent for them. I hope that I have been accountable.  Finchum And the handshake means a lot.  Brooks Handshake still means a lot to me, it really does. All these contracts, to me, they   re just a lot of paper.  Finchum Do you have a favorite quote? Some people do and some people don   t. Do you have a favorite one?  Brooks (Laughs) Yeah. I probably   maybe I do, but     Finchum Can   t think of it?  Brooks    I can   t. You   ve kind of caught me off guard.  Finchum (Laughs) Never trouble trouble till trouble troubles you.  Brooks (Laughs) Yeah, that is right.  Finchum Anything else you want to add before we close? Go Pokes?  Brooks Go Pokes  Go Pokes  (Laughter)  Finchum Well, thank you. It   s been a pleasure.  Brooks Yeah. Well, I hope it   s turned out okay for you   Finchum It   s been great.  Brooks Has it?  Finchum It has.  Brooks I hope I haven   t embarrassed myself.  -------  -------   
