 Gill and today is November 10, 2009. I   m visiting with  Trish Houston in her office here in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview  is for the O-STATE Stories Project and the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. Trish, thank you for taking time to visit with us  today.  You   re welcome.  Trish, I want to ask you the questions dealing with the Wentz  Foundation, with the Scholar Development Program at Oklahoma State  University. But can we step back for a little bit and find out more about  Trish Houston?  Oh, okay.  Can you share a little bit about your early family life, where you grew  up, your family?  I grew up in Shidler, Oklahoma. It   s in Osage County. Lived there all  my life until I graduated from high school. My dad was an oil field  worker and my mom was a homemaker. Came to Oklahoma State  University as an honors student and that   s one reason I   ve been so  fascinated by the Wentz Foundation because I was a Wentz Scholar back  when it was work study. Back when I went to school, our idea of a  scholars program was they threw you into what they call 1 X 5 classes,  the most advanced classes, with little or no preparation and we had no  one giving guidance on how to proceed to do higher scholarly work. So  you   re thrown into the deep end of the pool and  either  you sank or  swam. That was not good. (Laughs)  You grew up in cowboy and cowgirl country in Shidler.  5  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  That   s right. That   s right. It was unfenced back then.  Did you live out on a ranch?  No, we lived in town. But I had lots of friends who had places out in the  country and it was just a wonderful place to grow up. It was right on the  edge of the Tall Grass Prairie.  And you had brothers and sisters?  I had two sisters and a brother. Yeah. And no one in the family went to  Oklahoma State except me and now my nephew is a graduate. He   s an  honors graduate out of the Ag College, so we   re trying to form a dynasty  here. There are only two of us. (Laughs)  You   re the first of the dynasty. That   s good.  That   s right. My uncle went to college here. He is an electrical engineer  up in Ponca City. He   s my mother   s youngest brother and so there   s  three of us now.  What influenced you to enroll at Oklahoma State University?  My uncle was a graduate from here and one of my best friends came to  college here, but because I was valedictorian of my high school class,  OSU still does give valedictorian scholarships. That was a big influence  and I had a lot of scholarship money. I came here as a hotel and  restaurant major. I graduated eventually in accounting, and they had a  great program. I had a high end scholarship   it was the biggest  scholarship given out to a freshman that year, at that time. Long time  ago, but anyway, so for a lot of reasons I came to Oklahoma State. I  loved the university. It was the biggest place I   d ever been to when I first  came here, which is really hard to believe. (Laughs)  You talked about starting in Hotel Restaurant Administration  and  changing  to Accounting. Did you have classes under Wilton Anderson?  I certainly did.  The legendary Wilton Anderson.  That   s right.  A little bit of background, I   ve heard and you can confirm this, that he  actually taught the first two survey classes.  6  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  He taught the first two and I had to take   I lived in Germany for a  couple of years and I took it by correspondence. I went to work for a  German CPA and I spent a summer supervising about twenty-five  waitresses and decided this is not my career path. (Laughs) I won   t be  able to do this.  So you started at Oklahoma State and you     I went to live in Europe for a couple of years. My first husband was in  the military. It was the days of Vietnam when I went over there. We  lived in Heilbronn, Germany. I worked for a German CPA, had a great  time. Loved Germany   loved the German people and my first husband  and I got divorced. I came back to go to school. I was always very  proficient in math, so I decided I need to have a career path that was  going to pay well. I went to the library at Oklahoma State. I looked up  the pay grades for engineering, accounting, and I picked accounting  because at that time, it was paying quite a bit more than engineering for  women. I was the only female in my undergraduate class at the time  which was odd because the majority of CPAs are female.  Could you share a little bit about your undergraduate experiences as a  student   academically also? Leadership things, organizations,  activities.  When I first came here, I will tell you, I had some really outstanding  professors at Oklahoma State. I did have one professor and I don   t know  if we want to put this on the oral history or not. (Laughter)  Let   s try it.  When I was an honors student here, Lionel Raff (who has intentionally  kept us from getting Phi Beta Kappa) told us as a freshman class that his  job was to flunk us out. I was just damn sure he wasn   t going to do it to  me. (Laughter) So I made the best grade in that class that year, but I  learned nothing because I worked so hard and I just wanted to show him  and I went into his office and I said,    Dr. Raff, do you remember what  you said the first day of school, that you were here to flunk us out?    He  had been no help at all during the semester   none. And I said,    If it  weren   t for other professors that were so good, I   d leave this university,  just based on your attitude. You don   t like kids. You don   t like students.  You don   t want us to succeed and you   ve made it really clear.    I   ve  never forgotten that as I got older, I   ve just been astounded that he   s  gotten away with this.  In your career, there might have been some professors that have  influenced you in a positive way?  7  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Oh, absolutely. Some of the best professors I   ve ever had. I had a  wonderful English professor. Very encouraging right before I went to  Germany and then the best professor I ever had was Bill Houston and I  married him. (Laughter) He was brilliant. He was a brilliant teacher. His  mom taught geometry. He was from Dallas and Bill was just a natural  born educator and he was an English major   English and foreign  language major in undergraduate school, honor student at Baylor and he  always felt like if we couldn   t write and communicate as accounting  majors, then he wasn   t doing his job. So he really was probably, in terms  of being a good professor, he was the best teacher I ever had   ever.  That   s an unusual combination-Accounting and English.  Yeah it is. He was great. He was very talented, but when I graduated, I  went to work for Peat Marwick and what happened was, I had one of the  partners at Peat Marwick come to me and asked me if I would represent  the firm at the Tulsa Opera Ball because I loved opera. The only person I  knew that loved Opera was Bill. I called him and I said,    Dr. Houston,  you   re not going to remember me, I   m sure, but       and he said,    No,  sure I do.    And I asked him if he would go with me to go the Tulsa  Opera Ball, if he would escort me to it, and he said he would be glad to  do that. He took me out to the nicest restaurant in Tulsa. I could not eat a  bite. I couldn   t call him Dr. Houston. I couldn   t call him Bill, so I hardly  spoke. (Laughter) It was just a horrible date. I thought,    Oh, my gosh,  I   ve blown this for sure.    And he said,    You know what, my name is  Bill and if you think you can eat your dinner, I   d like to take you out  again.    (Laughter)  You got the opportunity to fill your stomach this time.  Oh, my gosh it was incredible and we were married thirty-three years. It  was wonderful. And then he died, but we had a great marriage, a great  time.  Were you involved in any student leadership?  Oh, a lot of things.  Can you share some of the things that you were engaged in?  Oh, goodness. Of course all of the Honors Society stuff, but then I left  and came back, but I did a lot of work when I came back with the  Vietnam Vets. When Gene Ray was here, we had a campaign to raise  food for the orphanages in Vietnam. I headed that up. We did a lot of  things back then. I didn   t get involved in student government and those  kinds of issues, but it was those kinds of honors programs and the thing I  8  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  was really passionate about was working with the Vietnam Vets after my  first husband served a tour. I worked a lot with the military, with the  wives and the soldiers in that area.  What year did you graduate from Oklahoma State?  I didn   t graduate until    75 because I left and came back.  You started what year?     67. When I graduated from high school in    67,  I came here .  And then you had the break over in Germany.  Right and then I came back and went to school.  Can you share a little bit about after you graduated Oklahoma State  University, Trish? Your professional experiences.  Okay, it   s been interesting. I went to work for Peat Marwick. Bill had  encouraged me to go ahead and go to law school, so I took the LSAT  and passed it. And I like I said, he was a great professor   he told me  how to study for it and I aced it, which was a good thing. Got accepted  to NYU and was going to go to law school, so Peat Marwick put me on  the Tax Staff and I loved it over there. I loved it. Peat Marwick   I  helped recruit   great time. Tulsa   had a great time. Then Bill and I  decided to get married. I never went to law school and I came back here  to go to work. Stillwater National Bank, Bob McCormick hired me and I  was their first internal auditor. He had just come to work for the bank.  He   d be a good one to interview, by the way. He   s not a graduate, but  he   s been a huge supporter of OSU. Peggy is a graduate.  But anyway, so I went to work for them. Set up their internal audit  department and then Bill and I started our own CPA firm. He was an  Arthur Andersen guy and I worked for Peat. So we had a great time as a  CPA firm, then Bill suffered a stroke during surgery, he had to quit and  thought I should quit. I didn   t want to quit because I didn   t know what  was going to happen to us, financially with what was going on. He  thought our clients aren   t getting good financial advice and he  encouraged me to go ahead and get my CFP  Certified Financial  Planner . We had a lot of clients coming and asking us if we could help  them invest and help them make decisions. We weren   t licensed to do  that and we wouldn   t do it. So then I went ahead and got my Certified  Financial Planning and I now have a Certified Divorce Financial  Planning and I went into Financial Planning as well as a CPA and it   s  been very good. It has filled a real gap.  9  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  You   ve been in the Stillwater community all that time, other than you  were in Tulsa?  Yes, yes. We were married thirty-three years and then Bill   s been gone a  year. Lived here a long time. I   ve lived in really two places (laughs) my  whole life. I   ve lived in a lot of places, but not long term.  Trish, you   re currently the administrator of the Lew Wentz Foundation.  Yes, yes. I   m the administrator and I   m the first and only. (Laughs)  Can you tell me a little bit about how you got engaged with it?  Well for years   I don   t know if anyone has talked about the history of  the Wentz Foundation.  Go right ahead.  Okay. There are some letters in the OSU archives that are really  interesting between he  Lew Wentz  and some of the past presidents of  Oklahoma State. I don   t know if you know much about Mr. Wentz, but  he came to Oklahoma   well first of all he was born in Pennsylvania. He  was the son of the blacksmith and he was one of twelve children, I  believe. I think he was the youngest. Honestly, I   m having a little bit of  trouble because Mr. Wentz avoided talking about himself. There   s very  little information on him as a person. Life Magazine did a huge  magazine cover and article on him and it   s in the Ponca City Library  Archives. He was the richest bachelor in America at one time.  (Laughter) His oil wells were pumping a million dollars a day at one  time. It was an astounding amount of money that he had.  But anyway, so Mr. Wentz came out here for a fellow that was in the  sauerkraut business. Very wealthy. He had just bought some unproven  mineral rights as an investment and wanted Mr. Wentz to make the trip  out here to see if they were any good. Mr. Wentz was very personable.  He was coaching a baseball team and he was very involved with  politics   the Republican Party, canvassing neighborhoods for the  Republican Party   so he was very personable. This gentleman knew he  would represent him well. Also, his mom was a Methodist and he had a  very kind of a stern ethical code. Sent him out here, they hit big. He paid  Mr. Wentz a fairly good sum of money for doing that for him. Lew took  that and invested it in his own unproven mineral rights and just luckily,  and it was pure luck, he hit big. He became a very shrewd businessman  and he grew that into a substantial portion. And then just before the  stock market crashed  in1929 , he liquidated all of his assets and put  them in U.S. Treasury Bills,  which was  just fortuitous. So he didn   t go  10  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  through the crash as most people did. He came out of it alright, let   s just  say.  During that period of time, Mr. Wentz had a saying   I just loved it. In  fact, I picked it up and used it on the Wentz material. He wrote a letter to  one of our presidents and at the bottom he signed it and said,    Don   t  forget the    we    in    Wentz.    I thought that was so telling of who he was  as a person. He was a real team player and he didn   t want his name on  things that he really helped with and he did an enormous amount of  charity work. Before he died (his life is really fascinating and I can go  on and on about it) he lived in the Atherton Hotel in Ponca City. He had  a big ranch but he made his home at the Atherton Hotel. The lady who  owned that, they became really good friends and when she died, he had  promised her   she named him executor and she was widowed. She had  made the bequest and he took money out of his own pocket to make sure  those bequests were fulfilled. I mean that was the kind of person he was.  He was also the kind of person that you could borrow money from him.  The oil field workers, in one of his letters, he never had a bad debt. He  would loan people until pay day. You know they   d come sit on the porch  and rock. My grandfather would go, because Granddad came down from  Michigan to drill for Phillips Petroleum Company. He would go over  and tell Mr. Wentz that so and so was having a really hard time and he  said,    Well, if you   ll vouch for him.    And then he   d loan them money  and he never had a bad debt.  This was your grandfather?  Yeah, my granddaddy.  So your ties back to Wentz goes back a long ways.  I lived in Shidler and he lived in Ponca City, but then the years go by  and he was very concerned about children. He loved children and he  never married, which was really a shame, but he built the Ponca City  Olympic Pool,  which  is just gorgeous. He did the Oklahoma  Children   s Hospital. He rebuilt the Masonic Lodge in Guthrie, the really  nice temple. He did just on and on and on for Oklahoma. As years went  by, he wanted to do something for the service men coming home that he  could see that they   back then when he started this, there weren   t  scholarships at Oklahoma State or OU and there was no lending  program. The government was not involved in student loans. That   s hard  to believe in this day and age, but back then there was no way. GIs had a  GI Bill and it wasn   t that great. They were coming home and he saw  these young men needed an opportunity and so he was determined to  help give it to them. So he worked with the presidents of OU, OSU  (back then A M) and several other institutions. He had five institutions  11  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  that he worked with to develop a way to provide some money. So he  started out, I think he originally gave  25,000, which was a huge amount  of money back then, to each of these funds and they were still working.  Nobody really knew how to do this, so they were still working on a  process and as ours developed, we had a very insightful president and he  said,     You know, Mr. Wentz, what you and I know now will not be this  way in fifty years, sixty years. I mean we don   t have a clue of what the  future is going to look like.    Mr. Wentz gave Oklahoma State the  opportunity to amend the trust because we had a president that requested  he do that.  Dr. Bennett?  No, it was not. No, it was not Dr. Bennett. It was a gentleman who really  wasn   t here that long and I can   t think of his name and I   m sorry  because he was very influential. A very insightful gentleman. Mr. Wentz  said,    That   s a great idea,    and he gave us the ability to amend the trust,  which we have done four or five times now. But it started out that he  wanted to make loans available to servicemen. That was his whole  objective and that went on for quite a few years. Then the student loan  program got going and the banks became very involved in it. It became  obvious to our board that there was no need for us to be involved in  student lending. There were other people doing a better job. So we sold  that loan portfolio and invested the money. It was  735,000. We  invested that money in the stock market. We had a very forward thinking  board and we   ll talk about that in a minute. We had a substantial  endowment. We knew Oklahoma State really needed scholarship  money, so we paid it down. Our goal is to grow the corpus at the rate of  inflation. I had long records of rates of inflation since 1992 when we  sold the portfolio and I became the administrator until now. We   re a  little bit behind the goal because of the recent market issues, but we   re  right at  11 million at this point. From  735,000, that   s not bad.  That   s grown real well.  And we have given out a lot of scholarship money, but we thought that  Oklahoma State was lacking in scholarship money and that   s where we  wanted our money to go. In between, the university had used interest  income off the loans to fund work study programs. We funded OSU   s  work study program, but our board became concerned that students  weren   t doing meaningful work that would help them in their career.  They were doing work that helped the university, but it wasn   t work that  helped the student, so we just decided we were going to change it.  Picking up on that, could you share some of those major changes and  transitions in the Lew Wentz Program? I know it went from loans to  12  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  work study that you could pay back to scholarships.  Sure. It started out as a loan program and the original loan amounts were  only  400. That was a huge amount. This was back when tuition was  nothing. I think  400, in fact, was the tuition back then. It was enough to  pay tuition. We started out with a  400 loan. Mr. Wentz first funded it  with  25,000. They just made those to GIs and they   ve repaid him and it  was kind of clicking along there. Then Mr. Wentz determined that he  needed to put in another  25,000, so they used that. In the mean time, he  was trying to decide how he was going to do what he was going to do  for the universities. We kept clicking along. Now the interest was three  or four percent back then. I think it was three percent when it first started  and then it went to four. It wasn   t a huge amount of interest, but it  started rolling in and it was enough that they could start a work study  program.  Now, that did not happen until Mr. Wentz died. He died very suddenly  of a massive heart attack in 1949. He started this program in    26, I  believe, is when he put in the first twenty-five. It was a long period of  time there that all we did was make interest. Made little loans and repay  and it wasn   t a big deal, not at all. Well, Mr. Wentz   s will provided that  upon his death, his remaining estate, he had put all of his assets, at that  point in time, into a family trust. But whatever was left, which wasn   t  going to be a lot, was going to be divided between OU, OSU and the  Children   s Hospital and two other institutions. He had just made a trip  out to Amarillo, Texas to close a deal on buying a huge acreage of  unproven mineral rights and he put that down in his personal name  instead of into the family trust. He dropped dead of a heart attack  unexpectedly and so we inherited twenty percent of the unproven  mineral rights, which ten years later sold   our share was over  2  million. That   s all we started with. That  2 million is what created what  we see today.  It jump started that.  That   s right, because the university was able to take that money and  really start a decent loan program for students. They invested the  2  million. We had a lot of student loans, then that   s when we started  having interest coming in and we started funding the work study  program. Now the work study program did not have to be paid back.  That made a big difference, first of all, just the loans you pay back the  interest and there was a work study program where you just worked off  what you were using.  Yeah and it became, like I was a graduate assistant when I was doing the  13  Gill  Houston  work study program. Some of it was really good work   some of it was  just filing. You know, some of it was just busy work, but it gave kids     back then, I don   t know if you recall, but we didn   t have very many  student jobs in Stillwater. It was a big part for a kid to come here and go  to school. The great thing about Oklahoma State students is that we have  a lot of kids that have farm backgrounds that are used to working and  they don   t mind it. So it was a huge help. They didn   t have to pay it back  and it filled a real need for a long time. Then, like I said, the board began  seeing that we had real issues with the fact that the banks were so  involved in the student loan program and there was a legal issue with  lender of last resort. There were some problems with it. We decided to  sell the loan portfolio and our board (I think it was very far thinking of  them) decided they wanted to do something that would really, really  help students and we thought help raise the level of academic  achievement at this university and just do some great things for  Oklahoma State.  Trish, about what year was this?  That was in 1992. And Bill, my husband, had been   in fact, a lot of  Wentz people worked for him and he was really   he said,    I   ve just got  kids filing papers. It   s silly. They   re really smart kids and they need the  money, but it would be better if we could give them scholarship money  and they could devote that time to their studies and write or we could  work with them.    He was thinking we could work with them in writing  courses and teach them how to write papers and how to do research and  spend some time with them doing academic pursuits that they weren   t  being taught because they were undergraduates. Back then we didn   t  think about undergraduates doing that.  We talked about it at the board; we went on quite awhile doing just  loans, then Stan Lybarger came on the board. We had a long discussion  and we agreed that we needed to do something different. So we went to  the university and we talked to them about how we wanted to change it.  I talked to them about what I thought would be a sensible thing to do   with  the scholarship money, because back then we were desperate for  scholarship money. There was some resistance, quite frankly because we  had a huge build up. Those kids were filling those jobs that needed to be  done in a lot of places and we were paying for it. I can understand why  that was a real issue, but the board finally just said,    We   re going to do  this. We   re going to pull the work study money.    And that hit the  budget, so everybody had to kind of scramble around and we   re going to  make scholarships. After that we started working on the academic  research projects. Now that has been a huge, huge thing for Oklahoma  State. Gosh, Bob Graalman and I, we massaged it and worked with it  and it has evolved.  14  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Can you kind of summarize where it   s been? It started off as a loan  program and then work study, you could work it off and then the  scholarship program, which still has the academic component as a part  of it, but then it moved and that was in the early    90s,    92? And then you  indicated that you took a portion, half of that or so, into research  projects. When did that transition in?  We started that at the same time. But we started out very slowly, because  we didn   t know what we were doing. There were no undergraduate  research programs anywhere in the United States that we could find     none. What the board told me they wanted to see happen and Stan  Lybarger, in particular, was responsible for this,  was  a program that  benefits the students, that will benefit them in a way that they can build  on it for career choices. Bill helped me, he said,    We need to teach them  some research skills.    And then Jack Vitek talked to him about it. Jack  was really helpful in pulling together this whole idea of how we could  do that, but we still didn   t know what we were doing. So we thought,  well we   ll try this.  We started developing the program. The other thing the board was  adamant about, it has to be a student initiative. They have to really want  to do this. We had student initiative. No one knew how to write even a  proposal, much less a project. (Laughter) At first it was hard getting it  going, but we progressed huge since the first year we did it. I, in  desperation, awarded everyone who applied a research project, just to  get it going. I mean there were some really bad things in there.  (Laughter) But we just had to get  going,  because nobody knew how it  was going to work and it has really boosted our national scholarship  presence and our whole Scholar Program just to a whole new level. It   s a  very sophisticated program now. We have a lot of tremendous students.  Almost every national scholarship we   ve received, one of those kids has  done an academic Wentz project.  Trish, about what percentage of interest are you applying to general  scholarships first, and research projects?  The board has given us the leeway of, we first do the projects, we fund  as many projects   do you understand how that works? The whole how  this is done?  No.  Let me back up then. First of all, I refuse to get involved in OSU  politics. (Laughs)  Good idea.  15  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  I don   t want anything to do with OSU politics. Bob is really good at his  job and I want him to be allowed to do his job, so what my thing is, as  the administrator, I want to make sure that our money is not wasted and  that the board   s guidelines are followed   strictly followed. We choose  five professors from across the university. They   re in five different  disciplines, usually chosen by their deans and they are published     people who are involved in research in all different areas over the  university. They sit on the panel, we receive all the applications in and  then Gail Gilliland in Bob   s office goes through, she copies all of the  originals. Of course, she blacks out all the student names and all the  professor   s names on every project. It   s a blind selection. Then each of  the five gets a copy of all the proposals and they rate them one to five or  however we   re doing it now, one to ten. We   ve done it different ways.  Then, we average all of that and we have meetings and we discuss it. My  job is to look for outliers. I look at it and I say,    Okay.    And I read them  also, but I   m like,    This makes no sense. Two of you giving this project  a one and two of you give it a five.    And then we discuss them. The  ones that are obvious, we just pass. If everybody agrees it   s a great  research project, they just get in. But when you get down to the nitty  gritty of why did some of you think this was positive and some negative,  we have a lot of discussion on those issues. We end up with the best  projects and it   s been right at about forty, but if we had forty-five or  fifty, the board has given us a leeway that we could award forty-five or  fifty. But if there   s only thirty good ones, I   ll only give out thirty.  They   ve got to be good research projects. The rest of it goes into general  scholarship money.  Trish, about how many applications will you get?  Depends on any given year. We can receive 100, we can receive 150.  It   s a lot more work than a scholarship is. That   s why I really like to give  out   this is our baby. We fund this first because it really helps the  students that are going to give back to the university.  Somewhere on average, about half the money given for each year is for  research projects?  Well, let me think, since we   re having to cut budget, it would be about  half. But we give money to the music department. We have a four year  scholarship for a Ponca City graduate in honor of Mr. Wentz, a  16,000  scholarship for a Ponca City graduate. We really wanted to honor Mr.  Wentz and I think that   s a great way to do it. We do help OSU-Tulsa  Medical School, but we   re only able to give one  5,000 scholarship  there. We give the music department some money    25,000,  30,000, it  varies. We give to Martha McMillan, she has this program called  16  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill     Diamonds in the Rough.    It   s her non-traditional students. We give her  book money for those kids and that   s a great program and then the  scholarship money, but now the academic projects take up about half.  Trish, if I   m understanding this, you work primarily through Bob  Graalman   s office which is the Scholar Development and Recognition  Program?  That   s right.  And for the project and scholarships.  He is the OSU alliance. He   s an extension of what we do. I let him do  his job. I do not try to second guess anything he does. He does a great  job.  OSU has received national recognition for a number of students who  have competed successfully for prestigious national scholarships like the  Rhodes, Truman, Gates, Cambridge, Marshall, just to name a few.  Udall. Yeah, amazing.  Individuals close to the program I   ve had a chance to visit with and  interview have been unanimous in their opinion that the Lew Wentz  Research grants have been extremely influential in developing those  scholars and helping make them compete successfully for these  prestigious scholarships. How do you feel about that?  I think it   s fabulous. I mean, mission accomplished. That   s what we  want to do. Oklahoma State is blessed with really truly gifted kids. We  have helped them be what they can be, achieve goals that they should  have been able to achieve and can achieve. I just feel so happy to be a  part of it and I think we still have some distance to go. We desperately  need more scholarship money. We need to recognize academics at the  same level and we are starting to do that as we have our sports program  or other issues at the university. An academic athlete is just fabulous and  that   s not saying anything negative about anybody else because I love  our sports program. By the way, I   m totally convinced a winning  football program will bring scholarship money into the university. I   m  all for that and support that, but I think that we have never pushed our  alumni to give money for scholarships. We are way behind the ball  compared to OU. We decided that we need to get out and show them  what we can do and the money will follow and, to some degree,  hopefully that   s happening.  Was it an intended and envisioned goal of the board and the Foundation  17  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  that research projects for Wentz scholars would be used to compete for  national prestigious  awards ?  Yes.  Or was that an unintended consequence?  No, we intended for that to happen, but we didn   t know how it would  happen. Bob and I have been good friends for a long time and he never  had enough money. He never had the pool of talent that he needed to go  after some of those awards and so we just knew that we had to do  something. We had the talent, we just weren   t grooming them properly  and we weren   t giving them incentive to really pursue some of those  goals. It takes a huge commitment on a student   s part and it takes a lot of  discipline. There   s got to be some reward along the way for doing that,  so yeah, it has succeeded to a greater degree than I had hoped, but it was  intentional. That   s what we were hoping for.  Is that a source of pride for you and the board?  Oh, a huge source of pride for all of us. We   re just thrilled with it. And  we know it will continue. We   ve pretty much got it embedded. But the  thing we   re doing too, in keeping Mr. Wentz   s original document, we  are not ever going to set policies that the future boards can   t change. I  mean, that would be wrong of us because who knows what is going to be  going on at the university fifty years from now. So, hopefully the Wentz  Foundation will be here and be able to adjust and be able to boost the  university and help the university achieve whatever goal that comes  along.  Trish, just an explanation to see if I understand, there   s a professor  matched with a student and the student beginning at the sophomore  year, sophomore through senior level.  We do have some freshmen. Out of this, Niblack Awards, we   ve stepped  back in some areas where other people have been generous enough to  step up and say they   re going to fund these research projects. That   s  been fabulous and hopefully this will feed other people stepping in to do  this so we can get a bigger and bigger pool, but we have done some  freshman awards. We normally do it for sophomore through senior.  They have to propose the project. They have to go to a professor and ask  them if they will sponsor them and work with them and then the dean  has to sign off on it. There   s quite a process there. And then it comes to  us and we do the selection process.  And the importance of that is, if I understand this, when you   re  18  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  competing for like a Rhodes, Cambridge, the key scholarships, that  usually there   s a strong requirement of a research component and as an  undergraduate what have you researched, what has been your area of  expertise.  Right. The issue, though, and Bob travels to some very prestigious  universities and talks about this. Our program is pretty unique in that it  gives students more opportunities for undergraduate research than just  about any other university. Most universities don   t help their  sophomores do research. It   s kind of been a blessing and a recruiting  tool for great students.  We talked about how you kind of had a vision to do this. What is the  mission currently and the goals of the Lew Wentz Foundation for OSU?  What would that be?  First of all, I would say we have several different things. Let me talk  about the financial goal of the foundation first. We try to grow our  corpus at the rate of inflation. That   s all we   re trying to do to provide for  future students and then we give everything back to the university for  scholarship money. It   s a very simple financial goal. We   re not trying to  be the biggest foundation on campus. We are trying to put everything we  can into scholarship money. We are very responsive to where the needs  of the university are. Now, what I have discovered over all these years,  we   ve had a lot of different presidents. I   ve work with, I don   t know  how many   a lot. (Laughs)  OSU presidents?  A whole lot of different presidents. They all have different goals and  different agendas. I   ve learned over the years not to get drawn into a  personal agenda; they might think we might need to spend money on X  when that   s not in the best interest of the student body and the future  students as a whole. While we try to be responsive to the university, and  we have the president of the university serving on our board, we try,  also, to have an oversight of long term,    Is this where we want our  money to go long term?    I will tell you I think our board is very, very  committed to the academic projects and, if enough money came in, that  those were totally taken care of by other money, we   d move our money  somewhere else because this is not an ego thing with our board. I mean  we don   t have to be out in front. We want to be where we will do the  most good. We look at humanities. We look at education. We look at  areas that don   t have enough funding and we try to help them. That   s  been one of our issues.  So, we don   t take the leadership position, is what I   m trying to tell you,  19  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  but we do stand back   I think the university is blessed that we   re an  independent foundation and we have the ability to stand back and say,     You know what guys, this doesn   t    exactly make a lot of sense at this  point.    We were asked to put in a pretty large sum of money into  creating a statue for Mr. Wentz in Ponca City   OU was helping to fund  that. They were really upset with us and my argument was,    No, we   re  not going to do that.    Because if Mr. Wentz wanted to build statues or  monuments, he had all the money in the world, he could have done that.  In fact, Stan Lybarger was the one who said that and I totally agree with  him. He could have built any statue he wanted. We decided that we  could give a scholarship   in fact, we already were giving a scholarship  to the high school students. I said,    Guys, we   re giving  16,000 a year.  Why don   t you do the same? If you   ll get us  16,000 a year, we have  two Ponca City students being educated by Mr. Wentz   s money. How  good of a deal is that?    But we   re the only ones giving  16,000 a year to  do scholarships for Ponca City.  That didn   t fly, huh?  Didn   t fly. (Laughter) We try to be very prudent with Mr. Wentz   s  money.  Do you hope students and beneficiaries of Lew Wentz give back either  scholarships or research projects?  I hope they give back to this university. (Laughter)  That   s where I was going.  Every time I give my annual speech, I talk to them about that. The only  way to really pay Mr. Wentz back or pay anybody back is to give back.  Give back to the university. Be a mentor to a younger student. Send us  good students. Support the university. Be positive about the university.  There   s a lot of ways to give back, but give back. It   s critical. Not just  your money, but your talent.  These are highly successful individuals that are going to be very  successful in life which ever category they choose.  That   s what we   re hoping.  Do you correspond with  them ?  We have not been good about that, actually. First of all, the database at  Oklahoma State has not allowed us to keep up with a lot of things. I   ve  been told that Charlie Burse has developed a way that he now has a  20  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  database that has all of this information, so we will be able to mount a  campaign hopefully in keeping with his new situation to go out to Wentz  undergraduates and to help them give back to the university and  encourage them to.  I   ll tell you what I   m doing, personally. When Bill passed away I gave   100,000 to the university. I haven   t given it yet because I   m an  investment manager (laughter) and it hasn   t lost any money and if I give  it to the university, it would be down. So they   re still going to get their   100,000, but what I would like to do   Bill was an undergraduate in  English and foreign languages. But Bill, his ego wasn   t huge either, in  terms of having buildings and things named for him. I would like to  have the English chair named for Mr. Wentz. It would honor someone  who has been so, so influential. We could not have done what we   ve  done without him. He was such a modest man and I think he would  appreciate that. I   m his first administrator. Burns has pledged that to do  the Phi Beta Kappa that we will have an English chair. I would like it to  be named for Mr. Wentz because mine is going to be the most  substantial gift (laughs), I   m sure. I   m hoping that will all happen. And I  think the Wentz Scholars would give to that. I do.  Absolutely. And just thinking, too, in terms of, have you thought about  your close connection and working relationship you have with Bob  Graalman and Gail and with the Office of Scholar Development? Have  you thought about the continuation of that program in terms of  supporter funding, maybe endowments or different things along those  lines?  We can   t do that. The Wentz Foundation will never endow another  group. We just can   t. We have limited moneys. I mean  10 million  sounds like a lot of money   it   s not a lot of money. And so our whole  issue is, the University, I hope, they   re trying with the Bellmon to  permanently endow Bob   s  position in  that area. If they don   t then  they   ve really made a huge strategic error and I don   t know what will  ever happen. But we can   t control university politics and university  administrative decisions. It would just be a shame, but we determined  that if they don   t get someone to replace Bob, they   ve just really messed  up, but there   s nothing we can do about that.  Trish, do you meet regularly with Bob?  We meet all the time. (Laughs) We talk all the time about different  things.  Strategies and development and some of those things.  21  Houston  Gill  Houston  Yeah, but Bob is a professor as well as being the administrator of  Scholar Development Program, so he   s daily in the mix. My job is to  step back and really look at kind of an overview of where we   re headed.  Are we headed in the right path? I don   t want us going off this tributary  when we need to be going right down the center. There   s a lot of issues  and Bob and I don   t always agree on everything. I may not see  something as critical as he may see it, but we have those discussions and  work through them and the board has given us a lot of leeway.  Ultimately, if he and I don   t agree, I take it to the board to let them have  another view of exactly what   s going on.  We have some really terrific people on our board, very big thinkers and  they really give a lot of insight. We were blessed   we got the president  of the university, Burns, now. Our chairman of the Board of Banks of  Oklahoma and Stan Lybarger. I   ll tell you, we are so blessed to have  him. We have Jim Orbison, whose dad Scott served on the board for  forty-some years   super people and great friend. Jim   s an attorney of  course with a wide political background and deals with lots of  complicated issues. Tom Muchmore is president of the Ponca City News  and radio station. His father also served for forty-one years on the board.  Those gentlemen have just been so insightful and so adamant about what  they want to see happen and except for Scott none of those people are  OSU graduates, except Burns now. None of them. But they really do  love the university and they really want to do what   s right for the  university.  What   s given you the most personal pride in your association with the  Lew Wentz Foundation and Oklahoma State University over the years?  Oh gosh, what I would love to see (laughs)   let me tell you what my  passion is. I would love to see us fund the valedictorian program   fully  fund it. One of the presidents, Mac Nyguen, talked about it being a  20  million funding issue, but I came here on a valedictorian program and I  feel like that is such a critical part of what we do as a university. It   s  kind of like what we do at Lew Wentz, I knew we couldn   t tackle that  program. We just don   t have enough money. I was looking for another  niche that we could actually do something in mission accomplished in  that area.  We have another mission over here that I would love to see tackled and  accomplished. Right now, personally, I serve on the leadership  committee for Women for OSU and I   m in charge of fundraising for our  annual event next spring. I think that is an area that we have not fully  taken advantage of   our strong female support group. That   s an area  that I   m very interested in developing. We   re also interested in doing  scholarship money and etcetera and I think what Mr. Pickens has done is  22  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  incredible. Thank goodness that we have such a terrific   we   ve had a lot  of great alums and very generous people, but we   ve never had anybody  step up to the bar like this before. My goodness. It   s fabulous. I can   t say  enough good about him, but you   re talking about in terms of this  program and what   s the best thing, and that   s hard to say.  More of a personal perspective, as you look at your involvement since  1990.  Oh, yeah. See I was there auditor before I became the administrator.  Administrator in    90. Through all those years, can you look back and  reflect on what   s given you the most pride?  I think when Blaine Greteman got the Rhodes. I was just thrilled. I   ll tell  you another thing that   s been unbelievable   Blaine getting the Rhodes  was wonderful, but another thing is we do that summer Cambridge tour  for the kids. I will tell you, during that period of time, such a short  period of time, those kids mature and evolve and their eyes are open to a  different world, to a different level of academic achievement, different  level of culture. That has been a huge source of pride and there have  been a lot of things over the years. I   ll tell you, the book awards for the  nontraditional students, those are the ones that just bring tears to my  eyes. I have people walk up to me and just give me a bear hug on the  street because   and a guy who was the father of four, I   m thinking.  Where you paid for books for the students?  Just the books. These guys are kids that they   ve got kids to support,  they   ve got deaths in the family   I mean weird, awful stuff going on in  their lives and they are determined to get a degree. I think Mr. Wentz  would be the proudest of those, frankly. I really do. I am really proud of  them. If you   re a great scholar, you   re going to have some help along the  way, we hope. And we   ve been influential, but those kids that are  struggling that are under the radar, they don   t always have help and I  think over time we   ll try more and more to help them more.  Trish, what keeps you going, after all these years?  Of doing this?  The compensation is not that big a deal for you, a lot of hours that you  put in   I mean, thousands and thousands of hours.  Well, I think it   s     23  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  What   s kept you going?  You know, I love OSU. If it weren   t for this university, I wouldn   t have  done all I   ve done in life and I just see the potential of the kids who  come here and just youth in general. There   s so much that can be  accomplished and we   re blessed with really great kids and I think  they   re horribly underrated. I don   t think we give ourselves enough  credit. I have a lot of pride in the institution and a lot of pride in the  student body. A lot of pride in where we   ve come in a pretty short period  of time. I think that just being a part of that is wonderful. If I was head  of a large foundation, I would take care of that valedictorian program  (laughter), that would be my next deal. But I hope during my lifetime,  that I will see a way to help get that done, that we   ll see some real  movement on that because talk about a tremendous boost to the  university, it would be incredible. But what we have done, I   m really  proud of it. I think it   s something that has really helped the university  move forward. It   s like a stepping stone and we   ll use that to do more  and more good things to the university.  Is there anything that we haven   t talked about? You   re very intimately  acquainted with the program,  is there anything else  that you would  like to discuss that we haven   t talked about just yet?  I would like to say a little bit more about the board. We are only a four  member board. It   s a very workable board and we only meet twice a  year. We meet to do financial matters. Then, we meet in the spring and  we have the Student Appreciation Day at OSU as a Lew Wentz event  where we present all of the academic projects and have speakers come in  and luncheons. It   s a great event and if you haven   t attended then you  ought to skip over there and look at it. But I will tell you, I cannot tell  you how much I appreciate our board. They are not micromanagers.  They make very hard decisions and they don   t hesitate to make hard  decisions. My job is to carry out that decision process. So we   re a great  team. When I have issues that arise and used to I had a lot more issues.  Now, I have some very clear marching orders and I just carry them out.  If anything needs to deviate or if there   s an issue then I let them all know  and we talk about it, but as a whole we have a great board. They set  down clear rules. When I call them they know I really need to talk to  them and they are right there on the phone to support me and tell me  what I need to hear. Otherwise, this foundation is efficient and I treat  Bob the same way.  I have a unique situation, but I think it serves the university well because  we are not involved in the politics. We don   t care and we don   t care  about short-term issues. We   re only looking at long-term results and  that   s huge. I wish all of the foundations had that opportunity.  24  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Trish, some of your responsibilities are sort of on a daily basis to be  internal with the Foundation? You keep the books and     Oh yeah, I do books and I     Annual reports, etc?  Yeah, of course. And Bob and I work on   we have kind of peak times.  Of course, we just finished audits. We   re getting ready for the annual  audits and we   re getting ready to have our annual board meeting here in  a couple of weeks. When we are going through the selection for the  projects and for the scholarships, I have oversight. I don   t really ever  second guess. I don   t vote. I never vote, but my job is oversight, to make  sure the process is done correctly. And then I talked to the board and I  talked to Bob and I talk to the president and I just try to have my feelers  out on what   s going on. Sometimes I   ll see a need. I   ll hear it from two  or three different places and then I kind of put it all together and we do  something about it.  Back to our conversation we were having a little bit earlier, Trish, about  the pride and where it   s going. Do you see, in the near future, any  changes? Do you still see it focused towards the research projects?  No. For now I do. When the economy improves, I   m sure we   ll have  some people that will come in and academic projects and do some other  things with the university. We may shift our money around a little bit.  We are desperately in need of so many endowments for the university  and what we   re able to give is totally inadequate. So for now, we   re just  going to keep on doing this and keep on doing it well and hopefully we  fill that niche and we   ll continue doing that. I just wish we could do  more.  But you and the board have chosen wisely and I like your concept of stay  focused on one mission.  Yeah, we   re trying to stay on target and do something and do it really  well and then hopefully encourage. We wish we could leverage it to a  challenge for other people to match or do. That would be perfect and we  tried doing that with some of our departments and have been somewhat  successful in getting other people to give us scholarship money, so the  concept of leveraging is something I wish we could do more of. Boone  has done that fabulously well. I think that whole chair situation was  great.  Well let me just say in closing Trish, I   ve had a lot of positive feedback  from the university about the wonderful job and how much the Wentz  25  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  scholar money has really meant to the university.  Yeah, we   re proud of that. We   re very proud of that. I think Bob and I  have a big job in front of us and that   s choosing his successor and my  successor. (Laughter) Because we want this to be in perpetuity and it  will be for the university. It   s a very personal thing. It   s about keeping  your ego out of it and doing what   s right for the university and not  necessarily the university   the students of the university. (Laughter)  How did we move and how did we evolve towards the concept of  undergraduate research?  When our board decided that the idea of providing work study programs  was not where our money needed to be we had a long process of  discussions on where and how we wanted that to happen. Bill, my  husband, had a big influence on me in that he felt like we were just  flushing money down the drain and we weren   t raising the bar,  intellectually, for students. So we talked about that a lot and I thought,     How can we do that?    Bob Graalman and I had visited a lot. He did not  have a base of how we were really going to do scholar development at  OSU. He was very, very frustrated.  Trish, can I interject, sort of background at around    92, Bob was head of  just the scholarship office right?  That   s right.  I want to say    98,    99 we actually created the Scholar Development and  Recognition Program, and this was sort of evolving at this time.  Right. Actually his positioning evolved out of the Wentz projects  because we then began   I discussed it with my board. Stan Lybarger,  Scott Orbison at that time, much more and the president was, at that  time, goodness that was John Campbell. We had lengthy discussions  about how to go about this. My board was adamant that we wanted this  to be student centered. It had to help students. Bill added a layer on, that  we should aim at raising their intellectual capabilities, and his idea was  maybe help them get into really good graduate schools, really good  graduate programs. Then Jack Vitek as part of the president   s office sat  down with us and at that time the graduate school really needed funding.  We explored the possibility of doing graduate research projects and  came up through all those discussion and all those ideas because the  board was adamant they wanted it to be an undergraduate program with  the idea of research projects for undergraduates. None of us had a  remote idea how this would work, but we started developing criteria on  how we wanted that. Jack worked really hard on that; Bob did. And we  26  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  knew it was evolving.  Our first set of rules was just kind of worthless. (Laughter) We found  out, this isn   t going to work, but surely we evolved and it was pretty  simple criteria, but it works and slowly but surely then we started getting  awards and started getting students who were going on to do other things  and that evolved and Bob was put in charge of a lot of things. That  evolved into the Scholar Development Office, which is fabulous and  hopefully from there the Henry Bellmon Chair will make that a  permanent fixture at the university. And it should be. It really should be.  So it   s been quite an  evolution .  That transition, by the ways we discussed earlier, this is pretty  innovative for undergraduate research.  Oh very, yeah. It   s not done. Yeah.  But from that concept, you got tied to helping     Students.  And also then helping students in their career path and then their  competition towards national scholarships.  Right.  So it evolved then?  What happened was, we didn   t first start thinking about competition   with  national scholarships. That was not our first issue. Our first issue  was to just help. The board told me that whatever we came up with had  to be something that would first and foremost help students. They didn   t  want it to just help the university as a work study program, they wanted  to be helpful to students. Okay, so then I knew that that had to have  some type of grant or scholarship. Then we laid a layer on top of that,  well how can we really help students? Not just by giving them money,  but by giving them incentive, by giving them a step up and something  better and how do we achieve that?  Then we went through this whole process of how can we leverage our  scholarship money into something bigger for that student and for the  university? I think we   ve been successful at that; the program has been  phenomenal and a lot of it   the university has just been tremendous.  The mentors over the years, oh my goodness, we   ve had fabulous  mentors. The deans have gotten behind it. Bob has done a fabulous job.  We   ve had great students, and the combination of all that has just been  27  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  Houston  Gill  terrific.  Trish, can you name some names? You   ve talked about administrator  and faculty side.  Oh, my goodness   over the years. I am so bad about names. It   s  probably one of my worst failings.  Ed Jones, Ed Miller     Oh well   yeah. Edward has been fabulous. We   ve had professors over  in the engineering and chemical  department  who have done an award  every year. They   ve had ten kids they   ve mentored through. That   d be  important for this. We ought to give you a list of some of our mentors  and some of our students. I mean Shannon Ferrell, Blaine Greteman, the  young lady who is now at Colorado, Courtney Timmons. She gave the  introduction for Boone when he gave the big gift. Courtney   s fabulous. I  mean just a terrific gal. We   ve just had incredible students. Incredible  professors and the mentors are the ones I can   t say enough good about.  They do this   it is not paid. They don   t get anything out of it. They  spend a lot of hours doing this and it   s an enormous   it   s really truly an  educator who is willing to take these projects on and without them we  couldn   t do this. They   re the guys that really deserve the credit for this  program being successful.  Trish, I appreciate you giving us the opportunity. Thank you.  You   re welcome. I would love to give you a list of all the mentors. I  mean the mentors have been incredible. We will try. We might add that  later on. Some of our mentors have gone way above and beyond.  Thank you very much.  You   re welcome.  It   s been a great interview.  -------  -------   
