 Gill. Today is December 10, 2008. I   m visiting with  Dr. Roger Panciera in his office on the OSU campus in Stillwater  Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Dr. Panciera, thanks for  taking time to visit with us today. I know you had a long and  distinguished career at Oklahoma State University, but I want to first of  all get a little bit about your early life, where you grew up and about  your family. Can you share a little of that information with us?  Yeah, I was born and grew up in Westerly, Rhode Island. My dad was a  cabinet maker and my grandfather and great uncle and cousins operated  a couple of farms, mixed, dairy, chicken, etc. I spent a lot of time there  on the farm. Westerly is two or three miles from the Atlantic Ocean. A  great place to visit and enjoy beach, swimming, ocean fishing.  A great place to grow up. Where did you do your undergraduate studies,  there in Rhode Island somewhere?  Yeah, I attended the University of Rhode Island, then Rhode Island State  College, just kind of like Oklahoma State was Oklahoma A   M. I did  that for two years and at the end of two years I was accepted into  veterinary school.  Now you were in the class    53?     53.  So that would have put you in either the second or third OSU class?  Third class to graduate.  There   s got to be a story about how a kid from Rhode Island gets to  5  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Oklahoma. How did you get here?  Actually my advisor at the University of Rhode Island was a veterinarian  who happened to be a classmate of Dr. Lewis Moe, who was on the  faculty at OSU, and my advisor, Dr. Delaplane, learned at the summer  American Veterinarian Medical Association Meeting that there might be  spots in the veterinary school class at OSU; he advised me to apply,  which I did and was accepted very late in the year, very late in the  summer. I wasn   t sure that I should accept this opportunity but my  advisor told me that for every person accepted there were seven  applicants for each position in Veterinary School at that time and he  advised me to get a railroad ticket and head for Oklahoma, which I did.  Now was there a contract agreement with the state at the time?  No, no contracts.  Just the relationship you described earlier is how you found out about  Oklahoma State?  Yep. Things were different in those days. Publicity. I mean, it didn   t  work that way.  What did you know about Oklahoma at that time? Did you think you  were going to be living with Indians in a reservation?  No, I didn   t think that. However, after I got here or maybe after I joined  the faculty, I overheard someone on a telephone, probably from New  Jersey, calling back home and talking about that very thing. Were there  any wild Indians and stuff like that? I thought that was pretty amusing.  So you came in the Fall of    49, graduated in the class of    53. Can you  recall some of the early day faculty that you had some classes with, that  taught you?  Yeah. Dr. Lewis Moe was on the early faculty. All of us students at that  point knew Dean McElroy. He didn   t teach, but he was sort of the  distinguished gentleman on campus. We had Dr. Rice, Dr. Orr who  became Dean of College. Dr. Krull was an inspirational instructor of  parasitology.  Did he influence your decision later to go into parasitology?  Dr. Krull influenced my view of the scientific method, my view of  thoroughness, specificity, he was a great influence. And interestingly, I  went to graduate school at Cornell and it just so happened that Dr. Krull  6  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  was spending his summers up there solving a liver fluke problem that  existed in upstate New York, so I got to know him well and got to soak  up more of his philosophies of how to do things, etc.  It must have been different being a student in that era than it is today.  What was the typical day in the life of a student? Or a typical semester?  Can you share a little bit of that?  I don   t think there were very many things that are now termed    Student  Rights,    and I think it might have been better that way. The school week  during much of my matriculation was anywhere from 38 to 43 hours a  week in class or labs. Money was pretty short. Living was more in the  survival mode than in the living and enjoying mode.  Where   d most of the students live at that time? Here across campus?  Yeah, students rented rooms in private homes. They didn   t rent private  homes. Vet Village was probably the most common accommodation for  many of my classmates, most of whom were World War II Veterans.  Few people had cars, there was plenty of walking done. The campus was  quite different. I actually have a copy of a photo of campus in my office,  the old campus.  Did you ever meet President Bennett? Have a chance as a student?  No I didn   t. No I didn   t. He had the fatal plane crash shortly after I  graduated and had gone to graduate school.  What do you remember about some of the facilities we had? Teaching  facilities and labs, clinics?  Yeah, the day or two after I arrived I got to see the new Veterinary  Medicine building. It was stacked up on the curb at McFarland. Farm  Road was gravel. Highway 51 paving ended at Western. There were  very few faculty members; they spent almost all their time teaching. The  school was very unstable, in the sense that financially it was very poorly  supported; I remember going home to Rhode Island for summer vacation  with some concern that the Vet school would still be here in the Fall. But  it was, and it still is and it   s going great right now.  When we think of Veterinary Med we think of teaching hospitals, clinics,  we think of modern labs. But what were some of the labs like? Can you  describe some from that era?  Well my specialty, pathology, I have described our post-mortem lab in  the past as two 16 X 16 foot surplus army shacks pasted together. The  7  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  heat was from the hot water heater, the screen doors kept the flies in,  pretty primitive stuff. Our facility to drag animals in and out of this  place, was operated by muscle power.  No hydraulics?  Pretty primitive stuff. But it was great. We had good students; students  and a bit of enthusiasm are, it seems to me, what it takes to have  educational fun.  Maybe you can confirm a conversation I had with Dr. Lester Johnson.  He was describing the operating table; if I   m telling the story right, it  was a gift from Fort Reno. They had a veterinary medicine facility  because they had draft animals. He said it was huge and you really  couldn   t get large animals on there, so they did a lot of operating on a  mat. It was a wrestling mat that they would sterilize and clean. He would  describe them being down on their hands and knees and operating. I was  trying to picture    Is that true?  Absolutely true. Things were crude  Actually veterinary medicine   and  I think human medicine at the time   were   primitive is too severe a  word, but slightly above primitive would be pretty appropriate.  What would you do if you had a clinical course? What would clinic be  like?  Well there were a lot of farm calls that Dr. Moe was primarily  responsible for; large animal patients were relatively much more  numerous than pets. There   s been a lot learned about medicine in  veterinary medicine since the early 50   s, I can tell you that. And learning  facilities, learning aids, books, video stuff are just so much better today  than they were then.  What kind of equipment   obviously you didn   t have internet and some of  that   but what kind of visual aid equipment would you find in a typical  classroom?  Probably 8- or 16 mm movie projectors. Overhead projectors, other sorts  of projectors that projected glass plates with photographs on them. The  copy machine, an embryonic version of today   s copy machines was  coming in. Things were typed instead of computer generated. There  were dictating machines around; they produced a recording on a record,  not on a tape or on a disk, but on a record. Blackboards were pretty  widely used, black boards instead of white boards. Notes were not  handed out. We used a lot of books back then, and I almost think that  books provide a better learning mechanism than today   s handed out  8  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  notes and stuff like that.  What about some of the offices? I   m trying to recall what Dr. Johnson  shared, I think his first office was in a stall.  Yeah.  Was that common? To have an office in a stall?  Well, yeah. There was a line of stalls that opened to the outside.  Which direction did they open out to, do you recall? Was it here in the  McElroy building?  No, it was in the old first vet building, part of which is now McElroy  Hall. The old building was constituted of an auditorium, a clinic floor  and a pharmacy, and then a barn and stall space. Most of the stall space  was opened to the inside of the building but there were a series of six or  eight stalls that opened to the outside of the building and most of those  became offices. When I first came to work here in 1956, our office was  in the hayloft of the old clinic building. The roof of that building was  composed of thick slabs of plaster tile or something and I think it was  designed to store heat so that in the summer time if you were working at  10:30 or so at night, it was still 90-plus  degrees  in those buildings. It  was pretty crude.  Well Dr. Panciera, going back in just a little bit to your student  experience here as a professional student at the college, are there some  experiences that stand out in your mind? Extracurricular, classroom,  whatever?  Socially, for a single guy that lived in, I lived in the old TF 9, the old  anatomy and pathology building, with one roommate. Our social life  was pretty limited. The vet school had one major all-school blast I think  at the end of the spring semester. It was a pretty wild party. And we had  something we called a smoker in which some of our classmates were  joke tellers. The thing I remember best was that we had boxing matches.  I was a boxer that had the advantage of having grown up in a  neighborhood where my neighborhood chums were in a boxing club and  I sparred with them sometimes. So I learned a little bit about boxing and  it gave me a big advantage in our smoker performances. I think we did  that two different years. That was a big event. Probably the most  important thing I did as a student was I met and courted my wife. That  was a big deal.  Is there a story there? You talked earlier about how your social life was  9  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  pretty tough, but you must have worked something out   Well one of my roommates was dating a hometown neighbor of my  wife, and that   s how I met my wife. I owe my old roommate and  Beverly a big debt for making it possible for me to meet my wife.  After you left, you went to Cornell and got your master   s and Ph.D.  there, is that correct?  Right, correct.  Can you share a little bit about that experience, how you got to Cornell,  and then maybe we   ll talk a little bit about how you got back to OSU?  Well, I think I finished Vet school, or graduation was on May 26, 1953.  I got married two days later. Our honeymoon consisted of checking into  potential graduate schools between Stillwater, Oklahoma and Westerly  Rhode, Island. I think we stopped at the University of Illinois, Purdue,  Cornell, and it seemed to me that Cornell had the cart behind the horse. I  was fortunate to be admitted to their program and it was pretty intense,  and I   m thankful for that. While I was in graduate school, Dr. Krull  actually informed me of a possible position here at Oklahoma State and  fundamentally that   s how I got here on the faculty in 1956.  Did you find going through graduate school that you wanted to teach at  that point as opposed to practice? When did you make that decision?  Well when I went to graduate school my goal was to become better  informed specifically about bovine reproduction. But the pathology bug  bit me pretty hard and I was having so much fun learning that I gave up  on the practice idea.  Over a tenure of what, nearly 40 years here, you   ve worked under  several deans. Can you share some of your recollections to some of  these? There are probably some good and some bad recollections there.  How do you compare them?  I think I have been associated with the Vet school for every single dean  except one, Dr. Orr who was one of my professors but who didn   t  survive until I got back on the faculty. And I didn   t know that much  about Dean Mac except he was into everything in Stillwater and a grand  ol    guy. Our next dean was Glenn Holm, a pretty capable guy, I thought.  One of the things that impressed me about the early deans was that one  dean and a secretary could administer the whole veterinary school,  compared to today when we have I don   t know how many Associate  Deans, support people, a business office. Things have become much  10  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  more complicated. Let me see, after Glenn Holm, there was Bill Brock,  and then Morgan and then Joe Alexander, and then Mike Lorenz. A lot  of good people in there.  Can you think of some particular leadership strengths or qualities some  of those brought to it?  I think Holm was a pretty strong guy. I   m afraid I might be forgetting  one dean. I think Joe Alexander advanced the plate of the school  significantly, and I think Lorenz has   I   m just very happy that he   s here.  I think he   s been an excellent leader and a good man.  Are there any Dean Lorenz stories that you can tell me? Do you  remember him maybe as a student perhaps?  Well actually, Dean Lorenz maintains some of the personal qualities that  I recall him having as a student. He never lacked for confidence. I think  his performance is probably the product of trying to satisfy his ego.  That   s great. That   s what could be one of the things that makes him go.  I   m gonna say, he   s a hell of a good dean.  Well talking about you and your specialty a little bit, I studied some of  your research. Pretty impressive. As an outsider, I   m saying pretty  impressive. If I   ve got it right, your specialty field is primarily  pathology, parasitology. Is that right?  Pathology. I   m trained in pathology. Some people think I   m pretty good  at parasitology. And if that   s the case, it   s because of the stimulation and  motivation that Dr. Krull gave me.  I think you   re being a little modest. I know you made some important  contributions in the field, especially on blood diseases in dogs, bovine  respiratory diseases, and shipping fever. Can you discuss your research  over the years a little bit?  My research really revolves around trying to understand nature   s  experiments, not my experiments. And what I really mean by that is that  nature creates diagnostic puzzles, sometimes puzzles that have never  ever been recognized as puzzles before. I   ve had the good fortune to  recognize several of those sorts of puzzles. I   ve also made some  additions to puzzles that had been recognized but I   ve been able to fill in  some of the blanks, and it   s been fun. I mean it kind of makes me get up  in the morning, still. The only reason I   m here doing this right now,  several years after I retired, is that I   ve had a lot of fun in the last ten or  twelve years studying primarily one disease, a dog disease.  11  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  You   ve had a long career in both research and teaching. Is teaching  your first love? Do you have a favorite area?  Well, having grown up in veterinary medicine in an environment where  teaching was the primary issue, I felt that to be my first obligation as a  faculty member. I like it a lot. You asked is it my first love and the  answer is my love is shared by lots of different activities as a faculty  member.  Are there some former students here that you take special pride in?  Oh hell yeah.  Can you name some of them?  Well, Tony Confer, Mike Lorenz, Jerry Ritchey, Melanie Breshears,  Talmadge Brown, Bob Whitney who became Surgeon General of the  U.S. of A. for a while, much to my surprise. There are too many to think  of. Check out that note and look at the picture.  Do you mind if I read it aloud here?  Yeah, go right ahead.     Dr. Panciera, I wish I could be there to congratulate you. You honor  all of us by your efforts and it makes me proud to have learned at least a  few things at OSU. One of the greatest I think will always be not settling  for average. As a person should, you   ve demonstrated that to all around  you. I keep this picture in my office to remind me when I need a kick in  the ass. Congratulations.    Is that Greg Emmer?  Greg Emmet. Yeah.  Great. You probably have dozens of those.  I do. I do. I believe that a major responsibility of a faculty member is to  motivate. I don   t think faculty members teach anything, because learning  is a first person experience. It   s what students do. So my job is a  motivator and if it takes a kick in the butt, that   s okay by me. I   m  perfectly willing to do that.  What adjectives would some of your former students use to describe you  do you think?  I   m sure that some of them call me an SOB, and some are appreciative  of having been one of my students.  12  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Tough would be one of those words?  I hope so. I don   t like the word intimidation. I don   t like to think that  was one of my techniques. I like to think I drew lines in the sand and  that you better get as close to that line as you could.  In military they call that motivation I think.  Yeah  Well yeah, I mean it   s motivation and it   s also sort of remaining  in charge of your class instead of allowing other people. I mean, hey this  is the standard, that may not be a sharp line, but you need to put out the  effort or you don   t get much sympathy from me.  I expect discipline wasn   t a problem in your classes?  No, it wasn   t. You know, I   m probably a poor enough observer,  although I don   t believe that, to believe that in however many years I  taught in a classroom and gave exams, I   ve been suspicious of students  cheating maybe not over 2 or 3 times in 40-some years. I think part of  that had to do with the warning beforehand and the fact that students  believed the warning was for real, rather than kind of an empty threat.  Let me read off a couple of things here for you, embarrass you just a  little bit. In 1964, you received the Inaugural Distinguished Alumni of  the Year award.  Yeah that   s right.  The college year book was dedicated to you in 1975. And you received  the Norden Distinguished Teaching Award in 1986. How special were  these recognitions to you?  Well I think the best one was the Alumni Award. I   ve probably got  many more than my share of honors and they kind of embarrass me  because there are other people around, or have been around that have not  been adequately honored and I think   it embarrasses me. Yeah, yeah,  the yearbook.  The yearbook   s dedicated to you in 1975. The Norden Distinguished  Teaching Award in 1986.  Those things have happened at least three times each. I mean, I   ve been  around here a long time.  I just picked around     13  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Yeah, yeah. So my percentage isn   t all that good.  So you earned each of those three or four times around.  Yeah.  That   s fantastic. You might have sort of answered this, but what kept you  at Oklahoma State University so long? I   m sure you had opportunities to  go other places and certainly with your degrees from Cornell which is a  very prestigious college of Veterinary Medicine School, but you stayed  at Oklahoma State.  This is going to sound   I came back here from graduate school knowing  that I had learned a lot in graduate school, that I could be a significant  contributor to our program here, and I suppose that   s why I came here to  work and it might be a major reason for having stayed here. I have felt a  strong commitment to the Veterinary School at OSU. I have wanted it to  get better and better over the years, and it has. I   m proud to be here. You  know, we have not been one of the more prestigious veterinary schools  in the country, but we   ve improved a great deal and I   m really pleased to  have been part of it.  It was a long career as a faculty member. Are there some favorite  memories that you have? You must have, of course, hundreds or  thousands of them. Are there some highlights for you? Some things that  stood out? I   m not talking necessarily awards, but just personal  experiences, rewarding experiences?  Almost every day has been a reward really. I think I   ve helped a lot of  cattle people, swine people, sheep people in the state of Oklahoma.  Some dog people, through diagnosis. And diagnosis sort of in the  prevention of added problems. The individual cases where we made a  difficult diagnosis or an important one. I mean there are many many  many of those that are highlights in my life.  One of the things that I am particularly pleased with is the recognition of  a disease in a calf, a parasitic infection that was eventually recognized in  people. It   s a very important disease in people with AIDS. My report  was not the first report of cryptosporidium, cryptosporidiosis in the  world. It was seen in the early 1900   s in snakes and birds. But my  publication sort of opened the flood gate of people recognizing this  disease, this infection, and several years later it was eventually  recognized in man. So I kind of like that one.  That was then also something that was transferrable to research in AIDS  and HIV.  14  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Yup. And there have been several things.  It   s a multi-multimillion dollar business shipping cattle. You must have  had some impact in there. There are some times they refer to it  generically as shipping fever, some significant research in that area.  Was that important to you?  Oh yeah, I mean the work that I personally was involved with early on  was sort of primitive sort of stuff. When Tony Confer came here as a  trained immunologist, he grabbed that ball and has gone somewhere  with it. However, the focus of our work has been attempting to produce  a highly effective vaccine which we   ve made great progress towards.  But we don   t have the silver bullet even yet. I think we started that  research in 1969.  Wow.  Yeah, see, 40 years. There   s a lot of people out there in the public that  think, oh hell, give me a couple of weeks and I   ll work on this and we   ll  have it done. But here we   ve been 40 years working on the same  problem fairly intensively and the problem is still out there.  They think there should be something like a vaccine for Polio that you  take and you   ve got it solved.  Yeah, shipping fever, I mean it   s an important disease and I would say  that Dr. Confer right now is one of the people right at the forefront of  study of that disease.  While there are highlights and some special moments, have there been  some frustrations and disappointments over the years?  There was a very frustrating period at one point in my career. Is it okay  to talk about deans?  Sure.  We had a dean for a period who didn   t seem interested in the quality of  our program, of the veterinary program, and that was very frustrating. It  led to some un-collegial activities and that   s probably the most  unpleasant period of my existence here.  How in your mind has the college changed over the years? In what ways  has it changed? I know in thousands of ways, but generally speaking?  Well, our program has improved tremendously. Our teaching program,  15  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  our research program, our goals for veterinary students and for research  productivity have expanded and improved and of course the profession  itself and the scientific basis for what we do has improved tremendously.  So you know, standing still would have been intellectual suicide I  suppose is one way to put it. I think we   re doing an excellent job now.  Especially as a retired person that   s still hanging around, when I  overhear what students are talking about and what they know that I don   t  know, it kind of scares me. It says that I   m either getting a lot worse,  more ignorant, or they   re getting a lot better. And I think it   s more likely  the latter. They   re getting better.  Well, what about some achievements that you recall with other  professors or former faculty members. Can you share the struggles of  getting accredited and getting the teaching hospital? You know some of  them have mentioned that as highlights of the progress that the college  has made?  I   m not one to ask that kind of a question because although I was  department head briefly, for a few years, four or five years or whatever it  was in the    80   s, my commitment has been primarily to students and  diagnostic process and more broad-reaching administrative issues have  not been my interest. I think maybe the deans haven   t been interested in  them anyway, in my opinions about some of that stuff. I can be pretty  conservative. I mean I at one time wasn   t too keen on everybody getting  a new computer every two or three years. What   s wrong with the old  one? And the answer is it gets slower and slower and slower the further  back you go   That   s true. We were talking a little bit about your perspective in the  college over the years. The new teaching hospital, how did it help with  the development of students? Was that significant do you feel to the  college, and to your efforts as an instructor?  I think it   s a little like Boone Pickens stadium, maybe. I think it made it  more attractive to recruit faculty. They certainly have a much greater  capacity to provide better patient care. As a practitioner   myself as a  practitioner of dead animals mostly, the teaching hospital hasn   t made  that much difference to me. They   re too interested in curing everything  and I   m interested in looking at disease process. I don   t recognize what  it   s done from my part of the program.  Well in your opinion over the years, what have been the strengths of the  college?  Oh, I think the faculty that have been around. People like Ralph  Buckner, Lester Johnson, Oyler, the faculty in general have had a very,  16  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  very strong commitment to the educational process and I think you can  spread one faculty over too much territory for that faculty person to be  heavily committed to all those territories. I think in our early days,  everyone was a teacher. That was what the faculty had to do.  Wasn   t it kind of what this college was known for in the early years, was  for teaching?  Yeah, exactly. More recently there   s an expectation of faculty   of many  or most of the faculty to be involved in research or in advancing their  discipline. It seems to me that, not specifically but in general, you   re  dividing a person into two pieces. However, I think it   s very important  that each of us have a creative activity component to keep us from  becoming mental vegetables. I mean to work on a specific project and  prepare it for publication causes you, if you have any pride in yourself,  to be pretty damned sure of what you are putting on paper for the world  to read is pretty close to the truth. It doesn   t have to be the truth, but it  has to be a defensible opinion.  Defensible opinion. I like that.  Yeah, and I think that keeps us sort of intellectually alive.  Sort of begs the question, you talked about research, you talked about  teaching. In your career, how much interaction did you have with  practitioners and also with people out in the field and with animals?  I   ve had a lot of contact with them. Until the diagnostic lab became  operational, I was involved heavily with providing diagnostic stuff for  the public. And that was good.  You think it   s an important component for faculty member to have?  Contact with the industry?  Yeah, I think it tells you a lot about what   s going on out there in the real  world. And like I said, it provides the faculty person himself or herself  with a lot of sort of exhilarating experiences, diagnostic experiences.  Yeah, I think for a lot of my career, my hours have been whenever any  veterinarian or person out there had a problem they wanted to talk about.  It got to a point one time that I just couldn   t stand to hear the phone ring.  Drove me     I suspect we glossed over a little bit, because I know in your work with  bovine and with cattle and the industry that you   ve had you had a lot of  contact with the public and the different industries involved in that.  17  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Yeah I did. I did. And it was good. I   ll tell you, I   m one of the lucky  guys who mostly got paid for coming to fun. Good stuff.  That   s great. I can tell from the sparkle in your eyes, you have enjoyed it  too. If asked, what advice would you give to a current or future faculty  member, administrator about advancing the mission of the college, what  would you tell them is important?  I would say number one, they   ve got to be a conscientious worker. I   m  not sure you can be a contributing faculty member in an eight hour day. I  think a few people who are extremely efficient, personally efficient can  do it, but if they   re like me, eight hours is not enough and neither is five  days a week. I like to think that it   s important that faculty feel that they  are working for the good of the company, in other words, the veterinary  school. Self promotion, if they   re doing that, conscientiously happens.  Self-promotion is not a very good personal goal for me. I mean, just like  any job, if you put 100  into it, on average good things are going to  happen. And if you put 120  into it a lot more good things are going to  happen.  I can imagine the faculty administration has a lot of things coming at  them, a lot of expectations, a lot of requests. In your mind, having had  this long look at it, what should be the appropriate mission of the  College of Veterinary Medicine, particularly Oklahoma State University  College of Veterinary Medicine?  Well at this date in 2008, I think we are a Veterinary College whose, it  seems to me, primary mission is to produce well-trained veterinary  graduates and whose added mission is to provide advance training for  primarily veterinary graduates. And in order to do that, there has to be a  level of research to provide training opportunities for these advanced  people. There has to be enough research, as I said earlier, to keep the  faculty intellectually stimulated. But there are veterinary schools in this  country today that are fundamentally research institutes and they sort of  have a side program of teaching prospective veterinarians, or in other  words the veterinary curriculum. I don   t like that, however the whole  issue has to do with dollars and I guess it   s necessary, but I don   t have to  like it even if it is necessary.  You indicated earlier that you feel good about the college. How do you  see the future of OSU College of Veterinary Medicine? Do you feel good  about it?  I hope it   s good. You know, who knows. I think if it   s good for anyone  in any of the vet schools in the country, we   ll be right there. Who knows  what   s in the future.  18  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Fair enough.  I mean we   re here today in the present, why not do the best we can right  now.  I know from our talking to you this might be an embarrassing question  for you Dr. Panciera, but seriously what do you feel has been your  legacy in nearly 50 years?  Like I told my kids, it doesn   t make any difference what you do in life,  just get good at something and swing the bat. Be there. And I think I   ve  done that here. I like to think I   ve helped motivate quite a few of our  students to actually become pathologists. Have a little bit of enthusiasm.  I mean it can be a hell of a lot of fun.  Hard work can be fun.  It   s good stuff. Yeah. I mean hard work for me, my family history, I  think farming and working with my dad, but especially on the farm. It  seems to me on the farm in those days, the 40   s, 50   s, we looked for the  most difficult way to do things and that   s how we chose to do it. So  work   .  Builds character.  Work is no big deal.  How do you hope people will feel when they remember Roger Panciera?  How do you hope they   ll remember you?  I hope that most people think that I usually knew what I was talking  about. That I was honest, that my students think I was fair. In that  regard, I think about Vince Lombardi, the coach of the Green Bay  Packers. He was quoted as having said,    He treated us all the same, all  of us players, like dogs.     But he was fair.  But he was fair about it, yeah. I really have tried to be fair. Even when  my own kid was in vet school. When they were in Boy Scouts I was  unfair to them. I would criticize them so the kid next to them would get  the message. But when my kid got into vet school, I vowed that I was  going to treat him just like all of the rest of the kids. And I think I did.  Did you teach him in some classes?  19  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  Gill  Panciera  You know, he probably wrote the best exam paper that I ever got. And  obviously the reason is because he was in my brain. He knew     Good genes.  No, no, no. He just knew the way I thought. I like to ask exam questions  that you had to figure out. For some questions you had to figure out what  the question was before you could answer it, because that   s what we deal  with  I mean hell, our patients don   t talk. You   ve got to be able to read  them. Right? I mean, I think that   s right. Why not have a little bit of that  experience in a classroom?  Well Dr. Panciera, it   s been a great interview. Anything that we   ve left  out? Anything you   d like to add?  Oh, hell. I mean, you know. You haven   t asked me what great kids I  have.  Well I think I know about the one.  I   m sure that   s out of bounds.  Well I do have to ask about your son, the son who went to veterinary  college, where is he now?  He   s actually working for the Governor of Virginia. He   s on the faculty  at Virginia Tech Vet School. So the Governor   s paying him and he   s  doing a hell of a good job.  Great. I   m proud of him. What about your other kids? You   ve got other  kids?  One of them   s a spy. My daughter is a spy.  Like CIA or something?  No. She   s a satellite image expert. She has a master   s from OSU in  Geography and her project was satellite imaging. So she works for a  defense contractor and kind of looks down on McFarland, if she wanted  to, or Baghdad or wherever.  -------  -------   
