 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Ms. Concepci  n Vivar Romero for the Latino Americans: 500 Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Edmon Low Library on the Stillwater campus of Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Tuesday, June 14, 2016, in the Edmon Low Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma. The interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, director of Library Graduate Services. Again, thank you for agreeing to participate in this Oral History Project, Ms. Vivar Romero. I want to remind you that this may be published as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, and that you have granted us permission to publish the transcript and video in part or in its entirety. Okay, to begin the interview, can you tell me something about your parents?  Romero My parents were born in Veracruz, Heroica Veracruz. They are my role models, they were very hard-working people. My dad was a little bit older when he married my mother, and for me, I guess it was normal to live around older people since my dad was forty-five years old when I was born. He was the greatest example to me. He was such a hard-working man. We were eight, nine brothers and sisters, and I admire him so much for raising us, same as my mother. Both of them work very hard to keep the family together. Like I tell my son and my daughter, we didn   t really have a lot. We didn   t have that much but it was such a close family. We were very close, very united, and it was very hard for me to leave my hometown when I decided to come to the United States.  Baeza I   ll probably ask about that later, but what did your father do?  Romero He was self-employed. He would buy metal scraps from big companies, re-sell them, and my mom was a housekeeper. Both of them, like I said   all I saw, since I remember growing up, it was seeing them working all the time.  5  Baeza How many brothers?  Romero Altogether, we were   . Okay, my father was   . His first wife pass away, and that   s why when him and my mother met, he was a little bit older. His first wife pass away, and they had a daughter together, which my sister was about seventeen, eighteen years old when I was born. My mother was also a widow, so she already had one son and one daughter. Then when they got married, we were   it was   . I have to count, I   m sorry. (Laughs) Four daughters and two sons were born when my mom and my dad   s marriage, so altogether it was nine kids. Like I said, I cannot imagine how hard it was for them to be raising nine children, but thank God. Each one of us, we follow their example and we just worked. (Laughs)  Baeza What did you do as a child in Veracruz?  Romero Just be child. (Laughs) Help around, my mom was always out of the home because she was working as a housekeeper. Then she started, not a business, but in Mexico, you don   t really have to have a licensed business. She would be baking cakes, and Mexican bread, or tamales, anything that would help the family to survive. Like I said, I tell Angela and Ryan, even though we were poor, we had a very happy childhood because it was another kind of life for us. Then as we became teenagers, we realize we needed to pitch in, so we decided to start working. We would go to school, but then in the evenings or late afternoons, we would go and babysit or help   . My uncle had a bakery. My brothers grew up working in that bakery. Me and my sisters would go to babysit, do something outside of the house so we can pitch in. I finish school, then I wanted to be a nurse   s aid. I realize it wasn   t my field, so I quit that.  Then I work on a pharmacy, and after that, I started working on a shoe store as a sales clerk. That   s when I met my children   s father. He was already living here, he was already established here, and I fell in love. When you   re twenty years old, you don   t really realize how big step you   re going to   . I don   t know what I was thinking when I was twenty years old. I just follow my heart. We got married, like I say, he was already established here. I had to follow him because, like my mom and my dad said,    It   s your husband. You   re already married.    I had to follow him, but it was very hard for me. Like I said, at that moment, I then realize that I was going to spend so many years without being able to see my parents. It was seven years later that I went back to see my mom and my dad. My son and my daughter were already five and six years old. The reason we didn   t go to see my parents that soon is because my kids were little, were babies.  They might get sick when we go to Mexico, and I accept that, but now I realize it was a time or years that I regret not being able to go back and see my parents. I came here to the United States in 1984. I met my husband, 6  1982; we got married, 1983. I came to the United States in 1984. A year later, my son was born, and the following year, my daughter was born. Then after that, like I said, I spent several years without seeing my family. I went back on 1992, I think. Three years later, my mother pass away, and then my father, which it was a surprise because my father being almost twenty years older than my mother. By logic, you think he is older, he is going to die first. It was a shock for me to   . When my brother called me to let me know that my mom had cancer, and she only had a month to live, so it was a very hard thing for me because I was already working at that time. I wanted to spend time with my mother, but I was just able to be there for a week. Come back, and three weeks later, my mother was gone.  Baeza How old was she?  Romero My mother was sixty-seven years old, so it was very hard to process. For me, she was still young, and she was gone. After that, after my mom died, which it was 1995, four years later, my father pass away. You come here to the United States, and you live a different life, a better life maybe, but you give up your family.  Baeza What was the process from   because you said you came to the United States after you got married?  Romero Yes.  Baeza What was the process of getting from Mexico to here in the United States?  Romero Like I said, my husband was already established here. We tried to   . It was going to be a long process for me to come, so I had my visa as a tourist. Unfortunately, they reject me. Once I was here in the United States, I don   t know what they saw, but they send me back to Mexico. I was happy that I went back to Mexico, to be honest with you, but then like I said, my parents said,    You have to be with your husband.    Unfortunately, I had to come. Somebody had to cross me. Somebody had to   me tuvieron que traversar la frontera.  They had to bring me across the border.  It was not a good experience like it is for everybody. You   re risking your life. You are exposed to people that you don   t know. You don   t know those people, and you just pray to God that they will take care of you and take you where they promised to take you. Like I said, it   s a experience that everybody that comes to the United   not everybody, but all the illegal people that comes to the United States goes through, and it   s a high risk. It   s sad that they have to come, or we have to come, in that way.  Baeza They didn   t bring you through the border crossing or through the desert?  7  Romero No, I was fortunate not to go through the desert. It was through Laredo, I think. To tell you the truth, I don   t know where I was. (Laughs) I truly have not that much idea. The place where they have me go through, it was in the middle of the night. It was, I don   t know why, but even the electricity went off for quite a few hours because there was some storms, or I don   t know what was happening. It was a very scary situation for me. Like I said, in those moments, you   re just like,    God, I   m in your hands, and let me go through this   .  Baeza What did they bring you across in?  Romero I think it was a small boat, like a lancha. There was another girl and four other guys, four other kids and older men. Like I said, I had no idea who they were, I was being   .  Baeza Who made the arrangements?  Romero There was this lady that she did all the work, and my sister-in-law.  Baeza When you decided to come back, as your parents are saying you were supposed to be with your husband, was it your parents who paid for this and organized it     Romero Oh, no.  Baeza    or your husband?  Romero My husband.  Baeza You were hidden inside the boat?  Romero No. Like I said, it was just so dark. Yes, we were on the little boat across the river, and then I was in the lady   s vehicle. I remember it was a huge truck. (Laughs) To be able to fit seven people there, I guess it was a big truck. Like I said, to be honest with you, I had no idea where I was. I had no idea the town that we went through. I didn   t speak any English at all.  Baeza They picked you up, or someone picked you up in Mexico, drove you to the river, and then you got in a boat?  Romero A small boat.  Baeza And crossed?  Romero Yes.  8  Baeza Then someone was waiting for you on the other side with a big vehicle, and then you guys drove. Where did you meet your husband?  Romero In Texas, in Houston.  Baeza The drive from the border to Houston, do you remember very much?  Romero Not a lot. I don   t know where I was. I know my sister-in-law actually was waiting for a day or so. I was wondering where are they or who is going to come and pick me up. The lady was very kind. They had a beautiful house. The children were very   . She had children. They were very, very nice to me, but I remember   . It looked like a whole day for me, waiting to hear something until the lady finally told me,    I   m going to take you to Houston,    and there my sister-in-law was waiting for me.  Baeza Do you remember when you finally saw your husband again?  Romero Actually, I spend time at my sister-in-law   s house, and then I flew from Houston to Oklahoma.  Baeza You just met him here at the   .  Romero At the airport. yes.  Baeza Then what?  Romero Then I was here. It   s a new world to you, it   s a different world. I was happy to be with my husband, but it was very hard, to be honest with you, very hard to be away from my parents. I spent a lot of time crying because it was the first time I was away from them, and it was not like I   m going back next week, or next month, or next year.  Baeza Were you able to communicate with them at all?  Romero We talk on the phone. We talk on the phone, and for years, I used to write. My father, he was a loving father, and he would write me back. We would   my mom, and my sisters, and my brothers would all to write me. I have very fond memories of my father because he would write me almost every week, every two weeks. Even if was just,    Take care,    or,    I love you.    That was, like I tell Angela and Ryan, my children, for me, writing letters to my parents, it was like a way to   . I will describe them what was life like around here, and to me, to receive their letters, it was also remembering my city, my family. That was the way I really liked to communicate with my parents, with my family.  Baeza After you got here, when was Ryan born? 9  Romero He was born in 1985.  Baeza A year after you came back the second time. Were you worried at any point, since you were undocumented, of being caught?  Romero Honestly, no because I didn   t go anywhere. (Laughs) I didn   t   my husband was working, I was at home. Would go out do shopping, do what we needed to do, but to be honest with you, I didn   t even think about that. I was just homesick. (Laughs) Maybe no, I was not afraid of being caught.  Baeza You said your husband was already established here in the Stillwater area?  Romero His parents came to Wisconsin first, on the sixties, maybe sixty-five, sixty-six, and he was like ten or eleven years old when he got here. When they got to Wisconsin, and they established themselves there in Wisconsin. His father, I think he was a translator for the braceros, and then he started working at Mercury Marine. It used to be here. Anyways, they were there, and then he decide, when MerCruiser was established here in Stillwater, then he came to work here, to Stillwater, and my husband came also. When I got here, they had been here for almost fifteen years, something like that.  Baeza How much English did you know when you got here?  Romero None. (Laughs) None whatsoever.  Baeza What was that like?  Romero Like I said, it was hard, but also like I said, I didn   t really go out a lot. To me, I guess it was not a big problem for me since he was the one speaking. When we went to the store, he would explain to me this and that. We were living over his parents for a year or so, but then when Ryan was born, we knew it was time for us to have our own place. At that time, 1985, you only saw maybe   . I was not familiar with campus life, or (Laughs) I didn   t realize there was Hispanics here in campus. Whenever I saw one or two Hispanic people, I would get so happy because I would be like,    Whoa  There is somebody I can talk to.    In a way, I guess it was a good thing that we went to live by ourselves, and it was mainly all the American people in the neighborhood that we establish our home. I forced myself to learn English.  Angela and Ryan, sometimes, my children, they will laugh because I learned English through Sesame Street and soap operas. It   s like I was already familiar with Sesame Street. Sesame Street is in Mexico, so I already knew the characters, and I would follow their dialogue. I was like,    Well, if it   s a soap opera, it   s in everyday life.    I got familiar with the characters, but 10  truly, I feel like that was a good thing for me to learn English. I was blessed to find a friend. She was the same age as I am, but she was a college kid, and she   . It was funny because we would just communicate through signs, but she was so kind to me, so patient to teach me.  That   s how I started pushing myself to speak English. It was scary when I was by myself because I was like,    If something happened to my children, how can I get some help? How can I do this?    We didn   t have a home phone at that time. I was at home with my children, being a housewife, trying to learn English through some of the shows. Like I said, it was hard sometimes to not to feel homesick. Taking care of my children was a beautiful experience. It kept me busy, (Laughs) but whenever I was not busy, I would still get homesick. I guess all the people that migrates from another country is general   it   s normal, especially when you don   t have anybody to talk with. Just wait for your husband until he gets home, and that was during four, five, six years.  Baeza What   s your first memory of Hispanic community in Stillwater?  Romero I am Catholic, so like I said, I think the first time I saw a Hispanic people, besides my husband   s relatives, it was at Walmart. Now, we have that joke,    If you want to find some Hispanic people, go to Walmart.    (Laughs) I was at Walmart, and then I see this lady, and I was like,    Whoa  There is a Mexican lady here with her children,    so I ask her where she was from. She was from Mexico, the state of Oaxaca, which is west   down from Veracruz. Then we were so happy to see each other, to talk, and then she told me about the Spanish Mass, which it was every month, St. John   s, and then I was like,    Wow, there is more Hispanic people here.    That   s how I got to meet more Spanish-speaking people, but it still was like only once a month.  Baeza And where were the people from?  Romero Different countries because most of the people that went to Mass was students. They either single, or with their families, or some were from Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia, some nuns that came from Tulsa. At that time, we were able to have the Spanish Mass because there was a priest, and a couple of nuns that came to Stillwater every month from the city of Tulsa. It was nice to be our own Hispanic people.  Baeza After you met this woman in Walmart, was that the first time you had gone to church here in the US?  Romero Yes.  Baeza At that time, how big was the community, do you think?  11  Romero Not as big as it is. (Laughs) At that time, like I said, I was not exposed to OSU. I didn   t realize how many people was at the university. I just saw the surrounding areas. It was a small-sized population, I would say. We had a Walmart. The Walmart was quite small, and the biggest place to shop was Cimarron Plaza, which is now a run-down place in a run-down area. That was the main place to go shopping. It was, I guess, like now the Lakeview Plaza, and there was J. C. Penney, T. J. Maxx, and maybe video store there, and some other stores there, but that was the main place to go. Walmart was   . I think where Payless or   . Walmart was somewhere in there, but it was a very small Walmart.  We had three or four grocery stores. It was three IGA Consumers. Safeway, I think, was one of the grocery stores, and when we went to the store, there wasn   t all these Mexican or Hispanic products. It was like a big surprise to see there was cilantro and jalape  os and maybe corn tortillas, but that   s all you were able to get at the grocery store. You think that it will be familiar, like,    Oh, this is not from Mexico, but this is something that I   ll like, that I am going to (Laughs) enjoy eating.    Not that I don   t enjoy eating American food, but it   s something that will make me happier.  Baeza Can you think of what year it was that the Hispanic community in Stillwater got bigger?  Romero I will say maybe early 2000. We went to the Spanish Mass every month, but then the priest and the nuns from Tulsa stop coming because it was not suitable for them anymore to come all the way here. Then we have another priest that will do the Mass, but in early 2000, we got a priest from Mexico. Somehow, we say he drew people. (Laughs) He is a very charismatic priest. That   s when we start, when the Hispanic community   . Somehow you just saw Mexican people everywhere, and not only people from Mexico, from another countries, but that   s when I noticed after early 2000, the Hispanic community.  Baeza Do you remember the priest   s name?  Romero David Medina.  Baeza How long was he here?  Romero He was here   I am not completely sure, but I will say between two and three years. Then the bishop from Tulsa, he realized that he was like a Mass, how can you say like, he would make people come to church. He was very, like I said, charismatic, and somehow he would make people get closer. I guess the bishop needed him in Tulsa since they have a bigger community, so he went to Tulsa. The community, or at least the people that was going to church when he was here, after he left, it went down, the amount of people 12  that assist, but then it picked up. Now we have, (I am talking about people going to the Spanish Mass) we have between maybe sixty and one hundred, one hundred and twenty people.  Baeza Who conducts the Mass now?  Romero Father Ken, he is an American priest, but he was kind enough to keep the Spanish Mass going, and we made him learn Spanish. (Laughs) He keeps learning Spanish, but yes, the Hispanic community has grown, and it   s people from different countries, so Venezuela, Argentina, Colombia.  Baeza When did you start working in the US?  Romero Well, my husband wanted me to be a housewife, which it was good because in that way, I was able to raise Angela and Ryan, enjoy them, and I guess they enjoy me being there. He felt like I didn   t needed to work since he was a provider. In 1993, 1992, he started having problems with his back. Finally, 1995, he stopped working because his back started giving him a very hard time, and then he had to file disability. There was no income coming, so for a long time I was asking him,    Can I work?    I want to work because I was used to work. In Mexico, I was used to earn my own money. When I met this lady, the first Mexican lady, she said she was working at the school. Since then, I was like,    Well, if she   s working, I guess I can work too.    Anyhow, I guess it was necessity that finally make him realize that somebody needed to bring some income.  I learn that I can go and work at the university. At that time, they didn   t have any openings, so I went to a nursing home. Since I said,    I have some   I work in Mexico. I was a nurse   s aid, so maybe I can go.    Well, they didn   t had any openings at that time, and when you need the money, you cannot be picky. They said,    The only positions we have available is housekeeping, if you want to apply for it,    so I started working quite soon. Two days later, I was hired. I kept keeping my eye on the   . I wanted to work at the university. Somehow, I don   t know why, it was exciting for me to work for the university, so I work for them. I work about three or five months, and then when I learn there was openings, that was on the fall 1995. There was an opening, so I went to apply, and a day later, I was hired.  Baeza Now, were you still undocumented at the time?  Romero No. In 1986, 1987, I think   the beginning of 1987, my sister-in-law from Houston, she came to visit. She told us about   at that time, it was the amnesty, la amnistia, and so she said,    You need to go with me, so you can start your paperwork. You need to be legal here and live. Have the opportune   there is an opportunity for you to have your papers.    I love my sister-in-law because she was the one that pushed me to do this. She has 13  always been very supportive to me, so me, and Ryan, and Angela, I didn   t want to leave my children here, we went to Houston, and we spent almost two months there.  It was like, you have to be there for the process, so thank God, I got my residence card, like three or five months later. I was blessed, and like I said, thanks to my sister-in-law that she was pushing me to do this. She wanted me to go back and be able to see my family, so that was in 1987. I got my green card, and then I got my working permit, which like I said, I was just at home. I was not   . (Laughs) You can say I didn   t needed to work, and like I said, I was happy to be with my children, spend time with my children. It was a very good thing, but I was being used to work, like I need to do something. (Laughs)  Baeza How old were they?  Romero When I got my green card, they were one, two years old, and then the years pass by. I didn   t see the need to become a American citizen. Whenever we went back to Mexico, a couple of times, it was   not a problem, but then you   re not a citizen, you go here. The citizens, you go there, and it was a confusing thing. Not a big problem, but anyways, then in 1996, I decided to become a American citizen.  Baeza You took the test?  Romero Yes.  Baeza How was that?  Romero It was actually, like they say here,    A piece of cake.    (Laughs) At that time, I was already working here at the university, so the gentleman   . To be honest with you, I was very nervous because two or three of the people that I knew, they had failed the test. I would be reading the book every day. I was like,    Well, hopefully I will pass it.    Anyhow, I got there, and I was like shaking, and then the gentleman was just asking me questions, like where are you from, and this and that. Then I   d say,    Well, I live here. I live in Stillwater, and I   m working at the university.       Really? Well, I know people that works there.     Then he asked me the color of the   it was a trick question. He was like,    What   s the   ,    something like the color of the white house. It was very simple questions, thank God. I was blessed. I thought he was just having a conversation with me, and then he say,    Well, you pass the test,    and I was like,    Wow. Thank you, (Laughs) thank you God.    It was scary, but it was easy too. To be able to answer, like I say, it was just three questions out of a hundred questions there, and he asked me the three easiest questions. 14  Baeza Where did you go to get sworn in?  Romero Oklahoma City.  Baeza What was that like?  Romero It was a happy experience, but then you also   at that time, they ask you to give up your Mexican citizenship, so it was like   . I was happy. I was happy to become part of this country. Even though it   s not my country, me ha cogido, me ha, they had embraced me, this country, I would say, with open arms. They have been nice to me, people here, so it was a happy experience. Next day, I went back to work, and they were waiting on me with a cake and a big celebration because they were happy that I became a American citizen. It was a good experience, it was a happy time for me. Unfortunately, a month later, that   s when my mom pass away, so it was a bittersweet experience.  Baeza Did you   . Now that the US doesn   t require that you only have one citizenship, have you thought about gaining your Mexican citizenship back?  Romero I thought about it. Well, three years later, after I came to the United States, one of my brothers, my youngest brother decided to come here. Not here to Oklahoma, he went to southern California. He was blessed also that at the same time, he became a resident, and now he is also a American citizen. He has done that, he has the double citizenship. He encourages me to do the same thing, so we won   t have trouble when you go as a Mexican because sometime they give you a hard time when you are in Mexico. I don   t know why, but they give us a hard time, but yes I have thought about it.  Baeza Que dicen?  What do they say?   Romero Como que se enoja un poquito.  It   s like they get mad a little bit.  (Laughs) No s  . Lo hacen dificil a veces. I don   t know why, but they make it hard for you.  Baeza What was your first job at Oklahoma State?  Romero I   ve been working as a food service aid. It was making salads, taking care of the dining room. I was blessed to have a lady manager that she taught me. Like I said, I grew up with hardworking parents, and that was already me, but this lady was very supportive. Even though she was a very strict manager, she would make you feel, or she will let you know when you   re doing a good job. I felt comfortable working for her. I felt like she pushed me to be a better worker, a responsible, dedicated worker. I   ve been working dining services for twenty, twenty-one years. 15  Baeza That   s a long time.  Romero Long time. It was, like I said, it was the circumstances that made me, or that I was allowed to work. It was temporary, until our financial situation got better, but in a way, I   m glad. I   m glad I was able to start working, so I don   t have to depend on somebody else, and I can support myself if I have to.  Baeza How old are your children now?  Romero I don   t know if they want me to say their   but my son is thirty, and my daughter is twenty-nine. They are my pride and my joy.  Baeza We   ll talk about them later. Where have you worked on campus?  Romero Scott-Parker-Wentz cafeteria. That is when I started working. I worked there for twelve years, fourteen years or more. Sorry, I work there maybe fifteen years, then I injure my shoulder on a car accident. They ask me if I wanted to move to another position where I will not be lifting heavy equipment, or whatever I needed to lift that it was heavy. I accept that position, and I   m working right now at the Henry Bellmon Center Research Center. There is a small caf   over there. It   s called Newton   s, and I run that small caf  . I   ve been doing that for four years, five years.  Baeza Have you been there from the very beginning of when it   s opened?  Romero No. Some other lady was the first employee when they opened that building. As far as I know, Henry Bellmon is a new building. It was, I think, for a year or so that this lady worked there, and then she moved somewhere else, and I was offered that position.  Baeza When you first started in the   90s     Romero Nineteen ninety-five.  Baeza    what do you remember, or can you remember seeing a lot of Hispanic employees, or did you see a lot of Hispanic employees?  Romero I did. Actually, the lady that told me about the job, about the position was a Mexican lady. Her husband was a professor here, and she worked there, food service. She was the one that told me about the position being open, and then there was another two ladies from Mexico. Mainly, it was students, how can I say it   . The husband will be going to school here, and the wives were able to get a job in the university.  16  Baeza Have you   was there   not a club, but did the Hispanic employees hang out together?  Romero Yes. We would try to mingle with the rest of the employees. Like I said, I was blessed to have this manager that she was very open to any diversity. She didn   t care if we were speaking Spanish. She would pat our shoulders, and she would be like,    You Spanish-speaking ladies,    but she was not being mean. She was   . It was comfortable to be around this lady. Some people would not be too happy about us speaking Spanish, but for us   and it   s not   . Some people might think, most of the American people might think that we are gossiping about them. You feel comfortable, you feel happy when you are talking to let   s say she is from Mexico. My hometown is close to her hometown, and it   s like   . Even with this lady from Honduras, I was introducing, and we would go to Walmart.  Like I said, the place to meet Hispanic or all is Walmart, so I went. Once I started working there, then I met another lady,    Well, I   m looking for a job. Do you know?    I would introduce them to my manager, and then they would be hired. Then I met this lady from Honduras, her husband was   they just came from Miami, and the husband was going to start working at Mercury, and then he ask me,    Do you speak Spanish?    I say yes, and he   s like,    Well, my wife is looking for a job. Do you know of any positions?    I said,    I think so. Let me talk to the manager,    so I go talk to the manager, and then this lady from Honduras was hired, and then another Mexican lady. I think I was a recruiter. (Laughs) I brought like five Mexican ladies, five ladies from Hispanic background.  Like I said, when you meet somebody that speaks your language, it doesn   t matter if they   re from Venezuela, Colombia. It   s like you feel that connection, and you want to   you feel good talking to them. Remembering, even like you remember this song, you remember this. Sometimes I   m like, I wish I met them when my children were very young because then I will   . I raised my kids by myself. I hadn   t   you don   t have experience as a parent, but then now that I   m older, and I see all these young mothers, exchanging ideas and all of that, I didn   t have that. Still, it feels good to find somebody that speaks your language, that knows the traditions, and all these things that brings you some happiness even for a few minutes.  Baeza You mentioned that not everybody was happy when you guys were speaking Spanish to each other? Did you have situations where people were mean or rude?  Romero Yes. Like I said, people has been nice to me, but there is quite a few people that they don   t appreciate, and they will say that,    I don   t appreciate you speaking Spanish.     17  Baeza These are other employees, managers?  Romero Other employees, and one lady was very direct. Me and this other Honduran lady, we were talking, it was about five in the morning. I don   t think it was the best time of the day for her to be listening to a foreign language. We were   and like I said, we   re not gossiping. We   re just having a good time, talking about anything. Then this lady comes, and she was quite upset. She was like,    I don   t appreciate you speaking Spanish at all, and you know, English is the official language here in Oklahoma. If you want to speak Spanish, you do it at home.    For a second, I was like   but then, I said,    With all due respect, you don   t have any right to forbid me from speaking my native language. I am not offending you.    She turns around, and she says,    Well, you   re laughing, and I   m   .    she said this,       and I   m assuming you   re laughing at me, or you   re making fun out of me.    I   m like,    We have more important things to talk about, I   m sorry. Like I say, you don   t have any right to forbid me from speaking my language. I don   t think anybody has the right to forbid.    Then she got quite upset, and she just kept working. It was sad to have somebody talk to you in that way, but at the same time, I was like,    I   m not going to quit the talking Spanish to my friends or having a conversation with my co-workers because that makes me comfortable.    I know it might make her feel uncomfortable, but as long as I know that I   m not saying any bad things about them, I don   t think I should stop.  Baeza Do you remember what year this was?  Romero That was maybe early 2000.  Baeza Is that employee still around?  Romero No, and actually she is a very charming lady. I think that morning she was not a happy person, (Laughs) but she loves me. She loves Angela, but that day she was like   . I don   t know what happened that morning.  Baeza Was she a pleasant person before that conversation?  Romero Yes, she was. She is still a pleasant person. She is not working there anymore, but we see each other Walmart, somewhere else, and she is very loving. I don   t know what happened that day. (Laughs)  Baeza Talking about speaking Spanish and then your children, Ryan and Angela, did you speak Spanish to them when they were growing up?  Romero Yes, there was no English at home, of course, because I didn   t knew any English. (Laughs) My husband, we agree to you to teach them Spanish. The way they learn English, it was watching TV shows and watching movies. At 18  that time, I was not driving. There was no need for me to drive, so we were always at home, and it was just me singing and read Spanish. Playing with them, everything in Spanish, that   s for the first three or four years. Since I was not driving, they were not exposed to   . I don   t know if expose is the right word, but my husband working, coming home late and me at home, they didn   t have the opportunity to be around more children. I don   t know if it was a shock for them to, not a shock, but hard for them whenever they started school because they were more used to Spanish than English. They knew English, they expressed themselves in English, but they were not   . They were like on this small bubble, where there was Spanish all the time.  Baeza How well did they do in school when they first started going?  Romero Maybe, like I say, it was a little hard for them, but I think it was harder for them to be away from me because we were so used to be at home. I cry all day long when my son left for kindergarten, but I had Angela with me, so we were   . Then when Angela left for school, I just felt naked because I didn   t have my kids with me. I am glad that they grew up   . The first language that they spoke, it was Spanish, because now it has   I think it has given them the opportunity to get better jobs, and to know even though they live in this   they were born in this country, but they care about their Hispanic heritage. They care a lot, and they feel pride to be from Hispanic backgrounds.  Baeza Have you taken them back to Veracruz?  Romero Yes. The first time we went back it was, like I said   . Now, my parents were not   . They didn   t have that la dicha  the saying , the cargarlos cuando eran bebes, to hold them when they were babies. It was after they were five and six years old. That was the first time we took them to Mexico. Maybe a second time, and then unfortunately, the third time that we went back to Mexico, that was after my mother pass away, but they love Mexico. Angela, she enjoys going back to Mexico and experience the culture, all the things that she knows. She   s always pushing me to go back to Mexico, to visit, to spend time with my family.  Baeza So that she can go along?  Romero Yes. (Laughs)  Baeza What are your children doing now?  Romero Angela is coordinate, she coordinates this program which is called, I don   t know if I   m pronouncing right, because I get confused with rise and rice. This program, Retention Initiative for Students Excellence. It   s basically for, what I understand, for low-income, first-generation students. She is in 19  charge of that program, and she gives herself to the job. She cares so much for her students. It   s a diverse group, and I   m not saying that she focus more on the Hispanic kids, but she cares so much for all of these kids. She relates to them because   I didn   t mention. They are, my son and my daughter, they are the first ones to go to college on my family   s side, and I   m guessing my husband   s side also.  For Angela at least, I know it is a must for her to push students to go to college, to be something. That   s what she does. She   s been running that program, I believe, for four years. Before that she, she work for another program related to students. She work for a high school. It was hard for her to get to college. She had to look for scholarships, she had to work hard to be able to start college. We didn   t have a very, like I mention before, having one income, it was hard for us to survive. That   s why I feel so very proud of Angela and Ryan accomplishing, going to school and being professionals now.  Baeza They both went to Oklahoma State?  Romero Ryan started on NOC in Tonkawa, then he wanted   well, sometimes, we as parents, we think that we know what   s good for our kids. He wanted to be a personal trainer, and at that time, ten years ago, personal training was not like   . Unfortunately, me and his father, were like,    What kind of profession is that? What are you going to do with that kind of title?    We pushed him to go on different path, like business. I guess he did it to please us, so he started business. I think he went for two years, but then, it was not what he wanted. Then he was not too happy following that career. He stopped going to school for a while, but then he finally   maybe it was like 2009, 2008 that he was like,    I want to go back to school, and I want to do personal training because that   s what I want to do.     At that time, he was working on a casino, and he asked for help from his father. He went back to school, he was going to   . He was working fulltime, went to Heritage College, and that   s where he got his degree, and he struggled. He was hired on a facility, I cannot remember if it was a gym or what was it. Then he was like,    I want to own my own business.    He was very blessed to find somebody that would help him, and he opened his business early 2010. He   s been blessed to keep his business open for almost six years. He has a studio. He runs that business by himself, and it   s hard for him to run a business with nobody   s help.  He is by himself, so it   s a big accomplishment for him. It   s a dream that he had for years, and God bless him to be able to go to school, and he is doing right now what he feels is right for him. Angela, she is a   . The two of them are my pride because they have pushed themselves so much to accomplish what they wanted to accomplish, even though we had a hard time. We had a 20  very hard time when they were growing up. Financially, emotionally, it was not a very pleasant life for a few years. I think that unfortunately, sometimes when you have a rough life, that   s what pushes you to do better, to do your best so you can move forward and have a better life.  Baeza Speaking of life, what for you is the most important or meaningful experience of your life?  Romero My children.  Baeza Anything in particular with your children?  Romero Just by seeing where they are right now, just by watching them, watching and knowing how much they have accomplished. I don   t know if I am answering your question. (Laughs)  Baeza What about yourself? What   s something that you   ve accomplished that you are the most proud of?  Romero For myself, that   s a good question. My priest has asked me that several times. I don   t know, I don   t really think about myself that much.  Baeza Do you have something that you wish to accomplish in the near future or in the future?  Romero I know I should, I need to have a goal. To be honest with you, I don   t. I don   t think about myself that much. I don   t know if that is good or not. (Laughs)  Baeza Is there something you would like to say, probably in Spanish, to encourage someone who might be considering coming to the United States or immigrating, someone who has recently immigrated, some advice you would give them from your own life?  Romero Yo se que en Mexico, la vida es dura. Para sobrevivir es muy duro sobrevivir en Mexico. Pero tambien, yo se que se piensa en la familia, dejar su paiz de uno para mejorar la familia, pero tambien, lo que deja uno atras, viene uno a, a una vida mas comoda, a ganar mas aqui en los Estados Unidos. Pero dejamos parte de nuestra vida, en nuestro paiz. Es en la manera en que yo me siento. No se, no se si eso es un buen comentario o no pero, soy feliz aqui porque tengo a mis hijos. Son mi vida, pero parte de mi vida esta en Mexico todavia.   I know that in Mexico, life is hard. To survive, is very hard, survive in Mexico. But also, I know that one thinks about the family, leave one   s country to improve the family, but also, what one leaves behind, comes one 21  to a life more comfortable, to earn more here in the United States. But we leave part of our life, in our country. Is in the way that I feel, that   s how I feel. I don   t know if that is a good commentary or not, but I am happy here because I have my kids. They are my life, but part of my life is still in Mexico.   Baeza Todo el tiempo.  All the time.   Romero Todo el tiempo.  All the time.   Baeza Is there anything that you would like to say that I didn   t ask you about?  Romero You live here, your mindset more comfortable, you have a better life, but also to have that comfortable life, you have to work hard. Back in Mexico, and maybe another countries the mindset, the way they take and the way I know. What would   . I   m going to be earning dolares,  dollars  and I   m going to have a better life. Yes, you are going to have a better way of living here, but to be able to have that, you have to work hard. You have to work hard to have what you have. I experience that myself, and that   s the way I see it. If you are going to buy   to have the comfortable life that you want to have just like the American people, the people that lives here, you have to work hard, just like my parents show me. I always follow my parents example, by working honestly, by not cheating, by not   . You accomplish what you want to accomplish, but it   s hard when you are not looking for the easy way to have things. When you know that it isn   t honest, it isn   t a way to make a living. That   s the way I see it.  Baeza Okay. Well, thank you very much.  Romero You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
