 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Tuesday, August 2, 2016, and I am in Erick, Oklahoma, Beckham County, to interview Charlene Davis as part of our Cowboys in Every County Oral History Project. Charlene, thank you for being with us today.  Davis Well, thank you for coming.  Nykolaiszyn Well, let   s learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell me the year you were born and where you were born?  Davis I was born in January 24 of 1942, and I was born at the Sayre hospital.  Nykolaiszyn And tell me a little bit about your parents.  Davis My father   well, we were farmers. Everybody worked at farming, but specifically, like, he grew cotton and wheat, and ran cattle. He also had a herd of cattle. He would milk them each morning, and we would refrigerate the milk. He had a cream separator, and he   d run the milk through and separate the cream. We would take that into Sayre on Saturdays to sell the cream to the creamery. Then in addition to that, my mother and I, we would deliver quarts of cream, and the cream was like sour cream. In other words, you could pull a spoon through it, and it would stay separated. It was very   a lot of butter fat in it. Various ladies in Sayre would buy our cream and our eggs, and we would deliver eggs. Then Saturday was a big day for all of us. If there was a movie I liked, I   d get to go to the movie, and I   d get a bag of popcorn. Never did want a drink with it. Ate it slow enough, and it   s good. Then I would also go to the library, and I would bring home an absolute armful of books from the library. In fact, when I was pretty young, I was reading Silver Chalice, and I was impressed by me. (Laughs) But anyway, every Saturday, like I said, it was a town day, and we would sell our stuff.  Then another exciting part about it   it   s where you come from. All our meals were cooked at home, and Mother was a tremendous, wonderful cook. 5  Saturday night, after we   d been in town all day, Daddy would buy a box of Post Toasties and some bananas. We got to have Post Toasties and bananas for supper, and it was a treat for us  I mean, normally it was eggs and bacon and toast and things like this, but that was our treat. Mother was from Elk City, and she was a five-foot-tall lady and very pretty. Daddy was a handsome guy. We were active in the church. In fact, the first house that I lived in, it was just about a quarter of a mile south of the church. It was a Baptist church that my grandfather had founded. In fact, I have pins. I think at it, and I go    cluck, cluck    because I have pins for attending Sunday school continuously for eighteen years. (Laughs) In fact, my aunt and uncle had a lake in south Texas, and they invited us there. We went and they had to take Charlene to church so she could get to her Sunday school. Anyway, that   s neither here nor there.  Nykolaiszyn How did your parents meet?  Davis I don   t know. I really don   t know.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and are you an only child, or do you have siblings?  Davis I have a brother that   s two years older than I. Then I have a sister who was nine years older, but she has passed away.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and tell me the names of your parents.  Davis My parents, my daddy was Amos Robert Green, and Mother was Frances Mae Penick.  Nykolaiszyn All right, so you   re growing up outside of Sayre on a farm. Chores, did you have chores?  Davis Yes, and they were typical. I did not like   Daddy had built pens for our chickens, and you had to reach in the box to get the eggs. There were bull snakes in it, so you learned to take a stick and prod around in there so you wouldn   t stick your hand with a bull snake   . I did not like it, but I had to do that. He tried me on milking the cows, and that   s how they were all milked. They were hand milked, but I did not have enough strength in my hand. I made the cows give up their milk, so I lost that job, thank heavens. (Laughter) I had to hoe weeds in the cotton fields. There was a tree in the center of the field. It wasn   t that I really needed to go to the bathroom, but I needed to go to the bathroom a whole bunch because I got to go over to the shade tree for a little bit and cool off a bit. (Laughs) Daddy did not make me much of a worker, but yet I look at what I   ve done since I   ve become an adult, and I think I worked just as hard as I would have on the farm.  6  We would pick cotton. Mother made us bonnets, and the slats came out about this far in front, I mean, no sunshine was supposed to get to my face. Daddy pulled a fifty-foot sack around. Then you walked, and you pulled the cotton and so forth. I   d get down to the end of the row, and, of course, he had a really, really long sack. He was doing two rows, and he was moving. I guess I was just filling time. (Laughs) I don   t know. I never did really get my heart into that because I   d get to the end of the row, and he   d weigh his sack, and he had a hundred and twenty five pounds. I   d weigh mine, and it didn   t do   well, it   d only have ten pounds. (Laughs) Once again, my tree was still over there, (Laughs) and so that   s where I would be able to take my breaks. That was one of our main chores because everything on the farm, it took all of us to make it happen.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you mentioned your mom made your bonnets. Did she make other clothes?  Davis Oh, very definitely  In fact, everything I had was homemade, and then I learned to sew. I was in the 4-H program. I had a pair of curtains that I made that went to the state fair, and they won First. I showed livestock in 4-H. Interesting story: most of my calves were, I   d get First or Second. I don   t think I ever had any champions. I had a Duroc hog that I had showed in Beckham County, and it won Grand Champion. It had really, really good possibilities, and now this is a fun thing about it. Daddy hooked up to a cotton trailer. That   s the only kind of trailer we had. He had our animals, and he had to have the feed, and we had to have everything. We started  Highway  152 to Oklahoma City because then that was the route that you would take. I don   t know, three or four times tires would blow out. He would unhook from the trailer, take the tire, go to the nearest town, get it fixed, and bring it back. We finally made it to the City. Well, I had this good hog, and it was in the hog barn. It was time for me to go show; it was state fair. The hog got excited, and we were chasing the champion red Duroc hog all over the fairgrounds. Needless to say, by the time I got him into the show ring, he was not show quality at all. (Laughs) Yeah, little things like that make life interesting.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   re talking about 4-H. When you started to school, where did you go?  Davis I went to Sayre schools. I rode the bus.  Nykolaiszyn I was going to ask how you got there.  Davis I rode a bus.  Nykolaiszyn So on the bus route, were you among the first or the last or somewhere in the middle to get picked up? 7  Davis Kind of middle. It still took a long time, though, but all I had to go home was work. Yes, I worked, but I also read an awfully, awfully lot, and I liked school. I can remember when I was little, Daddy had a five-gallon creamery can by the back door. My brother and sister were in school, and I really felt mistreated because I could not go to school. I would have been in kindergarten, and there wasn   t any transportation unless Mother and Daddy did it. We didn   t have that kind of money or time. Anyway, there was this guy from Sayre. He had a mobile station, and he would bring gasoline to fill up Daddy   s tank. His name was Jimmy Winget. I would sit on the gas can, and I   d call him,    Wimmy Jinchit.    We had more fun. Then the grader guys would let me ride in the graders. These were big treats when you were too young or not able to go to kindergarten.  Nykolaiszyn Well, when it came time for you to go to school, kind of describe your elementary school for me.  Davis I had a wonderful, wonderful first grade teacher, Mrs. Smith. I loved school from the very first minute until, what, thirty-eight years later. No, it   d be more than that. I really did. I loved school. I loved learning. I loved being able to interact with the kids, and have friends and do things together. I liked it. Fourth grade, Mrs. Lowrance, our teacher, she asked us all what we wanted to do, and I said I wanted to be a teacher. You know what? I went to OSU, and I graduated with the exact number of hours that were required to be a teacher.  Nykolaiszyn Were your family, were they very supportive of education?  Davis Oh, very much so, yeah. Any involvement in school, any parent involvement, they would be part of it, and they encouraged me. They bought me a saxophone, and I played the saxophone in the marching band. Then I was a drum major. I was trying to think whatever else. I went to Girls State in 1959 as a representative from Sayre. That was interesting because I think it was a business and professional ladies that had sponsored me. I was attending a 4-H camp at Quartz Mountain. We had a little bit of time in the afternoon, and one of the ladies was going to pick me up and take me back to Sayre for my report back to the group about my experiences at Girls State. I had climbed up, and I put my foot on a rock. I looked down in it, and there was a snake. I didn   t know where the head was or where the tail was, but anyway, needless to say, I didn   t work much on the speech that I was going to give. My presentation to them is I sang some of the songs that we sang at Girls State, (Laughs) and I thought that   s about as good as anything. Why not?  Nykolaiszyn Would you ever attend 4-H Roundup in Stillwater?  8  Davis Oh, very much so, yeah. Many, many years I went to Stillwater. In fact, Lana Ruth and I gave a soil conservation demonstration on waterways. We had worked on it and prepared it and everything, and went to Stillwater. Well, we had to have grass because we were showing how the water washes more quickly without grass. We went outside the dorm, and we borrowed a little bit of OSU   s grass to give our demonstration. We did win a Grand Champion on it, so surely OSU forgave us for our little, little swatch of grass that we got. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn As you   re progressing through high school, how did you figure out that OSU was the place you wanted to go?  Davis Well, I was going with a guy, and he was going to go to OSU. I went with the family to a lot of ball games at OSU. I know once we were driving home. He was asleep, and I got lost. Instead of coming down, like, through Cheyenne or Sweetwater, I was at Arnett, Texas, and I thought    Oh, dear.    But we got it fixed; we found home. Yeah, I attended all the ball games. In fact, when we were at OSU, we didn   t miss many of our football games. I loved the basketball. I always said I liked basketball. First of all, it   s in the indoors, and you don   t have to deal with elements, and then I just like   . In fact, my grandchildren, all their basketball games   . Of course, Sayre didn   t have football, but Clinton did. I go to all my grandkids    sporting events. Any efforts they give, I will be there.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you graduate from Sayre High?  Davis Nineteen sixty.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, so 1960 you graduated from Sayre High, and you   re heading to Stillwater?  Davis I was already in Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn You were already in Stillwater, so because of the guy?  Davis Yeah, we were married then. In fact, I finished my first semester at Stillwater High School, and all I lacked was a   I can   t even remember. I only lacked one course, and I took it by correspondence. I finished, and then I came back because Stillwater said you had to go to their school to graduate there. I took my correspondence, got all my credits, and then came back to Sayre and graduated with my class.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, so tell me how you met your husband.  Davis At 4-H, basketball games, Sayre and Erick played.  9  Nykolaiszyn Okay, so you   re in Stillwater. You   re a freshman at OSU. You   re married.  Davis Got a baby.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and when was your baby born?  Davis April.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, of 1960?  Davis Yeah   I think.  Nykolaiszyn Where are you living in town?  Davis I was trying to think. I think it was Seventh Street because I know the car had to take my husband to work, and I can remember walking to the Safeway. I   m pretty sure it was a duplex on Seventh Street. I know my first semester that I started OSU, I walked. I carried my baby, and I walked and left the baby at a babysitter   s. Why in the world I ever did this, but I took swimming. By the time I got through swimming an hour, and picked Susie back up and got home, I was just absolutely worn out. Sure got me in shape, though. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn I think it may have been required at that time. I think you had to take swimming.  Davis Well, I did, but I thought   . Like I said, there was one vehicle, and that went to work. Whatever I   groceries, I waited until the car got home, or went   . In fact, I remember one day carrying a sack of potatoes, and I thought,    Oh, I don   t think I   m going to buy this again. We   ll wait until we have a car.     Nykolaiszyn What was your husband studying?  Davis Animal husbandry.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, so you have a baby, you have a husband, and you   re going to school. That is tough   Davis Well, it   s how you approach it. I did not think so. Like I said, I enjoyed school, and you adapt. You do what you have to do to make your grade.  Nykolaiszyn That   s true. That   s true. Tell me about some of the classes or professors you remember fondly or maybe not so fondly.  Davis Interesting, in the education field, I got really close to some of the teachers. I can   t say that I remember all the names. I do remember I took an art class. 10  Not disrespectful, but she was very, very old, and kind of wizard and white haired. She invited us to her home to see her artworks. That was quite an honor. I went, and she had this monster painting of the most voluptuous, beautiful woman I   d ever seen. It was her. (Laughs) Never in my life would I have figured that. She was quite interesting, and that   s what makes life fun.  Nykolaiszyn You were studying to be a teacher, and was there a certain area of specialization you were aiming for in your teaching curriculum?  Davis In elementary education, you cover all.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and you also had a minor?  Davis In French.  Nykolaiszyn In French  How did that come about?  Davis I wanted to go to France. First of all, it   s a beautiful language. It   s the prettiest language I   ve ever known, and so I have a minor in French, yes, which got me my job. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn So you finished. Were you able to finish in the four-year time period?  Davis Yes ma   am.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and while you were at OSU, in between studying did you have a job?  Davis No.  Nykolaiszyn No. Did your husband work     Davis Yes.  Nykolaiszyn    on campus? What did he do?  Davis He worked at the pig barn     Nykolaiszyn Oh, interesting.  Davis    where you go through lots of pairs of boots. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn How was laundry?  Davis I can   t remember. We did not have a washing machine, so we had to go somewhere to do that. I remember when we splurged, we would go to the A W and have a hot dog with a frosted root beer. 11  Nykolaiszyn Well, I was going to ask what you would do for fun outside of   .  Davis Well, that was it. We   d go to a movie every once in a while but not too much. Sometimes activities on the campus we would participate in.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, were there   would you attend sporting events on campus?  Davis Yes.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, tell me about that experience for you.  Davis Well, the time we were at Stillwater, OSU never won a football game. (Laughs) That   s a kind of experience. The basketball programs have been pretty good. I know one. Smothers Brothers came to Stillwater, and we went to see them because my parents-in-law came, and we all went to see that. Then they would come for the Homecoming parade, and so we would get to see that.  Nykolaiszyn And how would your classmates dress to go to class? How would you dress? What would you wear?  Davis Mainly, well, I can remember wearing a lot of dresses. I know when I first started teaching, it had to be dresses and heels. Now, you could take a pair of low heels at your desk for your room, but it was high heels. My thoughts about that now is that a lot of the teachers want to be friends with their students, which is fine, but I don   t think they need to dress at their students    level. I still think that children ought to know that someone is in charge of that classroom and they have a dress code in mind. I think it has to do with respect, making them respect you.  Nykolaiszyn And at that point while you were doing your education at OSU, did you have to do student teaching?  Davis Yes.  Nykolaiszyn Where did you do your student teaching?  Davis Oh, dear. I think it   s Will Rogers. Is that the one that   s on North something?  Nykolaiszyn Sure, so you were lucky enough to do it in town.  Davis Yes, yes, very much so.  Nykolaiszyn And how was that experience for you?  12  Davis Oh, it was fun   Nykolaiszyn You were ready.  Davis I was ready, yeah. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember much from graduation?  Davis My mother and daddy came up, and we took a picture in our backyard of Mother and me when I graduated. No, other than that, it happened.  Nykolaiszyn You   re on campus at a time when buildings like the library and Student Union are relatively new in 1958-59. Would you spend any time in those buildings?  Davis We had a close friend. He was assistant dean of men, Dean  Darrel  Troxel, and we became friends with him. Some Sunday nights he would take us out to eat, or I would fix something at our house. He   d tease me because I really did not have time for the library when I was getting my bachelor   s degree, and yet when I went to Weatherford and started on my master   s, I would go to the OSU Library. He   d tease me  He said,    You never came to the library when you were here, but now that you   re gone, here you are.    That   s how it is.  Nykolaiszyn I think some of that still happens a little bit today, too. As you look back at your time as an undergraduate at OSU, are there any memories or places that just really stick out in your mind?  Davis Not that I can think of right now. I   d have to think about that because I know there   s something that surely   .  Nykolaiszyn So after you graduated, what happened?  Davis We moved to Erick.  Nykolaiszyn So you moved to Erick. So you moved back to western Oklahoma.  Davis Yes.  Nykolaiszyn Why Erick?  Davis This is where his family was.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and so you started teaching right away?  13  Davis I had one year off. Well, I guess I graduated in spring, and then I had a year off. Erick alumni was having a street dance downtown, and the superintendent of schools came up and questioned me about my French. I said,    Yes, I have a French minor,    and he hired me at a street dance.  Nykolaiszyn He hired you to teach at the high school or elementary school?  Davis Well, I taught French at the high school, and then elementary at the elementary building.  Nykolaiszyn You   re brand new teacher; you   re teaching French. Are you feeling like,    I could teach French   ?  Davis Yeah, I mean, I was that confident. Like I said, the one young teacher that got me to thinking in French, it stayed with me after that until   . After many years of disusing, yes, you do forget.  Nykolaiszyn So take me through your career as a teacher. Kind of walk me through your different stops and what you taught. So you started out teaching French.  Davis Then the remainder of the time was in the elementary. I think I taught French about four, five years, I believe, on a temporary certificate and then two extensions. Then I went elementary. I loved teaching reading and English, and I taught math. It   s just that I was not enthused about teaching math, but, yeah, they had to have that too. I did that several years. During that time, I made a Teacher in Space application, which took me about a week to do, and my superintendent gave me the time off. I did not get it, but I would have been happy had I had. Like I said, I taught several years because I did not get my master   s until   . I probably taught ten, fifteen more years, and I got my master   s degree in Guidance and Counseling. Then came back. Erick had never had a counselor, and so I had to get in and learn what to do, or teach myself what to do. Eventually I got really, really busy and loved it.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you get your master   s?  Davis I don   t know.  Nykolaiszyn And you got that at Southwestern  Oklahoma State University .  Davis I got that at Southwestern, yes.  Nykolaiszyn You   re the counselor in Erick, and you do that for several more years.  Davis Well, yeah. I do that until I retired. I loved being the counselor. I really did.  14  Nykolaiszyn And what year did you retire?  Davis Two thousand and five.  Nykolaiszyn Wow, that   s a long career in education.  Davis Yes, it was, thirty-eight years.  Nykolaiszyn Do you still hear from some of your former students?  Davis Yes, I do. I have a lot of them, and this always throws me. They   ll come right up in my face,    Do you remember me?    Well, they were in the sixth grade. I look up at this person, and he probably weighs 250 pounds, and face is just like a little pumpkin. I have to admit, I do not remember them. (Laughs) Very few of them look like they did when they were in school.  Nykolaiszyn That   s a long time to teach. That   s a lot of students.  Davis Yeah, it is.  Nykolaiszyn Well, what   s interesting, I think, about you, Charlene, is what you do in your spare time, and so I kind of want you to talk about how you got involved with planes, with flying.  Davis That experience   a friend called from the City. He   d just got his pilot   s license, asking us to meet him at the airport, and he   d take us flying. He did. He wanted to show a stall, and he went up into a stall, and the engine died. Fortunately, he got it restarted. I thought,    No one should be that afraid,    so I go enroll in flying lessons. My instructor was at Shamrock, and he had a Piper 140 that I trained in. He was very patient with me because I told him,    I   m terrified of this thing.    I know the first flight we went up, he said,    Take the yoke.    Well, I passed out. (Laughs) He just calmly reached over, opened the little window, and sat back down, and, of course, Charlene woke up. He was very patient with me. In fact, we   d been through everything I needed to do, and I had just gone over and was doing touch-and-go   s, practice landings. I had quite a few hours, but that   s all right.  I wanted to be sure I had it down pat. He and I had gone up, and I stopped, and I said,    You can get out now if you want to.    In other words, I told him I was ready to solo. I did, and it went fine. From there on in, I worked through all my phases of it and got my private pilot   s license. Then because proficiency is so vital, and it   s hard to justify flying the amount of time just to be proficient, so I just started adding ratings. First, I got the private pilot, and then I got the instrument rating, and then I got a multi-instrument rating, and then a CFI, which is Certified Flight Instructor. Then I have all my ground school ratings and so forth. I was doing them just to stay proficient. 15  Lots of friends, wonderful experiences, and truly, truly wonderful friends for sure.  Nykolaiszyn You   re also involved with the Ninety-Nines. Could you tell me about your work with them?  Davis Well, the Ninety-Nines is a women   s flying organization, and they promote aviation any way that they can. I took my check ride for private pilot   I can   t even remember the date. Anyway, soon after I had taken and passed my check ride for the private pilot, I got an invitation to go to the Ninety-Nine meetings. This was fun because, you know, this was hat-and-glove times, and it was held at the Oklahoma City Golf and Country Club. I went down, and, of course, I was just terrified or in awe of all these women that flew airplanes. Truly enjoyed it and have been a member ever since. That would have been in the   80s. I   ve been a member since the   80s. I was chapter chairman for   82 through    86, and    86 I got the Oklahoma chapter Pilot of the Year award. Then I was chapter chairman again two or three years, 2011 through    13, or however it goes.  Anyway, I just did another stint as chapter chairman. Right now I   m chairman of a eight-state section meeting of Ninety-Nines that   s going to be in Oklahoma City. That is scheduled for September 16 through 18. I   ve got the hotel, and now we   ve got our schedule, and we   ve got our registration forms out. That is what I   m working on now. Making lots and lots of trips to the City. I was also chairman of Air Race Classic Start when they were in Oklahoma City. That was a major fundraiser really, but it was really lots and lots of fun. We paid money to be a start, but then we also made money. Every bit of money that we make, we use it as scholarships for females. In fact, just coming up the twentieth of August is Okie Derby. This is an air proficiency race where you estimate your speed and fuel, and who gets closest to it is the winner.  We just have a lot of fun with Okie Derby, but through our sponsors, we give a girl a five-thousand-dollar scholarship to fly. Now just in the last year or two, the Ninety-Nines has started a program where they will give a girl money to become a private pilot upon application. That is really a tremendous thing because they give a whole bunch of these out to girls. We   re just making more and more females. The thing about it, I   ve often wondered   I was thirty-eight whenever I got my flying certificate. At that time, females in the cockpit were not. I think it   s partly because of the Ninety-Nines and other women that just kept after it and kept after it and convinced them that,    Hey, yeah, we are just as good as you.    Now I see the young girls that come through our chapter here in Oklahoma City, and I think,    They have no idea what it was like then.    Of course, it   s changed so much for me.  16  For example, the glass cockpits, all of the instruments and everything that they use, because I used a section map and a compass heading. That   s how I got from place to place. Instrument was the easiest to fly because you   d let Air Traffic Control file your flight plan for you because once you   re cleared on an instrument flight, there   s no restrictions. They clear you all the way. I always say the instrument was   . In fact, two girlfriends and I flew to New York City in a Piper Dakota. Of course, one was a big wig in the Ninety-Nines, and she had to take the kitchen sink. (Laughter) We flew to New York City. One of the Ninety-Nine members in New York City   s mother had a apartment on Park Avenue, and we were invited to her house for a party. Then we were on a boat around Ellis Island on July the Fourth and saw the fireworks. This is the thing about all of our international meetings because they just really show you a lot of what you might never be able to do otherwise.  Nykolaiszyn What a great, supportive atmosphere, too.  Davis Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Anything we can do to get the girls to fly, we do. I am so thrilled because we kind of   in a lot of chapters, their members are getting old, and young girls aren   t interested. I think Oklahoman chapter is so lucky because I go to a meeting and there are as many young girls as there are the older ladies, and it is so fun. I said each time I leave, I think,    We took care of a whole bunch of business, but we laughed  We laugh a lot.    I thought,    Isn   t it great that you can go to a meeting and have a reason to laugh with each other and so forth?    Yeah, I am truly a Ninety-Nine   Nykolaiszyn With your experiences in the Ninety-Nines, have you run into any women who were Flying Aggies?  Davis Yes   I don   t know about females. Stillwater has had some girls that are involved in Oklahoma State, but I can   t remember who they are. I know the Ninety-Nines have helped judge NIFA, National Intercollegiate Flying Association, their finals, and I worked at Altus on that. Then we have a Ninety-Nine that   s a Oklahoma chapter member from De Queen, Arkansas. She had two NIFA final meets at her place, and I flew there. Interesting: one time, because to time them, you   ve got a string above you, and the minute they go over that string   . Of course, you   re laying back on the ground. I had an inchworm going over my string, (Laughs) and I was watching him going from side to side. One year, it was Memorial Day, and we were in the cemetery to do our timing of the planes. Everybody brought their meals, and came and visited graves and decorated graves and so forth. I just have a lot of neat experiences. That   s all there is to it  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m here at your house. I knew exactly what house it was. You have a flag out front, a nice big OSU flag out front. Your front door is orange. 17  There   s a lot of orange in your house. How do you show your OSU pride? You have this pride right here in this part of Erick, Oklahoma.  Davis Oh, I very definitely do because across the street   s an OU fan. (Laughter) I have to put my dukes up, and say,    Hey, I got it, too.     Nykolaiszyn Looking back at your time on campus and how you feel about the university, how did earning a degree from OSU impact your life?  Davis Oh, my goodness gracious, how did it not? As far as I   m concerned, I   m defined by it. You gave me my education, and, yeah, I would say it totally impacted.  Nykolaiszyn Are there a lot of OSU alums in this part of Beckham County, or in Beckham County?  Davis Yes, quite a few. In fact, I think around here in Erick there are a lot of people that have graduated from OSU.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. We talk to a lot of alums, and it seems that many, many folks are loyal to the school, to OSU. What is it about OSU that sparks such loyalty?  Davis The memories. I remember walking through campus, and the magnolia trees were in bloom. I thought,    Oh, my goodness, what a delightful smell  What a great way to be doing     I liked school. I really, really did, and any time on that campus, I always enjoy myself.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me a little bit about your children.  Davis I have a son,  Davey , who is a cowboy. No, he did not attend OSU, but he is a true cowboy. I mean he wears the chaps, and he takes care of the cattle. In fact, he had to go unwrap some wire from around one of my bulls of my cattle. Then I have a daughter Susanne, and she lives northwest of Sayre. Then I have a daughter Linette, who lives at Clinton.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and you have grandchildren?  Davis Oh, yes  Eleven  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Whoa   Davis Yeah, eleven, and not only that, now that   . Go forth and bear fruit, I do believe  Those eleven grandkids   I have   at least eight, (I may be forgetting some) at least eight great-grandchildren.  Nykolaiszyn Wow. 18  Davis Yeah, that   s why I said,    Go forth and create.    (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Holidays must be fun.  Davis Oh, they are. Christmas before last, I had them in here, and I had wall to wall tables. Now I take them to the barn, my barn, which is about fifteen miles away, because there   s plenty of room and I can handle all of them, seating them. Used to, there was this guy had a column in the paper, and he would tell of the family dinners that they ate sitting on the bathtub sides and holding the food. I thought,    Well, I   ve never had them do that,    but there   s a lot of people.  Nykolaiszyn Well, when we started talking today, you were telling me about going to town on Saturday in Sayre, right?  Davis Yes.  Nykolaiszyn What are some changes through the years? What was in Sayre then that may not be in Sayre now, and vice versa? How has Sayre changed through the years? Sayre   s the county seat. It had a movie theater.  Davis There were two movie theaters. We had a choice on Saturday afternoon. There were two movie theaters. Naturally, the creamery is no longer there.  Nykolaiszyn Probably several banks.  Davis Well, there   s still at least two over there, I think, but other than that, I don   t remember. I know everything has been modernized and so forth, but I don   t remember about changes, how it   s changed. Course, the cars and styles and everything change. That   s a given. Courthouse has always been there, long as I can remember.  Nykolaiszyn When you were growing up, did you see much blowing dust?  Davis Oh, yes   Nykolaiszyn I mean, you grew up in the   40s.  Davis Yeah, and I think we were   it was probably the end or close to the end of the Dust Bowl. I do have a picture. Mother would dampen tea towels and hang them over the windows to keep the dust out. I have a picture. A. R. and I had made fudge, and I remember because the dirt was just blowing horrendously and we were eating the fudge out of the pan. (Laughs)  19  Nykolaiszyn Did your parents have any thoughts on The Grapes of Wrath, the Steinbeck novel, or did they feel strongly about it either way?  Davis I don   t know. Evidently not, or I would. We were not in as bad shape as, like, the Panhandle was. Yes, we did lay foul on the land, but now they leave the stubble to help hold the things in. I remember one, the big black cloud. I remember one at one time of that, and that   s about all, and then the picture and the memory of that, when that picture was taken. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   ve retired. You   ve traveled the world, yet you always come back home to Beckham County. What is special about Beckham County to you?  Davis It   s home. I know I went to Hawaii, and it was beautiful. I loved it, but everywhere I went, there was a line to do something. I thought,    I am going to be so glad to get home, and I can spread my arms out and just twirl around, and twirl all around,    because I don   t do lines well. Sure enough, like I said, I got home, and it was just like this. Plenty of space, plenty of room.  Nykolaiszyn So you are retired, but you also have a close relationship with the land, as well. You also farm.  Davis Yes. Well, I raise cattle, and so yes. I raise grass to feed the cattle, and then my son helps me, like when the cattle need to be worked or when I lose them in the flood. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn It   s good to have a son who   s a cowboy.  Davis Yes, it is. Not only that but his two sons are just as good as he is, and so I have three cowboys. They went to work for me last night just to get some hot wire from around one of my bulls.  Nykolaiszyn We   ve been talking a lot. We kind of did this really quick fast-forward through your life, super-fast-forward. What are we leaving out? What are we missing?  Davis Well, in other words, what do I do now? (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn That would work, yes. What   s next on the agenda for you?  Davis Oh, goodness gracious, I don   t know. I can   t say. I really don   t know. Some things I kind of do on a whim. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, Charlene, you   ve definitely had an impact in this part of Oklahoma with your long career as an educator, and it   s really great to hear how you and the Ninety-Nines will continue to inspire the next generation of women 20  pilots. I really appreciate you taking some time out to sit down with me and share about your life.  Davis I thank you, also  It was a long drive for you, but I appreciate you making it.  Nykolaiszyn Well, like I said, we   re definitely in western Oklahoma.  Davis Well, you   re only seven miles from the Texas line  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Thanks again.  Davis Yes, and thank you.  -------  -------  
