 Neurohr  Welcome back to campus for the Women of Willard Reunion and for  Homecoming 2009. My name is Karen Neurohr and I   m a librarian at  the Oklahoma State University Library. This is an Oral History Project  called O-STATE Stories and it is a project of the OSU Library. Thank  you, Phoebe, for coming today and participating in the interview. We  appreciate it.  Thank you.  Can you tell me a little bit about where you grew up?  I grew up west of Kingfisher in Kingfisher County. I attended Omega  High School, which is also west of Kingfisher.  And who were your parents?  My parents were John and Emma Schieber Kunneman. Both of them  really are from early day Oklahoma families, pioneer families. My father  came to Oklahoma in May of 1900 when he was just an infant. And my  mother was born near Okarche in 1905. It was Oklahoma Territory.  Oklahoma wasn   t a state yet. So I feel they were really a part of the  beginning of Oklahoma.  What did you say your maiden name was?  Kunneman. Often pronounced Koonaman, but we have always said  Kunneman.  Did your parents go to school at Oklahoma A M?  5  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  No, both of my parents had only an eighth grade education. I think that  was pretty common in the early 1900s. My mother, I know, helped on  the farm and, of course, my father was the oldest son and he helped on  the farm. His younger brothers did get a high school education and  beyond high school. But, being the oldest son in 1900, he didn   t.  Did anyone else in your family go to OSU?  My brother did, David. He   s six years younger and so he attended later  and got both a bachelor   s and a master   s from Oklahoma State.  What year did you start at Oklahoma State?  1955, September.  It wasn   t called Oklahoma State then, was it?  No, Oklahoma A M College. It changed names during the time that I  was there and, of course, that was a big controversy, whether to become  Oklahoma A M University or Oklahoma State, Oklahoma A M  College, or become Oklahoma State University. And I think there was  also a little friction between OU and OSU because OU was the  university in Oklahoma at that time and I don   t know if everyone at OU  thought that we should become a university. I do have some clippings in  my scrapbook, I do remember, of the pros and cons of becoming  Oklahoma State University. Would anybody know who we were if we  changed our name? And we already had a solid reputation as Oklahoma  A M College. And others thought,    Oh, we need to be known more  than just for agriculture.    But it was a big controversy at that time.  Which side of the fence were you on?  I can   t say that I really remember what side I was on. I don   t know.  So what was it that influenced you to attend OSU?  I think what influenced me was 4-H. I know that I had a big decision of  whether I was going to go. All of the other girls in my class were going  to go to secretarial and business school in Oklahoma City. I think there  was a 9-month course or something. That   s what all the other girls in my  high school class did. I think it was the 4-H connection that pulled me to  Oklahoma State. And having come over here for 4-H Roundup for two,  three years already while I was in high school and liking the campus and  meeting other 4-Hers from across the state and meeting some of the 4-H  leaders, I think it   s 4-H that had a big influence on me coming to  Oklahoma State.  6  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  What high school did you go to again?  Omega, a very small high school. There were 16 in our graduating class.  Is it still a school?  Yes, it is. But it has combined with Loyal, another small school, after a  tornado destroyed the Omega school buildings in about 1960 sometime.  Then they combined with Loyal. So it   s now Lomega.  So you came to 4-H Roundup. Was that in the summertime?  It was always in May, about the last weekend in May, something like  that, every year. And the leaders, you know, you had to win the trip to  the 4-H Club Roundup by giving demonstrations or talks or your high  school, your 4-H projects. It was kind of an honor to come to the 4-H  Club Roundup.  What did you major in at OSU?  Home Economics.  And when did you graduate?  1959.  When you first came to OSU did you move into Willard Hall? Was that  your first place to live?  That was the first place and I moved into 215 Willard Hall and I stayed  in that same room for four years. And it was a corner room, I guess  that   s why. You know, corner rooms were prized rooms because they  were slightly larger and they had two windows. And it overlooked Theta  Pond. I changed roommates. My first roommate moved out, I think, to  get married, and then the next roommate (and they   re all members of  this group that you will be talking to this afternoon) she had to move out  to do student teaching, then I got another roommate but I stayed during  the entire time except when I was out student teaching and living in the  Home Management House.  Well tell me about the Home Management House.  (Laughs) Well that was a nice experience. Actually, I lived in the  house   it was on North Monroe, I think, up here. And Dr. Gertrude  McAlester was the house mother or the teacher, professor in charge of  that and lived there with us some. I think there were five of us living  7  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  there, Virginia Adams Semrad that   s here with this group lived there at  the same time I did. And you had to fill out detailed schedules for who  was going to cook and what the menu was and keep within the budget. I  think we had to have a high-budget week and a low-budget week and a  moderate-budget week. And we had to do a certain amount of  entertaining. We had to work all of this in around our classes that were  up on campus, too. Actually, it was a good experience and I always  credit   I in later life was an administrator and I say that I learned a lot  of my administrative skills through that Home Management House  experience, the detailed work and dividing up responsibilities and that.  Did you live there for an entire semester?  No, I think only six weeks. Yes, because the same semester we did  student teaching for six weeks and then we lived in the Home  Management House six weeks. And then there was like a week on  campus before you did anything and a week in between and a week or so  at the end, so that made it about a semester.  Was Willard considered to be a popular or prestigious hall to you?  I don   t know if we thought of it as prestigious. It was convenient in that  it was close to the Union and it was closer to the library than some of the  others. Stout Hall was a newer dorm so there was some maybe prestige  to live in Stout just because it was slightly newer in the 1950s. But I  always felt it had a good reputation.  You mentioned that you had a corner room with two windows. Were you  allowed to decorate your room?  Yes. I think, as I remember, because we   d buy matching bedspreads. We  didn   t paint the room that I remember. And we would buy curtains and  things like that and that was probably about the extent of the decorating  except at Christmas and Halloween and all of the other holidays. You  decorated your door for the occasion. And there were always Christmas  door contests, who had the best decorated door and I don   t know if we  had that at Halloween, but there were lots of parties always at Willard  Hall, Christmas parties, Halloween parties, pajama parties and this and  that. There was always a lot going on. The dorm had a social chair that  planned social activities. And, of course, there were the proms or dances  that were part of Grand Council, I think, at that time where like Stout  and Willard and Murray Hall would all have their Spring Formals and  their Fall Formals and this and that.  Tell me about the telephone situation.  8  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  (Laughs) Well, that   s certainly different from today. There was one  telephone, as I remember, on each wing of the dormitory. And so there  wasn   t a lot of privacy, for one thing. I think you could go downstairs on  the first floor and have a more private telephone call. And there was  always a race to answer the telephone, especially before certain special  events or this or that certainly. But yes, there was only one telephone for  that whole wing and that must have been close to 20 rooms or more,  something like that.  I   ve also heard about the buzzer system. How did that work?  I don   t remember, but yes   I mean I haven   t thought about that, I guess.  I guess if you came in after hours, after the curfew   and we women had  curfews. I believe eight o   clock for freshman women and maybe 10:30  for the upper-class women. If you got in late, well then you had to ring  the buzzer and then, of course, the house mother then came to answer  the door and you had to account for that.  Was there a common shower and restroom area in the wing?  Yes. No privacy. No private showers, no private restrooms or in your  rooms or anything like that. There was just one large shower, just a room  with, it must   ve had five or six showers, I guess. I can   t remember.  Were they shower stalls?  As I remember, they were, for each wing. The wing, that probably was  close to maybe 30 rooms because it would go halfway through the  middle wing, too. So that many sharing a shower and bathroom.  Was there diversity in Willard that you recall? Ethnic diversity or  international students, anything like that?  There were a few. Not many. Certainly not what you would find today.  For some of us I think in Oklahoma at that time, the students that came  from New York were the diverse students to our backgrounds. But not  too much, really, that I can recall at all. And I can only remember right  now maybe one black student, Valerie Robinson that I remember quite  vividly because she was in Home Economics. I can   t remember if she  lived in Willard Hall or not. But I do remember her very well. And  coming over to Willard Hall and studying with her and that kind of  thing. There was certainly not the diversity that must be on campus  today and certainly that I   m used to living in the Washington, D.C. area.  Do you remember anything about the house mother?  9  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Just that she seemed like a much older woman and I remember her as  being very nice and very matronly. But I don   t have any particular  memories.  Do you remember anything about the Dean of Women?  That was Dean Patchin, I believe, at that time. Not specific memories,  just at that time I think was somebody that was certainly to be respected.  I   ve heard that there was a cafeteria in the basement of Willard. Can  you tell me what that was like?  The cafeteria was just kind of a plain place really and served not fancy  foods, but common foods. The thing I do remember about the cafeteria  though is that on Sunday it was a dress-up place. We came from church  and you were all dressed up and I think we were expected to dress up for  Sunday dinner. And I believe that they   maybe they put tablecloths on  that day, on Sunday, but it was made to be special.  You mentioned also about the hours, that freshman had to be in by 8  o   clock and then the older students 10:30 or so.  Something like that for women, but that didn   t apply to the men.  Well that   s not fair.  No. (Laughter) And I do remember this inequality was after several  sports events when the students would demonstrate wanting a walk-out,  you know a holiday the next day because we beat, I think, KU. There  were several sporting events that OSU won games that were really  important and emotional. The students would rally and all of the men I  think and everybody was out there,    Walk-out, we want a walk-out      after the game. And, of course, the women had to come in, but the men  could stay out, or the women risked the consequences. I think some of  them did stay out and didn   t come in by the curfew hour.  Do you remember a walk-out ever being granted?  Well I think several times, yes, they did. But they didn   t call it that. I  think they said that it was    in recognition of the achievements of the  basketball team,    not because of the demonstration of the students.  Oh. (Laughter) How did the women dress for classes during that time?  Usually we dressed. I don   t think we wore jeans to class. We wore skirts  and sweaters and cardigan sets and bobby socks and loafers. Probably  10  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  dressy compared to today   s standards, but different. I can   t remember  that we wore pants that much, really.  Were there letter sweaters or letter jackets or that kind of thing?  I don   t recall.  Do you remember hearing about the panty raid on campus?  (Laughs) That   s probably being asked to everyone. There were rumors  several times that different fraternities were going to have panty raids. I  can   t really answer in specific details about that. Sometimes there were  rumors and I can   t remember.  Were you active in the residence hall association or anything like that  on campus or for Willard?  We had a little newsletter. I think it was a one-page thing that I edited  part of the time. They put that out. I think it was called the Willard Wind  or something like that.  Willard Wind?  Yeah. (Laughter)  What kind of things would go in the newsletter?  Oh, maybe events that were going to occur or the names of election of  new officers. It may have included some social activities that were  coming up, maybe something about the coming Christmas party or that.  I don   t remember.  How did you make copies of it?  I think on a mimeograph machine. It was purple ink and it was typed on  a typewriter.  Were there several typewriters available for students in Willard Hall?  A lot of us had our own typewriters.  Oh you had your own. Were they electric typewriters?  Oh, no. (Laughter) Not that I remember.  So the ribbon and     11  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  And all the correcting them and the carbon paper and all that.  How did you distribute the newsletter?  If I remember correctly, we each had a cubby down on the first floor  where they put our mail and I think it went into those cubbies.  Did you work on campus anytime while you were there? Did you have a  job?  No, I did not have a job. I had a 4-H club scholarship for several years  and I think a high school scholarship, for some reason, that helped with  tuition.  Were there opportunities to stay active in 4-H somehow after you went  to college?  Yes, there was a collegiate 4-H club, but it was more of a social club  then and might have had a few service activities, but it didn   t have the 4-  H club projects that you had during high school.  Were you in that?  Collegiate 4-H club, yes. And that   s how some of us have continued to  maintain relationships. Many of us in this group were in 4-H club and so  we had that tie.  Do you remember when the WOW term was first used or you first heard  that term? Women of Willard, WOW, the WOW group?  For this reunion.  For this reunion. Okay. (Laughter)  Yeah. We were always Willard Hall group, I don   t know.  What do you remember about the library?  Oh, it was a wonderful place. A beautiful building, it was just  impressive. And I do remember the study rooms when you go in the  library and on both sides of the entrance there were rooms with nothing  but long tables and that   s where we went to study usually or sometimes  we would go to another floor where there were smaller tables  interspersed with shelves of books and things. But there were the two  large study rooms on the first floor on each side of the entrance that lots  of people always went there to study. And then you would take a break,  12  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  go to the Union for a coffee or something and then come back and study  some more. It was part social, part study. But we often went to the  library to study.  Do you remember anything about the security at the library or about a  dress code?  I don   t recall anything about a dress code. I don   t recall anything about a  dress code throughout college at all actually. But the security, they did  check your books when you left the library. There was someone at the  desk that checked the books.  Now I   d like to ask you about some of the traditions at Willard Hall that  you might remember. You mentioned door decorating. How elaborate  would the door decorations get?  Well, depending on what the residents of that room wanted to do.  Probably the basics were covering the door with paper and pasting on or  drawing on designs on that. Some that were more artistic certainly did a  lot of drawings and that. Others might just have a bow or a wreath or  something. It just depended. They decorated for Halloween also, the  doors.  Were there some special Christmas traditions at Willard?  As I remember, I believe a Christmas party down in the living room  would be singing and they would have punch and cookies and that kind  of thing. And, of course, there was a Christmas dance that was  coordinated with Murray Hall and Stout Hall.  Would girls go to the dances if they didn   t have a date?  I don   t remember them ever doing that.  So you had to have a date to go to the dances?  Yes.  Would there be live music?  Yes. There was live music.  Was there a piano in the living room?  Yes. Yes and that was used for parties and for singing and sometimes  the women would just sit there and play, too.  13  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  What would happen when a woman became engaged?  Usually a shower party. Got thrown in the shower is one thing I  remember. (Laughs)  Do you remember anything about scrapbooks at Willard? The traditions  or history or anything that would   ve been around that you could see?  I can   t remember that.  Do you have any other personal special memories of your time at  Willard?  Well I think the friends that I made there, of course, have lasted for 50  years and we really made a group of really special people that I have  been connected to for all of these years.  How many reunions have you been to?  I think I have made all of them except one. We lived in South America  for seven years so I did miss I know one when we lived in South  America. Virginia Semrad and I organized the first one, which was the  ten-year reunion, at Quartz Mountain State Park and that was in 1969.  But I think I have made every one of them except that one.  So after the Quartz Mountain one, when was the next one?  It could   ve been in the    70s because we were in Peru    73 through    80  and I know I made one in    84.  Did you have a career after you left OSU? You had your degree in  Home Economics.  I taught for two years at Ripley, which is not very far from Stillwater, of  course. My husband was working on his doctorate at OSU so I got the  job at Ripley and then we moved to Stillwater in the summer of 1961  and I had a graduate assistantship at OSU. And then I was on the faculty  in the Child Development Department for one year then. And then he  finished up his doctorate and we moved to Mississippi. So then there  was a period of devoting my time to children and then in 1973 we joined  the Peace Corps. My husband took a leave   he was teaching at Texas  Tech University and took a leave of absence for two years from Texas  Tech and we went to Peru as Peace Corps volunteers. And we   re one of  the probably last Peace Corps volunteers with children to serve in the  United States Peace Corps. Because after that they stopped taking  families as volunteers but we then served in Peru as Peace Corps  14  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  volunteers.  We stayed in Peru for seven years, continued there after the Peace Corps  years. And have been living in the Washington, D.C. area for the last 20-  some years. And for the 15 years   well I worked in child development  and then the last 15 years I was Executive Director of the Falls Church-  McLean Children   s Center, which served disadvantaged children  primarily and provided a lot of comprehensive services for the children.  You know, speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, and  psychological consultation, parent education, so forth. So after that I  retired.  Do you feel like OSU enabled to have the job skills and the career  advantages that you were able to enjoy?  Oh, yes. I guess I just never dreamed I would be so fortunate to have a  career where I felt I could use all of those skills and also felt that you  were contributing to the community both as a Peace Corps volunteer or  at the Children   s Center. Yes, Oklahoma State gave me a good  foundation.  What about when Willard was converted from a dormitory to  administrative use, what did you think about that?  We were a little disappointed. But all of this group came over for the  dedication of the new Willard College of Education. And we as a group  also collected funds to dedicate that corner on our wing to one of our  members who had died. So we wanted our print to continue in the new  Education Building.  And that was the west end of Willard?  Yes, where we put the little plaque and dedicated that corner.  Are there any classes or professors that really stand out to you in  particular for the programs that you were in? You mentioned the one at  the house.  A professor that really influenced me and is why I am in child  development is Dr. Josephine Hoffer. She had a great impact on me and  influenced me to go into child development, which I didn   t regret. I had  a number of classes  with her  and she also directed my master   s thesis.  What was your topic?  What was my topic? It   s something to do with pre-adolescents and  15  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Meyer  whether those pre-adolescents who felt they were living up to their  parental expectations fared better or differently from those who didn   t  feel they were living up to parental expectations. You know that   s  almost 50 years ago, to get the exact title, I don   t know. (Laughter) So it  had to do with pre-adolescents feeling of achieving their parents     expectations.  Did you enjoy the research experience?  Yes.  Were you involved in any other activities on campus?  I was involved in Phi Zeta Kappa, a religious group. And I was a  member of Gamma Delta, a Lutheran student group, that I can  remember.  I was Secretary of Home Economics Club and President of  Home Economics Education Group.  Those are the main ones that I  remember.  What was Homecoming like?  The thing I do remember is how we dressed up for Homecoming; in high  heels and dress suits and it was a colorful, special occasion.  Did you dress up to go to the football game?  Yes, we were dressed up.  Did you wear corsages?  We usually wore   especially if you had a boyfriend I know you did.  (Laughter)  Were there any other student traditions that stand out in your memory?  Of course at Homecoming was walking around and seeing all of the  houses all decorated. We would do that.  Is there anything else you   d like to add about your experience at Willard  or your experience at OSU?  Well, I can say it was a great experience and often I considered those  college years among the best years of my life. They were fun and I had  lots of good friends and we had great times. We studied hard and had  great times together. Those are just really some of the best years of my  life. And I always look back on them with fond memories.  16  Neurohr  Meyer  Neurohr  Good. Well thank you so much for participating in the interview today, I  appreciate it.  Well thank you. I hope it   s helpful.  It is.  -------  -------   
