 Finchum Today is April 9, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in Stillwater, on campus, to speak with Paul Freeman, who is a Cowboy alum from Texas County. Thank you for coming today.  Freeman Sure. I enjoyed the trip down. It   s always nice to come back to your old stomping grounds, you know.  Finchum This is part of our Cowboy in Every County project. Let   s begin with learning a little bit about you, beginning with when and where you were born.  Freeman I was born in Guymon, Oklahoma, which is the county seat for Texas County. I was born in 1960. Born on July 4, so I got a good birthday. In fact, it   s kind of interesting. There   s three of us brothers in my family, and all of us were born on a holiday. We always have a lot of fun with that.  Finchum What other holidays were they?  Freeman Labor Day and George Washington   s birthday, which used to be a holiday. Now they have turned it into President   s Day, so it   s not quite accurate anymore.  Finchum There are three boys?  Freeman Yes ma   am.  Finchum Which order, where are you?  Freeman I am the youngest, and my oldest brother is Mark. My middle brother is Luke.  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Freeman My father was a rancher. He was a cattle guy. Him and his father began acquiring properties in Texas County and then Sherman County, which is just south of Texas County in Texas. Began acquiring properties back in the    40s, and kept expanding those properties. He was an interesting, my grandfather and father were very interesting, colorful people. They have a lot of history back there. First irrigation wells in the area, first feedlot in the area, in Texas or Oklahoma. We   re in the grain business. The elevators in Texhoma, they actually built part of those elevators. Very colorful background. We started out in the cattle business. That   s what I always thought I would end up doing when I was growing up. Didn   t turn out to be that way.  Finchum Well, did you have chores on the ranch?  Freeman Oh yeah. One thing my dad believed in was he believed in work ethic. He proved that with us kids. He just was brutal with us kids. We worked everyday all summer. We did take one week off every summer for a family vacation. That was about it. Worked six days a week, even during school. We   re from a small school. It   s Class A. My graduating class had thirty-one in the class, so small. We played football. Sports were about the only thing you could do in Texhoma. Even after a Friday night game, it   d be an away game, get beat up pretty good. Come back on the bus, and get in at midnight or one o   clock, and he   d have us up at five o   clock the next day. We would be going out to work on Saturdays. Even two-a-days in football, you had to work between the two-a-days. He believed in work ethic. At the time, that was always tough. As you get older, I really, really became to appreciate the many things that taught all us kids.  You see a lot of children today don   t get that opportunity, and I do mean an opportunity. Today you can   t take a fifteen-year-old kid and go put them on a tractor like we used to. Those old tractors were no cab, no top. They were easy to operate. You were pulling a one-way plow, for instance, and if they tore something up, it wasn   t that big a deal. Well, today, it   s two hundred and fifty thousand dollar tractors. You just don   t go throw a fifteen-year-old kid on it unless they   ve got great experience. Minimum wage is high enough that even the grocery stores hire adults anymore instead of the kids to do the sacking. They really have a hard time finding summer jobs today. I think there   s problems we   re going to see because of that. Yeah, he liked the work ethic. I grew up on that ranch, doctoring cattle, working cattle. In the feed yard you rode pens, and pulled sick cattle, you gathered cattle, scattered cattle. Got a really, really good background in agriculture.  Finchum How young were you when you drove your first tractor?  Freeman We didn   t get to drive a whole lot of tractors. We started helping horseback when we were, oh my, I   ll have to think about that. I want to say we started helping gather cattle when we were six, seven years old, something like that. You had certain horses out there. When you were a beginner you rode Gopher, the horse I rode. You learned on him. As you got better, you graduated to Cherokee, was the next horse we got to ride. Cherokee had a little bit more gas, and he could be a little scary at times, so you had to have a little bit of basic skills developed before you got on Cherokee. Then you went to Button, and then you went to Badger. You progressed into horses that you could do a lot of good work with instead of just something to sit on.  Before long, you got to break the colts. We had our own mares. We had a string of twelve gray mares. The fillies, we would typically sell the fillies. We would keep the horse colts. I got to break. My first summer I helped break the colts was when I was a freshman in high school. I would   ve been fourteen. I had four that I broke, and my brother had four. It was just me and him. We really didn   t have a whole lot of coaching. He had done it a couple of years, and you just kind of did it the best way you could. It was trial and error, and it was pretty western, I promise you. It was lots of bruises and bumps and cuts. I don   t think the horses, probably, turned out that well actually. We didn   t do a really effective job, but they were usable. (Laughs)  Finchum Would you get an allowance for doing this type of work?  Freeman Oh yes  We got paid. I really don   t remember how much, but it was an hourly deal. You had to keep your own book, keep your hours in it. It was like two, two and half an hour. Something like that is kind of what I remember. We got paid the same thing. I don   t think we ever got a raise. I don   t know what minimum wage was back then. Surely it was higher than that. We got paid a little bit. There wasn   t any savings plans or anything. He let us turn in the  hours , and we   d take it into the office, and they   d write us a check, and we got to spend it how we wanted to. It would be a whopping hundred bucks or something. I got to buy lots of floats and cokes and cheeseburgers, you know.  Finchum Mostly food?  Freeman Always food. You know how that is. Growing boys. (Laughs)  Finchum All that work, what would you do for fun?  Freeman Typical small town. At that time you rode around on Friday and Saturday nights in your pickup. Back then, it was different times. Everybody had a vehicle. Typically, they were old, farm trucks that your parents would kind of give you as they used them up at the ranch or the farm. You rode around, and we called it    packing bricks.    Main Street, in Texhoma, and Second Street are the old WPA projects where they laid bricks on Main Street. You just rode around, and when you passed somebody you knew, you   d honk at them. And, you know, chase the girls and ride around and hang out in the parking lots, and visit and talk. That   s really about all you did.  The big thing, if you could afford it or actually had a driver   s license, you could go to Guymon, which was twenty miles away, and go to the movie. That was the old Suburban Theatre there. It   s no longer there. You could go to the movie with your girlfriend or whatever. That was where you did the dates. The rest of the time it was just drive around, pack bricks. That   s what we did. They don   t do that anymore. Gas got too high. Now they seem to hang out more at the houses and stuff.  Finchum No fishing ponds or swimming holes?  Freeman Oh yeah. There   s a river north of town, the North Canadian River. We called it the Beaver River. It   s pretty much a dry riverbed, except there are areas where it   s spring-fed and there   s holes. Yeah, we   d go out there and swim in the swimming holes and do a little bit of fishing. All you could catch was little bitty ole    four to five inch mud cats. You sure didn   t want to eat those. We   d do some of that.  When the river would, every now and then, when it rained big west of us, towards Clayton, New Mexico, and Kenton  Oklahoma  and that area, and Stratford, Texas, the river would come down. It would come down, oh, it would be a mile wide. It was like you   d see in the movies, it had head water. It would actually be just a wall of water washing down the river. We used to get tire inner tubes or canoe type things, and you   d ride those on the river from Texhoma all the way to Guymon. It would be twenty-some miles. That was always lots of fun. I   m not going to say it was real safe.  When the water came down like that, it   d wash all the water gaps out, which were fences that crossed the dry riverbed. They   re set up to where, they have baling wire. When the river came down and pressed on it hard enough, it   d break the baling wire and it   d swing open like a gate. You would just float right down the river. That was always a lot of fun. The only bad thing was you knew when the river went down, you   d have to go back and fix those water gaps. That was always our job, because it   s not a fun job. It   s usually hot and humid after it rains like that. Those fences, the gates that open up, they just get totally stacked up with trash and wood, and tree trunks, and roots, and you have to dig all that stuff out. Pull it back across, straighten, stretch it up, and redo the fence. Digging wire out of all that trash was never much fun.  There was actually one summer   that   s why it   s changed a lot. There was one summer we had about, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, it was about ten water gaps we had to fix on our ranch. Which is called the Anchor D Ranch, by the way. And you had to   one summer, we would go through and fix the outside fences first, so your cattle didn   t get over in the neighbors. Then you   d fix your interior fences. We fixed them seven times one summer. We   d just get them all done, and it would rain big again, wash them out. We actually did that seven times in one summer. Now then, they   ve kind of built the dam system up river from us. It controls the water better. It seems to rain a little less than it used to. The river doesn   t come down, you know, big like that? Never. But when it does come down to wash the water gaps out, you may be talking once every four to five years, it seems like. It   s changed. It   s not like it used to be.  We used to have quicksand down there where if you were riding a horse, you could get in the quicksand. And we   d lose cattle in that quicksand. Nobody gets sucked under and dies, but you could get a horse up to where his body would be totally covered in that quicksand. And you   d have to have somebody tie ropes around the saddle horn, and around the belly of the horse, and pull those horses out of that quicksand. I remember that several times. You learned how to avoid that after a while. There   s no quicksand down there now. That water level has dropped. Still have trees out there and light water. It   s not like it used to be. It   s dry.  Finchum Sounds like a good way to come up, though, learning how to do all that.  Freeman We learned a lot of common sense things. That was one thing I noticed when I came down here to school is kids that grew up in the cities didn   t have that kind of exposure. And there was a lot more common sense about it. They got a lot, probably, better education in high school than we got. They were more prepared for the English and the accounting, and the sciences than we were, they had a big head start on us. That other stuff, we knew how to have pretty simple fun and a lot of other things. It was different.  Finchum Did you carry a pocket knife?  Freeman You know, I never did. Most of my classmates would carry a pocket knife, yes. It   s funny you asked that. (Laughs)  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school?  Freeman In Texhoma. There   s an elementary school there in Texhoma, and I went to their elementary, middle school, high school, and junior high. It was all together on one campus. It was actually an elementary school building, middle school, and high school, but they were right next door to each other. It wasn   t like you were real segregated from the rest of the school population. We all   I remember the kids that were seventh and eighth graders when I was graduating, which was nice. As you get older that age seems to kind of not matter, where back then it was huge you know. You got to know, and you truly grew up with, everybody in that town.  Finchum Did you have a favorite subject?  Freeman Wow  Favorite subject? Well, I wouldn   t say it was my favorite subject, but what I naturally was good at was math. I was always real good at math. We used to have races on the chalkboard, where you had to do multiplication or division or some kind of  math , and we used to have races on the boards. I was always pretty good at that. Math was certainly my best subject, always has been. English was probably my least favorite. Thank God they had good teachers down here, and nice teachers, and people that would   Funny, I was just telling my wife Tina, we passed by Morrill Hall. I told her that   s where, I don   t know if it   s still this way, but that is where all the English classes were. That was my hardest class, learning how to write stories. We just didn   t have a background. We learned, in that time, predicates and subjects and adjectives, and knew how to diagram sentences and do all that. We just didn   t do a lot of writing.  It was so new to me when I came down here, I absolutely lived in that poor lady   s office. She was so kind to me. She would actually give us an assignment. I   d spend hours trying to put it together, write something. I   d go in and she   d give you one shot. She   d kind of like pre-grade it for you, for those who were challenged. (Laughs) She   d actually kind of pre-grade it for you and help you out. Then you   d get to go rewrite it and turn it in. After you got a bad grade, you   d go in and she   d help you through what you did wrong. It was kind of like an accelerated, for us horrible pupils, it was like an accelerated class. We were having to learn much more than most of the other students. It was pretty easy for them, it seemed like. Particularly, there was a really hard English teacher at the Guymon High School. She   s legendary. Her name was Mrs. Gardner. Her students didn   t have to go to class. They   d just figure out what the assignment was, and they could just wiz through it. It was so easy for them, and we just struggled.  We just had a high school teacher, I don   t  mean she wasn   t a good teacher. In fact, she was maybe the best teacher I had . She was very good. We did a lot of reading and a lot of understanding, and similes, and metaphors. All those things and then reading, she really gave you a love to read. She was very good about diagramming, sentence structure and speaking properly, and using the right tenses and things like that. Her strong suit was not writing, and that   s what they wanted here. It was so hard  I really wish I could remember that teacher   s name. I just can   t remember her name. She was about sixty and just as kind a person, she really enjoyed. She loved to teach. She helped me out a lot. I would   ve had to retake that class. If I   d had any other teacher, I would   ve had to retake that class, like God knows how many times. Finchum You would have graduated from high school in    70     Freeman Seventy-eight.  Finchum How did you choose to come to OSU?  Freeman My father went to Texas A M for a year and then transferred to Oklahoma  State , because it was in-state. He actually did not graduate from Oklahoma State. He was within ten days, I think, of taking his finals his last semester, and he had a family situation pop up. His mother, no, that   s not right. His father   s driver, back then they had drivers. He was always going to San Angelo  Texas  or  Seymour, Texas  or New Mexico buying cattle to stock the ranch with, the feed yard. They traveled a lot, and they would spend all day sorting cattle, buying, negotiating. They   d have to drive home during the night, so they had drivers. There was a lot cheaper labor back in those days.  His driver, was a man named Raymond Choate, called Dad and said,    We   re in       trying to remember where it was, down on the border somewhere. No, they were in  Laredo, Texas . Called and says,    I   m with your dad. We   re in  Laredo , and we   re really having a problem. We got a situation here, you need to come down here.    My father left school to go take care of that situation. He never got to come back and graduate. He always regretted that. He dealt with a lot of really educated people later in his business career. He did not ever get his college education. He was within a week   it   s kind of a sad story.  Finchum You should be able to fix that?  Freeman Yeah. He had everything done but the last tests. Anyway, he was an OSU student. My oldest brother came to school here in    72. My middle brother came here in    75. I really didn   t know I had a choice. I honestly, it was the only college campus that I had ever been on besides OPSU, which back then was Panhandle A M in Goodwell  Oklahoma , ten miles away. I didn   t want to be ten miles away. I knew Dad would have me out there working everyday if that was what   I wanted to go further away. I honestly never considered another college. I thought it was expected. This is where you went to college.  Finchum What were all their majors, your brothers?  Freeman They were, Mark was agricultural economics. His adviser was John Goodwin, who   s a legendary ag econ professor here. He won Most Outstanding Professor on campus for like six or eight times. He was really, really a good professor. Luke started out in, I think, he graduated in animal science. When I came to school, I was ag econ. I stayed with ag econ. Didn   t have a double major or anything. Had quite a bit of finance and accounting that went with it, but I was an ag econ guy.  Finchum Where did you live?  Freeman Oh my  I lived in about, I added it up one time. I think I lived in seven different places while I was in school here. Because my brother was here, when I   my first semester of school my brother Luke was in his last semester, and because I had a relative that was living off campus, they would allow me to live with my brother and not live in the dorms. That   s what I did that first semester. He graduated, and I just never lived in the dorms, always lived off campus. I moved around a lot until I finally found a home with some very, very good friends that were from Darrouzett, Texas, and Booker, Texas, which is fairly close to me. We played high school ball against each other. They had bought a house here, over on 1005 East Fifth, over across the tracks over there. I moved in with them and lived there the last two and a half years or so.  Finchum Close enough to walk, or would you have to drive?  Freeman Oh no  We had to drive. It was over there.    you know where the feed mill is?  Finchum Uh-huh.  Freeman It was four or five blocks on the other side of Perkins Street over there.  Finchum So you had to drive.  Freeman We had to drive and had to bear the weather when we parked. The parking lot back then was not close. I just remember how cold it was. There was one winter the snow never did melt. Making that trip from the car to the classes, I always liked early classes, so I could be done. I usually had a lot of seven thirty or eight o   clock classes. Oh my, it was cold. The coldest place here was the walkway between the Library, on the east side of the Library. That walkway in there caught all the wind. It was the coldest. It was always solid ice. It was the coldest place. I just remember making that trip through there. I remember it like yesterday.  Finchum Ever detour into the library?  Freeman Yes. I spent some time in the library. I was not probably the most studious guy in America. I still kind of, you probably don   t like hearing this. I still think a lot of college is growing up. Learning how to be responsible, and learning to do the right things. Learning how to treat other people. Learning how to learn. I actually   fortunately, I was in an area where a lot of things I learned in agricultural economics, I do get to practice, the concepts. As far as drawing out total revenue and total production curves, and marginal revenue, and all the things, I   ve never done that since I left school, but the concepts we use.  Most of it, to me, was I did learn how to study when I was here. I certainly didn   t learn that in high school. I learned how to study. I learned how to go find information, like to the Library. How to do research, and learned if you put enough hours in, you can learn pretty much anything. How to dig, how to memorize, and how to actually understand concepts, instead of memorizing things. That   s what I learned when I was here. They did a great job of teaching that. I was not a four point student by any means. I knew exactly what GPA I   d have for my parents to be satisfied, and that   s about what I got. They set the bar, and it wasn   t that high. (Laughs)  Finchum Did they send the grades home at that point?  Freeman Yes they did.  Finchum So they got to see?  Freeman I   m pretty sure. Yeah, they did. My parents always knew what my grades were.  Finchum I don   t think they do that anymore.  Freeman No, we noticed that. It   s amazing, we   d always ask the kids what they made, and they   d tell us if we   d ask, but we never did really verify that. You know, when I was in school here, I probably would   ve fibbed. Our kids are, we obviously raised better kids than I was. I promise you. They   re more like their mother. (Laughs) I was kind of a rotten kid. I was pretty ornery.  Finchum Well, did you have to work while you were in college?  Freeman (Laughs) That   s funny you ask. My first semester here my dad   s instructions were,    When you need money, you call Sidna,    she took care of the books at the office,    Sidna will deposit what you need into your account.    That was a pretty nice deal. I kind of thought,    Yeah     I called in quite frequently my first semester. When the semester was over with my dad called, well I was home for Christmas. He said,    You know, Cowboy, I went through how much you spent last semester. That   s going to change. Here   s what you get every month for the next semester. That   s just what   s going to have to work for you.    He was pretty good at that. I really think he did that on purpose. I truly think he knew that you don   t give a kid an open checkbook, and I would abuse it. He taught me a lesson right there. Little trust involved there, and this is what happens when you don   t hold your end of the   he was like that.  He gave us x dollars, and I don   t remember what it was. What I noticed, I had enough money to pay for my books, my tuition. I had to kind of plan for it because I was getting money by the month. When that bill came up, I didn   t get that much money. I had to put some of it back to pay those things. I learned kind of how to budget, out of that. Then, I could buy my food. There wasn   t any beer money left over by the time   and pay my rent and utilities. There wasn   t anything left over after that. You sure couldn   t cheat on the food. I was still young and skinny as a beanpole. I had an appetite. You know how young boys are. I did go through a month where I ate nothing but macaroni and cheese. For the special part, you got to throw tuna in with the macaroni and cheese. I overspent and didn   t have the money, so that   s what you ate for a month.  I did go to work. I started filling in for a couple guys I was living with, Sig Alphs, as a houseboy at the sorority houses. When they couldn   t get there, had to study, or didn   t want to, they   d recruit me to fill in for them. That was a pretty good gig back then. You didn   t get paid anything, but you got free food. The girls at the sorority houses took pretty good care of you. They   d take you out to happy hour once a week some places, once a month other places. When they had parties, somebody didn   t have a date, you were always available to go with them. You got to meet lots of girls. All the things that were really important to me back then. I found a full-time house, working in the kitchen at the sorority house. That   s how I got my food paid for. Now, I had money left over to kick your heels up a little bit.  Finchum Your dad didn   t adjust his amount based on that?  Freeman No. Oh no  It was that way for the rest of college. It got harder. It was either that or you could go bartend. I didn   t want to do that. That   s where I wanted to be probably, but I didn   t want to be on that side of the bar. There were a lot of the friends that would work in the clothing stores, the Wooden Nickel or places like that. I really wasn   t a thread god by any means. I really didn   t want to go   there were lots of jobs where you could go    There was little old ladies that their husbands had died, and they had a hundred cows. You could go help keep the cows, and do those kinds of things around here. I really didn   t want to do that. I   d done all that I wanted.  The houseboy job fit me pretty good. It was interesting. I tell this story quite a bit. When I started doing that, you always gravitated and found the jobs, for the houseboys, at the sororities that had the prettiest girls. That was how you picked where you went to work. It   s funny how that changed over time. After a little while of that, you figured out you went to the house that had the best cooks. I ended up at a house that had a lady that weighed about four hundred pounds, cooking there. She made homemade honey butter every meal and homemade rolls, and I found a home right there. The food was great. You got two free meals a day. You had to show up there at noon and at dinner, and on Saturday morning, Saturday lunch and dinner. The worst one was Sunday morning. You had to come in Sunday morning to serve the girls breakfast. That was not fun. Saturday night, it was always tough to get there on time to do that. It was kind of interesting. You sure got to see the girls in pretty interesting   they   d just crawl out of bed and come get breakfast. It was kind of an eye-opener. (Laughter)  Finchum So your dad called you Cowboy?  Freeman All the time. Cowboy, that   s how he referred to   when he was getting ready to say something important, he always started that way.  Finchum Just for you or all three of you?  Freeman All three of us.  Finchum All three of you   Freeman All three of us. I didn   t have sisters. I didn   t have   there were no girls in my family. I had one cousin that was a girl. Uncles, it was all guys. It was pretty interesting to me. I had to learn pretty late how to act around girls and how to treat ladies. That was always interesting. I was around boys. It was always Cowboy. That   s the way he referred to us. It was Cowboy this, Cowboy that. His dad did the same thing. It   s kind of a trait that   s followed down the generations I guess.  Finchum How would you do yours? Do you have sons?  Freeman Yes, I have one son and two daughters.  Finchum Do you do Cowboy for him?  Freeman I do. That   s what I was setting there thinking about. You   re reading my mind. I do the same thing for with my son. If I   ve got something that   s gonna be kinda funny, or something I think is going to be funny, it   s usually not with him, or something I need to be serious about, I always start it with Cowboy, now that I think about it.  Finchum Well, how about the girls?  Freeman Nope, don   t do it with them. Don   t do that with the girls. The girls    Oh boy, raising girls was quite an experience for me. That was new. I will tell you that I thoroughly enjoyed my girls. I was scared to death of them when we started. Our first two children were girls. They were    what a pleasure. What a pleasure. Lot more problems with girls. Lot more fear with girls than boys. Boys, turn    em loose, and let    em go get in trouble, and let    em go get hurt. The girls, we worried about them a lot more than the boys. There   s a lot of reward there for the girls, too.  Finchum Was your mother an important   she was a major part of your life, too, I would think.  Freeman Yes, she was a homemaker. She stayed at home, did not work. That was very common back in those days. She obviously had a big influence in my life. She   s a very strong lady. Her job was taking care of us. She spoiled us rotten. Three boys, we did a pretty good job of running over her at times. I remember her big deal was she   d throw shoes at us if we misbehaved. She had a pretty good arm too, that hurt. She would try to take care of us as well as she could, but there was times she had to bring in Dad. Dad was a pretty good disciplinarian, but yeah, she had a big influence in our life. She did teach us manners, and taught us the right thing. She was more of an influence with religion. She took a more active role than my father in that side of it. She made sure we did the right things. Her job was to take care of us kids. She   s still alive. She   s eighty-something. She was born in  November of 1931 . She   s very healthy. Her dad lived to be a hundred and three. He   s the only grandparent I ever knew.  Finchum A hundred and three   Freeman Yeah, a hundred and three. She is eighty-something now. What   s that make her? Mid-eighties   Finchum What   s her name?  Freeman Jacqueline with a q. She   s a real classy lady. Very classy   Finchum What   s your favorite thing she cooked? Your favorite meal that she cooked?  Freeman Spaghetti and meatballs. She made the most awesome spaghetti and meatballs. Those meatballs were big meatballs, guy meatballs, and spaghetti was always my favorite meal. She has a jalape  o cornbread that is to die for. She was, she really was a good cook. Everybody in Texhoma knew how good a cook she was. She would, I remember my dad telling us stories. When they were newlyweds, she would cook the same meal over and over and over until Dad was just sick of it. She would perfect it. That   s the way she perfected her meals. She   d just keep cooking it until she got it just right. Then she would start on a new one. She did that for years. Everything she made was really, really good.  Unfortunately, she never wrote anything down. She did it all a little of this, a little of that. She never wrote it down, and when she would write it down, it wouldn   t be right. We always accused her of doing that on purpose. My mother was a very loving mother. She expected a lot from us. We did feel pressure from her to do well. She was also very loving and very   her job was taking care of us kids, which has really caused us some issues later on in life. We all get married, and our wives don   t have a chance with her. They just can   t take as good enough care of us as we deserve. That   s really her attitude. There   s always that mother-in-law/daughter-in-law conflict there. Mother   s pretty upfront about telling them they   re not doing a good enough job. She   s pretty outspoken, and it takes a while for daughters-in-law to get used to that. It was interesting.  Finchum Did she ever come to campus? Visit you on campus?  Freeman Yes. That   s one thing, that when my mother and father came, they never came by themselves. They went everywhere together. They would come to school. I just remember we always went out and had a really, really good meal. They would typically come for football games. I just remember I spent as little time with them as I absolutely had to. That was the sign of the times. That was the way all my friends were, everybody was that way. You went and ate dinner with them. You hung out with them a little bit, but you were more interested in going with your buddies out to have fun and stuff. You might go to the football game with them. That   s really what they expected, too.    You know, today   we have talked about this a hundred times. Today, when we would come visit our kids, they   re so much more inclusive than our generation was. They wanted you to go out with them and meet their friends. Go have fun with them and eat dinner. Go play pool with them, or go to Whiskers or whatever. They   re so much more inclusive. We got to know our children   s friends really well. They were like, instead of like    Eh, the parents are here. That   s no fun.    It   s more like,    Come on and go with us     They would just have a ton of fun with you. They would go out of their way to make you feel good. I don   t know what you   d call that, but it was so much better way to do it. We got to know all our kids    friends. They   re just like our kids now. That   s been really, really nice. Especially with the girls. Probably the girls more so than my son, Trey. The guys were the same way, but you know guys never make as much effort as the girls do. The girls make a ton of effort with you. I just love their friends.  Finchum Then all three came here?  Freeman Yes.  Finchum All three kids came? Freeman Yes, all three of my children came here, but it was funny     Finchum Did they have a choice?  Freeman Yes, they did. I was very open with them about it. This was my deal,    You make As, pick where you want to go. You make pick As and Bs, go anywhere you want to, as long as it   s in-state tuition. You do less than that, we   ll go to a college ten miles away.    You know how it is. Everybody wants to leave home, so that was not a good thing. That was kind of, Tina and I both, kind of concocted that thing up. Our kids all made pretty good grades. In fact, two of them are valedictorians and one of them is salutatorian.  Our oldest daughter had a scholarship to the University of Texas, and she was very independent. Very confident, thought she was very liberal, and this is kind of the way it went with her. You always think, especially with the first child, that when they go to college, you   re going to kind of help them move down there, and get them settled in, and check out the surroundings, and help them out. I just assumed that was the way it was supposed to be done. She informed me, it got within two or three days, time to go down there. She says    Dad, don   t worry about going with me. I can do this on my own.    It really hurt my feelings, to tell you the truth. She didn   t know that at the time, but it just killed me. I thought, alright. I said,    Go to Lubbock and turn left, and we   ll see you at Thanksgiving.     She went down there for a year. Was absolutely miserable, did not enjoy the school. She was so excited to go. That scholarship to UT was pretty valuable. She came home after her freshman year, and said she was ready to go somewhere else. She wanted to go Oklahoma State and try that out. I said,    Okay.    It was great news for me. I hated to see her give up her scholarship. She also had the valedictorian scholarship at Oklahoma State, if she would   ve went there her freshman year. If you don   t go your freshman year, that goes away. Now, it   s back on the pay plan. She wanted to go to Oklahoma State, and that was fine.  It got within two or three days, time to go to school. I just assumed,    Well she   s done it once, and she   d been to Stillwater before.    She said,    Let   s do it different this time. Would you mind taking me down there?    It was kind of a neat deal, and it   s really funny. When we got to Stillwater, I had my    I   m trying to think how that went. Her car was already down here for some reason. We were in my pickup and had a bunch of stuff in the back. We pulled into the C-store. Right when you come into town, it used to be Buy and Buy, but I don   t know what it is now. Right there by the old Holiday Inn on Sixth Street. She said,    Pull in. I   m thirsty. I   m going to get a Coke or something.    She went in and got her a coke. She came out, jumped in the car, and she says    Dad, I   m home.    I looked at her and said,    What happens in a convenience store to verify that?    She said,    When I walked in there, somebody opened the door for me. When I was at the register, they were very friendly. When I walked out, somebody opened the door for me.    She said,    That has not happened to me in a year.    I kind of thought that was telling.  After that, my second daughter really excelled at basketball, and she was a very good basketball player. So is my oldest one, but she had no interest in playing after high school. My second daughter, she certainly got recruited. Had a lot of opportunity to go play college ball. Went and looked at like Washington University in Saint Louis, Trinity in San Antonio, and really upper-end schools that were division three. Had some division two. She was from a small school, so division one was not an option, if she wanted to play basketball. I really discouraged her. I said    Jade,    her name   s Jade. I said,    If you really want to go play basketball in college, you better love playing basketball, because it   s going to be different than it was in high school. It   s not a couple of games a week, and go to practice. It   s going to be all involved. Everything you do is going to revolve around basketball. School is second, but it has to be done.    She said,    I   m just not done yet. I can get better than this, and I want to pursue that.    I said,    Okay.     She ended up going to UCO at Edmond, and she really liked the coach there. She went to school down there. A year later, what she decided, she always wanted to be a doctor, always wanted to be in the medical field, wanted to be a doctor. She had never made a B in her life. She went to school there, and she made her first B in a chemistry class about    It was one of the sciences. It had a lab with it. She made a B in there. The reason she did is she could never make the labs because they were either traveling or practice. In division two, they don   t give you a whole lot of help. Division one gets a lot more tutoring, and a lot more help. Division two, there is no help. If you miss class, you miss class. She made a B in that.  She went to her coach, and she said,    I want to be a doctor. Grades are so important to me, I can   t have Bs.    I really respected the coach because he was pretty excited about her. She was doing really, really well, and was going to be a good player for him, going to get to play a lot. His comment was, he says    Oh Jade, I   ve had lots of girls come through my program.    He had coached there quite a while. He said,    I   ve had a lot of girls come through my program that are nurses today, radiologists, different fields, and you can do that. You can play basketball and pursue your career after school.    She said,    You don   t understand. I want to be the doctor.    When he figured that out, that she wanted to go to med school, and he knew how important the grades are for med school, he looked at her and he said,    You know what? You   re probably right. I don   t think you can be in my program and make straight As, and get that done. That   s going to be really, really hard for you to do.    That honesty... You know how a coach is. They   re very important to their players. They   re kind of like a dad in a lot of ways. I   ve always respected that coach because that had to be hard for him to say. I mean, not that she was going to be an All-American. I   m just saying she was going to be a good player for him. She transferred to OSU after that. She gave up her valedictorian scholarship also. My son is the only one that picked OSU.  Finchum From the get go?  Freeman Yeah. He came here, he knew he was coming here. Course, he was younger, and we were always down here visiting his sisters. He had the brainwash already going on. They   re all pretty orange. They   re still very, very excited about Oklahoma State. Love their college here. Felt like they got a very good education. Jade, our middle daughter, is in med school right now. She   s at OU med school, which sometimes is difficult on me. We   ll accept that. She is in med school.  Our oldest daughter, after she took a  gap year  in  Australia    they do a lot of it. They take a year off before they go to college and do the backpack thing. She kind of got it, she did it different. When she got out of OSU, she went and did a year in Australia and then went to London. It was really interesting. That   s when I knew she was grown up, because she   d been accepted to law school at, not UCO, at OCU in Oklahoma City. She was going to go  to Australia  with some friends of hers and spend like a month, month and a half, two months doing the backpack thing over there. She had enough money saved up. She could get her way over there, and they have to work while they   re there.  It   s pretty interesting. She called me and says    Dad, I think I   m going to stay here for the whole year. I   m going to defer my law school.    I said,    That   s a pretty hard process to get accepted. Do you give that up?    She said,    Yeah. I have to reapply, I have to start over.    I didn   t like the sound of that. You always have fear about once somebody leaves school, they don   t ever come back. A dad and mother, we were both like,    Oh my God. We can   t do this.    I just told her, I said    Ciera, you   ve done a very effective job of selling that program to me. I understand your reasoning, but I   ve learned before I pop off and say something I   m going to regret, I   m going to hang up and think about it a couple of days, and try and take the middle road here and be open-minded. But I   m wanting to say some things you don   t want to hear. Let me take a couple of days, and I   ll call you back, and let   s talk about it again.     I called back a couple of days later, and I began on my,    You need to come back and go to law school now.    I didn   t get four words into that sentence. She says,    Dad, you don   t understand. I don   t need your permission to do this. I   ve already canceled my tickets. I   m staying.    It was right then that I figured out that I had no  say in the matter . She was a grown-up. She was an adult. She was twenty-three years old. She didn   t have to have my permission. She sure wasn   t asking for any money. I had no leverage. I figured out then, she was grown up.  She did her backpack thing, came back, and had more money than when she left. She just really had a real wonderful experience. Made a lot of good friends, and then applied for law school and got into Tulsa University. She is now practicing law in Tulsa. It was really interesting that year and half she spent on her own. You can   t imagine the jobs they had. She learned how to, she was a short order cook, a barmaid, washing cars, cleaning hotel rooms. It was not the premium jobs. It was anything they could get for two or three months before they went to the next place. That experience probably did more for her than anything she could have done here. Gave her a lot of confidence, gave her a lot of bravado. She knew she could come make it on her own, and she could do anything she wanted to do. It was just a matter of her working at it.  She went to law school, and her and one of her classmates got out of law school, and went and opened their own practice. They weren   t interested in doing    go to work for the big firm, and just kill yourself for ten years, and become a partner, and then have a normal life. She   s in criminal law. She didn   t want to go to the public defender   s office, or the DA   s office, and spend three or four years before she got to see the courtroom. She likes the actual courtroom trial process. She just didn   t want to do that, so she and one of her partners went out on their own. Opened their own little firm, and they   ve been doing that two years now and been   they   re not getting rich, but they   ve sure made money. She   s getting a ton of courtroom. They   ve handled, four or five hundred cases. She   s spent a lot of time in the courtroom, not always with trials. She   s just telling us the other day, they got somebody acquitted, a not guilty plea, that should   ve been not guilty. She   s doing great things now. They   re very excited about OSU. Very excited about it. Very good education.  Finchum Did they get an open checkbook when they came?  Freeman Absolutely not. I didn   t let them do that. I didn   t let them make that mistake. I made them fill out a budget every year for me, and that budget determined what money they got each month. We   d reviewed the budget. It was interesting what got added to the budget as the years went by. I still think they used that budgeting even after they got out of college. That   s what I learned from my dad   s way of doing it. I just didn   t let them make the mistakes. Now then, the mistake is they get the credit card, and everybody   s got to abuse the credit card at least once. My kids aren   t any different. It   s just kind of nice, they   ve got a five or six hundred dollar balance they   re having trouble paying, and not fifty thousand. They still use that budget. Finchum One   s on track to be a doctor, and one   s a lawyer, and what   s the son?  Freeman He got out of school. I   m real proud of him, because I   d planned on college. Tina and I had done a pretty effective job on saving money. In fact, when they worked in the summers, whatever they put into savings, I would triple it as an encouragement for them to put money in. It used to be double, and I got to figuring it wasn   t enough to get how much savings they needed. I started doing triple, and anyway, if they wanted to keep something, fine. But I wasn   t going to triple what they kept. I tried to teach them savings that way. They were able to get through school that way.  It was the after-college thing. I never thought about master   s degrees, and law school, and med school, and holy cow  That was kind of a financial rude awakening for me. Good gosh  Our goal always was we wanted them to get out of college and not have a lot of debt. We were able to accomplish that, but that got more difficult when we had one at OSU and had two doing the after-college thing. That got very difficult on us.  Our son, he got out of school, did not go for further education. Was going to come home and go to work in the family business, and I set down and visited with him. He was like    Dad, I just can   t wait to come back. I   m so excited. Just let me build a shed, live in a shed. I just want to work all the time. Make some money     I told him, I said    Trey, when I got out of school, I really didn   t know I had the option to go do anything else. We all came back and went to work. My brothers and I all went to work in the family business when we got done. I just never really thought about doing something else very seriously.    If I have one regret, I think back and wonder what if? Not that I regret what I did. It   s been a very fulfilling life. Yeah, you always wonder. If I really just went out and did something on my own, I might be living in the Hamptons, I don   t know. I might be something different. I said,    You ought to explore that. You ought to go work for somebody else for a while, and go do something. I want to encourage you that that   s a possibility that you ought to think about before you come home.     I never heard about coming home again after that. Man, he just took me up on that and went to town and found a job. He   s in Chicago, and he   s a commodity broker. He does a lot of risk management for ag stuff, wheat, corn, cattle, rice, cotton. He trades a lot of currencies, gold, silver, oils. He   s getting a really, very good education in risk protection and taking risk out of your business. Makes a really good background; it doesn   t matter what he decides to do. That   s kind of the name of the game now. As volatile as markets are, and as wild as things are, being able to control your risk is important in anything you do. He   s getting a really good background in that. The best thing is he   s not naturally   my girls can talk to anybody. They just, you know, lot of personality, a lot of people skills. He   s got a great personality. He   s really funny, but he   s much more conservative and more laid-back. He listens to people and doesn   t really get involved for a while. He got into an area that had to    He couldn   t make a living being that way. There   s a lot of sales to it, a lot of marketing to it, a lot of him having to present himself. It   s not what he   s good at, and he   s gotten real good at it real fast. He had no choice. He was going to starve to death. He picked an area that was not his strong suit, but he got really good at it. It   s been good growing experience for him.  He is planning on, he   ll be back in the family business. I think another   he   s been up there two years. Another year or two up there, and he doesn   t like Chicago. He likes the country. He just hates, he lives right there in the middle of the Loop. You know, he doesn   t even have a car. He won   t spend the four hundred bucks a month that it takes to park a car there. He   s getting a city experience. He looks about like that piece of paper. He   s just white as a sheet because he never sees the sun. I mean, he looks unhealthy he   s so pale. Hope he doesn   t hear that, but he loves what he   s doing. He   s really learning a lot, he realizes that.  He calls me all the time. Our deal is, if I get wore out, and time for me to go do something else, he wants to be sure and get home, where I can help him out and train him what I know before I quit. That   s our deal. If I had a health issue or whatever, he   d come home immediately. For the time being, he   s going to milk all he can learn out of what he   s doing. He told me the other day, probably another year, maximum of two, and then he   ll be done and come home. I look forward to that.  Finchum They   ve all done well with their OSU degrees then.  Freeman Very well  Yeah.  Finchum When did you graduate? It would   ve been     Freeman January of    83. Well December of    82, actually, I guess.  Finchum Did your parents come out for graduation?  Freeman I did not walk. I really had not a big urge to do that. My mother was mortified that I did not walk. I still hear about that. Probably wish I would have, looking back. Honestly, I   d been here for four and half years, and I was so excited to go out and get a real job that I just wanted to pack my stuff up and go out in the real world. That was my attitude. To hang out another week to walk and do that stuff, I just couldn   t do it.  Finchum Where was your first job?  Freeman I called my brother, and he was in the bank there in Texhoma. He had offered me a job, and I accepted that job. I called him and told him when I got out of school, it was like, mid-December, early December. I said    Mark, I   ve got a little money left. I   m going to go snow skiing until I run out of money, and I   ll be home.    He said,    That works out perfect.    I ran out of money January 16 of 1983, and I was working January 17. I remember the day. Never looked back and enjoyed every bit of it.  Finchum You   ve been with the same company?  Freeman Yes. Same thing.  Finchum The family business   Freeman Yes, we   ve had opportunity to acquire the bank there, and my two brothers are partners with me. Mark started in the bank and was there until    95, and he left. My other brother Luke, who   s on the ranch, he never worked in the bank, always worked at the ranch. Of course, still very involved in the bank. He left me there on my own. They   re having the fun out there in the country, getting to do all the cattle business, and I   m stuck in the bank.  Finchum Air conditioned?  Freeman Yeah, I call them every February when it   s twenty inches of snow on the ground and freezing cold. I call them and tell them what a great job I   ve got. They do the same thing this time of the year. You know? (Laughs)  Finchum Well, we should back up and ask how you met Tina.  Freeman (Laughs) Tina, when I was a    After my freshman year of college, I came home for the summer and I was over in Guymon. Of course, you know how it is. When you come down here to school, you get to meet all the Guymon guys that go to school here. When you come home, you get to go visit them. I was hanging out in Guymon. That was a bigger pond, more things to do over there, and packing bricks, of course, same thing over there. There   s an Arrowhead, it   s like a Sonic. It has a drive-thru with the little buttons you push to order things. But it was an Arrowhead, it wasn   t a Sonic. It was a chain, but I don   t think they   re around anymore.  Everybody, when they turned around on Main Street, they   d go through the Arrowhead, and then go back out on Main Street. If you were able to get one of slots, there were probably about fifteen slots there for a car, you got to see everybody that drove by that was out that night. You know, premium place. I was sitting there with some of my friends and talking, and Tina drives by. I said,    Who   s that?    They said,    That   s Tina Lothman.    I was kind of like,    Tell me about her.    And I got to kind of figure out everything about her.  Later on that night, we were out driving around, me and my very best friend. His name is    Fast Ed    Hosier. We   re driving around in the car and pulled up next to Tina. It was a four-lane main street there. I pulled up next to her, honked, and told her to roll down the window. She rolled down the window. I said,    Hey Tina, what   re you up to tonight?    She looked at me. She didn   t have a clue who I was. She said    Oh, nothing. I   m just driving around a little bit. Got to go home in a little bit, it   s about curfew time.    Well, just chatted with her for a while. I looked at her and said,    You don   t remember who I am, do you?    She says    No, I don   t.    She was a little bit hesitant to say that. I went through this long story about where we   d met and how offended I was that she didn   t remember me, and it kind of hurt my feelings. Wasn   t quite that plain, but that was certainly    Then I finally talked her into getting in the car with us. I had her convinced we   d met before.  She got in the car, and it was a little two-seater. She actually had to sit on my lap, and we rode around. After a while I told her,    By the way, I never had met you. I made all that up.    We got to know each other that night. We dated off and on for six or seven years. We really didn   t get too serious about it. She was in school at OPSU. Then, she was at school at Southwestern in Weatherford  Oklahoma . She never was at school here, so we were always a long ways apart. We always stayed in touch. We dated other people and did a lot of other things. We talked on the phone, oh gosh, at least every week for six or seven years. When I came home from school, she was in Amarillo working, which is a hundred miles. That   s kind of like going to Perkins. For us out in the Panhandle a hundred miles is nothing. We got engaged. We got married at that time. We   d known each other for a long, long, long, long time before we ever decided to do that.  Finchum Have you turned her into an OSU fan?  Freeman It   s interesting. She now would tell you that she wishes    I used to beg her to come down here. It   s funny. We were talking about it this morning. I really wonder what would   ve happened if she would have, because she probably wouldn   t have seen my best side if she had actually went to school here. But yes, she wishes she would   ve probably went to a bigger school, broaden her horizons a little bit more. And Oklahoma State, course she   s been here enough. She comes with me to the football games. With the kids here, she was down here all the time and got to know the town a little bit. It is a unique place. Oklahoma State   s very unique. It   s a college town, you know. There   s virtually similar amounts of people, students versus   well, the town   s grown a lot since those days. It   s still a college town, has a college feel to it. You know, all the excitement with Oklahoma State. It   s just a unique place in that if you go to colleges that are in more metropolitan areas, they just have a totally different feel. They   ve got so many other things, and they can go other places and do other things. Here, it   s a tighter knit    It   s a small town. I still say the kids here learn how to have fun doing a lot of things, being more creative. They   re closer knit. The campus is right together. You can get from one side of campus to the other in ten minutes. You   re not riding busses all over town. Everybody   s passing each other. It   s just like     We stayed in Enid last night on the way down here. It   s Mothers    Weekend, so I couldn   t find a hotel room in Stillwater, so we stayed in Enid. The lady that was taking care of the front desk, I was talking to her about her kids are playing baseball. I was giving her a hard time about the sack lunches they had; she ought to be stealing those and taking them to the baseball players. I know I went to school with her. I recognized her when I met her. I didn   t know her. I just knew that I had some classes with her, or she was a friend of a friend, or something. But I know dadgum, good and well that she went to college here. I know that I crossed her path. It happens to me all the time.  I   ll talk to people sometimes and say,    You went to Stillwater, didn   t you?    They   ll say,    Yeah.    We don   t know how, but it   s just obvious. You just see a lot of people that went to school here. Got a lot of great relationships that are still here in Oklahoma, and some in Dallas, Kansas City, all over the place. The relationships you make here, I think, are lifelong relationships. It   s not that way, in my opinion, it   s not that way, at every college. There are other colleges like this. But there   s something special about OSU. I truly believe that it   s an interesting mix.  Finchum The graduates are pretty loyal. Do you have any idea of why that might be?  Freeman I think it   s similar to   I do think there   s another school where I see that kind of loyalty, it   s Texas A M. It   s very similar in that those people are just rabid A M fans. OSU   s like that, but it   s for different reasons. I understand the Texas A M thing, and that cadet thing, and a lot of things that caused that there. Here, I don   t know what causes that. I   ve never been able to figure it out, but I do think the fan base for Oklahoma State is as strong a fan base as I know of. Everybody roots for OSU if they went to school here, and I don   t mean athletic events. That   s part of it. I   m talking more, just the college. They want their kids to go there. They want their cousins to go there.  All the people I went to school with still come back here, and it   s not always to see their buddies. I like coming back here. My children are gone now, and I have a niece here. Even if I   m not going to see her, I like coming through. I just drive around, and I feel a kinship to Oklahoma State that I don   t think everybody feels. I don   t know if Oklahoma State has some master plan that they spike the water around here or something. There is a kinship and a strong tie with other students that attended here and the college itself. I don   t know what causes that. I wish somebody would tell me, because I   ve never figured it out.  Finchum You would bottle it? Huh?  Freeman Yeah. I could bottle that and sell it. We all look for loyalty. Nobody has loyalty like the black and orange does. Yeah, I spend my whole life trying to figure out how I can have my customer base be as loyal to my business. I think about OSU a lot. What causes that loyalty? I   ve never put that together, never have figured it out.  Finchum Do you have a closet full of orange, or at least a few things?  Freeman Oh, absolutely  Black and orange are, you know    Tina   s got a closet full of orange stuff. I buy it for her all the time. I follow the sports. Football is    Just so excited about them. It   s just nice to see them. When I was here, they were not very competitive in the Big Eight back then. They were kind of the doormat. Never were very good. There was a couple of years where we actually challenged for the Big Eight Championship. That was like, that never happens. That was exciting.  Now then, they   re very competitive. They   re challenging every year. They have a better program than, my opinion, than most of the schools in the Big Twelve do now. They rival OU in a lot of ways not. We used to could not compete with OU. Now we can. We compete very well with them. Basketball, I   m excited about that. Had a pretty tough go last    It   s time to have a change of leadership, not that I   m that anti   It   s time to change that deal. It   s best for the program. I am excited for what   s coming down the road. I hear we got great things coming.  Finchum Golf and baseball seem to be always ranked near the top.  Freeman Yes. I can   t play basketball anymore, sure don   t want to play football. Can   t run track anymore, so I play golf. That   s what I do for my outlet. If I need to get out of the bank for a while, and I don   t want to go work cattle, then I go to the golf course. The program, they got a great program. The women   s program is coming.  Finchum Sunset Hills?  Freeman Yes. That   s exactly right. Out there costs you like two hundred bucks a year to be a member at Sunset Hills. We   ve got really good golf out in our part of the world.  Finchum Ever made a hole in one? Freeman Never have. I have pounded pins and left ball marks on the edge of the cup. It   s amazing how close I   ve got twenty times. I   ve never got one in the hole. Now I did do this. On a par three once, I hit the first one in the water. The second one I knocked in the hole. That   s not a hole in one. It   s just a par.  Finchum But in one swing though.  Freeman Yeah, exactly  I   ve done that actually twice. It just kills me. (Laughs)  Finchum OSU has been a good choice and a good path     Freeman Absolutely.  Finchum     for where you are today?  Freeman Like I said, there   s a lot of contacts. I firmly believe, that if you want to be in New York City, you ought to go to college in New York. If you want to be in Oklahoma, I think you need to go to an Oklahoma school. If it doesn   t matter, you need to go to Oklahoma State, because it is the best place to go. If it   s even close, go to Oklahoma State. It   s a great place. The people that I know because of OSU, there   s a lot of opportunity there. It doesn   t matter who I talk to in Oklahoma, or even the Texas Panhandle, or even Dallas. There are so many students that come out of Dallas, and out of the Texas Panhandle, the Amarillos, the Herefords, the Borgers and Pampas. All those towns have a lot of kids that come to school here. We   re going to know somebody in common. It   s just a matter of figuring who it is. It   s always an easy thing to talk to people about. A lot of contacts and I think that   s important.  Like I said, Oklahoma State really prepared me well in a lot of ways. In a lot of ways, not just the economics and the professors I had. The Dr.  Robert  Oehrtmans that was such a    In my mind, when I think college, I think of Dr. Oehrtman, who   s retired now. He was kind of right after Dr. Goodwin. Taught from Dr. Goodwin   s book. You know, that old Ag Econ, I think it was 1014. It   s every concept that you   re going to study for the next four years is in the book. If you got the first round of it, okay. The rest of it just expanded from there. It was easy if you really   I got an A in that class. I really worked in that class, hard. You know the professors like Tom Tice that was here, I think he   s in Virginia now. You know, the old professors. The Dan Badgers, and I just think back to all the Kim Andersons. The professors I had is a good group of people that really cared about the students, and they would help you. They would, they were here to teach.  I see a lot of places, and I   ve been around a lot of campuses and a lot of professors and the emphasis, in my opinion, is really not   Everybody   s talking about education. When you get down to the level of professors, or even the adjuncts, the emphasis here is always about, they had a love to teach the kids. That   s one of the things that   s unique to OSU. It   s that want to teach the kids. It   s just like people I deal with, and people I choose to do business with, or have for friends. If the effort is there, I   ll put up with mistakes. If there   s loyalty and effort, that   s who I want to be around, and that   s what I felt here. The professors here, they really had a love to teach. Even if it was kids like me, that they didn   t really enjoy. They really tried to teach me, and I needed some help. I   m not the brightest guy in the world, I promise you. They took very good care of me.  Finchum Did you have a favorite spot?  Freeman Spot?  Finchum On campus? A favorite spot?  Freeman I don   t know if I     Finchum Building or Theta Pond?  Freeman Let me think about that a minute. Old Ag Econ 101 is where I spent so much of my time. That   s got to be one of the spots. The old Dairy Barn was a good one. There was a, I don   t know if it   s still here, but there was a little, bitty dairy down there where they had coffee, milk, and donuts that was always pretty nice to hit on the way to the next class. Student Union was always one of my favorite spots. You don   t see a lot of student unions like this one. It   s a cool place.  Finchum Did it have the bowling alley then?  Freeman Yes, I actually took a bowling class in that bowling alley. It   s bizarre you say that. I   d forgotten about that. I don   t guess   is it still here?  Finchum No.  Freeman I took a class down there. I bowled there every Tuesday and Thursday for a whole semester.  Finchum They took it out when they remodeled. I don   t know how far ago, but it wasn   t here when we came in    96, so it was longer than that.  Freeman At that time, I think you were allowed fifteen elective hours. I saved all my electives for the last semester. It was a really interesting semester. Bowling was one of them. They weren   t all that. That was a class that fit. I wanted to get out. It took me an extra semester to graduate, it was time for me to be done. That was the class that fit.  Finchum Registration and all that would not have been on computers at that point.  Freeman Oh, God no   Finchum You stood in long lines and     Freeman Oh yeah, that was one thing you learned. When you were a freshman, you learned how to get around that system. You learned, you got there early, you got in line early. You already had a pretty good idea what you were going to do, because those classes would fill up, and you   d end up with a horrible schedule. You knew where your anchor classes were, what you needed to get. You made sure you got in those first and then the rest of your schedule    Yeah, there was lots of tricks to it back then. Lots of lines, lots of time, lots of mess ups, everything was manual. Course, you would think you were in a class, and you wouldn   t be. It was a nightmare. The way they do it now, I   m just amazed. They can do it sitting at the kitchen table. It   s better   Finchum Although you could communicate with the person behind you too while you were waiting.  Freeman Yes, there was lots of social. (Laughs) I was big on social.  Finchum That   s part of what college is all about, isn   t it?  Freeman Part of growing up. It   s part of the growing up process. I still say that   s a big part of it. When my kids came down here, they were sure a lot more grownup when they got done. (Laughs)  Finchum They came from good stock, too, it sounds like.  Freeman I don   t know about that.  Finchum Anything else you want to add before I ask my last question?  Freeman Hmm    no, nothing comes to mind.  Finchum I always finish with when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say? How do you want to be remembered?  Freeman Oh, God  (Laughs) That   s a pretty big question. Family first, of course, belief second. Those issues were always the biggest. Your family, it   s always got to come first. Course, your beliefs have to be in there first, too. I really want to be remembered as somebody that did the right thing, basically did the right thing. Be the right kind of person. Make good decisions. Successful, because obviously everybody would like to be successful. Book   s out on that until you   re done. I always, I think the people that you have the opportunity to work with are like family. They need to be treated like family. I expect that. I think people that you work with for a lifetime, you owe that kind of treatment too. I really want to be somebody that working    Who I work for, or who works for me, would all agree. It   s very important to me that I enjoy who I work with, I enjoy what I do, and that the people around me hopefully learn something from me. I   ve certainly learned a lot from a lot of really good people.  I think that whole, encompassing thing is being honest, having great integrity, being, what   s the term I   m looking for? Not see through, but transparent. Being transparent, and in your personal life, in your business life, in your family life, I think it is the right thing to do. I think whether you   re in politics, or whatever you do, that transparency is important. Having enough integrity to do the right things. Being able to have no skeletons, nothing in the closet. That whole concept of a holistic mix of your personal life and business life, I hope I   m good at that. I preach that and I hope I   m successful being able to pass that along to the, not just be over with when I am done. I would like the organizations I   m involved with for that to last. If I   m known for anything, I hope that   s what it   s for.  Finchum I   d add loyal and true to that.  Freeman Loyalty is a huge part of that. I agree. True to yourself, true to your co-worker, true to your family. We all make mistakes. We all have ups, and I   m certainly not perfect. I don   t mean I want to be perfect. I just want to learn from those things and have the ability to adjust, and fix, and change. It   s important, it   s a big concern to me that people I work with, and people I do business with, and people I love and around all my life enjoy their time with me.  Finchum Well, I   ve enjoyed my time with you, so thank you for coming today.  Freeman You   re sure welcome. Enjoyed the opportunity, very much.  -------  -------   
