 Gill. I   m with the O-STATE Stories project of the Oral History  Research Program for Oklahoma State University Library. I   m here in  Pawhuska, Oklahoma in the office of Fredrick F. Drummond. The date  is September 25, 2008. Okay, Frederick you grew up on a ranch in  Osage County. What was it like growing up on a ranch?  Good place to grow up. Lots of activities. Fishing and hunting and all  the good things. Riding horses and playing football, athletics in high  school, and good bunch of guys. Best place in the world.  What position did you play in high school?  I was a guard, a 145 pound guard.  It wasn   t that small, necessarily, in those days. Now, it   s small.  The biggest guy on our team was 185 pounds and we thought he was a  monster. (Laughter)  I thought you would say wing back or tail back. You probably ran the  single wing, didn   t you?  Ran the single wing and the guard ran with the ball on occasion. And  he   d pull out and get the ball and so it was kind of interesting. My little  high school team beat Cleveland when Billy Vessels was in his senior  year. Our senior year we beat Cleveland and Billy but he was an  outstanding athlete and a Heisman award winner.  Now was it Pawhuska?  I grew up in Hominy.  Hominy, okay. Hominy Bucks.  6  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Hominy Buck. I was a Hominy Buck.  It   s sort of different here. You lived actually out on the ranch     No I didn   t. I grew up in the town     Town?  And we went to the ranches in the summer time.  Growing up, what were some of the jobs you had that you got assigned  as a smaller kid?  The lowest jobs you could get.  Shoveling the manure and that sort of stuff?  Yeah. Just anything. Rolling fence, just any job that nobody else  wanted. Mucking the stalls, cleaning out, and just general ranch work.  Now you say that casually, general ranch work, that   s pretty hard work.  Can you describe some of the things you did on a working ranch?  I grew up in an interesting time because I was a teenager during World  War II and all the young men had gone to the military so it was just the  teenage boys that didn   t go and the old men that ran the ranches. We  didn   t have any vehicles. We rode horseback everywhere and you   d  have six horses and so I grew up riding ten-jillion miles. More miles  than anybody could ever think of today, because you rode everywhere  you went. I could remember getting up   I think the earliest I ever got up  to go to a round-up was two o   clock one morning. And we rode eleven  miles and got there before daylight. If you didn   t get there before  daylight on a round-up you just didn   t amount to very much. I   ll never  forget that day particularly. We had a typical lunch, which is a cheese  sandwich on white bread. Then riding back that evening, it was hot and  dusty and never had a drink of water between, just at noon and the old  horse had his head between his legs and he was tired and I was tired. I  was probably 14 years of age and I made up my mind I never wanted to  be a rancher.  You didn   t want to be a cowboy, huh? (Laughter)  I don   t want to be a cowboy. There   s no future in this. Well anyhow,  that   s the story.  At that time I guess you still branded, you may tag nowadays, but did  7  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  you actually do the round-up of your cattle, the new calves and brand in  the spring?  Yes, we had spring round-up, fall round- up and we   d get new cattle.  And we had steers. And of course we had cows and calves gathered with  steers in the summer time. They   d put them in a corner of the pasture  and the guy that owned them would cut the fat steers out. We   d load  them on the railroad train and send them to Kansas City or St. Louis,  Missouri. So every week you   d cut out the fat steers, you   d have a  round-up with all the cowboys. My job, as a kid, was holding the cut or  doing something like that. Just the job that nobody else wanted.  So how often was that did you say you   d do that?  Every week.  Every week?  Every week. Usually from July, August and September with a few  exceptions. The Fourth of July you didn   t do it. That   s the way the  cattle industry was. There were trains, there were no trucks. There were  a few pick-ups. They didn   t amount to a whole lot. They were quarter  ton Jeep pick-ups. Everybody thought that if you had one of those, you  really had something. Four wheel drive. But the rest of the time we did it  all on a horse. A lot of good horses, a lot of good cowboys.  Where did you ship out of?  Well, it was along the railroad. They had Santa Fe Railroad   three rails  came through Osage county. There are none of them available now. All  gone. The Santa Fe, about every 15 to 20 miles they would have a  shipping pen. This railroad was specifically, as well as the other  railroads that were here, were designed where they had shipping pens  where you could drive your cattle to those pens, load them up, and send  them to the market. So you talked about country markets, and they  didn   t have those then. They didn   t have one in Pawnee or one in Tulsa  or something like that. They had the central markets. That   s where the  packing plants were and so the cattle we got up to Kansas City. Swift,  Armor, Cudahy, they all had big packing plants and they would come  and buy. As a kid growing up, the ranchers would go up on a Sunday  and the cattle would be there on a Monday or a Tuesday. You shipped  them on a Friday, usually on a Friday or a Thursday or Friday. And they  put them in pens and commission them and feed them in these pens. And  call those numbers. Kansas City Stockyards, I   ve got a picture up there  of the Kansas City Stockyards which kind of showed what it was like in  those days. They   d have 20,000 to 30,000 head of cattle which was a lot  8  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  of cattle. And then the packers would come ride around on horses and  pick out the pens of cattle they wanted and they   d drive them to the  packing plants. So it was a pretty simple process. Then they sent all  those cattle back east. But it was 90 , 99  were grass fed cattle.  So an entirely different industry then, up until after World War II and  then they started feeding cattle up in the Corn Belt. And people liked  that corn fed beef. Trucks came in and 1967, the railroad went out and  so that was a great transition. So I   ve been fortunate enough, Jerry, to be  there from the old days to what we have today. It   s been amazing to me  what cowboys can do today that they couldn   t do in the old days. You  know in the old days, if you fed cattle you had 100 pound sacks and  they   d come out, cottonseed cake. They   d come in on railroad cars from  Tennessee or somewhere like that and you would unload them and take  them out and put them in the cake houses that you had on the various  pastures. And they   d have pens around the cake houses. And in the  winter time the cowboys would get on their horses, regardless of the  weather: snow, ice, sleet, rain. Ride out to the pasture. They   d call the  cattle. Loudly, a cattle call. Good old western song,    Cattle Call   . And  there was a cattle call. They   d be there waiting on you. And he   d open  the gate. He   d string the cake out in the troughs. One hundred pound  sacks, so it was pretty heavy sacks. You can   t find anybody who can lift  a 100 pound sack any more. And string out and open the gate, and all  the cattle would rush in and eat out of the feed trough. Then he   d ride  out to the next pasture until all that was done. It was a very physical  existence for the cowboys up through and after World War II. And then  after that is when everything changed. So I got in on the first of it.  Did they sometimes between rides go check the fence too?  Oh yeah, they   d ride the fence. You built your own fence, and that was  always a great thing, to make sure all the steeples were in.  Building a fence wasn   t the most fun thing in the world, was it?  Oh no  Building fence was   you   d wear-out gloves and some of the  messiest jobs where you   d buy creosote post by the boxcar load. You  can imagine what it   d be like to unload a car load of greasy creosote  posts in the middle of the summertime. You talk about miserable,  sloppy, oh the worst, creosote and then of course shipping. We didn   t  have anything to kill flies in those days, so the flies were absolutely  terrible. We didn   t have spray machines to spray or any insecticides or  pesticides. And we had screw worms. We finally got to where they  dipped cattle, for Texas Fever. Today it   s such a simple deal compared  to what it used to be. Hey, those guys were tough.  9  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  So that   s when you decided that you really didn   t want to be a cowboy.  That   s when I decided I didn   t want to be a cowboy.  Well just speaking, you say the Drummond Ranch.  Ranches, There are a lot of Drummonds     That   s what I was going to say, there   s not a Drummond Ranch.  No, a lot of Drummonds.  Can you give us a little bit of background, Frederick? Your grandfather  was the first person coming in. Give us a little bit of the history of your  family ranch?  Well okay, I   ll give you a little background history. My grandfather  came from Scotland as a young boy to make his fortune. And went to  Texas, and lost everything he had. Was working his way back East. Got  to St. Louis, and that   s where the west, you know Lewis and Clark  started going West those days. And he ran into an Indian trader that said,     Come, go with me to trade with the Osages.    Well he didn   t know  where the Osages were, didn   t know what that was so he went with him  and ended up in Pawhuska and learned how to speak fluent Osage and  wound up as an Indian trader. And then it worked out that later on  civilization came in, little later trains came in. I think the first rail came  in maybe in 1906. And moved to Hominy and settled what is called the  Hominy Trading Post which was the Wal-Mart of the day. They did  everything. They had gents and ladies furnishings. They had hardware,  they had a furniture department. They had a grocery department and  they   d even put you away if you had a furniture department in those  days. The furniture stores would also bury you. So I mean that was full  service. That   s what he wound up being was a merchant.  Then he had three boys: R. C. Drummond , the oldest who was the prima  genator, the largest of the Drummonds. And then my father, Fred G.  Drummond, Fred Gentner Drummond, was on the first Board of Regents  at Oklahoma State University. And then Jack A. A. Drummond. Those  two graduated from OSU. Our family has   most of them have graduated  from OSU, or they have sure gone to school there. Education has been  very important in our family history. And there was a daughter, too. My  grandfather, his name was Fred Drummond, was Frederick Drummond.  And, of course, my father was Frederick Gentner Drummond. Then I  happen to be a Frederick Drummond. We   ve changed the middle names  around.  10  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  R.C. Drummond, who was the oldest, was born in 1893. My father in  1895. R.C. Drummond had Fred A. Drummond, Jack and Gent  Drummond and Louise, Janice, and Kathryn. So it was those three boys  all wound up in the cattle business here. Fred A. married Ruth Thatcher  whose mother  Jessie Thatcher-Bost  was the first female graduate from  Oklahoma State University. And then Gent Drummond and Jack were  twin brothers, twin boys. They went to OSU and graduated. One of them  married one of the Swim girls who had the old Swim Drugstore down  there that was a great piece of Oklahoma State, Oklahoma A M piece  of edifice that everybody went to. It was right on the corner, on campus  corner. He married and then his sons all went to Oklahoma State and  that was Gentner Drummond, and Jonathon Drummond, and David  Drummond. Jonathon is an eye doctor down there now, an  ophthalmologist.  These are Leslie   s     This is Leslie   s kids. This is Gent   s son Leslie. And his sons, of course,  Gentner and Jonathon and David. And Gentner of course was the OSU  attorney for a number of years, of the Alumni Association. And in fact  the first aviator into Kuwait during the     Desert Storm?  Yeah, Desert Storm. Now, a practicing attorney in Tulsa. And again,  Jonathon   s an ophthalmologist in Stillwater.  Your dad and the two brothers that stayed and ranched here in Osage  County, did you ever mix any of the operations?  No. The Drummond families all had their own ranches, their own  separate operations. They either stood or fell on their own. But they  always tried to work together on buying feed or selling or something like  that that would come along. They tried to help each other much like  what a Scotch clan would do in many respects. And stood together in  difficult times.  How many acres did your family ranch have and about how many head  would you say? At the peak     Well, Jerry it   s hard to say how many acres our family ranches were. We  had two ranches and they come and go when we bring steers in. We had  so many cows. You kind of hate to tell. You know ranches can vary.  Yes.  11  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  I   ve got a friend who   s got a ranch that   s got 640 cows on it out in  Arizona; it joins the Grand Canyon on the north side, 640,000 acres.  And then I   ve got another friend that   s got a ranch 10 miles north of  Dallas. It   s 240 acres and its worth a lot more and runs more cattle than  the other one does. So it all varies. That doesn   t tell you anything about  the ranch. Something that will tell you that   s kind of fun, sometimes we  tell the size of a ranch by the size of the sign. Big sign, small ranch.  Small sign, big ranch. (Laughter) Maybe the size of the hat you wear, I  don   t know.  I see. What about, how many cattle would you end up   in a peak, a good  year? Maybe say back before World War II and maybe after World War  II? How many cattle were you running?  Oh well quite a few. I hate to say anything like that. We   d run quite a  few. Well, if you threw us all together, the Drummond   s would have lots  of land, lots of cattle. And then we   d all have various sizes. Sometimes  we   d own a ranch and sell it. Sometimes we   d lose it because of the  economy. But when you go back all those years, Jerry, ranches come  and go. So you can   t really say how big your ranch is.  Kind of sounds like stock.  That   s right it sounds like stock to us. Did I make   I got a big winner in  CYSCO stock or somebody like that.  Well Fred, you actually still, you and your son Ford still run your family  ranch?  Yes, yes. Ford does.  And how many working hands do you have on your ranch now?  How many cowboys do you have full time? We have four full time  cowboys. But when you really go out to work and do something, well  you   ll have day labor. And for round-ups you   ll have your neighbors  they   ll come in and help you. When you   re doing anything like working  calves or something like that you need six or eight cowboys. You need a  couple of them who are young guys who can work at putting the cattle  through the chute. Just a lot of work.  Are you still using horses for some of that work?  Yeah, absolutely use horses. Yes, this is still cowboy country. It   s  cowboys and horses. We still have some cowboys that are second, and  third, and fourth generations that are working for some of us  12  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Drummond   s. I got one cowboy that   s been with me 46 years. Another  one   s been with me 42 years. It   s an easy life compared to what it used  to be. These guys are in good shape. They   ve eaten beef every day, all  their life and never had a heart attack yet.  The cattle business has always been the signature     Yes, the signature operation.  Some other operations auxiliary and some other operations that you   ve  been engaged in?  Oh, I   ve done a lot of things, Jerry. I   m still in the banking business. In  fact after I graduated from Stanford, I worked for a bank in Kansas City.  And I was kind of their    ag guy    and then after my father developed  cancer I came back from working in Kansas City for this large bank.  And wound up buying a bank and my cousin Fred A. joined me in that  effort. Then I   ve been in the oil business for a little bit off and on since  1959. Never very successful. Just enough to raise four kids, get them  through college. And that   s about the most important thing I   ve ever  done, right there.  Oh, absolutely. So some memories you had of some of your family  members growing up. Thinking your brothers and sisters anything you  can share with us. Your brothers and sisters? How many     I have two sisters.  Ann and   .  Ann and my sister Mary Points.  Mary?  Mary Points, now deceased. She died about five years ago of pancreatic  cancer. And my sister Ann lives in Ada, Oklahoma. Her husband, Walt  Wooly, was the past president of the Oklahoma State Alumni  Association. A wonderful guy. So we   ve always had lot of OSU  relationships forever and ever.  Fred, I know you and I talked before about your father who   s a very  special individual at Oklahoma State University and just a very special  man.  Yes.  13  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  But this Frederick   Frederick     Frederick Gentner.  Yes, Frederick Gentner Drummond. He was a very special alumnus of  Oklahoma State University. Just some things I noted. He was a member  of the first OSU Board of Regents. He was National President of the  OSU Alumni Association.  Yes.  He helped raise money for student scholarships and loans and one of the  first to do that back in the 1920s.  Way back.  He was actually engaged with his Alma Mater all of his life.  Mm-hmm.  There   s a residence hall, Drummond Hall named after him there on the  campus.  That   s right.  So, what are some of your earliest memories of going to Stillwater with  your dad? As a young kid, I bet you used to trail along with him as a kid  to activities. Can you share some of those early memories?  Hey, those early memories were great. I   ll tell you what because he  would go down often. The cars weren   t very good in those days.  (Laughter) The roads weren   t either.  No, the roads were not very good. But hey, he   d put my mother, Grace,  and three kids in the car and we   d go down to Stillwater to the football  games. They had friends down there. We   d go by their house beforehand  and have lunch with them. There wasn   t any place to eat particularly so  you ate with friends. Then you   d go to a football game. And of course he  knew everybody. It was a small group, you know.  Even class size?  I know the year I graduated there were 12,000 students. All total. And he  had people on the Alumni board taking us kids down to the football  games when we were just in high school and going to affairs were  14  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  probably 5,000 or 6,000 students.  Was he in the class of 1912?  Yes.  So you had been going with him in the 1930s era. What were your  earliest memories?  I was born in 1931.  1931? Oh 1931. Okay.  So I don   t remember a whole lot.  So not too much of the 1930s then.  No it was the latter part of the 1930s.  So do you remember Bob Fenimore? And Joe Lookabaugh.  Sure I know Fenimore. And Lookabaugh. You bet. And Conrad  Lookabaugh, who was Mr. Lookabaugh   s son, was a pledge friend of  mine at the Beta Theta Pi house. Yeah, Bob Fenimore, what a hero he  was.  He truly was. I   m going to assume since you played football in high  school that was your favorite sport?  Football, yes. I loved playing football. But in those days with a single  wing and double wing in high school they called us 60 minute men.  We   d play all day long and you played offense and defense. You know  how those work.  You enjoyed a football game. Did you get involved in wrestling?  Watching wrestling?  We didn   t have wrestling. So I watched a little bit of wrestling when we  were down there. Gosh, when you grow up in a little town like I did you  had two sports, football and basketball. You had one coach that coached  every sport there was and he had nobody to help him. We had leather  helmets to begin with. No face guards  I   ve got a mouth full of chipped  teeth as a result that, Jerry.  Well, Frederick, before we get away from your dad, who was, and I say  this very sincerely, just a very, very special individual to this university.  15  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Well, yes, a big deal. Very exciting.  What non-OSU things do you remember about your dad? What things  did he   do you remember growing up, community involvement? What  other things was he engaged in?  Well, he was on the Board of Regents practically up until the year he  died. He was on a long time.  He was in his second term I believe, wasn   t it.  Yes. And he died when he was 63. So I mean his life revolved around  Oklahoma State University. It really did.  Was he a Mason? A 32nd degree Mason?  Yes, a 33rd.  And he was involved here in Osage County?  Early on with that, with the Masonic efforts. And of course with the  Calanthe. And of course the 1930s, to be a survivor, were tough, tough  years. Everybody was broke or going broke. So people in those days  they didn   t have time for much recreation or anything, Jerry. You know  after 1929 on, the world stopped. Really. Or so I   ve been told. So he had  to be a workaholic to stay alive all those years. Especially in the cattle  business and the other business. He was in lots of businesses. He had an  automobile dealership. He was a banker. He was in the insurance  business, cotton gin business, ice house business. He   d gone on, after  graduating from OSU, and in two or three years went on to Harvard and  he was in the third business school class in Harvard.  Wow.  And then when his father died at age 49, that   s why he came back to the  Osage to run the Hominy Trading Post.  What values did you learn from your dad that stayed with you?  Work.  And work and work.  Work and work. (Laughter)  I   ve heard it said that he had a very good relationship with the Tribal  16  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  leaders here...  Oh, yes. He spoke fluent Osage.     in Osage. Very much trusted.  Very much a trusted gentleman. Very trusted. He spoke fluent Osage.  And my grandfather, the original Fred Drummond, Frederick  Drummond, he spoke Osage, and then my father spoke fluent Osage so  they got along very, very well and were trusted by the Osages. And had  an Osage name. His name was    Man with Glasses.    Don   t ask me what  it meant, but it was an Osage name.    Man with Glasses    which he had  bad eyes and wore glasses. (Laughter)  You   re love for OSU then certainly must have come from your dad.  Oh, I was indoctrinated early, Jerry.  You   d been dipped early. Didn   t have any other choice, huh?  I think he probably would have said,    Well Frederick, you can go  anywhere you want to go to school, but your tuition   s paid for at OSU.     So some of your first trips to OSU, when did you first meet Dr. Bennett?  President Bennett?  Oh back when my dad used to go down and have breakfast with him.  They   d go down, he and Dr. Bennett were really good friends. Dr.  Bennett made good biscuits.  Is that there at his home, at the President   s home?  Yeah. At his home at the President   s home. Evidently he liked to cook  and my dad liked to eat. They did a lot of business over breakfast at Dr.  Bennett   s house. But Dr. Bennett did make good biscuits.  He was president of the institution during your undergraduate years  there I guess?  Well, no. Dr. Willham was President when I was there.  What year did you come to Oklahoma State?  1949.  1949. So was he with Truman in the Point Four Program at that time  17  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  then?  Yes, that   s exactly where he was.  What do you remember about Dr. Bennett?  Oh, he was just a wonderful neat guy. A really good friend of my  father   s and we   d see him regularly. Colonel Stewart was another one of  the board members, original board members and was a dynamic old  Texan that had Mid-Continent Life Insurance come into Oklahoma City  and a lot of good guys on that board. And Dad really enjoyed them.  They were really some of the finest years out. They were trying to get  OSU off on the right foot, which look where we are now, a wonderful  university.  Your father was a Regent at OSU when you were a student there?  Yes, that   s probably the only reason I had good grades.  How did that work out? It   s kind of like being a preacher   s son at  church? Isn   t it?  Yes. It   s like a preacher   s son at church. It was not an asset, I can tell  you that.  Did that affect some of the decisions about what you didn   t do socially?  That is right  Of course I didn   t have a car until I was a junior in college  and you couldn   t get into a whole lot of trouble without a car. (Laughter)  In those days it was hard to get in trouble. The worst thing you could  do   they did have panty raids, though, while I was down there.  Do you remember in your time, late 1940s, early 1950s, any special  professors, administrators that impacted you?  Oh yes, a lot of neat guys. Of course I was an Ag major.  Agronomy? Or animal science?  Animal Science.  Animal science.  And I took courses, I loved taking other courses. I probably had a minor  in business. I took a couple years of Spanish, took a petroleum  engineering course. That was when I met Cal Voght who was the head  18  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  of the engineering fraternity, and I was the head of Alpha Zeta at that  time.  And Alpha Zeta was the?  Alpha Zeta was the ag fraternity, honorary fraternity. And there always  was quite a bit of competition between the ags and the engineers.  Always a lot of fun. The ags would maybe release the pigeons or put  some manure on the front steps of the engineering building or something  like that. And so the engineers really got back at us. They stole our  bronze bull which was a major trophy that the animal science boys had  won at Chicago.  National   you mean judging contest?  Judging contest. And it weighed probably 200-300 pounds. They stole  him and he was gone for five years. And because I met Cal, probably the  most noteworthy thing I did at Oklahoma State was Cal and I got  together and I got the bronze bull back. (Laughter) That was my one  claim to fame.  Where had they been hiding it all this time?  They always said they castrated the poor guy. But yes, I think they had  him buried somewhere. I don   t know where he was. But anyhow we got  him back and he   s still in the Animal Science Department right in his  prestigious spot and he   s been there ever since. But he   s chained down.  Are there some other special memories that you have of your years  there?  Well that, and just the football games.  You were active in a lot of things. What were some of the activities,  undergraduate activities?  I was Blue Key and lots of other things.  You were a fraternity man? A Greek man? Right?  I was a Beta Theta Pi for the fraternity. And I was probably too   I did  all kinds of things. Just a typical college guy. Lots of girls, too.  Trying to get a date on Friday night?  Trying to get a date on Friday night, right. Yeah.  19  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  What were some of the hang-outs on campus? Swims, you mentioned,  was one of them.  The Student Union was built when I was a junior, of course. That was  the big hangout.  That was special wasn   t it? A big deal?  Oh boy, you could go have coffee there. They had a place called the Frat  House over across from the Chi-O house. That was the place where  everybody could wander over, a little bitty hut. Can   t think of the name  of the guy     Y-hut?  Yes.  Y-hut.  And that was a place where everybody went. That was a neat place. And  the coffee shop.  That would be about where the classroom building is today? On that  corner there? Right across from the Business Building?  Yes. That was a good spot. I don   t think any of us worked that hard. We  had a lot of fun. I just remember that college was great. You know after  you   ve been a cowboy or growing up in Hominy, Oklahoma there  wasn   t a whole lot of trouble you could   my father was on the school  board there, president of the school board. What a handicap to grow up  with  And two sisters that were always trying to watch over you. And a  mother that was very strict. Golly.  You did all right?  I had to get out of college before I could have any fun, Jerry.  Surely, in your time some recognition you received, some offices you  held and if you recall?  Well, I can   t remember a lot about that. I was one of the top ten students.  And I was the OSU candidate for the Rhodes Scholarship one year.  Other than that     Can you describe the process for that a little bit? A local competition  then a regional?  20  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  A local competition. Strictly a local competition.  State of Oklahoma?  Every university would pick their own people. So Oklahoma State  would pick one or two people and I was a representative. I thought I had  a pretty good chance. I thought that would be a good deal.  That would be a great honor, just to be selected     I was very flattered to be picked, very flattered to be picked. Ag people  don   t get picked very often. They don   t think we   re very exotic for some  reason or another. And maybe that is true.  And you   re also a top ten student at Oklahoma State?  Yes. I had very good grades when I got out of Oklahoma State. I think I  had two B   s.  You told some about the Student Union being built, which had to be  really special. I guess the Library was under construction at that time.  Maybe finished right after you left.  Yes, it was there the last year or two, and what a wonderful facility that  was. And you could also study over in Old Central. If you really wanted  to study that was like going to a tomb. If you went to the Library, there  were a lot of good looking girls studying over there, too. Made it very  difficult to study.  And they couldn   t wear slacks, right? They had to wear a dress?  Absolutely. Boy they looked good. (Laughter)  Theta Pond was a special place.  Theta Pond.  Social gatherings there?  Oh yeah, yeah. We had rope pulls with one fraternity against another.  Tug-a-war?     another across Theta Pond. And somebody would always wind up in  Theta Pond.  21  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Get pinned or engaged you   d get thrown in Theta Pond.  Oh, yes. Someone would always do something trivial like get engaged.  They didn   t do that in those days. We didn   t have a lot of married  students in those days, Jerry. You know, really. Nobody could afford to  get married so they didn   t get married. They got married, most of them,  after they got out, when they graduated.  Had the GI   s gone through by the time you were there, that post World  War II group?  When I was there, no, they were still there. The GI   s had come in. See  that was 1949. So they   d been there a couple of years. So there were a  lot of guys that were World War II vets.  A lot of those were married that lived out in the Vet Village     Yeah, really the married guys were the vets from World War II and that  was a lot different. Those guys were there to study and make grades.  And they had a wife, or some of them didn   t have a wife, just came back  to school. You know they had been in--they were 24-25 year old guys.  Tough guys.  They   d seen the world and they were ready to settle down.  They   d seen the world. They were ready to come back and get civilian  life. Some of them liked college. Some of them just wanted to have a  good time. Some of them wanted to make grades and get a good job.  Looking back at your career and things you were involved in and the  activities outside of the classroom: leadership opportunities as well as  grades. Do you feel like your degree at Oklahoma State helped prepare  you for your life after you left OSU?  Yeah, I think that   s true of college life. I figure a third of what I got out  of college life was the education and the classes. A third would have  been the friends I made, and a third would be the opportunities that  degree made available to me. You learn how to study and take advantage  of what you have in the way of opportunities. And there were a lot of  opportunities. I think that, to me, that is what education should be about  today is to create a desire to take advantage of those opportunities.  Whatever you learn or whatever you   re interested in, or whatever you  think you want to do. And a lot of life is changed by what happens in  the world. Whether it   s war or military involvement. And of course I  was a Korean War vet. I graduated in 1953 in the Korean War. We were  all ROTC guys. That was the only way you could stay in school to  22  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  graduate was to be in the ROTC. Then when you graduated you pretty  well thought you were going to Korea as a second lieutenant.  Did you see action there in the Korean War?  I was in the artillery and every artillery officer they graduated from Fort  Sill for the previously four years had gone to Korea as a forward  observer. And their average lifespan was two weeks. So we all thought  that we were going to go to Korea and be two week guys. But then the  Cold War was really boiling in Germany at that time and so we were  picked to go to Germany. And hey, that was the wildest party I was ever  in on my life, celebrating going to Germany instead of going to Korea.  That would not have been a nice place. And Germany wasn   t the best  place at that time either. The Russians had 300 divisions over there  ready to come across and where I was stationed was up on the border  and they said you   re discounted. In three days if the Russians come  across, the first place they could be stopped was the Rhine River. So I  think the only thing that really kept them   and the Cold War was very  cold at that time, was the fact that we had an atomic cannon and that  thing could lob a shell 30 some-odd miles. You can wipe out a lot of  divisions with those things. That   s where I was for almost two years,  was in Germany which was a very educational experience for me.  You got your MBA at Stanford. Did that come after that?  Yes, after that. After the military, then I had the GI Bill and I went to  Stanford and got that MBA which Uncle Sam paid for most of that  which was a great thing. Gosh, I had more money then, as a single guy  than I ever had in my life, Jerry.  Well, all right. You told me earlier in the conversation that you didn   t  return to the ranch immediately, you worked in banking in Kansas City?  Yes.  And primarily in ag lending and     Primarily in ag lending, cattle inspections and things like that. That bank  was very big.  What was the name of the bank?  It was the United Missouri Bank, today. The UMB and they have  branches here in Oklahoma. It was not that name then, it was a different  bank name at that time. But it   s recognized as the United Missouri Bank  today.  23  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  So and how long did you work there Frederick?  Oh, a little over a year. And just really got started good and my father  developed cancer. And I was the only son. You were expected to come  home. Six months later, why he was dead. Had lung cancer.  At what age?  At 63   63. Two packs of Lucky Strikes a day, or more. Everybody  smoked in those days Jerry, you know that. Maybe your family did too.  Not a good thing.  So your life changed then when you met a young lady named Janet?  Yes. I   d met her when I got back from Stanford. She had graduated from  OU. She was four years younger than me and so she was teaching when  I came back. She was teaching in Tulsa and that   s when I met Janet. She  taught a year over there. Then I convinced her she needed to come over  here.  Now your family, the kids, can you tell us a little bit about your kids?  And Janet?  I had three daughters. My daughter Diana works in Washington, DC  with the FDIC and has two children. And a daughter Anne who lives in  Los Alamos, New Mexico and has two sons. Her husband works for the  lab there. Then I have a daughter and son-in-law in Seattle, Washington,  and they have two children. So we have grandchildren in every time  zone. It requires a lot of traveling to see all those wonderful  grandchildren.  Kind of like the British Empire, the flag never sets on your family.  That   s absolutely right  Absolutely right.  Well, Frederick, like your father, you   ve been engaged and involved with  Oklahoma State University most of your life, your adult life.  I sure have.  Just noting a couple of things, you served a leadership role in the  Alumni Association for example National President of the Alumni  Association. You and your father both served as the National President  and as far as I know it   s the only father and son team to have ever both  been National Presidents of the Alumni Association.  24  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Could be. Could be.  Pretty unusual. And was it special for you to follow in some of the  footsteps of your father in terms of the leadership organizations you   ve  been part of?  Yes. He was a mentor and a wonderful guy. So he set a good trail for me  to try to follow, and he influenced me greatly. Good man.  What do you recall, Frederick, and again over your lifetime you   ve been  involved, particularly the time you were on the board and kind of  working your way up and president and you presidency, what were some  of the key programs of the Alumni Association, key activities, issues you  recall?  Well, there was a guy down there by the name of Jerry Gill. Made it  very easy to work with the association and he had all kinds of good ideas  and so it made it a lot of fun. It was no problem. As long as you had a  good leader, any organization is a good one.  Maybe sort of going back a little, Murl Rogers. What do you remember  about Murl?  Oh Murl, he was a wonderful guy. And of course his wife     Elizabeth?  Elizabeth, such a neat women and we   ve always been good friends.  Yes, Murl was a great guy. Of course you look at that span of CEO   s it  went from Murl to you, and how many years did that encompass?  Well let   s see. It started back with A. O. Martin, Archie Martin.  Yes, Archie Martin.  23 years.  Yes, I remember that.  And then Murl 25 years, and then we had Ray Sharp for about 3    years  in between you and me. Ray worked on Murl   s staff for 13 years and  then I was in there 22    years.  You were there 22   let   s see.  Almost three quarters of a century.  25  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  All my time was spent with you, I think.  Murl had a lot of it?  I just know he was there when my dad was there. And then after that of  course, every one of them, Arch of course, and Ray Sharp, too.  I was trying to recall again the year you were President of the Alumni  Association. What years were you President?  I really don   t remember right off.  What were some of the issues that you recall, Frederick?  Membership.  Membership? Okay.  Membership. I think it   s still a major issue. Getting people who  graduate to belong to the association and realize the value of it and be  contributing members.  I guess Homecoming was probably still the big program.  Homecoming was the biggest deal. That was the opportunity to get them  back. Of course we didn   t have computers early on, Jerry, so keeping all  the data was a big job for you people who were professionals.  Alumni Association at that time kept all the records on Alumni.  Yes.  It was really, the primary   the only keeper, really, of alumni records.  I   m sure that   s very, very true.  You said at that time reunions were really   class reunions were strong?  Yes.  In the 1950s and 1960s, and that era?  Yes. But it was a lot of challenges in those days because it was   the  economy was tough.  Obviously the two eras were different. But do you remember similar  26  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  issues that your father   s eras which would be 1920s and 1930s in his  leadership and your Alumni Association years in the 1960s and 1970s?  Gosh, I don   t have any idea. I was too young when he was there, Jerry. I  just remember college athletics and the guys on the board that were neat  guys and he was gone a lot.  Now let   s see, in the Alumni Association you and your father were past  National Presidents. And then your sister, Ann   s husband, Walt     Walt Woolly.     was National President of the Alumni Association. And Leslie and his  wife have both been on the board. Your family has just had a lot of  engagement over the years in the Alumni Association, a lot of  leadership.  A lot of involvement in the Alumni Association, absolutely. All the  Drummond   s, absolutely.  You   ve had a chance to think about this a lot over the years in your  opinion, Frederick, what is the role of alumni affairs in the university?  How important is the involvement of alumni and engagement with their  alma mater?  Well, how important is the Alumni Association? It   s a key organization  for any university. If you don   t have a good Alumni Association, they   re  the ones who come in and support you later on. They   re the ones that  represent you in the legislature. They   re the ones that ask for the criteria  for the athletic department to be successful because that   s what brings  them back, too and as far as the academic areas, the strengths you have  from those departments. All these things evolve around the alumni  association, the one that cohesively pulls these people together after they  graduate. I don   t think they are often given the credit that they should  receive for what their mission is, the Alumni Association mission.  They have that slogan    Connections for Life.    How important is it for  alumni to stay connected with the university throughout their life time?  Oh it   s very important for them to stay connected to the university but  getting them to realize that importance and most of them I think directly  or indirectly do because on any resume they make in life they   re going  to say where did you graduate from and what was your major and did  you get a degree. And it   s a degree from Oklahoma State University, a  very valuable degree. Yes. You   d get a kick out of that because the  typical college boy   s room in those days, you know, we had the old  27  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  pennants.  Let   s talk about the Drummond House in Hominy. Is where your  grandfather   s original home, and your father grew up there obviously.  Can you tell me a little bit about   it   s a museum now operated by the  Oklahoma Historical Society.  Oklahoma Historical Society, yes. In fact this fall, the national meeting  of those organizations are going to be held in Tulsa.  National  Preservation Trust Meeting  So on their tour of places that are of  historical significance in Oklahoma, the Drummond House is going to  be one of them. And it   s really quite a place.  You   re kind of describing it a little bit, a sort of a piece of history there.  A big old house built in   I think it was 1904, maybe 1905. It was  probably one of the first houses to have running water and a bathroom.  What they did is they had a big cistern and they had a pump in the  basement that would pump the water up to the reservoir on the third  floor. So they had gravity fed water in the bathrooms. And then they  were one of the first ones to have gas lights. They had a carbide system  in the basement that made gas, so they had gas lights. So they had gas  lights and running water. And out back, of course, there was the barn  where they kept the teams and wagons. There was an enormous garden  and chickens. Everything was self sufficient in those days. It was really  a mansion in those days.  Did they have a lot of OSU pennants in it, did you say?  Oh yes, you really need to see it because the boys rooms have  everything   everything is still there, just like it was. You   d really get a  kick out of it. Still some of the old toothpaste, too. The lady that redid  the thing, it was just like a treasure trove, she never threw any away,  even kept the manuals on how to operate things. You could have almost  done a museum on washing machines from the early days, from the  wash board all the way up.  I guess the directions on that wash board weren   t too complicated.  That   s right. Simple things like that. My grandfather was a great reader  so they had a wonderful library. A good part of those books are still  there and things like that. All the china and silverware. They ate very  formally. He was from the old school, from Scotland. And they   d sat  down to dinner and they   d have a formal dinner.  Every day?  28  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Every day. That was important. And they dressed. They had house  parties on weekends. They had a big screened in porch up there where  they had six beds. People would come up from Pawhuska with all their  team and wagons. And they   d have a party all weekend and everyone  would stay at the house because they could accommodate all kinds of  people.  Do you have some early memories of the home? Did you visit your  grandparents there?  Well, yes. My grandfather died when he was 49, quite young, 49. He  had an appendicitis attack and there was no medicine. If you had  anything like that, you were dead. He died while trying to get him to  Kansas City to a doctor to be operated on and he never made it. Of  course the best memories that I ever had are of my grandmother. She  was a wonderful cook. She had wonderful cookies. She loved children to  like her homemade candies and cookies. And that wasn   t a bad thing to  go see grandmother. She had plenty of bait there.  Go see grandmother and spend the night sometimes?  She was a great cook. Great cook. Loved the Presbyterian Church.  Good Scottish. I had the Presbyterian Church as well.  Yes, good Scottish. The Scottish have always been Presbyterians.  What, Fred we were talking earlier about some OSU memories but are  there some other activities at OSU that you remember being involved in?  That my dad was?  That you, yourself, personally.  That   s I   ve been associated with?  Yes sir.  Other than OSU?  No at OSU. We talked about the Alumni Association quite a bit and your  activities with it, and your leadership roles. Have there been other  organizations and units at the University that you   ve been affiliated  with?  Well, I   d have to go back in my college yearbook. That   s ancient  29  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  history.  Well, you   ve been on the board and Alumni Association National  President. You   ve been engaged in the foundation, with athletics, with  your fraternity. You   ve stayed connected in other ways with OSU?  That   s been most telling right there, Jerry. You summed it up. You  know, I   ve ran our family ranches for 45 years. Been the chair on that  little bank and done some other things that I   ve told you I   ve done. Tried  to diversify a little bit. And done some other things that I don   t need to  mention.  You were active with the Oklahoma Cattlemen   s Association?  Yes, I   ve been president and vice president of the Oklahoma  Cattlemen   s Association. I was a member of the board for the National  Cattlemen Association. I was affiliated with the Federal Land Bank in  Ponca City for 37 years and chair of it many times. And active with the  Wichita Bank so the banking business has taken a lot of my time. I   ve  done a lot of work with the Federal Land Bank and the regular bank.  Active with the Oklahoma Banker   s Association, too?  I   ve been a member.  Mm-hmm. A member.  Just a member. That   s all. That was enough. But     When you came back and actually moved to Pawhuska after growing up  in Hominy, have you been, locally involved in a lot community  activities?  I   ve been involved in the Rotary Club. And involved in just about  everything in the community, as far as that   s concerned. And I   ve a wife  who is very involved and she keeps me involved. The old saying is that  it   s hard to hit a moving target so you don   t want to slow down. Just like  you, Jerry, right now.  Well Fred, we were talking earlier about you and your dad being very  special to Oklahoma State University and I know your modest, but what  do you feel like you have been able to give back to your Alma Mater?  What do you think is your legacy? What have you been able to do over  the years that you take pride in?  I was very pleased to be a part of the new building. I think I had a  30  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  significant contribution in that project. I was very pleased to have a  room named after my father so that was a financial commitment. And  Jerry Gill has tried to keep me hooked up ever since then. I   ve made my  contribution this year Jerry.  Great. (Laughter) Sort of looking back, you   ve seen the ebb and flow.  You know with your dad when you were young, and you saw the tough  years in the 1930s when Bennett was just trying to keep the college  alive. How do you feel about things going on now, Frederick?  Supposedly with the new campus master plan there   s something like 800  million dollars worth of renovation and new construction currently  going on or planned in the next 10 or 15 years.  It always amazes me.  But what do you think about that?  It blows my mind that we are even able to do it. Just amazing  construction continually going on. I   m very glad to see that they are  trying to keep the continuity of the architectural design. I think that   s  good instead of going off and doing everything helter-skelter. I think our  campus planning   we   ve been blessed with having property to work  with. So that   s a real blessing for any university. Unlike the University  of Chicago or somebody that   s been cramped. TU has been cramped in.  I think we   ve been very blessed with opportunities from that perspective.  Part of the building is the so called    Athletic Village    where you   ve  been a fan of sports and other things that are important to OSU. You   ve  got to be pleased with that?  Yes. That athletic facility that we have is going   but I   m sorry that  Boone has lost a billion dollars this year. Just hope he makes it up next  year. But we   ve been very fortunate to have Boone make those  significant contributions to Oklahoma State. There are very few who  have the opportunity or the ability to make those humongous, significant  financial contributions. It   s very nice to see some who have come to the  plate to do that. But you have to add up everybody else and it all turns  out to be a quite a bit of money. And the OSU Foundation is a pretty  significant factor.  Do you feel like, Boone   s gift and some larger ones we had lately, the  Smith   s gift, and the Mitchell   s gift, does Boone   s gift kind of help  people think cause they   re stretched them to what   s a big gift and get  more people involved. Do you think it   s been helpful?  Obviously, it has. The Mitchells made a significant gift and probably a  31  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  lot of others. In fact, A.J. Jakes made a significant contribution. A lot of  significant contributions have come as a result of Boone   s leadership, I  think, to Oklahoma State.  Speaking of that, we   ve got something coming up. Our Conferencing  Campaign with a billion dollar campaign. As Boone says the first billion  is the hardest. Did you ever think in your days when you were  struggling, I guess you remember when we first started having the  Foundation, when the Alumni Association helped develop the first  foundation called the Development Foundation. Then, a  1,000 was a  big gift.  A  1,000 was a big gift. You know, they found out I had given longer  consecutively to Oklahoma State than anybody. Did you know that?  No. no. That   s great.  Yes. The Foundation came up with that. That I contributed every year  one way or form or another since 1953. And I mean never missed a year  since 1953. It might have been  10 one year but I think one of the years  where I gave  20, Boone gave  10. That was probably the second year I  was out.  So you can tell people in the early days, I out gave Boone.  In the early days, I out did Boone. I gave twice what he did one year.  So let me do quick math, 55 years or so straight of giving to Oklahoma  State.  Yes, I haven   t missed a year.  That   s quite a record.  Yeah it   s quite a record. I   m proud of that record.  And you know, I think you mentioned earlier, too, that a lot of other  people come around. A lot of people give whatever level they can afford  to give.  Sure, sure.  They give their time, their talents, their gifts.  Yes.  32  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Sort of that philosophy of the Alumni Association had is important as  well.  Yeah, whether its  10 or  100 or  1000 whatever it is. Just have your  name there on the books. Be a helper.  Have given 55 years and given to things that you know are important  and helped OSU through the years. How did you feel that your  philanthropy has made a difference in the lives of people? Is it good  thing that you have those?  I don   t know. Mine were never that significant, Jerry. Probably the most  significant thing I   ve ever done is encourage people to go, to get an  education while there.    Hey, you know you can get a great education  down at Oklahoma State.    I mean talking to other young people as  they   ve come along and trying to encourage them. I   ve been active in  our local school here. I   ve gone to all the     Honor banquets that they used to have?  Yeah the     The college     The banquets and academic things. Encourage young people to go to  school. And you can   t go wrong, going to Oklahoma State.  You mentioned earlier in the conversation, Dr. Willham at the time was  the first and up until just a few months ago you know a year ago was the  only graduate of Oklahoma State University to ever be President. We   ve  got a second one now, Burns Hargis. What do you think of Burns     leadership?  Burns will be a good President. A good President, he sure will. Lot of  challenges out there.  Do you think especially to you, I mean being an alum and with your dad  and your background, think about an alumnus from Oklahoma State  University being President. Is that a special feeling for you? Do you  take pride in the fact that one of our own is President of the University  now?  Yes, really I think so. Absolutely right. I   m impressed. Burns is a good  friend of mine. And I   m thrilled to death. I mean we just did very, very  well. And I think he   ll do quite well. Great person, a lot of personality  and a lovely wife.  33  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  Drummond  Gill  I   m going to say something and I know you   re going to kind of cringe     cause you   re a modest guy. Yours has been a life of significance in a lot  of ways.  Oh, I don   t think so.  You   ve given to the community and to the state. You   ve many  accomplishments and contributions.  I   m still here. I   ve been lucky.  This is a serious question. What would you most want to be remembered  for, Frederick? How would you want people to remember you, of all the  things you   ve done? How would you want to be remembered?  Well, people forget you pretty quick, Jerry. I don   t think I   m going leave  any legacy at all. I hope it   s not debt for my family. No, I just think that  if you can be a good citizen and have a lovely family. I   ve been blessed  in that area. That   s the most important thing. Have good friends. If  you   ve got good friends and good family, what else could you ask for in  life? And if you can be remembered being okay in those areas, why so  be it.  You said that you want to be remembered for your friendships and  friends and does that include also your extended   and your family you  mentioned.  Yes.  And for your OSU family as well?  Yes. My OSU family, absolutely. I   m still on the investment committee  for the Alumni Association. We wouldn   t have had that money if it  hadn   t been for Jerry Gill making a good deal on our credit cards. That   s  another story too. I hope you have that in the archives, Jerry. That   s  another good story.  Let   s bring it back to you. Frederick, is there anything that we haven   t  talked about? We   ve covered a lot of things. But you have a lifelong  perspective that a not very many people have of Oklahoma State  University, because of at your earliest age through your dad, trips you  made, times you spent as President of the Alumni Association. You   ve  seen OSU from literally as a small child in the 1930s to what it   s grown  to today. Anything that you would want to comment on? Changes  you   ve seen through the years? Things that you think have been good?  Anything we haven   t covered that you want to say about your  34  Drummond  Gill  observations about Oklahoma State University over the years.  Jerry, I really don   t. I think that it   s just been a school that has been a     the reputation I would like to see Oklahoma State continue to have is as  a good solid university that is true to itself. That it   s not trying to be  particularly flashy or prima donna but has graduated great solid people  that have turned out to be contributors to society in their fields of  endeavors. I think all along OSU has been the school of agriculture, and  engineering, and business. Where people --pragmatic. It hasn   t been one  of the real flashy schools, and I think that   s good. I think we   ve served  the public very well. I think the school has served the public very well  and served its mission very well.  Thank you. Appreciate it.  -------  -------   
