 Sherman, and today is Friday, October 16, 2009. I   m  visiting with George Long here in the OSU Alumni Center in Stillwater,  Oklahoma. This interview is being conducted for the O-STATE Stories  Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Thank you for  visiting with us today, and I just want to welcome you back to campus  and hope that you enjoy the 2009 Homecoming celebration.  I   m looking forward to it.  Let   s start with where you grew up and that kind of background  information.  Well, I was born in a little town called Anthony, Kansas which is right  across the line from Grant County, Oklahoma. I was raised in Grant  County, Oklahoma, and I went to school at some of the country schools  and then wound up going to Wakita for finishing out, and graduated in  1951. I played all the sports. Then I kind of messed around there for a  year or two, working in the filling station. Then I went to Northern  Oklahoma Junior College and stayed there two years, didn   t really study  too much, played the sports, and I found out that there were a lot of good  athletes even at small schools. So, competition was quite great as far as  basketball was concerned. But I did play on the tennis team and got a red  jacket with a big    O    on it, you know, big deal like that. And then I kind  of quit school again and had a little interim work area where I wound up  working in the oil field as a roughneck. I did that for a couple of years,  and then I decided in 1956 that I   d go back to Stillwater, and that was  probably the smartest thing I ever did. I wound up going through   I   d  taken geology, math, and physics and all the other stuff, and I got a  degree in geology in January of 1959. I really feel like I made pretty  good use of that degree, and I highly recommend everybody going to  college. (Laughter) Some people don   t need it, but I think it did me  okay. So, that   s basically how I got to Stillwater.  5  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Now, did you grow up on a farm?  Yes.  Can you describe for me what kind of farming you did?  Well, we were wheat farmers.  Winter or spring or both?  Winter. Winter wheat. You don   t find any spring wheat here in this  country at all. You have to go north to the Dakotas to find that. I had  asthma, so at an early age I found out I couldn   t hardly stay around the  wheat fields. I did run the tractors and took care of the cows, milked  cows, gathered eggs, fed the hogs, had show calves, did all that stuff  growing up. Started out in 4-H and went into FFA, and then came to  Tulsa and showed calves and so forth. So, that was a big part of my  growing up.  Were you part of 4-H?  I was for a couple of years, yes.  Did you ever come to Stillwater for the 4-H Roundup?  Yes.  Tell me about that experience.  Well, I came down here, actually here in Oklahoma City, judging milk  cows, and then when I was in the FFA, I came down here once again and  judged milk cows. I used to try to judge show calves, but I just wasn   t  very good at that, because you had to make an oral presentation of all  your things that you thought was good about that, and I wasn   t too good  at doing that. So, I wound up down here at one time with a whole bunch  of FFA boys all from Wakita. We were walking down the street there,  walking downtown. You know you could do all that in the old days, and  this guy   we stopped at this filling station to, maybe, make a few rest  stops there, and a guy was in there getting gas, and he said,    You guys  want a ride downtown?    I said,    Yes, I   d like to have a ride downtown.     Several of us got in there. This guy had a station wagon, and there was  kind of a screened-in box behind it. We all said,    What   s all that noise?     And he said,    Oh,    he says,    I   ve just come back from Okeene. I   ve got  a box full of rattlesnakes back there.    And there we were. I said,    Has  any of them ever got out?    And he said,    Oh, only one.    (Laughter) And  everybody raised their legs up to that. I said,    Next stop sign, let us out.     6  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  So, we were scared to death. We didn   t have rattlesnakes in Wakita in  those days.  How many head of dairy cattle did you have on the farm?  Oh, I would say from fifteen to twenty. We milked them twice a day.  What times did you milk?  Usually six thirty to seven o   clock. My dad was very good with milking.  He had great big hands. He could milk them, hand milk them. He could  milk them; he could hear that bucket, making a rattling in that bucket.  And of course, I was always small and not real muscular, but I learned to  milk. But we did that twice a day.  And this was before the suction machines?  Yes. Well, I mean, they might have had it, but we couldn   t afford it.  Now, one of my uncles had it up there, first one I ever saw, in Anthony,  Kansas. He had a whole string of them. It was pretty good, you know.  Did you sell that milk, and if so who bought the milk?  We didn   t sell the milk. We had a cave, storm cellar, real cool down  there, and we kept a separator down there, and we   d go down there with  the milk and run it through the separator, and then it   d go into a cream  can and it   d fill up about once every four or five days, and we   d take it  into town to sell it. So, you had about two or three of those cream cans  that you could interchange, but we were up there in tornado alley and we  had to kind of watch everything in those days. I drove an old John Deere  D tractor, pop pop pop pop, you know. Had to crank it by hand. Didn   t  have a crank on it. You pulled it over a big old fly wheel.  How old were you when you first drove a tractor?  Probably nine.  See, some people would be surprised by that. Was the old John Deere  the first tractor you drove? My dad, he grew up on a farm, and his first  tractor that he drove was an Allis-Chalmers. He remembers that  distinctly. Do you remember your first tractor?  Yes, it was John Deere; we had green all my life. We never did have  anything else. My dad had a tractor that I didn   t get to drive, but it had  the old steel wheels on it. And, you know,  it would  make a big old hole  in the ground, had a real sharp front.  7  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Oh, yes.  Ugly-looking things. If you run over anything, you   d kill them, you  know. But we had two or three of those John Deere Ds and finally got to  one that had a starter on it, but the equipment is a lot better nowadays.  And more expensive. I think Dad paid  4,500 for one of those tractors.  Yes, and nowadays you have the air-conditioned cabs and all those  kinds of conveniences on a tractor.  I drove an air-conditioned combine for my brother-in-law. I thought,     Well, this is pretty good.    I still got asthma. (Laughs)  Did you have combines?  Oh, yes. We had the pull type; they weren   t the self-propelled. That was  a Minneapolis Moline. I used to ride up there in the grain bin, and that  wheat would come out. But that was before I knew I had asthma.  Was the wheat sold for human consumption or was it for basic animal  feed?  Well, the wheat, I would say, was sold to make money. We raised it and  then sold it to the elevators, and sometimes they   d store it for us until the  price was right. But wheat farming has changed quite a bit in the last, oh,  thirty years. I remember I did drive a self-propelled combine. One of the  first ones, it was a Massey-Harris, and I drove that and drove it for two  days and wound up in the hospital four days. I got dust pneumonia. It  was pretty bad. But the farmers, they made the country as far as I could  tell. I mean, my dad used to talk about parity and I had no idea what that  meant, you know. But it was a rough life. I came up in the    30s, and Dad  had gone through that Depression and he drove a horse-drawn grader  down the road for  1 a day to keep the roads up. That was his part. It  was a tough life for those people back then. These guys, like you   this  recession we had,  it   s  nothing compared to    33, and of course we may  still be in a recession. I don   t have any idea.  Yes. When were you born?  I was born September 16, 1933, and that was a great date. Let me tell  you why. In 1893, they had the race for what they call the Cherokee  Strip. You know what I mean by race?  Yes, the land opening.  Land opening. That was the largest competitive race ever held. Over  8  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  200-and-something thousand people made that run. And my grandfather  was part of that and made the run into northern Oklahoma about a mile  and a half in from Kansas, south of the border from Kansas, and settled.  My grandfather got killed, and my grandmother actually proved up the  160 acres. So, it   s quite a deal, you know. That   s when I was born, 1933.  So, forty years after the land run?  Yes, right. Exactly, you   re doing good.  Some math I can do.  The town of Wakita, for a number of years now, holds what we call the  Old Settlers Celebration every September 16. It is usually held on a  Saturday nowadays, but it used to be held on the 16th. People would  come from all over and go to that celebration. Well, my mother was at  that celebration when she felt the urge and took off and had me.  (Laughs)  Do you remember much about those Depression days?  Not really. I would tell you that I saw my folks go through a lot of pain,  and I really didn   t know exactly   you know, my dad might go to the  bank and want to borrow  1,500 on an old tractor or something, and the  banker would say,    Oh, that thing   s not worth  1,500.    Well, the thing  about that was that maybe my dad had a deal made with the guy that  owned that tractor to farm his land. You buy my tractor, you can farm  my land. The banker turned him down. Very depressing. I mean, that   s  what I remember when I was 15 years old or so.  Did the war change much for farming in Oklahoma that you recall?  I think the only thing that I remember about the war is that it   we had a  little bit of gas rationing, we had tire rationing and, other than that, it   s  very vague for me. I do remember coming home from a family get-together  in Anthony, Kansas and turned on this old radio, and they were  saying that they had bombed Pearl Harbor. And that scared me to death,  you know. I asked Dad, I said,    Are you going to have to go to war?     And he said,    I don   t know, Son.    So, you know, that   s quite an  experience that we don   t see nowadays, either.  In the same tone, do you remember hearing about FDR dying?  Yes.  Where were you when you heard about that?  9  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  It was in April, I believe. I just remember hearing about it. We took a  paper out of Wichita, and that paper was delivered every day and, of  course, it had it in there. I listened to the radio a lot when I was growing  up. We didn   t have TV, of course, and I think that that   s a real advantage  for me because I got to hear a lot of old programs that you had to use  your imagination to realize what was going on. I mean they had The  Shadow, which was a guy that did good, and then they had Jack  Armstrong: The All-American Boy, Fibber McGee and Molly. You  know, they   d open up the closet and all this stuff would fall out for ten  minutes. Well, you could actually visualize that. And I think when you  watch TV four or five hours a day as these young kids do   I mean, I  don   t know how much you did, but when they   re growing up, these kids  had nothing to do for entertainment except watch TV. Well, you don   t  get that feeling of seeing all that stuff in your brain. So, when you get  out in the world and something happens, somebody tells you something,  I can visualize what happened a lot. And I think it helped me in my  geology. I can actually visualize certain geological provinces and so  forth like that.  What was harder: farming life or the roughneck life?  Well, I think the roughneck life was probably harder.  Why is that?  Well, it   s just more physical labor and I was   there   s physical labor in  farming, but, like, I couldn   t scoop wheat very long because I   d get  asthma. And then I was very lucky to be able to roughneck, because it  didn   t seem to bother me too much. I   d get asthma every once in a  while, but I was a little bit older and knew how to handle it when I did,  you know, knew when I was getting choked up. And the aspect of  learning that you could go out and do your best job that you possibly  could and still be fired the next day. I started out on my first job of  roughnecking. We wound up laying a 2   -inch pipeline, three miles,  thirty foot of joint, and laid that out there and screwed it together. Well,  you know, that   s a big deal for a guy that never did it before. We did  that, and I worked about two days out there, and the owner of the rig  come in there and asked the driller, he said,    Is that guy a worm?    A  worm in the oilfield means inexperienced. And the guy said,    Yes.    And  he said,    Well, get rid of him. We don   t want a worm out here.    So, I   m  down the road after  long  days of labor. That   s something you learn  right there, see. You can do your best job and still get fired. I really  enjoyed the work, though, once I got to do a little more, you know, was  able to stay one place at several months maybe. I usually worked every  summer while I was going to school at Stillwater, roughnecking.  10  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Where did you roughneck at?  Northern Oklahoma, Ashland, Kansas, and Medford, all around through  there into northern Oklahoma. Never went too far away from home.  Was it oil or gas?  Mostly gas. Yes, we would core, though, you know, go down there and  do a diamond core. They   d pull it out and lay it on the ground. That was  interesting. But I finally figured out that the geologists were coming out  there and drawing  125 a day, and they might have three or four of those  wells at  125 a day. So, they made the rounds, kind of. They   d come out  there, and I said,    I   m sitting here working for  1.85 an hour. These  guys are getting  125 a day a well. I   d kind of like that.    And I was  beginning to understand what was happening out there as far as we   d  drill, we   d find oil, we   d run pipe, we   d produce. So, you learn that, and  I thought,    Gosh, that   d be pretty good.    So, that   s how I got back to  geology.  I had a real good banker that told me, and OSU will really like this, he  said   I went to school. I wanted to go to OU because I knew they had a  good geology school. So, my banker, young, he was married to my  cousin. Not a real old guy, but just maybe four or five years older than  me. He said,    Have you thought about going to Stillwater?    And I said,     Yes, but no. Yes, but no.    And he said,    Why don   t you go down there  and look into their geology school?    He said,    I went to school at OU  and I didn   t learn a damn thing.    (Laughter) I thought you might like  that.  There you go. Speaking of your family, you come from a long line of  Longs that have attended OSU?  There   s been quite a few and I     Can you go into some of that, like what relatives have attended here?  Let me give you a little background on my immediate family, like my  dad. My dad   s mother was married to a guy named Frank Long. Frank  Long gets killed in 1900, so my dad   s only two years old. Okay. This  lady went ahead and more or less worked that land, but she also, she re-married  and had four boys. And they, all but one, no, two of them went  to school at OSU. One of them turned out Uncle Riley. He was a coach  and taught school and was a school superintendent. My Uncle Keith  Stormont, he went down here and studied farming and agriculture and  was a farmer. So, that   s one side of it. And then my dad   s cousins, first  cousins, more or less, were some Longs that lived right next door, right  11  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  next half mile north. And now they almost all went to school here. One  of them was Lloyd Long, and Charlie Long. I   m not sure Charlie went  here, but I think Don Long   there   s a whole bunch of, a string of Longs  that went here. Well, Lloyd had two boys that went to school here, Hal  and Edwin. Edwin was a state senator. Lloyd was one of my dad   s first  cousins. He was a senator of some sort, or a representative. He was a  politician, more or less. You could tell every time you talked to him.  You try to buy a tractor off of him, he   d give you that old used car sales.  (Laughter)  Are you the only son?  Yes. I have a sister that died a number of years ago. I had a brother who  drowned before I was born. In fact, I always say that I probably  wouldn   t be here if it hadn   t been for my brother drowning. But there   s a  lot of tragedies  that  happened on the farm back in those days, a lot of  tragedies. A lot of women had children that were stillborn and not only  that, they lost some of them, lost their own life because they didn   t have  any doctors to deliver babies back in those days. There was a lot of  problems. So, I feel very lucky to be here.  How old were you when you came to campus here as a student?  When I first came here, I probably   let   s see. I came here in    56, so I   m  almost   I would turn 23 in September of    56, and I graduated January of     59. I was here five semesters going through geology school and math  and physics.  Were you a transfer student then?  Not really. I just, more or less, went to the junior college for two years  and then I worked for a year, and then I wound up coming back to  Stillwater. So, I guess I transferred from Northern Oklahoma Junior  College.  So, some of those credits came here.  Yes, I   m sure.  Did you feel odd for being an older student on campus?  Well, I tell you what, it seems like to me when I first got here   of  course, I   d been roughnecking. About the only thing I had for dress  clothes was a pair of jeans. And that kind of fit in pretty good back in  those days, but I didn   t really have   I think I had an old coat of some  type and maybe a tie. I went to church a little bit while I was here but  12  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  not a whole lot. But I got what you call rushed back in those days, and  mostly the guys that were in the fraternities were all younger than me. I  really probably couldn   t afford to be in a fraternity, okay, because I was  borrowing money from a bank. A banker said,    I   ll loan you the money  to go to school.    So, that was pretty good. So, I really couldn   t afford to  belong to a fraternity, but I did feel like that I was well thought of on the  campus, because I was a little bit older and I liked some of the younger  girls. (Laughter)  Were you dating anyone at that time period?  No, I didn   t bring any dates down here. I did date quite a bit, different  girls, but I never really had a steady.  What was dating like back then?  Oh, I don   t know. The big date for me was to go to the library and study  and then wind up going back to the Student Union, dance a little bit,  then go back and study. We did a lot of that.  What kind of dancing did you do?  It was kind of the semi-Jitterbug, you know. I don   t know what you   d  call it, but it was fast dancing and slow dancing, too. There was a lot of  good music back then. I mean, Fats Domino and all those guys. My wife  could tell you exactly what it was.  So, what kind of music were you into back then? Were you into big band  stuff or more of the rock    n    roll or country-western?  In those days, I really liked country-western. But you know Elvis had  come out a few years before and he was a big star, and Jerry Lee Lewis.  That was a big-time thing. But they had slow dancing up there. They put  a record player up on the fourth floor, and they   d play slow music and  then fast music and we   d dance. Well, I didn   t know how to do a fast  dance but I learned how. In other words, good enough to get out there.  You know, it takes a lot of intestinal fortitude to get out there if you  don   t know what you   re doing.  Well, I   m sure good dancing helps with the ladies, right?  Well, I had no problem getting ladies to dance with me. That   s as far as  I   ll go. (Laughs)  All right. Where did you live on campus? Did you live on campus or did  you live off campus?  13  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  I lived at Bennett Hall, East Bennett, for maybe a year, and then I moved  over on Duck Street in an apartment.  East Bennett. Was that the home of the athletes back then?  No, West Bennett.  West Bennett was. Speaking of athletics, did you go to any of the  sporting events on campus?  Oh, yes. I enjoyed everything. I liked the wrestling and I liked the  basketball and I liked the football.  What was your favorite?  You know, I didn   t know anything about wrestling when I come to  campus, but I really enjoyed the basketball, but I also enjoyed the  wrestling. Football, you know, that   s just a game that   s really pretty  good to watch but it can be uncomfortable sometimes. I did go to one  basketball game one time in 19   I think it was    58. And they played  Kansas. And they beat Kansas, and this was Wilt the Stilt   s freshman  year. And I watched   I can   t remember the guy   s name, but old  Coach  Henry  Iba would tell this guy,    Every time Wilt the Stilt jumps up, you  run under him.    (Laughter) So, it was interesting. We had a school day  out the next day.  You had a walkout that next day?  Yes.  Now, this was the Mel Wright game, right? Where Mel Wright hits the  winning shot to     I think so. A long shot.  February    57, does that sound right?  That sounds pretty close. That   s right.  I   ve heard stories where the game ended and people ran back to their  dorms to listen to the game on radio because there was a delay.  I   ve heard that. I didn   t have a radio.  Because they could hear the actual winning shot. There was sort of a  rally cry for a walkout. Do you remember anything about that?  14  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  No. I know we started celebrating right then. (Laughs)  The games were all in Gallagher Hall, right?  Right.  Can you describe for me what Gallagher Hall was like back then?  Because now it   s called Gallagher-Iba Arena and     Well, I would say that it was very close into the court and everything, so  you felt you were kind of sitting on benches where we were, the  students. I do not remember it being any seats. So, it was a good place to  watch a ballgame. You had to get there early if you had tickets.  Like how early?  Oh, I don   t know. Maybe an hour.  You said wrestling was pretty big back then, right?  Yes, it was.  Coach Myron Roderick. Do you remember any other wrestlers from that  time period?  There was two twins, I don   t remember their names. They were good  wrestlers. And then they had a good wrestler that was a heavyweight,  but he couldn   t beat this guy Hodge from OU. I don   t know if you  remember Hodge, but he   d get on TV and take a pair of pliers and break  them. He was pretty stout.  I heard bedlam wrestling was a big event, OU versus OSU in wrestling.  Can you possibly describe what that kind of atmosphere was like?  They didn   t call it bedlam in those days, that I know of, but it was pretty  stout, pretty   when they came, it was very exciting and we were always  right   I mean, every move out there was big. Everyone was right in  there close, really getting after it. So, I really enjoyed it.  Was the crowd more of an influence in basketball or in wrestling?  Oh, I would say probably in basketball.  Was it loud in there?  Oh, yes. Just like it is now.  15  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  The rowdiest arena. You came during the name change, or     When I came, it was Oklahoma A M. When I left, I believe that year  was the first year they called it OSU.  What did you think about the name change?  I didn   t think there was anything I could do about it.  What did you call yourself: Aggie or Cowboy?  I called mostly Aggies because I   d go down and run into a few guys that  were Texas Aggies.  Do you remember anything much about football at all?  Well, I remember one game. There   s two games I can remember. One of  them was when the Air Force came to play Oklahoma State here, and I  could see that those boys in the Air Force had the desire to win. I think  they beat us simply because one guy just climbed up the back of one of  the OSU boys and caught the ball. I mean, that   s all there was to it. He  was just going for that ball and that was it. That was the end of the  game. Well, not the end of the game, but you know. But I would say that  it would be hard to beat a highly intellectual good athlete. You know  what I   m saying? And then the next big game we had, OU came here  and had, I think it was, Prentice Gautt. Does that sound right?  Yes. The running back?  Yes. He was good.  From Douglass High School, I believe.  I think so. Probably the first real black that they had down there. In  fact     I think he was All-American.  Oh, yes. I knew those athletes quite a bit because I served them. I was  working in Bennett Hall and I served them. They would come in and  that was the first year we had a few blacks. One young freshman boy  was going down to play Arkansas, freshman game. And that was when  they was having a lot of trouble in Little Rock. So, he said,    I   m  thinking about getting some powder.    (Laughter) He was going to  powder up before he went down there to Arkansas. I thought that was  kind of funny, but he was a good old boy. They never had any trouble.  16  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Were blacks treated well at that time on campus?  Well, I   m not sure they were treated badly, but I think there were still  some reservations about whether they were good athletes or not, you  know. They certainly would. We had Langston University come and  play our Wakita town team one time, and I   ve never seen such a bunch  of good ballplayers in all my life. They would just cross the center line  and shoot, and it   d go in. I mean it just,    pfth.    And, you know, they  really did a lot of talking in those days. They don   t do that so much now,  but I enjoy basketball. I go to the San Antonio Spurs. I   m a     Do you have season tickets?  I used to have them, but it got to where I don   t go all the time. They  priced me out, that   s about for sure. I think it   s about  40,000 a ticket  now.  Yes. So, you were kitchen staff then?  Yes, I just worked in the kitchen, the cafeteria, back in the   I mean,  we   d work, one day we   d wash dishes, next day we   d clean the tables,  stuff like that. You got free meals. That   s the reason I was there, see. Get  up at six o   clock in the morning, go in there and start getting things  ready, and that was part of my deal.  Did the athletes get better food than compared to the rest of the campus?  I think they got all the food they wanted. They might have got not any  particularly better food that I know of.  Do you remember any particular basketball players that you served?  Eddie Sutton. I don   t really remember much about Eddie. Eddie   s a  pretty quiet guy, far as I can remember. I mean, I do remember seeing  him around. I didn   t see him too much. There was another guy, I can   t  remember their names, but real nice. And I don   t think they had a black  basketball player at that time. Mel Wright, was he playing there then?  You   d mentioned his name, and I   d forgot about him. I think it was just  the freshmen. You know, they couldn   t play freshmen in those days.  What was your major?  Geology.  And did you have a minor?  17  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  I guess I had a minor in math, physics maybe. I don   t know what it was.  I think it was math.  What was the coursework like back then?  Well, I had a lot of   I was fairly intelligent. I wasn   t stupid, but I was  not a good student, because before I went to Stillwater, I didn   t study. I  just went down, played basketball, just kind of a hangout, you know, for  two years at Tonkawa. But when I came down here, I started studying  and I made good grades. And I got into calculus and all that stuff, and  physics I really enjoyed. That was something new to me, science. The  geology was really interesting, and we had great professors. John Naff, I  think it was Dr. Brent, and another guy named, oh, gosh, I can   t  remember. There was two more professors. One was the head of the  school, and his dad had run the school down at Norman. But probably  the most interesting class I had was paleontology, and that was John  Naff.  But let me tell you about John Naff. John Naff, the first course I took  from him was Basic Geology 101 or 102, whatever it was. John was  very brilliant. He would come in and take the cards, and he would hold  those cards up and he   d look at the name and he   d say,    George Long,     and, you know, you   d stand up and hold your hand up, whatever. He did  that one time. And the next time he came to class, he called the names  from memory. Pretty good, huh?  Yes.  And the third time he came in, he   d look around and he said,    Well,  everybody   s here.    (Laughter) Now, that was brilliant, I thought. But he  did that on every class that I took under him. I took three or four classes  from him, and I really enjoyed him. I was trying to think of this other  professor. We went to field camp out in Colorado and he   dang, what  was his name? We went to field camp out in Colorado, and we were  going along the side of the mountain, and he slipped and put his hand  out and it was into cactus. It just went right through the back of his hand.  Oh, it was terrible. I mean you know, you could pull them out this way,  but he was in intense pain. Big old long things, you know. Poisonous,  probably, just make you   and I can remember that just as plain as day.  Wow. That sounds painful.  And every day out there in field camp, about two o   clock you might as  well head over to the shelter. You know why? It was going to be  lightning and storm. Every day at two o   clock. That was at Canyon City,  Colorado. Very interesting. I spent a month out there and learned a lot.  18  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  So, it was like on-site work, basically?  Yes. You climbed up the mountains, and you took a little rock hammer  and you chipped away and looked at stuff and described it, whatever it  was. Then you drew maps, surface maps, as you call them. We had the  alidade, and we   d measure off over here, and draw a line here, and so  forth. I never used it again. Just kind of like calculus; I never used it  again. (Laughs)  At this time period, was there a big push for the university to get  involved with the sciences?  Well, you know, that   s probably a good question. I would say that we  possibly had some of the students that were getting ready for computers,  but we all carried a slide rule. And, you know, that was it.  It must have been fun doing calculus on that.  Oh, it was. But I had a professor in physics where you went to the class  on the finals, and you had all these questions and he would let you write  down all the equations. You had it for a cheat sheet, and when you  worked the problem, you didn   t have to come up with the right answer.  You just came up with how you arrived at that answer. I was really good  at that. I made eight hours of A in physics. I thought I was pretty darn  good for an old farm boy that didn   t know    come here    from    sic    em.     (Laughter)  Do you remember when the Russians launched Sputnik at all?  Yes.  What was that like?  Well, we really had no idea. I didn   t   what year was that? Do you  know?  1957.  Okay. I think I remember something on TV. We used to watch a little  TV there in Bennett Hall. I don   t know if that was in there then, but,  anyhow, I would say that that was kind of scary. It wasn   t near as scary  as a few years later when the Russians started bringing the missiles into  Cuba. Now, I was really worried then, because I was working for myself  at that time, and I had a brand new car. And I told my partner, I said,    I  tell you what. I   m going down to this well if something happens,     because San Antonio, I felt like, would have been a target.  19  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Because of the air base.  Yes. And, so, I said,    If something happens, I   ll meet you out in the  Davis Mountains, because that   ll be about as far removed from San  Antonio as I can get.    So, we had that, kind of, figured out. We even  bought groceries and stuff and put them in the back of   you know, cans  of beans and stuff, because we really thought something was going to  happen.  Do you remember anything else historically from that era that  particularly stands out? Like, say, from    57 to    60.  Historically?  Yes, that you can recall particularly.  Well, I don   t know about    57 to    60, but I was working on a well in 1963  when Kennedy was shot. Now, everybody knows where they were when  that happened, that was alive and knew what happened. I was out on a  well. It was colder than blue blazes in south Texas, and when it gets cold  in south Texas, it   s cold. It   s damp and really cold. That was a miserable  evening, and that was a miserable few days just watching that on TV and  everything. I do remember Khrushchev getting up and pounding on the  table at the UN, I guess. I remember seeing that. But, you know, those  days were   I was just getting started in the oil and the service business.  And the oil business wasn   t very good. Our business wasn   t very good.  Was there just one TV in Bennett Hall then?  Oh, I couldn   t tell you. I think there might have been one on each side.  What kinds of programs did you watch, or did you have time for  watching programs?  Yes, we watched   gosh, what was it? Had the dad and the two sons.  My Two Dads?  No, it was about Nevada. What am I thinking of? Anyhow, we watched  those quite a bit.  Did you study much?  I learned how to memorize a lot, and I did a lot of studying. I was having  a hard time in physics, and I finally started going and looking at the  answer and then worked backwards. It just came to me right away as  20  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  soon as I learned how to work backwards and come up with the answer.  So, then that helped me working with the problems that didn   t have an  answer right. I learned to study. I wasn   t much of a student as far as  studying. I was a good student because I was able to be a good student  without studying when I was in high school. I didn   t study in high  school at all.  Where were some of your classes?  Well, I had several classes there in the old geology building, which I  don   t even know where that is, and then I had     Actually, I think we   re on top of it.  Okay, I think you   re right. It looked like not too far from the old Student  Union. But then I had some engineering courses over there, and then I  had   what do they call it, not a history course but humanities? Is that a  course you still take?  Yes.  I don   t know if that   s a good course to take or not.  You are a science-type guy, so something in humanities, it   s a different  style of thinking.  And psychology. I didn   t go good with that either.  Do you have any other favorite spots on campus that you can recall?  We used to like to go over and get pizza.  At the Hideaway?  I think it was   what was it over here, do you remember?  The Hideaway?  Yes, it might have been.  Hideaway was introduced to the campus in 1957. Coming to campus  and eating there, was that your first experience eating pizza?  Yes.  Can you describe that for me?  21  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  In fact, I   d never hardly had shrimp as a growing boy. Oh, it was good. I  mean it was, man, that pizza was good. I always just got the cheese and  tomato stuff, maybe a little sausage every once in a while. But I could  eat a whole pizza by myself. And then used to go drink a little beer. I  had a roommate who was a fullback on the football team named Everett  Wood. He and I would go out drinking beer, and Everett was part Indian  and he had a hard time handling the liquor. I had to kind of look after  him. Everett was probably one of my best friends on campus at that  time. I had a cousin that went to school here and played football, a guy  named H.J. Green. He and I played basketball together in high school.  H.J. came down here and played on the football team, and I was glad to  know that he was around when I first came to the campus. He   d been  here a year or so; I think he was a sophomore when I showed up.  All in all, it was quite a learning experience to go to college, in my  opinion. I learned to socialize a little bit, not too much, but I think my  biggest problem in those days was being afraid to get in front of a crowd  and speak. Because I remember I was emcee at my alumni banquet one  year, several years after I got out of college, and I thought my knees  were going to break they were hitting so hard. But I   d probably do the  same thing now. I feel like I   m very comfortable in here with this  interview, but if I got in front of a crowd I might be not quite so  comfortable.  Has Oklahoma State University remained special for you all these  years?  Yes, definitely.  How so?  Well, I   m just proud of being a Cowboy, or proud of being an Aggie.  Whatever you want to call it. You know, I like OU but I don   t have the  same feeling towards them. I have a great feeling for Oklahoma itself. I  think Oklahoma   s a great state. I guess right now I really am worried  about the politics of the nation and not sure it   s going the right way. I  think my estimation is that Oklahoma   s going to have to help lead the  way out of that, and Texas. And you know, you look at who voted for  our current president, and the majority of the people that lived in this  part of the country didn   t do that. I don   t like to talk politics, but I think  all of a sudden we need to talk politics. We need to be able to see the  difference of how we think the country ought to be run. And, personally,  I   ve worked pretty hard all my life. I still work hard. I run a computer  every day several hours; I program. I do all that stuff. I mean, I   m not a  sophisticated programmer, but if I want to make something, I can do it  for myself. And I think that we   ve got to get back to working.  22  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  What do you think sets Oklahoma apart from the rest of the nation? Is it  the hard work that Oklahomans have that sets themselves apart?  I don   t think there   s the welfare in Oklahoma that there is in the other  big cities. I don   t think you got the people on welfare and looking for a  handout like you do in the big cities. I   ve been in some of these big  places, and you go to California. I   m not sure they know what they   re  doing out there. And I   m not sure they know what they   re doing in  Chicago. I   m not sure they know what they   re doing in New York, but I  did visit New York just the last few years and thoroughly enjoyed going  to the plays and everything. I enjoyed that. So, I   ve got a different  attitude towards New York than I do some of the other places. I do not  believe that you can find better people than Kansas, Nebraska. All these  middle states down through here are a lot of good people. They know  what it is to work, and they know what it is to be successful. And you  don   t be successful by looking for a handout every time.  Can you describe for us briefly, because we   re running out of time, what  you   ve done post-OSU?  Well, I   ve been in the oil business. I really started working for myself as  a geologist in 1968. I was in a service business prior to that, but I would  say that in the    70s, things were pretty good. And in the    80s, they were  even maybe a little better. In the    90s, things didn   t go too good in the  oil business. So, I   ve seen the ups and downs and the bottom of the wave  and the top of it, too. I just think we   ve learned to ride that cycle. And I  think the oil business right now is maybe suffering a little bit because of  the price of natural gas is a little too low. I spent a lot of money drilling  with  6 and  7, money for gas, and now I   m trying to pay for it with  4.  Pretty hard to do. So, I like the oil business. I   ve been in it for over 50  years.  What do you think about our famous alumnus, Mr. Pickens?  I think he   s doing the best job he possibly can. He   s a smart guy, and  he   s going to make money for him and whoever he wants to work for.  He   s good. I think he   s done a wonderful job here for OSU. You don   t  find many campuses that have got that kind of support from their  alumni.  What does OSU mean to you? What thoughts and emotions do you have  when you hear the words    Oklahoma State University   ?  Well, I think it   s a part of my life that, I would say, has been there for a  long time. And I, as an OSU graduate, I do not think I would ever   I   m  very proud of that, okay? And I don   t think I   d ever say anything bad  23  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  Sherman  Long  about OSU, and I   m sure that I   m just like everybody else. You come  down here and you do the best you can, and you get out of here and you  go on down the road, and you do the best you can. I can look back that  going here changed my life. From a kid that couldn   t breathe on a farm  tractor to a guy that really can   t talk very good today, but I   m still here.  I   m seventy-six years old, and I play golf. My brain   s still working fairly  good. At least I remembered where Stillwater was. (Laughs) So,  anyhow, I really think a lot of Oklahoma State University.  What   s it like to be a Cowboy in Longhorn country?  Oh, it   s terrible. In fact, I got a friend up in Wakita. He says,    I   m for  any team that   s playing Texas.    (Laughter) I belong to a country club in  San Antonio and I   ve been there a long time, and I have a lot of friends  there that went to Texas, and I find them somewhat arrogant but maybe  not too much. But maybe they   re brought up that way. Who knows?  They   re all good guys. But everybody that goes to school, I think, comes  out of college with a certain attitude that    My school   s better than your  school. We   ve got a better football team. We   ve got better students.  We   ve got a bigger campus.    And I say,    Well, you know, whatever.     That   s the way I look at it. Life is whatever. (Laughs)  Yes, as long as you work hard at it.  That   s right. That   s right.  Is there anything else you would like to add?  No, I appreciate you doing this interview. I never thought about giving  an interview; I   m not too good at giving interviews. And I hope this will  go into the archives and that someday maybe my grandchildren will get  to look at it.  Well, I thank you for your time today, and I appreciate it. And go Pokes.  Go Pokes   -------  -------   
