 Gill. Today is November10, 2008. I   m visiting with  Dr. Jonathan Friend in his home here in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This  interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Dr. Friend, you joined the faculty of  Oklahoma State University College of Veterinarian Medicine in 1948.  That   s correct, yes.  And that   s just a few months after it opened?  Yes, just a few months.  And retired in 1986?  That   s correct.  So wow, you must have seen a lot of changes at the college in your time.  Yes, I did. A lot. It   s like night and day.  Maybe first of all, if you don   t mind, can we go back and get some of  your early history? Maybe where you grew up, about your family, and  some of those things?  Well, of course, I grew up in Oklahoma about thirty miles west of here  on a farm near Marshall, Oklahoma. I went to what was then Oklahoma  A M College and the School of Agriculture and talked to Clarence  McElroy about going to veterinary school. Of course, we didn   t have  one at the time so I went to Kansas State and graduated from there. But  as far as the early history here of this school, it was during World War  II   Henry Bennett was president and he was very much in favor of  starting a veterinary school after the war was over. Of course, I call it a  5  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  school because at that time this wasn   t a university, it was a college. But  as I recall   well I don   t know when he appointed Clarence McElroy as  the Dean, but at some point he did and he was our first Dean. There were  two individuals that were hired or employed   one to teach anatomy and  the other in histology and pathology. Well, I don   t know what happened,  but the school was supposed to start the first semester, the fall semester  of 1947. Well these two men for I don   t know what reason, got  disenchanted or whatever, and they left. So by the time they got their  replacements, it took I guess most or all of that semester and part of the  next, anyway, there was a Dr. Donald Trotter and a Dr. Duane Peterson,  they were both teaching at the University of Missouri because they had  just started a school up there in veterinary medicine. I don   t know how  Dr. Trotter got word of the fact that there were two positions open down  here at OSU, but anyway he did. Of course he knew Duane Peterson real  well, so they both decided to come down here. I don   t know whether  they were invited, they certainly must have been. But they came down  and were interviewed I assume by the President and Dean Mac, and I  remember Duane saying that they were hired by five o   clock.  (Laughs)The same day.  I talked to Duane   s wife just the other day and she said she didn   t know  exactly when they came down here for the interview, but I assume it  might have been January of    48. Well, the school, at the time   they got  down here and everything ready to go   it didn   t start until March 1 of     48. Well Dwayne was teaching anatomy and it was the first course  scheduled so he gave the first lecture in the School of Veterinary  Medicine at that time and I   m sure Donald Trotter gave the second one.  But then the students went all the rest of that semester, and they went all  summer, not just part of the summer, but by the time fall came then they  were second year students. That   s when I came on board. It was  September 1 of    48.  Were there just two faculty members that first semester?  Well, I   ll say this. Lewis  H.  Moe and I think his first name was  Raymond or Ray  R.L.  Butler, were already here, but they didn   t get  involved until the students got involved in the clinical years. They were  here but they weren   t involved with the basic science courses. Well,  these two departments, anatomy and pathology/histology, they were  taught in an old Army surplus building which was moved in here and it  was a frame building.  Quonset huts?  Well, it was all wood mainly. Anyway, it was referred to as    TF9     6  Gill  Friend  which stood for    Temporary Frame Number 9.    I guess that is the way it  was designated in the Army. But it was located a little bit west probably  of where the Willham Residential Hall is now on the south side of Farm  Road there. I would say it was kind of an elongated building; the far  side, the south side away from the street was the anatomy lab. And  square footage-wise it was larger than the one that   s in McElroy Hall  now. On the north end was a laboratory for histology and pathology and  they used scopes, they had tables in there where they used microscopes  and so forth and it was also used as a lecture room. The anatomy lecture  room   the lab was so big that we just sat chairs in the southeast corner  and that was the lecture room.  Well, in between those two areas there were some offices and then there  was, across the hallway on the east side, there was a prep room to make  mainly specimens for histology and pathology and there was also an  apartment in there for two students to stay and help maintain the  building. Two of them that I can remember staying in there was Bob  Williams and Dr. Roger Panciera, who was on the faculty here for many  years. To talk about that building, I shared an office with Dr.  Duane   Peterson. And if you stood in a certain place, you could see through the  inner wall board and get the outer wall board lined up and you could just  see daylight right through it. Anyway, I was told that the refrigeration  system that we had in there was very large. It consisted of a chill room  and a deep freeze room. But that it came from where was that explosion  on those ships down in Texas, was it Texas City? Or someplace.  Remember, those two ships blew up and killed so many people must  have been back there somewhere right after the war. Anyway, that unit  had been shipped up here from Texas and it was used down there to  store a lot of the bodies that were killed during that explosion. Well, let   s  see, we occupied that building for 10 years, we had.  Temporary for ten years?  Well, they started building on what is now McElroy Hall. If you look at  it, you can see that   well they built the part, the northeast corner hub  there where the auditoriums in and then they built on back where they  had the large animal treatment room, the pharmacy and radiology room  and stables and so forth. Of course, the building was built in an    E     shape. Well, that was completed in time for the first year students, I  mean the first that ever attended the school, to complete their clinical  years in that part, in that new part of the building. Well in about 1958 or     57 they built on again, this time going south and included the middle     E,    or the middle wing I should say, where the anatomy lab is located.  Anyway, as I recall Dr. Peterson was head of the building program, and  I think that unit of the building cost a little over  500,000. But the  interesting thing is that if you look at the northeast hub there where the  7  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  auditorium is, it   s larger than the rest of the building. The rest of the  building has been reduced a lot. Well, I don   t know how I got a hold of  them, but somehow they appeared in my office. There was this drawing  of what the building would look like and it would have been much,  much larger than it is today because I guess it   s hard to get money to  build that much of it. When you looked at the plans, of course I think it  was three stories and a lot of basement and they had a lot of unassigned  areas in it and I   m sure this didn   t look too good to the Board of  Regents. So it was built on a much smaller scale than what it was  originally. I took those plans   I know I took them down to the Dean   s  office maybe when Dr.  William E.  Brock was dean. As I remember  they put them in a closet. Whether, they   re still there or not but I don   t  know.  Recently I was talking to Dr. Lester Johnson and he indicated that one  of his first offices was actually in a stall. You know, a horse stall? Some  of them were in horse stalls? Some of the offices?  Yes they were, that   s right.  And where was that located? That building?  Well, that was just part of the first part that was constructed. There right  now the big treatment room they made into a library. And then the  stables or part of those I think were the library and I don   t know what all  went back there anymore.  So they just had desks?  Yes. And then later they built a kind of temporary building there for the  clinical staff to have offices.  Let me come back and ask you a question to kind of pick up on your  history. So you went to Oklahoma State University?  Right.  Got your undergraduate degree     Yes I got   well I actually completed three years here before I went to  vet school. Actually, at the time had I taken the exact right courses, all  that was required was one year but you had to take the correct pre-requisites  to get in. But I didn   t have any problem getting in at Kansas  State. That   s where I wanted to go.  So you went to Kansas State in Manhattan and got your degree there?  8  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Yes.  Did you have a good experience there?  Oh, yes, very much so. And well, as a matter of fact, Dr. Peterson and I  were classmates. Never did I think we   d be here teaching together for 38  years. But it was a very enjoyable time.  Same class? Same entering class?  Yes. And Dr. Trotter actually started with us. But we were up there  during the war time, and of course they put us in uniform. Dr. Trotter  had had rheumatic fever when he was, I think a teenager and he had  quite a bit of damage to his heart, so the Army didn   t accept him because  of that.  But yes, then we moved out there, I remember moving in    58 into what   s  now McElroy Hall, in that middle wing. Of course the other part of the E  was built later.  Let me go back and ask you again, when you graduated did you come  straight to Oklahoma State University to teach, or did you work  somewhere in between?  No, I worked for a while for about a year or so for   well when I first left  veterinary school I worked on a testing program in the state of North  Dakota to eradicate Brucellosis and Tuberculosis. There were about five  or six of us out of my class that went up there. I left sometime in  October, started around the first of June, and came here and I worked a  seminar program for Oklahoma for a while. Then I worked for about a  year for a practice in Odessa, Missouri, about forty miles east of Kansas  City. Then, well one reason I worked for him was that he was pretty  involved with the AVMA,  American Veterinary Medical Association   their program and so forth and was gone a lot. So I came back home and  I don   t know, I knew the position was open over here, so I applied and  came in and visited with Dr. McElroy. I was employed then September  1, 1948. I guess I had no more than accepted that position then Dr. Suit   s  wife called me   he was the practitioner there in Odessa   and said he   d  had a heart attack and wanted to know if I would come up there and take  the practice over. It was a little bit tempting, but when I first started  teaching it was kind of a learning experience for me and I thought, well  maybe I made a mistake not going into practice. But I know now I  didn   t. I really enjoyed the teaching.  What was your first teaching assignment?  9  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Well, it was in anatomy. I assisted Dr. Peterson there in the anatomy lab.  Have you stayed in anatomy then your entire career?  Yes, mainly.  Gross and applied?  Well, with Dr. Peterson, we taught gross anatomy, applied anatomy,  surgical anatomy. I even helped him in histology some in the labs. So it  was a pretty long career anyway.  When you got here to the vet med school, can you recall some of the  faculty there on the staff with you? You mentioned a couple of names,  Dr. Peterson and Dr. Trotter. But can you remember some of the early  faculty and remember some things about them?  Well, I remember of course Dr. Moe and Dr. Butler and of course Dr.   Wendell  Krull came, he was on the faculty pretty soon. Dr.  Edward   Harnden, Dr. Orr. See Dr. Orr was here. I forgot to mention that. He was  already here and so was Dr. Harnden. Harnden taught bacteriology and  Dr. Orr taught physiology and then, well faculty kept coming on. Dr.  A.  L.  Malle came and Dr. Jim  James B.  Corcoran and Dr. Bill Brock or  later became Dean.  Was Dr. Peterson kind of your mentor a little bit? I mean did you     Yes. We had a good working relationship with each other. And so     He was head of the department?  Well, what they did I think originally, when the two, Trotter and  Peterson, came down here originally there was just one department. I  think Trotter was the head of it then Dr. Peterson was a member of the  department, but they soon split it and Dr. Peterson became the head and  Dr. Trotter became the head of the pathology department. Dr. Trotter left  after about five or six years and he went with the Cutter Laboratory out  in California because they were producing Polio vaccine. I think he was  with them about two years and then he went to Kansas State and was in  the anatomy department and became head there and then later became  the Dean. The administrative building, I went up there when it was  dedicated in his honor. It was named after him. There are three big  buildings up there in the vet school at Kansas State and the  administrative and classroom building was named after Dr. Trotter and  the other two are named after classmates of mine.  10  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  What do you remember about Dean McElroy? I know he was a special  individual. Have you got some stories you remember about Dean Mac?  Well, of course I wasn   t married at the time. I remember him having a  party for   you know where he used to live, don   t you?  No.  He used to live out there, out on east Sixth Street, oh what   s that steak  place,  Freddie Paul   s Steakhouse  down on south side of the eating  place. That   s about where his house was located. He had about ten acres  out there. And yes he was a very pleasant, easy individual to work with  and always gave you pretty good advice. I think he helped get this  school started off on the right foot.  What do you remember most about him? Because I   ve heard a lot of  Dean McElroy stories of when he was Dean of Students and then Dean  of Vet School.  Yes, he was just about everything. He was  the  Dean of Men too. We  used to have a Dean of Women and Dean of Men. I can remember when  I was a first year student going out to the   what   s Gallagher-Iba now?  Arena?  Gallagher Hall?  Yes. He was out there in the middle welcoming all the students and yes  we had a good relationship with him.  Do you recall some of the first faculty members you worked with? Can  you tell any interesting stories? I mean there must have been some  personality in that group. Were there some pretty colorful figures and  stories that you can share with us?  Well, one that I can share with you is it must have been maybe about the  first or second or third year I was here on the faculty. They used to have  a program for the veterinarians over the state to come in and they   d have  speakers come here to OSU and speak on various topics and so forth.  Well, I was in charge of arranging the program and getting the speakers  and so forth. Anyway, it was in the auditorium there of the vet school  where they held the meeting. Well they didn   t have any speaking system  or PR system in the building at all. I had to go over here someplace and  lease one or rent one and set it up, so I did that the evening before. There  were several students in there that were helping me, and I don   t know  whether you knew Dr. Newton Tennille?  11  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  No.  Dr. Newton Tennille was   well he was just different. He was just   well  not a big fat person but he was pretty large. He had a real deep  bellowing voice, you know, and when he   d laugh he   d just beller out  anything, be it curse words or whatever. But anyway, after we got this  system all set up, this one student got behind the mic to test it out. I   ve  forgotten exactly what he said, but he said something about Dr. Tennille  that wasn   t very appropriate to say. The way the auditorium was  arranged then, if you were speaking on the mic towards the audience you  were facing east. Well if you went west there was Dr. Tennille   s office  right there by radiology. Just as that student stepped up to the mic, Dr.  Tennille appears right behind him and he didn   t know it   I   ll tell you  what, he could have scratched a hole in that concrete. We could all see  what was going to happen but it was too late to warn the man   I remember one instance in anatomy lab where   we also dissected birds;  we usually got hens and roosters from the poultry farm here at OSU. I  remember   there was more than one working on a given specimen and  they were all huddled around this table and they were waving their  hands frantically for me to come down there and identify the organ.  Well, they were dissecting a rooster and of course the testes were up in  the abdominal cavity. This one girl was in there and she said,    If those  are testes, I   ll eat them.    (Laughter) Boy when she heard what I said she  took off and ran outside.  Oh, great story. As you progressed, did you do more clinical work or did  you do more research as you went on?  We did a little research but we did mainly teaching.  Mainly teaching?  Yes. But on anatomy labs, they were sectioned so we had to repeat  those. And see, some of those were   oh gosh, I think there for a while  we had a seven hour course; I think we finally reduced it to five. We  taught mainly, there toward the end, first year students and second year  students, and some juniors too.  Did you ever have any administrative positions? Department head  positions?  No I never did. I was a little bit unique in that I only taught on a nine  month basis instead of on a yearly basis, so I got paid for ten, and had  two months off. So I guess the old farm boy in me, I had to go over and  see what was going on at the farm, I ran that farm over at Marshall all  12  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  the time is was in school.  Is Marshall the home of Angie Debo?  Yes.  Did you know Dr. Debo?  Oh yes, quite well.  Did you bump into her some in the Library when she was working there  for several years?  Yes. She was a real good friend of my older sister. In fact they got  advanced degrees together. They spent one summer down at OU.  In your work, Jonathan, did you ever work very much with  practitioners? I mean if they   d leave and go into business, would you  work with alumni and practitioners in the field?  Not a whole lot. Sometimes they   d get some oddball fetuses in there,  wanted to identify some of the structures and so forth. I did help over in  Animal Science sometimes getting pituitary glands from brains and so  forth, and they did furnish us with calves sometimes to embalm if we   d  embalm some for their meats lab. So we   d kind of exchange that way.  You were talking earlier about your 38 years teaching. Did you intend to  stay that long when you came to Oklahoma State?  Well, you never know how things are going to work out. They just  worked out that way. It   s hard to predict how long you   d stay or  anything like that.  What was the special thing about the college? What was the connection  that kept you at OSU all those years? I   m sure you probably had some  opportunities to go other places.  Well, I don   t know. I was pretty well satisfied here and we two could  work together good. I think we had a pretty good relationship with the  students; I think they think we were a little bit rough on them. I really do  think we graded, well I know we did, we probably graded harder   I say  harder, it wasn   t as easy to make a grade for the first students as it was  for those, I think there was a little bit of inflation on the grades. But  anyway. I remember the first class, the first thing they would study in  anatomy would be the bones or osteology. Well they didn   t have those  specimens completely prepared at the time they started it. There was a  13  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  little old shack out there by TF 9 that they used as a macerating room.  Students kind of lost their cookies going in that place   You mentioned early over the years, were there some faculty that were  special to you, faculty or administrators that you respected particularly  over the years? That stand out in your mind?  Well I always remember Dr. Krull whose laboratory and office were  right across for quite awhile on the second floor of McElroy Hall in the  middle wing. His enthusiasm   boy when he got started lecturing on  those different parasites, it was really interesting. I could hear every  word he was saying  Man, he   d get revved up. I had a lot of respect     well I had a lot of respect for a lot of the faculty members. Dr. Sid   Sidney  Ewing was one of his advanced degree students and he of  course just retired recently. And Dr. Lorenz of course is our first Dean  who was an alumnus of this school, and I remember having him as a  student.  You got any stories you can tell on him Jonathan?  All I know is he was sure a good student.  I was hoping you could tell us some ornery stories or something.  I can   t right off hand. But he came from up around there north of Enid.  He got dairy farm. I think that was his intent to be a large animal  practitioner.  Jonathan, speaking of deans, I guess I was counting them, I might have  counted wrong, but I think you served under six deans and two interim  deans in your period? Can you talk about some of the deans you worked  with? You talked about Dean Mac earlier, and said he was pretty  special.  Well, yes. Let   s see after Dean Mac was Dean Orr and he died rather  suddenly, I think right after the first of the year. And then Dr. Holmes  became Dean. Dr. Holmes was pretty much a do-it-yourselfer. He just  ran the whole school with very little assistance. A of couple secretaries  and that was about it. Let   s see after Dr. Holmes   .  Was Dr. Reinhard one year, a short tenure.  Yes Dr.  Karl  Reinhard, bless his heart, he really divided the faculty.  He didn   t handle the appropriations correctly. My understanding was  they had to go rob some of the research funds to pay my salary and what  he proposed was a lot of additional building and buying a lot of  14  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  furniture. I thought to myself when I went to some of those meetings, the  Board of Regents is not going to approve all this. But he got in crosswise  with the administration, the president   s office, for misappropriating his  funds and putting out information. Our school was on probation at the  time, and he put out some information he shouldn   t have. I think it was  on a Memorial Day, Dr. Kamm was President and he called a meeting  that morning, I   ve forgotten the exact time. But about the first thing he  did when he came in was that he removed Dr. Reinhard from being  Dean I think appointed Dr. Brock as Interim Dean and he later became  Dean. That was kind of a sad time.  What do you remember about Dr. Brock?  Well, Dr. Brock was a pretty steady individual who kept the school  going on a pretty even keel. After Dr. Brock there was     Morgan I think?  Let   s see, yes, Dean Morgan was here. Then Dr. Alexander. Well Dr.  Alexander came I think the last year I taught. And of course he was  Dean probably the longest of any individual.  Well looking at students, you were talking earlier about grading  inflation. Have students changed over the years? Particularly at  Oklahoma State? I mean you   ve taught over a 37 year cycle. How have  students changed from the time you started to the time you finished?  Well, I   m not sure if I   m correct on all this, but I really didn   t seem to  have any big problem with them. Of course we   not the last class but  probably about the second to last class I taught was about 50  women,  50  men. But most of the others were just a little   later on, not at first,  there were a few more men than women.  So one of the big changes you saw was the change of more women  students?  Yes. Right. I think the early students maybe you could demand a little  more from them without any trying to counter or not do it or whatever. I  shouldn   t say this I guess. I didn   t really have any problems.  Can you remember some of your special students you had over the years  that went on and were very successful in practice or in teaching or  administration?  Yes, I wish I could remember names real well. I had one that   what   s  the title, Attorney General? Oh, what is it   usually an MD holds it. I  15  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  don   t know if he actually got the position or was just an assistant.  State Medical Examiner position?  Yes. He was out of Washington. Oh, what was the name of the   ? And  we   ve had some that made some discoveries on vaccines and so forth.  Have you kept up with some of your former students?  Well, I don   t know how many I   ve taught. I imagine somewhere over  2,000 of them. Real hard to   yeah some of them I   ve had pretty close  contact. Majority of them, of course not.  Well, reading some things here, Dr. Friend, you   re one of the legends in  the history of the OSU College of Veterinarian Medicine, especially in  the earlier formative years. Reading here, you taught 36 years, received  the Norden Distinguished Award     It was actually 38 years.  38 years. Served on the OSU Faculty council in 1971 and    72. The  college yearbook was dedicated to you in 1984. Are these recognitions a  source of pride for you?  Yes.  And you taught three months I think at the College of Veterinarian  Medicine at     Oh, Nigeria.  Ahmadu Bello?  Ahmadu Bello.  Ahmadu Bello in Nigeria; Nigerian students and other students from  other nations in Africa. Can you tell us a little about that experience?  Well this is a program that was funded through the federal government,  but it was administrated through Kansas State University. I think they  had a contract to establish a College of Veterinary Medicine and a  College of Agriculture there at Ahmadu Bello University. So it was in, I  guess probably early or late    71, we got a call from Kansas State  wanting to know if Dr. Peterson would go to Nigeria to teach anatomy.  They were on a quarter basis, so for the winter quarter. He declined in  that he had originally been down to, I think it was Guatemala, to help  16  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  that school out. So they asked me if I   d go and I thought well, why not.  So I went over there for that term. I actually went over there to teach  applied anatomy but I also assisted in the gross anatomy lab. I made  friends with some of the students. It was interesting to note there that     of course a lot of them were Muslim or of the Islamic faith, but there  were also a lot of Christians. Of course, I stayed in what was a house  that was constructed mainly for the provost, which was built by the  Rockefeller Foundation. But I remember these two students coming over  there, they were both Christians and   well you   d go in the classrooms  there and see Christian slogans on the walls and on t-shirts of students.  Anyway, this one student   s name was Samuel Kuziat and we still  correspond with him. When I was teaching I said,    Sammy, you  shouldn   t be a veterinarian, you should be a preacher.    Well anyway, he  came over here. He wanted to come to OSU to get a master   s. He  finished his veterinary degree. He couldn   t quite get what he wanted  here so he went to K-State and got a master   s up there. He went back to  Nigeria and I don   t know just how long he worked there, he was a  veterinarian but not for very long. Next thing I heard he was preaching  at a church and he   s been at a church ever since. But it   s interesting to  hear how close he came to being killed several times. And he   s come  over here, his wife   s sister and mother live in Minnesota and he comes  over here, I think I saw him about two years ago.  Looking at the big picture of OSU, how has the College of Veterinarian  Medicine changed over the years?  Well, there   s been such a big change it   s almost like night and day.  When I went to school they just   well we were some of the first to use  penicillin. I don   t think, we didn   t use near enough. And my goodness,  when you look at all the equipment and things they can do now with  computers and so forth that we didn   t even know about way back there.  Such a huge change.  A big change in teaching methodologies or     Yes, I   m sure there   s a lot of changes in the way they present it. They  probably do a lot more with computers and things like that than what we  used. We used to use a lot of drawings and what have you.  All projected on the wall.  Yes.  Well has the basic methodology of teaching, the core of anatomy,  17  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  changed very much over the years?  Well, there   s different ways to present it, you know. Yes we used  embalmed specimens, but we also used some fresh specimens. It would  be kind of like a post-mortem, the tissues weren   t fixed. I   d go down at  least once or twice a year to packing houses or slaughter houses in  Oklahoma City and collect specimens, particularly of the reproductive  tract and so forth, the different stages of the fetus development you  know. We   d have some labs on that. They   d study the fetal membranes  without being fixed. My impression was the men who followed us in our  positions went back to the more old traditional fixed specimens,  embalmed specimens. You serve their purpose but I think the other was  something we did that has been lost.  What have been the significant achievements and major  accomplishments in the College of Veterinarian Medicine?  Well, the fact it   s still here.  The fact it made it from where it started.  Yes, matter of fact the first I remember the faculty was small. That was  one of the topics of conversation, how long is this school going to last?  How many faculty did you have when you come on board?  Well let   s see, trying to count them up. There was Lewis, Moe, Butler,  Harnden   that was four. And then there was Dr. Trotter, five, and Dr.  Peterson and me   there were seven. Let   s see who else, probably some  came rather quickly after that, I guess it   d be like Dr. Krull and there  were some other   well it wasn   t too long before Dr.  Andrew  Monlux  and Dr. Johnson came on board. And then there were some others  maybe it in the clinical staff that didn   t stay very long.  But that first year you probably had less than ten people, maybe around  eight people or so the faculty from    48.  Oh, it may have been a dozen or so, something like that.  Pretty modest compared to now days.  Yes, right.  I   ve heard that some talk about the teaching hospital as a major  achievement or accomplishment. Do you perceive that it was as well?  18  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Oh yes, yes. One thing that helped us get off of probation.  For accreditation?  Yes for accreditation when we got that hospital.  So if I understand this     It was around 1980 or about then.  So it went about nearly 40 years     Yes, it took a while.     or about 35 years without full accreditation.  Well, I guess all the schools that first started that way, had to start on  probation.  Looking back in your experience, your 38 years or so here and looking  at it since, what advice would you give to faculty and administration to  keep it on target towards its mission? Any thoughts or words of wisdom  you   d have there?  Well, I guess they   ve got to be subject to change for one thing. What   s  down the road I guess would certainly be hard for me to predict.  What were some of your favorite memories from your time at Oklahoma  State University? Can you pick two or three highlights out? Personally  for you?  Oh, well I remember our retirement dinner was a very special occasion.  And I don   t know how this all came about, but any way they did name  that one residential hall after Dr. Peterson and me.  That   s right, I   d forgotten that.  That was kind of a special occasion, I guess. But anyway, I don   t know  why we were selected.  Have you visited the hall? The Peterson-Friend Hall?  Yes.  Pretty nice isn   t it?  19  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Yes, I remember getting this phone call asking me if they could name  the building and I thought,    Name the building? There   s no way they   re  going to.    (Laughter) So it turned out that way. Well another thing was  the fact that on my retirement there was enough money given in my  honor to make a   I think there had to be  10,000 or more to be funded  as an endowment. Through the years it grew and I never paid any  attention to it until Dr. Sid Ewing called me one day and said there   s  quite a bit of money in there. Well I pledged some money towards it,  and then there were other gifts made to it later on, and it   s gone to the  support of the Veterinary Library.  That   s great. Any professional achievement in terms of papers or     Well, I never did do much research. I did help some. I did some research  with animal science, but really wasn   t involved that much. Actually we  didn   t end up publishing a lot of it. But we did quite a lot of nerve work  on horses where we get them and get them mainly from that dog food  plant over in Sand Springs and we   d cut certain nerves and check out  how it affected the animal and so forth. Especially in horses. But we  didn   t publish a whole lot of that.  Talking about your legacy, how do you hope people will remember Dr.  Jonathan Friend? How would you want people to remember you and  your career?  Well, I hope I treated them fair enough. Some of them might disagree  with me on that. I remember one student coming in at the end of the  semester and he received a    D    as a final grade. He said he was going to  protest it. I said, well that   s your privilege. It was three or four days later  he came back and said he decided not to protest it. We have there on the  north side, the northeast corner a    walk of honor    out there on the brick  kind of patio or whatever you want to call it. Lo and behold, if he didn   t  put a brick down there in my honor. (Laughs) But I tried to   I hope  they   in visiting in them, I   ve heard them say, well you were tough, but  you were fair. So maybe that   s the way they should remember me.  Was teaching your great love, Jonathan? Was that what you really  enjoyed?  Well that, and I have to admit I enjoyed agriculture. Something about I  guess, being born on a farm that I couldn   t quite turn loose. (Laughs) So  I   m still involved in it, but not active right now.  That   s why you had the ten month contract? So you could spend a  couple of months every summer working on the farm?  20  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Gill  Friend  Yes.  You went back to the family farm in Marshall and worked on the farm?  Marshall, yes.  I think a lot of people are going to remember you, Dr. Friend, from your  years here. I know you   re well thought of with people I have visited with  and you   ve touched a lot of lives.  Yes, well really when a person teaches, he does touch a lot of lives in  spending time and being involved with students like that.  Do you get a special feeling when some of your   we commented earlier  about some of your students who go on to succeed and have really  successful practices or wind up in some aspect of veterinary medicine  and come back occasionally and thank you?  Oh yes. I see them   I used to try to go to those various meetings,  especially state meetings here. But I don   t think I   ll be able to go any  more. Wish I could, but   and I have been invited usually back for class  reunions, particularly if they   re held here. We try to go to most of them.  We haven   t missed very many of them.  Is there anything that we haven   t talked about that you   d like to let us  know from your experience at the college? Do you want to share any  stories or anything else that we haven   t covered?  Oh, I don   t know. I think we   ve covered quite a bit.  All right, well thank you very much Dr. Friend. I appreciate it.  Thank You.  -------  -------   
