 Nykolaiszyn Today is Monday, September 21, 2015. My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn  with the Oklahoma State University Library. I   m in Shawnee, Oklahoma,  Pottawattamie County, today interviewing Mr. Jim Lowe as part of our  Cowboys in Every County oral history project. Mr. Lowe, thank you for  joining me today.  J. Lowe Well, you   re more than welcome.  Nykolaiszyn I   d like to start and learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell me the  year you were born and where you were born?  J. Lowe I was born in Oklahoma City at the old Mercy Hospital in 1936 on  December 22.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about your parents.  J. Lowe My dad was working at that time for Oklahoma City Health Department.  Mom had been in school in Alva  Oklahoma , and that   s where Dad met her.  Dad graduated from OSU in 1927, and he was on the national livestock  judging team in Chicago, which I found out from one of the old OSU  magazines that came through years later. He had a brother and a sister that  also graduated from OSU. In fact, Fred Lowe has a building in the animal  husbandry department named after him. I had some orange blood in my  background, but most of it came later because Dad never pushed me, even  though he   d sit and listen to the football and basketball games on the radio,  and I   d sit in the living room and listen with him. I guess I was a normal kid  because it was a great time of life to grow up. We didn   t lock doors or worry  about things.  Attended Classen High School, and I graduated in 1955. I considered going  to OU  University of Oklahoma  because I was very interested in  architecture, and after visiting down there, I kind of lost my interest. I knew  that OSU had a, or A M had an architecture school, and then several of my  5  good friends were going up there so that was an easy choice to make. We  got up there in the fall of 1955, and we went through Rush. They moved us  all into Cordell Hall for a week, and it was in a little better shape then than it  is now, which I think it   s on the demolition list, I believe. It was quite a  structure at that time. Anyway, several of us pledged Kappa Sig, and we   re  still in touch. Some of us get together once a month and have lunch, and a  lot of fond memories, a lot of wild stories are still told.  Nykolaiszyn (Laughs) Well, let   s back up just a little bit     J. Lowe Okay.  Nykolaiszyn    and talk a little bit more about growing up in Oklahoma City. Did you  have siblings?  J. Lowe No  No, I   m spoiled rotten, but I had a lot of good friends. We   d ride our  bicycles everywhere. It was a good life. We could ride our bikes up to the  Villa Theater on Twenty-Third Street for ten cents. Go in at ten in the  morning, and we watched all kinds of cartoons and films and serials and a  movie and get out about four in the afternoon. You   d go in, and it was a  nice, sunny day. You   d come out. It was snowing and raining, but you had a  long, you had a mile to ride on your bicycle.  Boy Scout troop met at our Penn sylvania  Avenue  United  Methodist  Church, and probably the greatest thing we did was when we got a new  troop leader who had captained a PT  Patrol Torpedo  boat in World War II.  We just would sit around, he was also our Sunday school teacher, and he  could tell the greatest stories. We   d just be enthralled because we were all  still young when the war was over, but we could certainly remember that  you couldn   t go to a movie without seeing a newsreel about the war and all  the efforts and everything that was going on, and our neighbor that was  hording tires.  Oh, I   m starting to remember some things I   d forgotten  (Laughter) Went on  to, let   s see, Hawthorn Grade School, old Hawthorn Gorillas. Played a lot of  baseball. At Taft Junior High, I played some more baseball then started  working and throwing papers. One of the things about throwing papers in  those days, you had a morning route and you had an evening route. You ride  your bicycles to them, pick up their papers at four thirty in the morning, and  we   d have to go around and collect from people every, well, some were on a  weekly basis and some on a monthly basis. Every Saturday, we   d usually  have our collections in our paper bag, and some guy pulled me over one  morning and accused me of breaking into his car. I said,    No, I haven   t     He  said,    Let me see in your bag.    Next thing I knew my bag was empty. He  was gone. Dad bailed me out, thank goodness, but a church all the way  across on the other side of Oklahoma City saw it in the paper. They sent  6  some money to the paper station for me. I thought, and people I didn   t even  know, and I thought,    This is a good, going to be a good life.     Nykolaiszyn How much would you make throwing papers?  J. Lowe Oh, I think maybe thirty-five dollars a month, something like that, but all the  papers I could read. Then Dad would start letting me drive when I was  fourteen. Of course I   d been driving on my uncle   s farm, but this was a little  bigger. Then four thirty in the morning wasn   t much of a problem,  particularly after I got robbed. (Laughter) A lot of fun  In fact, one of the  guys that was in our fraternity and I have lunch with once a month was the  station manager. (Laughs) We   d go duck hunting after we got through  throwing papers in the mornings and sometimes go fishing and get out on  the Canadian River bed and go through where the dry holes were and find  the fish that were trapped in there. The worst part about the duck hunting  was cleaning the ducks. (Laughter) Of course, I guess that didn   t really suit  me because I remember Mother wringing chickens    necks in the backyard,  and then we were right in the middle of Oklahoma City. It was a good life, a  good time to grow up.  Nykolaiszyn Would you ride the streetcars?  J. Lowe Oh yes  It ran right by our house, and I remember to go take my guitar  lessons we   d have to ride the streetcar downtown and then catch another one  that would go up to where the teacher   s house was. I don   t why Mom was  going with me when I first started, but I would be carrying the guitar for a  while. Then she would carry it for a while, and she stubbed her toe on one of  the little turtles that they use to make turn lanes or safety lanes, them steel  things on the ground, on the pavement. Stubbed her toe and fell and scraped  her knees and dropped my guitar and all that, but the biggest thing about the  streetcars was the night they quit running, because they   d come by the house  about once an hour. You wouldn   t pay attention, and the night they quit  running, I   d wake up every hour because it had been part of my life. Now  they   re going back to them, but they have big rubber tires on them, I guess.  (Laughs) They were loud  Great memories  Thank you for bringing some of  those up  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Was education very important in your family?  J. Lowe Well, Dad and Mom both had degrees. Dad   s was from Oklahoma A M,  and hers was from, was in Garber  Oklahoma . In fact, that   s where Dad met  Mom because he was teaching vo-ag or something up there at Garber, and  that   s where he met Mom because she was still in school there. I would say  yes. They made sure I had decent grades, and it wasn   t difficult. I guess I  made all the honor rolls. I don   t remember.  7  Nykolaiszyn Would they take you to visit A M as you were growing up?  J. Lowe Not at that age, no, but like I said, Dad was always listening to the  ballgames. I   d sit in there and listen with him. I don   t remember going to  Stillwater at that age. After I decided to go up there, Dad drove me up there,  and I guess he went with me when I enrolled and then to get books. He had  been in school with a guy named Swim that had Swim   s Drug over on the  corner of, well, it   d be cattycorner from where Eskimo Joe   s is now, and he  had a pool hall upstairs. He and Dad were friends. Dad took me by there. I  sat there and listened to them talk for seemed like hours, but I guess it  wasn   t that long. I think he had some, I think we bought some of our books  there from him at that time. That   s the first time I remember being up there  with Dad. They came up, he and Mom both came up after I was in school.  They would come up occasionally for football games or to pick me up so we  could go hunting, but yes, I think education was very important in their  minds. At least they made sure I got up every morning and went. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Was there anything that sparked your interest in architecture growing up?  J. Lowe Well, I   d taken mechanical drawing classes, which I enjoyed, and I guess I   d  always been sketching little things, either (I   ve still got some of the things  around) Dad   s little profile or something. I remember doing some type of  gold mining operation in Alaska that I copied off of something. Yeah, I  guess I really did have more than I realized, and then I had a good friend in  high school that was very serious about architecture and has been quite  successful at it in Houston. Yeah, I just always enjoyed looking at things,  and some photography classes probably added to that. Yeah, I didn   t know,  didn   t think I could be any good at it because I wasn   t really good at math. I  guess they don   t even use it anymore now that everything   s on the  computers, but oh yeah, I was interested. I didn   t like calculus, and I decided  I better look at something else. (Laughter) That was an easy decision. I   m  glad that I did it. It worked out.  Nykolaiszyn When you first came to OSU as a student, how did you get there your  freshman year? How did you get from Oklahoma City to Stillwater?  J. Lowe Okay. Dad had bought a    55 Ford Fairlane, and I had to pick up two other  guys with it. That   s how we went up. Because he had a city car, it was no  problem for him to loan me the car for a while. There were several guys that  just depended on me to get them there and get them home.  Nykolaiszyn You were a popular guy with a set of wheels   J. Lowe It got that way. I don   t remember if they ever bought me any gas or not. Of  course that gas was, what, nine cents. It wasn   t much, and there weren   t a lot  of cars on campus, either. (Laughs) I can   t imagine trying to find a parking  8  place today up there. It   s bad enough for the football game or basketball  game. Then eventually Dad helped me, (Oh, because I joined the Army  Reserves in high school, I had some income from that, too, and had saved  my paper money) I bought a    52 Chevrolet, and it served the same purpose  as the Ford Fairlane did, only it was older and smaller. (Laughter) I had it all  the way through school.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you rushed Kappa Sig early on.  J. Lowe Yes.  Nykolaiszyn How did you choose Kappa Sig, or did they choose you?  J. Lowe Well, I guess it   s a matter of both. The guy I threw papers with was a Kappa  Sig, and I remember going over to their house. Of course it was impressive  because they had a brand-new house. It was 1955, and they were just  moving into it. I remembered when I was at Philmont Scout Ranch, I guess  when I was a freshman in high school, one of the counselors or camp leaders  or whatever it was was a big, old, hairy guy named Jay Roy Inbody. I  remembered him for the next four years, because I was so impressed with  the guy. He was so helpful and had guided us and helped us poke the mules  up the mountain and all that stuff.  We   re sitting out there on the front porch of the Kappa Sigma house, and I  don   t know who I was talking with. They said something about Boy Scouts,  and I said,    Yeah, Philmont was one of the greatest memories I have, and I  still remember a guy out there named Jay Roy Inbody.    He said,    Well, he   s  right over there inside the door.    (Laughs) Of course he didn   t remember me  from Adam, but that added to it. That just made me feel real comfortable  there, and as it turned out, even though we didn   t know it, three of us had all  been buddies all the way through high school and all the way back to grade  school. Ended up there at the same time, and we   re still in touch. It worked  out real well. Of course, that was A M. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn You didn   t live right away in the Kappa Sig house? You lived in Cordell?  J. Lowe Well, that was just for Rush. As soon as Rush, we had bid house in Cordell,  I believe it was, where we   d go down and pick up who might be interested  in us and then marched over to Kappa Sig house and brought our stuff and  moved right in. Then pledging was a little different in those days, too.  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn How so?  J. Lowe (Laughs) Well, you had to keep your room clean, your beds made. You had  to clean the house every Saturday night. You had to keep the phones  9  answered. I learned some decent, no, excellent table manners. That was a  very big thing with the house mothers. They really would. You   d always  dread when you were assigned to sit at her table, but today, I appreciate it  because I felt like I could sit down at a presidential dinner and not make a  faux-pas on which fork to use or what. I learned a lot.  Of course kids today have so much more in their world than we did at that  time, and of course television made a world of difference. Yeah, we did  have TV, but it wasn   t what it is today. (Laughs) I feel like it was just a  great thing for me, because my life had been then, not limited, but I didn   t  have a lot of worldly experience other than the little bit after I   d gotten in  the Army Reserves. I think it   s been a good guide for my life.  Nykolaiszyn Your house mom was pretty tough.  J. Lowe Well, she was, I wouldn   t say tough but stern.  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember her name?  J. Lowe Mother Bruce. We got a wedding gift from her. After she retired, she moved  with her daughter out to New Mexico, but she stayed in touch with a lot of  us through the years. Of course, you know, everybody   d always be  badmouthing her because she made us play straight, and I guess one guy got  in troubles because he came in a little intoxicated one night and went into  her room and fell asleep on her couch. That didn   t go over too good.  (Laughs) She was a sweet lady. Taught some great lessons. I don   t think the  young guys are learning all that today, but of course I   m sure all old people  say that. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Did you live in the house all four years?  J. Lowe I had an apartment one year, a little garage apartment. We liked to have  starved to death in it because we were, there was just two of us. Of course  nothing was air conditioned. That wasn   t an issue. Probably the biggest  shock of my life is when I came back. I had gone active in the Army and  went through OCS  Officer Candidate School  and got a commission and  came back in 1957, and I no longer lived on College Avenue. It was  University Avenue, and I couldn   t find the right address for a while.  Name  changed from Oklahoma A M College to Oklahoma State University in  1957  Actually, I   ve been to two colleges or universities for my degree, but I  don   t think that helps a bit. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn When did you leave for OCS?  10  J. Lowe That would have been in    57. I was only gone six months, but anyway, I  liked that Reserve money. It certainly helped out, and it, you know, I  thought I was going to be going to war a few times. It all worked out.  Nykolaiszyn Let   s talk about some of the classes and professors you remember.  J. Lowe I had one business class with a guy named Pedro Leano. His name   s no  more strange than yours, (laughs) but he was brutal. You couldn   t hardly  understand him, and fortunately he   d break us up into study groups. Then  we   d have a case to go work out for some corporation that something   s  going wrong. There   d be about four or five of us, and we   d get together and  work on it. Fortunately, one of the guys in my group, his last name was Batt,  B-A-T-T. He was from India, and he could understand the guy much better  than the rest of us could. That gave us a little bit of an edge, but it was a fun  class. In fact, Dave Cawthon is a friend of ours, who   s since passed away,  who was in that class. Dave was the president of OCU  Oklahoma City  University  for a while, an interim president. He did quite well. He got more  out of that class than I did.  I remember an econ class where one of the older guys in the fraternity was a  student instructor, and I walked in there one day and he was in charge. The  instructor, I can   t even remember who the guy was supposed to be, but  anyway, Phil was there to take the class that day. He threw a pop quiz on us,  and I had not a clue what it was about. I just wrote on my paper   if you  turned your paper in, at least you were credited for being there. I just wrote  on my paper,    Punt.    Got the paper back the next class. It said,    Field goal.  Three points.    (Laughter) I enjoyed the econ class.  There was a sociology class with a guy named May, Dr. May, and he was  from up north somewhere. Turned out that he was a Kappa Sig wherever he  came from. I don   t know if they showed us any favoritisms or not, but it was  an interesting class. I think that was the one we had over in Old Central, and  I know it   s been beefed up since then because it was so rickety. You just  knew there were ghosts hanging around you and all that.  I   m sure there   s others if I could come up with them, but anyway, after my  freshman year, I passed everything. I had to get freshman year out of my  way. Of course, at that time, you had to go to ROTC and go over there and  check our rifles out of the armory. There was a swimming pool in the  armory at that time. I didn   t really get to use it.  Nykolaiszyn You do a lot of drilling?  J. Lowe Yeah, but I   d already done it all in the Reserves so I was the squad captain  or whatever it was, squad leader, and that helped because I   d already been  through it all. (Laughs) Mostly down at Fort Hood one summer, but that   s  11  another story I   d just soon forget. Classes, I guess I remember more about, I  found the Library my senior year. I learned that you could study and be real  quiet over there, but in the Union, at that time, I think the   was it the French  Lounge that, there was a French and a Chinese Lounge, and one of them   s  gone now. I   m not sure which one of them, but that was always a good place  to go study. It was always, always quiet     Nykolaiszyn    and both buildings were relatively new.  J. Lowe Yes, the Union was extremely new, and I think, even then, it was  supposedly the largest in the world. Of course it   s been added onto many,  many times. The hotel was there with a good restaurant we could   it was  hard to get in on Sundays, because none of the houses had meals. You had  to go find someplace else to eat. There was a bowling alley in the basement.  I remember going down there one time, and I was with some of the football  players. I still had on a shirt and a tie, a pin collar tie that you put the pin  through. The tie kind of hangs down over, and I was trying to show what a  proficient bowler I was to these football jocks. I don   t know how in the  world I did it, but soon as I released the ball and I turned my head, the collar  just blew up, exploded. They   re looking at me like,    What in the world   s  that guy doing?    (Laughter) That was Dwayne Wood and I can   t remember  who else.  There was always something going on in the Union that   dances, there was  a freshman dance I remember. There was one dance I had a date with a girl  from Shawnee  Oklahoma , and somehow we got locked out on the roof. Of  course there was nothing on the roof at that time except air conditioners and  equipment, and I guess we finally made enough noise. I don   t think it was  her. I think it was me making a lot of noise till somebody come up and  opened the door for us. You (speaking to his wife) went to high school with  her. Beanies, we wore a beanie your first week as a freshman.  Nykolaiszyn How   d that go for you?  J. Lowe Well, nobody   s real proud of the beanies, but there was somebody had  started the whole thing about Howdy Week. I believe they still do Howdy  Week. I don   t know, but yeah, you had your beanie. Particularly the other  beanie wearers, you   d always want to say howdy to, yeah, but I don   t think  they lasted the whole week. (Laughs) Umm, what else? Let   s go to another  question.  Nykolaiszyn Did you stay in architecture?  J. Lowe No.  Nykolaiszyn What did you end up changing your major to?  12  J. Lowe After my first semester of architecture, I went to general business, and that   s  where I finally got my degree. Well, of course, I ended up in production  management, which I think has helped in some of the things I   ve done  during my lifetime. I think it made me be more efficient in ways I do things  with fewer steps or movements, particularly now that I   m not able to take as  many steps or whatever, (laughs) but it worked out well.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a good adviser in business?  J. Lowe I   m trying to, I was just trying to remember, and I   m sure I did because I got  through it. I   d say yes, but I can   t remember him. I know I didn   t have a lot  of contact with him. I know where his office was. Fortunately, I never got  called to people   s offices like I did in high school.  Nykolaiszyn (Laughs) Did you attend many sporting events?  J. Lowe Went to the football and some of the basketball and some of the wrestling.  Nykolaiszyn How was Lewis Field back then?  J. Lowe Well, it was a rust bucket, and some of the football players and basketball  players had little apartments under the north stands. That was a wild place. It  was one of our guys, Mack Carter lived over there, and then I think J.W.  Mashburn lived over there and some guys that I knew then or who I   ve  known later. I just loved to hear their stories. (Laughs) Of course Iba was the  little, little, small Iba. They had a little track underneath and workout area  for the wrestlers, and it was just, oh, it was a dungeon. I don   t know why the  guys put themselves through it to have to go down there. There was a  baseball batting cage, and anything going on, it   d always stir up the dust.  You   d almost choke trying to get up out of there to get some air.  Well, let   s see. Well, there was the night that we beat Wilt Chamberlain and  the Jayhawks. Of course everybody was packed into Gallagher Iba, and  there were little windows right up at the top that would open. Of course  there was no way they could meet any type of safety restrictions. (Laughter)  Oh, it must   ve been a hundred degrees in there. Oh, that was one wild night.  It went on all night  (Laughter) I guess the big wrestling night was after I  graduated when Dr. Mitch  Mitch Shelton  pinned Dr. Death  Steve  Williams  from OU. That tore the house down.  Nykolaiszyn Would you have many walkouts back then?  J. Lowe No, not that I remember. I can   t even, I don   t, I think we still had class after  we beat KU  University of Kansas  and Wilt that time. You don   t call panty  raids walkouts, do you?  13  Nykolaiszyn No, no, no.  J. Lowe Okay. Yeah, we had those. Nobody ever knew what started them or why,  but everybody showed up. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn With panty raids, I   ve heard varying stories about how they happened.  J. Lowe Well, I heard stories, because I wouldn   t be involved in any of that.  (Laughs) Well   . (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Explain how it works to me.  J. Lowe Well, the way I remember it, there was a couple of guys    was it Stout or  Murray Hall?    somehow got in. Whether they were let in, I don   t know,  but that   s what started it. How it spread so fast, I have no idea, but  everybody, everybody was out watching to see what was going on. (Laughs)  I don   t know. I never saw anything. (Laughter) Everybody thought it was a  big deal, and I   m sure some people have better stories on it than that.  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn You never ended up in the Dean of Men   s office then?  J. Lowe No. Now there was Dean Troxel that was over the Interfraternity Council  and all that, but that was usually to go drink beer or something with him.  No, I was never   in fact, the only time I ever went to the principal   s office  in high school   of course there was another, I went all the way from grade  school through high school with another guy named Jim Lowe. He was  Jimmy Benjamin and I was Jimmy Douglas, but everything else was just  Jim Lowe. The time I was called to the principal   s office, it was for Jimmy  Benjamin. Anyway, he went to OU, and I went to A M. I think it was  about, it was my junior year, and I had sent some clothes to the cleaners.  They didn   t come back. I went down to the cleaners, and I asked about my  clothes. They said,    Well, it says right here we took them to the Lambda Chi  House.    I said,    Why?    I went over to the Lambda Chi House, and there  was Jim Lowe  (Laughs) He had transferred up there. We finished that up  together. He   s a dentist, a retired dentist now in Oklahoma City. He was a  good guy. You   d have to with a name like that, really.  Nykolaiszyn Absolutely. (Laughter) How were Homecomings in the    50s?  J. Lowe Oh, they were, I can   t say they were bigger. There were a lot more floats  than there are today. They   ve just priced themselves plum out of everything.  I remember working on floats with the Thetas. Another guy and I had to go  find a Jeep so we could use it to build the float around, and we scoured the  countryside, you know. We   d drive up to a farmhouse and say,    Do you  14  have a Jeep?    (Laughter) We finally found one and helped them build a  float. Heck, you   d be up all night. Then it would rain, and you   d start all  over.  The house decks were a little easier. I remember we had one. It was, our  theme, I can   t remember what the overall theme was, but ours was    The  railroad runs through the middle of the house.    (Laughs) We built this big,  big engine with a little car behind it, and oh, I can   t remember what was  supposed to be moving. We had a lot of mechanical parts, and it   s a lot more  advanced today than then, you know. They build steel frames and weld them  and all of that when everything we did was pretty much out of wood. It was  big, and the parade was huge. Then all of the floats ended up outside of the  football stadium over there and then announced the winners. A lot like still  today, except the floats were just, at the time, I thought,    This could be the  Rose Parade.     Nykolaiszyn Wow   J. Lowe There was really some fine, fine stuff, and it was a fun way to meet more  people, too, yeah. Then you   d go sit up there at the ballgame and fall asleep.  (Laughter) It was nicer as you became an upperclassman, because you had  the pledges doing all the hard work, but yeah, it was a good time. Of course  the campus is so much bigger today than it was then, but still the  Walkarounds and all the stuff hadn   t changed. I remember going up, oh,  years later, must have been the    80s, for Homecoming. We   ve been active  with some of Ike Groce   s women   s tennis program, and in fact, there   s a  picture of them up here somewhere. Anyway, one of the gals that had been  on Ike   s team had come back for Homecoming, and she saw us driving by. I  don   t know why she recognized the car even, but she was, just jumped out in  the street hollering and yelling. She was out of Louisiana. You always see  somebody. I think it   s just as friendly today as it was then. I really do.  Nykolaiszyn Well, outside of the fraternity, were you involved in any other  organizations?  J. Lowe The Redskin. Yeah, I think there was three different semesters I worked on  the Redskin staff. I don   t remember doing much, but I   d go to their meetings  and all that. Of course pledges were, had to go out and do something on  campus. There   s a guy in our Sunday school class that had every edition of  the Redskin from up to when it closed, when it shut down in late    60s. He  had them all the way back from whenever they started back in the    20s. It  was interesting because we   d go back, and some of the guys that I knew that  their dads had gone to school there. One, (in fact, he was my little brother in  the Kappa Sig house), his dad and my dad were Acacias at the same time.  We found it in an old yearbook. I guess Acacia   s gone now, but I think it   s,  oh, it   s an annex for the Beta house.  15  Nykolaiszyn What was it?  J. Lowe The Acacias?  Nykolaiszyn Yes.  J. Lowe Well, since I was never initiated by them, I want to say it was sponsored by  the Masons. My dad was a Mason, and he talked me into joining the  DeMolays. I never went any further with it, but it, somehow Acacia  branched off that. How Masonic it is, I really   but if you ever interview a  Mason, he could probably tell you. I do remember selling an old boat I had  to an Acacia. I knew they were good guys. He paid me for it. (Laughter) It  got me around Carl Blackwell a few times. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Are there any campus traditions that come to mind?  J. Lowe Campus traditions  It seems like everything I see or do is a campus tradition.  Tailgating wasn   t anything. I don   t remember any tailgating. There could  have been some, but   of course there was always the wave. (Laughs)  We   ve got that, but now we   ve got O-S-U and all the things that we   re doing  now. Then OU will pick up something on it a couple of years later, but  we   ve always been a leader. Of course Homecoming is a tradition.  Nykolaiszyn Yes. Very much so.  J. Lowe Absolutely. I like the basketball, the way they do some things. In the  basketball games, there   s tradition about running the flag around  the Spirt  Run  and those things.  Nykolaiszyn Did you ever get thrown in Theta Pond?  J. Lowe No, but I certainly helped some go in. Anytime somebody was pinned or  engaged, we   d always have a pond party. Some of them got a little rough.  Some of them got a little mad. We all had a lot of fun. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn What was a typical date like?  J. Lowe Being bashful, I was very nervous. (Laughs) Of course pledges had to go out  on coke dates. They forced you to. You   d have to find somebody to go out  on a date with. Then there   s always some guy in the house that   d be dating  some girl in another house, and he   d have her find you a date. There was,  was it the Howdy Dance? I think the first dance as a freshman at the Union,  and I ended up with a date. I think her name was Blackman or something.  Turns out she was the dairy princess from somewhere down in southeastern  Oklahoma, and she was a nice girl and about as bashful and shy as I was.  16  We just kind of walked around. She had on her formal, and I think I, I don   t  know if I had on a tux. Probably not. We   d just walk around the Union, and  occasionally we   d see somebody we knew. We   d talk for a minute, and we   d  walk around a little more. Then I walked her back to her dorm and walked  back to the house. (Laughs) Can   t think of anything too thrilling in the early  days. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a curfew?  J. Lowe No. The girls did, you know, but the guys, guys didn   t. Probably as a pledge,  you probably did have to be in by ten thirty. Didn   t matter though, because  you couldn   t, they wouldn   t let you drink in Stillwater anyway if you were a  pledge, unless you got ten miles out, and that   s too far. (Laughs) You don   t  go.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have any interaction with bootleggers? (Laughter)  J. Lowe Funny you should ask that  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Were you a bootlegger? (Laughter)  J. Lowe Funny you should ask that  (Laughter) Ark City, Kansas, was the closest  destination, and you   d go around. You   d pick up five dollars from one guy  and ten from another and take their orders and run up there, and we made  one run. We   d always hear stories from these guys making big money doing  this, and then we started hearing more stories about the guys getting  stopped. They   d confiscate their liquor, and it wasn   t always the police that  did it. (Laughs) I think it was maybe some other guys that were just lying in  wait. I only made one run, and I think I might have broken even, with my  own supply anyway. That was my only story, but there were some, several  guys lost a bunch of stuff up there.  Nykolaiszyn You were one and done in the bootlegging business  (Laughs)  J. Lowe Oh yeah. I thought,    That   s not for me,    and even after I graduated, one of  my buddies, we went northwest to Oklahoma City off of Northwest  Highway and pulled in this little, I think it was right on the county line of  Northwest Highway. Pulled in this guy   s garage. It was a drive-through  garage, and he   d open a little window there. Dee gave him the order, held  the money out, and he dropped it. He got out of the car to pick the money  up, and the guy   s big dog came over and bit him on the leg. The guy said,     Don   t ever get out of the car.     Nykolaiszyn Wow   J. Lowe That was our last trip to that bootlegger, too. (Laughter)  17  Nykolaiszyn Gosh  (Laughs)  J. Lowe There was one bootlegger on the south side of Stillwater. You   d pull up to  his farmhouse and give him the order, and he   d get in his truck and drive  somewhere back off down across a pasture and into a bunch of trees and  come back with your order. That was probably the safest way to do it.  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Wow  Did you work while you were a student?  J. Lowe I was a houseboy. Of course then I   d go to the Reserve meetings and all that,  but I was a houseboy primarily at Kappa Sig house, which meant I got  plenty of food. Then I worked some in the Theta house and the Chi-O house.  I did that all the way through and out the door. Well, I guess not all my  senior year. In the Kappa Sig house, we had a cook named Babe, and Babe  was stern. If you thought Mother B was stern, Babe was sterner but a real  character and fun lover. We had a lot of fun, but she made you do it right.  Those days aren   t the same. I don   t think they even have many sit-down  dinners in the houses anymore, but we always did lunch and dinner, formal  dinners on Monday nights where you had to wear a tie and all that. Some of  the pledges always had to sit at the front table with the house mother.  Nobody sat down until the house mother came in. It was always some type  of, almost a ceremony. (Laughs) We had a prayer we   d all say together.  Nykolaiszyn Would you go home often, or would your parents visit?  J. Lowe Dad would come up during hunting season. (Laughter) I probably went  home once a month, usually with a bag of laundry, and I guess, you know,  after two or three years of it, you go home less. It wasn   t an easy drive going  to Oklahoma City in those days, either, because there wasn   t an interstate.  Nykolaiszyn How long would it take you?  J. Lowe Oh, it depended on how many stops I   d make, but it would probably be  close to an hour and half maybe. Of course I remember I   d always have to  take one of my buddies home. I   d made one trip home and it was late. I   m  sure it was on a Friday or a Saturday night. I woke up, and I was somewhere  between Guthrie and Oklahoma City. I don   t remember going through  Guthrie at all, and that was kind of scary. Maybe that   s why I didn   t go  home too often. (Laughter) There was always something going on.  You didn   t want to miss anything, and the folks understood that. They did  come up some. They came up and brought my aunt, who was also an alum,  when they dedicated a building to my uncle. That was the Fred Lowe that  was in animal husbandry, I guess. That   s where Dad was. They came up for  18  that, and then they came up several football games. Then there was a  DeCoursey Dairy. Dad was a health inspector. The old gentleman that  owned and started there, Old Man DeCoursey, Dad brought him up one time  to a football game, and he treated us at Whataburger. Of course we didn   t  have McDonald   s then, either. That old DeCoursey gentleman gave me a  silver dollar, and I had it for years. I don   t know what ever happened to it,  but I was impressed with that.  Nykolaiszyn What were some of the restaurants you remember from the mid-fifties?  Lowe Of course there was a cafeteria in the Union, and then there was a restaurant  that tied in with the hotel. It wasn   t the Atherton then. I don   t know what it  was. That was nice. It was later the Ancestor (it   s not even a restaurant  anymore) on south Main. I can   t remember what it was called originally, and  then it became the Ancestor. Of course  Eskimo  Joe   s wasn   t around.  Where did we eat? Whataburger and there was a chicken place on Main  Street. I never was a chicken fan, but there was a   the guy in the Beta  house, his mother ran it, and what was     Nykolaiszyn Was the Strip still there?  J. Lowe Well, it wasn   t like today. What was down there? Let   s see. There was a  drive-in restaurant, the Aggie B, I believe. It was almost down to Sixth.  There   s a bank or something in that area now, but that was a fine little drive  by.  Nykolaiszyn Would you go to any particular place off campus to have a party or to hang  out with friends?  J. Lowe Let   s see. The Anchor was a bar. I think it   s still there, and then George   s   Stables  was open then. Maybe some of those things are harder to  remember because I had been imbibing, I don   t know. (Laughter) I know  there had to be more places to eat. Of course we always had food at the  house. We had served lunch every day and dinner every night except  Saturdays and Sundays. There wasn   t any, you know, it was paid for.  (Laughs) Sorry, you   d already paid for it so you might as well eat it.  Nykolaiszyn Earlier you mentioned you were gone for about six months for Officer  Candidate School, and when you came back, we were Oklahoma State.  J. Lowe Yes.  Nykolaiszyn How did you feel about the name change?  J. Lowe Well, fortunately I didn   t have any business cards I had to reprint or  anything like that. (Laughter) Well, it was an adjustment, and probably for  19  years I still said A M. I   m still an Aggie. That was the big thing was just  having to write a new return address on anything I was mailing, and it was  really bad when they changed our phone number from Frontier Two to  whatever, you know, they got rid of Frontier.  Telephones  That   s something that   s changed. In the Kappa Sig house, we  had one phone booth on each floor, and if somebody was on the phone and  you needed to make a call, you   d sit out on the floor next to them and wait  while they   re sitting in there on the floor in the phone booth talking to their  girlfriend or whatever. You   d try to call somebody to get a date, and you   d  hear them yelling,    Susie     and hollering and screaming. It was really an  effort to make a phone call in those days. Of course there was payphones all  over the campus, but it wasn   t easy. It wasn   t easy, and of course you had to  dial them. That was bad on girls    fingernails. That was a talking point.  I   m not sure all the new devices are, they   re more like electric leashes now.  You can   t get away from them, but we didn   t know the difference. (Laughs)  You   d get mad if somebody stayed on the phone too long. You   d try to put  time limits on them, and once they   re out, they   re gone. Of course you can   t  find them because there   s no way to call them. It was certainly a different,  different time.  Nykolaiszyn When you look back to your college years and you think of mischief you may  or may not have gotten into, what comes to mind?  J. Lowe (Laughter) When we were pledges, we were getting ready for a formal  dance that, we were going to have it at the house, and it was the pledges    job  to decorate. I don   t know who came up with the idea, but we went out.  Coca-Cola had some huge Coke signs, big, red, Coke signs that were  probably five feet in diameter. Could   ve been bigger, but they were big. I  know that. (Laughs) We confiscated three of them and made a waterfall on  the front porch of the Kappa Sig house and put dry ice in it, and it was  smoking and all. We thought it was so neat, and the members were so proud  of us. It was just really sharp, and then the president, who was a Korean War  vet   several of them were, had been to war, and they were older guys.  When he found out that we had stolen those Coke signs, he lined us all up  down in the basement and picked one of those things up over his head and  threw it at the length of the basement. Oh, we were in all kinds of trouble,  but then they couldn   t find where to take them back.  They stayed stacked in the basement for a while, and then it snowed. Some  other brilliant fellow came up with an idea to use them as sleds. We   d take  ski ropes, tie them on behind our cars, and go out. There   s an old golf course  where some of the dorms are now. That was an intramural field, and then  there was an old rundown golf course. We   d go out there with those sleds  and get some Thetas or whoever was around, wanted to go and pile five or  20  six into the sled, and then somebody   d be holding on the ski rope. Off we   d  go over the golf course slinging them around. Well, all of a sudden, we  became heroes. (Laughter) We were forgiven for confiscating the Coke  signs, and they stayed in use for years up there. I don   t know what ever  happened to them.  Then one other, well, it wasn   t really mischievous. One of the guys    dads  was a pilot for American Airlines, and he was always experimenting doing  something. He made a little, and I think the idea might have come from the  Coke signs. Rick   s dad made a plastic shell of a boat. You could put a little  bitty motor on it and it would go really fast, or you could put a bigger motor  on it. Ah  Jim Wood, who was the All-American 1958, had access to  probably a twenty-five or, might have been a thirty-five-horse Johnson that  he brought out. We went out to Carl Blackwell with it and put that thing on  it, and it almost sunk it when we put it on it. Fired it up. Nothing. I don   t  remember who was driving it, but anyway, it just went up. It flipped and, of  course, came down, and of course the motor fell off and went right to the  bottom. (Laughs)  Our next project was to find that motor, because Wood was sweating bullets.  (Laughs) A couple of guys had some scuba gear, and of course it was so  muddy they couldn   t find anything. Oh, they tried, and they tried. Then  another one of our brighter guys came up with an idea of dragging a hay  rake around the bottom until we caught something. (Laughter) I don   t know  where he got the hay rake, but anyway, we hooked it on behind one of the  boats and started dragging that thing around. Well, they   d get all hung up in  trees, and then the guys who   d had their scuba gear would have to go down  and get   we never found the motor. I don   t know how Jim ever managed to  con his way out of not paying for it, but I   m sure he handled it someway.  (Laughter) That was another one of our great adventures.  Lake Carl Blackwell was a good spot. Had a pig roast out there one Sunday  after we had a formal dance, and these two pledges came through.  Everybody had on white dinner jackets and bowties and really spiffy. Then  here came these two pledges walking in with a pig on a spit with trim,  marching through announcing our pig roast the next day. Then they had to  go out and dig a pit and start a fire about five o   clock the next morning after  the dance, and then guys would start showing up about ten o   clock. Some  dates would show up later. I think it was probably well after two before we  had enough pig cooked to eat, but by then   everybody didn   t care anyway.  That was our pig roast, and nobody got sick. That was the good thing.  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn What was graduation like for you?  21  J. Lowe Well, I actually finished up the fall of    59. I had to come back in January to  take finals, but I was through. At my graduation, I was gone when it, you  know, it wasn   t until May, I guess, whenever, in the spring. I had to go back  up for graduation, and one of my very good buddies was in the same boat.  We got together and went back up there. I remember it was at Lewis Field,  and the folks were up in the stands. Larry and I, when we walked across the  stage, got our diploma, and everybody was turning to go someplace, we  turned the other way and cut out. It generally just felt like we didn   t belong  anymore. (Laughs) We were already out of school  (Laughter) In fact, I  talked with Larry just last week. He   s in Denver. Oh, you know, it wasn   t  that much because I wasn   t going through with my class, and of course there  wasn   t that many of us to begin with, not like today. When my  granddaughter graduated, well, that   s probably been ten years ago, and when  did she graduate? It went on forever. We were sitting up there,    Why did we  come to this?       (Laughter)  Charlotte Lowe    and it was just her School.  J. Lowe Yeah, that was just her group.  Nykolaiszyn Well, after you finished up at OSU, take me through what happens next.  What did you end up doing?  J. Lowe First thing I did was buy an Austin-Healey, but got interested in sports car  racing, which indirectly led me to meet Charlotte. That was a good  investment. That turned out quite well.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me how you met your wife.  J. Lowe There was a blind date. Tommy Wilson, who was, he   s deceased now, but  Tommy and I were running around together. I was playing fast pitch  softball, and Tommy and some of us were bowling and doing different  things. Tommy had met Charlotte when he was doing something in  Shawnee. I don   t, but anyway, he said,    I know a girl that   s got a little MGA  sports car.    I said,    Really?    He gave me her phone number, and I called her  and had a blind date. I   m sure I was late. I was always late for everything.  She could probably tell you more than that     C. Lowe Yes. (Laughter)  J. Lowe    but anyway, then started putting a few little accessories on her car for her  and doing some little things. We started dating pretty regular and got more  regular and more regular. We got married in February of    62 and still are   (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn When you were racing cars, where would you race?  22  J. Lowe I wasn   t racing as much as I was working the races. I did go through some  drivers    schools and did things like that. We had sports car races at the  fairgrounds in Oklahoma City. We had the Ponca City Road Race around a  lake up there that was really good. Then there was a drivers    school at the  Air Force base in Enid  Oklahoma . Then I went with some of the, and  Charlotte went on several of these trips up to, oh, someplace in Kansas.  There   s one in Alliance, Nebraska, where the hood of a Jag XKE came  down on my hand and my fingers left imprints in the hood where it came  down. (Laughs) I can   t think of the place in Kansas, but I   d usually be  working on somebody   s crew. I   d just go out and drive the course or do  something like that. It was a lot of fun, a lot of fun. Met a lot of good people,  which included Charlotte.  Nykolaiszyn What else did you end up doing?  J. Lowe Well, I had to work. (Laughs) I had to pay for that. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Too much fun.  J. Lowe Oh, too much, too much fun. I ended up with, going to work for Aetna, and  not in sales but in their office management. Talk about a drag. It really,  really was. I did get to go to a school up in Hartford, Connecticut, which  was an interesting experience. There   s good stories from up there, too. My  good buddy, Larry, that I walked across the stage with, he was in  Philadelphia with I.N.A. We   d meet in New York and remember our  younger days.  Left Aetna after sitting in that office for a while and went to work for  Pepsodent, Lever Brothers, and, well, I was a hot toothpaste salesman. That  got me to New York several times for some of the reunions and realized that  not everybody was brushing their teeth like I thought they should, and they  also wanted me to move it down to Louisiana somewhere, which didn   t  interest me at all, particularly since I think we   re getting ready to have a  baby pretty soon. I went to Northern Paper Mills. I started selling toilet  paper and found out everybody uses toilet paper. That worked out really  well. Then American Can Company bought them. I got to go to Green Bay   Wisconsin  several times.  Walked in a bar in Green Bay with a guy one time. He was from Lubbock,  Texas, originally from Nebraska. John was a big, big guy, and this was the  weekend that Green Bay was going to play Baltimore. I had a crewcut and  all of that, and John and I walked in this bar. Of course everything in Green  Bay is Packer Country, and they, because of John, they really felt like we  were a couple of football players. I was a little more   shapely at that time.  (Laughter) They thought I was, some of them thought I was Johnny Unitas,  23  which, we kind of pulled it to the hilt further than we should have before we  decided we need to get out of there. (Laughter)  Every time I went to Green Bay, I always took two suitcases, and I   d bring  one home full of cheese. We would take care of all the neighbors and friends  with pretty good cheese that most of us had never had before. That worked  out real well, and then I moved to Lubbock to take over a district. Oh, a year  in Lubbock is a long time. One of the guys I did some business with out  there had been a lineman for  Texas  Tech when Paul Horning was coming  down to recruit Donny Anderson. Donny had been their quarterback at  Tech. This guy had some great stories to tell, particularly when Horning  would hit town. (Laughs) Oh, that was probably my fondest memory of  Lubbock. We were out there for a lifetime, about a year and two months or  something like that.  Charlotte   s family had an operation out of Shawnee. They had retail stores  and Walls Bargain Centers, Newton Wall Company. You   ve got one in  Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn Yes.  J. Lowe We moved back to Shawnee, and I started a wholesale company or business  for them. Whatever excess we had that the stores didn   t need any more of,  well, I   d have their leftovers to try to sell, and it worked out quite well. The  company grew. I guess it worked out  I stayed with them for thirty-one  years.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you move back to Shawnee?  J. Lowe That   s    67, yeah, the winter of    67. Interesting about Lubbock. The first time  I flew out there to see my new territory before the family moved, we went  on Tree Top Airlines. That   s Trans-Texas Airlines. Coming over Lubbock, I  looked down, and the stewardess said,    It snowed out here today     I looked  down, and everything was red. They   d had a dust storm come in on top of  the snow, and that was my first trip. We built a house in a new area which  had underground utilities. There weren   t any phone lines for birds to sit on.  There was nothing  (Laughs) There was some good people out there, but  it   .  Nykolaiszyn Just a different environment.  J. Lowe Well somebody said,    Anything you ever want   s about five hundred miles  any direction.    (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn That   s true   24  J. Lowe Anyway, we were glad to get to Shawnee. Of course, Shawnee   s changed,  too. I guess we all changed, too.  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m glad you brought that up. Tell me a little bit how Shawnee   s  changed through the years.  J. Lowe Oh, I think when we got here in    67 the population might have been twenty-five  thousand, and it never got above twenty-nine thousand for years and  years and years. The interstate  I-40  started making a difference. Probably  it was in the    80s that things started to get a little more into it, but that   s  about the time they built the mall, which, wrecked downtown. Been through  all kinds of political changes and things.  I guess it was the, it was in the late    80s when they started the high school  finals rodeo thing, and there was a national group that came in and did it for  three years. Charlotte and I worked with them trying to take care of the  people that   d come into town from wherever. We had a group from  Nebraska, I don   t remember where all. That kind of got us started into the  rodeo business. We built a new expo center out there, and I served on that  trust authority for eight years. The rodeo has just become something really  big for high school kids and brings in   well, there   ll be somewhere in the  neighborhood of a thousand contestants every year, and they bring their  families and their horses. Yeah, it just runs over the town, and they come  back as often as they can because it   s just quite a   it   s almost like a  homecoming for them     C. Lowe    and it brings in a lot of money.  J. Lowe Oh, bigtime. That started hotels building, and it just has really grown since  then. I   m not sure the town itself has grown a lot. I know we   ve passed  thirty thousand, but the county has really, really grown and become a trade  center.  Nykolaiszyn What are some of the major employers in the area?  J. Lowe Oh, let   s see. The Potawatomie tribe is one of the big ones, and we   ve got  seven tribes just right here in this four-county area, plus all the casinos. Oh,  there   s Wolverine  Tube ,  AdVantage  Mobile  Media , TEK systems      of course, then we just recently opened a   who all did we open, all the new  stores out there?  C. Lowe Shawnee Marketplace.  J. Lowe Yeah, a whole bunch of them.  C. Lowe Newton Wall Company, Ford Milling   .  25  J. Lowe Shawnee Mills is a big one. Newton Wall Company probably, oh, they   ve  got over a hundred here in Shawnee. The Stillwater store   s our next to the  best store. It used to be a little bitty store down on Main Street.  Nykolaiszyn Yeah, it   s pretty big in Stillwater.  J. Lowe Yeah  (Laughs) It   s done quite well. Got a great lady running it up there,  too. Just got a whole bunch of new people, new stores out on the west side  of town. Hobby Lobby, Chick-fil-A finally got to town. We   ve got most of  the chains now.  Nykolaiszyn Shawnee   s a town that, every time I visit, always seems extremely active.  J. Lowe Particularly if you   re trying to get somewhere in a hurry and you   re behind a  whole row of pickup trucks. (Laughter) It never fails. There is a lot going  on. There   s a lot of people that are active in the city. Of course there   s  always your political fights, but I think everybody has those. My advice to  anybody is stay out of politics.  Nykolaiszyn Yeah.  C. Lowe They have all the downtown functions.  J. Lowe Yeah, every month there   s something going on downtown. Three or four  different bands play and street vendors. It doesn   t compete with Bricktown,  but we do have a Bricktown Brewery. (Laughs) A lot of local restaurants  now, besides the chains, that give you a little variety to sometimes stay  healthy and sometimes not.  Nykolaiszyn Are you retired these days?  J. Lowe Absolutely   Nykolaiszyn (Laughs)  J. Lowe I   ve been retired about eleven years     Nykolaiszyn Wow   J. Lowe    and I wake up at the crack of eight with a smile on my face. Just love it,  love it. We go to Lake Tenkiller pretty regular. Daughter and  granddaughters in Austin, and daughter and granddaughters in Waco   Texas  and go to Cabo. Travel around. Have a granddaughter that   s a junior  up at Stillwater now. I had two daughters go through there. This is the third  26  granddaughter. I   ve got two great-granddaughters. I don   t know if I   ll be  around till they get up there or not.  Nykolaiszyn Lots of orange blood   J. Lowe (Laughter) Lots of blood all the way back to the    20s.  Nykolaiszyn Are you involved with the Alumni Association?  J. Lowe Yes. They used to, before Burns came on board, they had a political,  Cowboys for Politics or something, that was supposed to work with your  local guys, but with Burns up there, we don   t need anybody out here. He  takes care of all of it. That kind of fell through, but in our local Pot County  group, I think I might have told you earlier, we have   well, yeah, that   s why  you   re here because the Pot County alums host, every summer, host the  graduating classes from all the schools around that are going to, the ones  that are going to OSU, and then any students that are at OSU are invited to  come in. We host anywhere, I think there   s fifty there this summer. One year  there was eighty     Nykolaiszyn Wow   J. Lowe    and gave out about thirty-five hundred dollars    worth of scholarships,  which is strictly by drawing their name out of a hat, but they appreciate it.  The kids that come back, and, you know, some of them have only been there  a year. Occasionally you   ll find, well, this year, we had one that just  graduated, but just to hear them get up and talk and telling these young kids  what to expect and all, it   s amazing. It just makes you feel good. I   m sure  there   s a lot of alumni groups around the state that do this kind of thing, but  it is, it certainly is for the good.  Nykolaiszyn Hmmm. How did earning your degree from OSU impact your life?  J. Lowe (Laughs) Well, it always helps to put on a resume that you have a degree. I  think it, anything from time management to motion, even loading a truck,  which I   ve done a lot of that. How to fit the most into a smaller space, it just  does something about the way you think and do things. Some of those things  in management courses, how you work your time and your motions and all  those things. It just helps in life.  Nykolaiszyn These days, how do you show your OSU pride?  J. Lowe Well, I   m talking to you for one thing. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn I couldn   t tell coming to your house today. (Laughter)  27  J. Lowe Well, yeah, we   re definitely known in the neighborhood. Of course we  tailgate to all the games. I did give up our basketball tickets a couple of  years of ago because those drive home at night are a little tough on the two-lane  road for old folks, but we still make it to all the football games. Our  tailgate group still, we   ve lost a couple of them, but it   s, there   s new ones  come in to replace it. Granddaughters bring friends by, and I see a lot of  young kids. It   s something. I can   t imagine any school doing more tailgating  than what   you know. I hear stories about others, but just to drive across the  campus or walk across the campus and see it   you   ve got to be proud of it.  You   ve got to feel good about it. Then every time we drive into town and  drive up Monroe and that new road that goes on up across campus and the  flowers and all that. Charlotte will say,    It   s more beautiful this year.    It   s  not difficult to be proud of it.  Nykolaiszyn How do you try to keep your connection and keep updated with Oklahoma  State University?  J. Lowe Well, of course I   m having email trouble right now, but we get our  magazines. There   s several over there, POSSE Magazine and the university,  STATE Magazine.  C. Lowe You have your lifetime membership.  J. Lowe (Laughs) Well, yeah, lifetime alum. We get stuff from the alums, and talking  with people, always, always talking with people. I haven   t found anybody  yet that wasn   t happy about their time at OSU or A M. It   s just second  nature to want to be a part of it.  Nykolaiszyn It seems many OSU alums are very loyal to OSU. What is it about  Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty?  J. Lowe I   d say friendship, because you   re friends for life. When you   re reading in  the sports page about these young guys coming up there, they talk about the  family. We   ve got a group that gets together around Grand Lake every two  years, and guys coming in from Kentucky or North Carolina and come back  just, you know, just get back together. Then there   s probably eight to twelve  of us that get together every month in Oklahoma City for lunch. Of course  everybody   s wanting to know what   s going on on campus, the ones from  further away.  I   d say friendship, good friendship because I   m talking about friends from  fifty-something years ago, and we   re in contact on a regular basis, even  though we don   t live anywhere near one another. The guys in California,  you   re talking to them, and they just want to know what   s going on. Of  course today they can at least watch some football games, and that helps.  28  Their connection, even though they   re not around, is still, those memories  are there.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me a little bit about your family as we start winding on down.  Lowe (Laughs) Oh  Well, my family   s winding on up. We   ve got two great-granddaughters  now. Callie graduated, that   s our granddaughter. Her mother  and dad are retired military. They live in Lawton now and spent about eight  years in Italy, which almost broke us. Callie was going to school at OSU, at  that time, when they moved to Italy. We spent a lot of time with her. She  graduated. She had an ROTC scholarship and was the first woman cadet  commander in the ROTC     Nykolaiszyn Wow   J. Lowe    up there and then went to, that other school has a law school. The military  paid for that. Then she   s on active duty now. She was originally up in  Virginia. Her husband, who was a Kappa Sig and   I guess his was just a  business degree, but anyway, when he got out, he joined the Navy and went  to Navel OCS. I guess his longest tour was almost a year. He was out on the  ocean blue. Anyway, they had their first child in Virginia, and now they   re  at Fort Hood, Texas. He   s in his second year in the MBA school at UT   University of Texas . They   re set pretty good, and they have two little girls,  future little Aggies. Her sister, Taylor, was at OSU. Did not finish because  of health reasons and ended up with a degree from UCLA. That   s the  University of Cameron, Lawton, America, but she was there for three years.  Her blood   s orange and she   s married to a West Pointer that   s in  Afghanistan right now.  Our other daughter, Shauna, graduated out of the hotel and restaurant  school. That was in, what,    88, and her husband graduated a year before that,  I guess. Anyway, they   re in Austin now, and great story he had to tell. When  they first moved down there, he   s with Accenture, and they worked with a  lot of the state government contracts for Medicare, Medicaid, and all of that.  There   s a little place called the Chili Parlor close to the capitol where the old  guys in their fancy suits go down, and they took Charles with them down  there one day. They   re standing in line to get their little bowl of chili, and  they heard some lady behind him talking who said something about OSU.  He turned around, and he said,    You said OSU. You mean Oklahoma  State?    She said,    Yes  Yes  I   m the president of the local alumni chapter.     He said,    You   re kidding  Here in Austin?    She said,    Oh, we   ve got a very  active group.       Here in Austin? How do you get along with all these  Longhorn people?    She said,    Oh, it   s easy. They hate OU more than we  do     (Laughter)  C. Lowe I love hearing you repeat that one. (Laughter)  29  J. Lowe They have done quite well in Austin. Their youngest daughter was a state  champion tennis player two years in a row down there and is at OSU. She  was injured and had surgery and ended her tennis career, but she   s a junior  this year and comes by all of our tailgates to get free a meal. Her younger  sister   s a senior in Austin and is also a tennis player. Who have I left out,  anybody? (Laughs) I think that   s most of them, but anyway, there   s some  orange blood in all of them.  Nykolaiszyn Oh yeah.  J. Lowe The only two that have, well, semi-orange blood both went to West Point.  That   s son-in-law and a grandson-in-law. We   ll excuse them.  Nykolaiszyn Absolutely, absolutely.  J. Lowe Since I   m an only child, I can   t say much other because I   m just spoiled  orange. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, we covered quite a bit of ground today. What have I missed? What  would you like to add?  J. Lowe Well, I thank you for making me start to think back on some of the good  times I had. I had a lot of good times, but it   s good to remember them. It   s  good to think about them. It helps having grandkids involved up there, but I  still don   t think about all of the things that you   ve made me think about. I  appreciate that.  C. Lowe I think your family would be very proud that you   re sitting there doing this  today, too. All your OSU family are probably very proud of you, that you   ve  been chosen to do this.  J. Lowe Well, that was Charlie   s fault.  C. Lowe Well, Charlie chose you     J. Lowe    because I was the oldest one there  (Laughter)  C. Lowe I   m sure Mom and Dad are looking down with a smile.  J. Lowe Oh, I know they are. I know they are. Frankly, I   ve enjoyed it. I was  nervous, but it   s, you   re good.  Nykolaiszyn Well, we appreciate your time today.  30  J. Lowe Well, I appreciate you coming down. I   m glad I don   t have to go with you as  far as you   ve got to go, on to Cimarron  County . (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn You don   t want to come along? (Laughter)  -------  -------   
