 Milligan with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program,  and I am talking with Peggy McBeath at the First United Methodist Church  in McAlester, Oklahoma. Today   s date is July 23, 2015. This interview is a  part of the Cowboy in Every County oral history project that is in  conjunction with the 125th anniversary of Oklahoma State University, and  we   re just going to talk today about Peggy   s experience at OSU and her life  in general. Let   s start. Just tell me a little bit about yourself, just where you  were born, where you grew up, a little bit about your parents, that sort of  stuff.  McBeath I   m born and raised Okie, having lived nowhere but Oklahoma. I was born  in Tulsa. Grew up in Claremore. Graduated from Claremore High. Then  went to Oklahoma State. Was there for four years. My husband was still in  school, so we stayed. I was there an additional ten years after that, working  for the food service department on OSU   s campus and then moved to  McAlester in    84, January of    84, and have been here ever since.  Grew up in a family with four children. I have an older brother, an older  sister, and a younger sister. Two parents that emphasized education to the  nth degree. Neither one of them had a college degree, but both of them had  college hours. Just had not been able to complete the college degree. Their  goal was to have all four of their children have college degrees, and we do.  All four of the children do, and three of the four in-laws have college  degrees. When my littlest sister graduated from college, Mother took a  picture of all four of us kids with our diplomas and put it in the Claremore  newspaper so that everybody could see her kids had gotten their college  education. (Laughter)  Milligan That   s great. What did your parents do then for a living?  McBeath My father was a carpenter by trade, and that is all he did until he couldn   t  hold a hammer any longer, which was a very long time. He grew up on a  farm, and his father was a carpenter. His grandfather was a carpenter, and  5  that gets you back to Germany. When they immigrated to Ohio, they took  the name Carpenter. Carpenter is my maiden name. My mother was, she  started out as a secretary and ended up being a building manager in  downtown Tulsa, and that   s where she retired from.  Milligan Oh, that   s interesting. I didn   t realize about the carpenter connection, too.  That   s interesting. When were your parents born then?  McBeath My father was born in 1921, my mother in 1926. My dad, bless his heart, he  was the fifth of six boys in his family, and when World War II came about,  his older brother was already married and had his own farm. He was there.  All of the other boys signed up for some military service, and Daddy  wouldn   t leave his mother because she was still on a farm, the family farm.  Daddy stayed with her, and Grandma actually sold the farm to move into  town in Mount Gilead, Ohio, so that Daddy could join the Air Force. He  joined the Air Force, but because he would have been the fourth son in the  service, he didn   t go overseas. He was a trainer in America and actually met  my mother, because it was a stopover place from Tulsa to Fort Hobbs, New  Mexico. He met her at a USO  United Service Operations  dance, and yeah,  that   s how it goes from there. (Laughter)  Milligan I think that   s a pretty common story from that generation, of the USO dance.  (Laughter)  McBeath Yes, I think so, too. My mother loved to dance. My father did not, but he did  dance with me at my wedding. (Laughter)  Milligan That   s a good concession, right?  McBeath Yes, it is.  Milligan That   s nice. What brought them to Oklahoma then?  McBeath My mother was born and raised in Oklahoma. Well, kind of half in  Oklahoma and half not. Claremore was the home where   her mother   s  family were in the Oklahoma land run, and they built homes in Claremore. I,  even as a child, remember going to my great-grandparents    home in the  home that they had built there in Claremore. When Mom and Dad got  married, they moved back to Ohio so Daddy could work on the farm again  and start his carpentry trade. After my brother was born, Mother said,    No,  we   ve got to go back to Oklahoma.    They came back to Oklahoma to be  with her family, and we all stayed. (Laughter)  Milligan All of your siblings are still   .  McBeath All of us. We   re all in Oklahoma.  6  Milligan Wow. That   s pretty great. I guess let   s talk a little bit about your transition  to get to OSU. What made you decide to go to OSU?  McBeath When I was twelve, I joined Rainbow Girls in Claremore, and it was really a  big thing back then because there were no girls    sports. I   m very athletic.  You know that. There was nothing for me to do but either be on the pom  squad or in the band. Well, I didn   t want to be in the band unless I could  play the drum, and they wouldn   t let me play the drums. I was in the pom  squad and then got really busy into Rainbow Girls, and we had our state  conclaves in Stillwater.  From the time I was about fourteen on, I would go to Stillwater to OSU   s  campus. We   d live in the dorms. We would eat the dorm foods. We would  have big meals, banquets in the ballroom. The Gallagher, now Gallagher Iba  Arena but then was just Gallagher Hall, they would lay down the mats on  the floor, and that   s where we had all of our big meetings and so forth. I did  that until I was about twenty-one. It was well past me going to school. I was  still in Rainbow and very active in Rainbow. That   s what drew me to the  campus. I just fell in love with the campus. I fell in love with the size.  Claremore, at the time, was a very small town, and I didn   t like being in a  small town. I left Claremore in 1973 and never went back except to visit my  parents. That   s what got me to Stillwater.  Milligan What did you end up majoring in?  McBeath I have a math education degree. Fabulous degree. Fabulous math  department. My mother told me when I was in the ninth grade that I needed  to be a math teacher when I grew up.  Milligan What made her say that?  McBeath I was that good at math, and when I was a senior in high school, the junior  high principal actually would call me out of school and have me come to the  junior high and substitute teach in the algebra classes, as a senior in high  school. Yes. (Laughs) It was awesome, and it wasn   t counted as an absence  because he took me out of school to get me over there to teach the algebra  classes.  Milligan Did they pay you?  McBeath No. No, but the experience was phenomenal. When I graduated from  college, I was unable to find a job around Stillwater. Like I said, my  husband was still in school. We needed to stay in that area. I didn   t actually  get to start teaching until 1993. Twenty years later, I finally get to start  teaching. I   ve been teaching for twenty-two years now.  7  Milligan Do you remember much about your classes and the program in general and  maybe some of your instructors at all while you were at OSU? I realize  that   .  McBeath My advisor was Dr.     I can   t say it now. It started with an A, but I had him.  He was my advisor from freshman year until I graduated, and he was  incredible. He was the head of our student teaching class, which there were  only six of us, and we had three instructors. It was awesome. That was the  fall of 1973.  Most of the people did their student teaching in the spring. It didn   t make  any difference when I did it. He said,    Why don   t you do it in the fall? I  have so many in the spring I can   t place them all.    I did my student teaching  in the spring and actually got to do it right there in Stillwater under Mrs.  Key. I did the trigonometry and calculus, which was absolutely phenomenal  because you   re talking about the brightest kids in the high school. I went to  Dr. Achilles. I can   t remember   Achilles  Achilles  Dr. Achilles. That was  his name.  Milligan A-C-H-I-L-L-E-S, right?  McBeath Yes. (Laughs) I went to him, and I said,    You know, I loved my experience.  It was absolutely terrific, but I am not going to be able to teach trigonometry  and calculus.    At the time, you had to have a master   s to teach those, and I  wasn   t getting a master   s degree. I didn   t have the funds to do that. I said,    I  really don   t feel I   m all that prepared,    and he said,    You   ll be fine.    He was  very supportive, too.  Dr. Kotlarsky was the only math teacher that I did not like, did not respect.  To this day, anybody you mention that name to, they go,    Oh my gosh, yes.  He was horrible.    All of the rest of them, I don   t remember their names this  many years later, but they were above and beyond helpful. I think a lot of  the things that I do now when I   m teaching are because of the experience  that I had with those teachers. It was nothing for them just to sit down in the  desk next to you and work with you, and that   s what I do with my students.  Because they were so free and so encouraging, it   s made it easier for me to  encourage the student, and of course I teach the students that are  remediating in college. They don   t like math. I told them,    I cannot make  you love math, but I can least make you like it a little bit,    and that   s my  goal. Usually I succeed, but it   s because they were so patient with me, and I  was so hungry. I had forty-two hours of mathematics when I graduated.  Almost all of my elected hours were in math. I have all of the math that was  offered pretty much at OSU at the time for a bachelor   s degree because I  just, I couldn   t get enough. I just loved it that much, and the teachers were  8  that terrific. Of course, by the time you get to your second semester junior  year and your senior year, you   re down to small classes in a mathematics  department. (Laughter) It was almost one-on-one attention pretty much, but  it was super.  I remember one time my senior year, a young man (he maybe was five years  older than I) was teaching us fundamentals of calculus, theory of calculus.  You weren   t just given the calculus formulas. You were proving those  calculus formulas. Over spring break, he gave us ten questions that we  needed to bring back after spring break solved, if at all possible. I went back  to Claremore, and I looked up some of my high school teachers from there.  They were both teaching at the junior college in Claremore. We spent easily  two to three hours every single day that spring break working on that paper,  and when I got back to school, I had nine of them solved. The only other  person close to me was two. (Laughter) It was fascinating. I think they really  saw that I was hungry for mathematics, and they just kept pushing more at  me and pushing me in. I still love mathematics.  Milligan Do you think there was ever a time when you thought about going into  mathematics instead of teaching mathematics?  McBeath No. Not ever. I   ve always wanted to be, my mother always wanted to be a  teacher, and I think it came from that but also from my experience in high  school. I   ve always loved to work with children, which you know that, too.  No. The only thing I considered was business for a little while, business  accounting, and I got into the business. I have a minor in business. I just  didn   t, I didn   t like it. I didn   t want to sit there and just crunch numbers. I  wanted to teach. I   m living my dream right now. (Laughs)  Milligan That   s fantastic. That   s fantastic. Well, we may come back to a little bit of  that when we get back to your teaching career, but let   s go back to your  more social life at OSU. What were some of the things that you did for fun  and extracurricular groups and anything like that?  McBeath I finally got into intramural sports. I got to play football. I got to play  volleyball, handball, squash, basketball, baseball, track, swimming. I took  golf. I did anything and everything I could that was athletic. If they wanted  somebody to sign up for a team, a sports team, I signed up for it. I went to  every athletic event that there was, anything and everything. As far as  joining clubs, no, I didn   t. I lived in West Bennett, and I was just on the  intramural teams and just having fun finally getting to be an athlete.  Milligan What was your favorite sport to watch? Did you have one?  McBeath To watch? Wrestling. (Laughs) My senior year in high school, Claremore  started the wrestling program. For the first several matches, they gave us the  9  rules and explained the takedowns and all of that sort of stuff, and then I go  to Oklahoma State, which are nationally ranked wrestlers. (Laughs) I even  got to see the national wrestling competitions. It was, still is very definitely  my favorite sport to watch. (Laughs)  Milligan Nice. What was your favorite intramural sport to be a part of?  McBeath Flag football.  Milligan Really?  McBeath (Laughs) Yes.  Milligan Were there many girls that did flag football?  McBeath No. You had to have three on the team because it was co-ed. You had to  have three on the team, and I was one of the three. I never came off the field  because everybody else rotated. I didn   t because I could still outrun the  boys, and I had a young man that was interested in me. He tackled me and  got a fifteen-yard penalty for tackling me, and I didn   t let him live that one  down, either. (Laughs)  Milligan Good for you. (Laughs)  McBeath I loved it. Then I went into softball, and when I stayed in Stillwater, I got  into the co-ed team through the Methodist church and played softball and  volleyball through the church. Even when I moved down here, we had a co-ed  team, and I played softball about fifteen years, you know, until about    89  or    90, something like that. Still love it. (Laughter)  Milligan I remember the softball from here. For some reason, in the back of my mind,  I remember that going on. Let me think how to go from there. You met your  husband while you were in Stillwater, right?  McBeath Right.  Milligan Did you meet him doing intramural sports? We   re not going to talk much  about it, but did you meet him doing intramural sports?  McBeath He lived in East Bennett, and I was in West Bennett. He actually was a good  friend of a gentleman that I was dating, and he introduced us. He needed  help with his calculus, and I tutored him with calculus. Yeah. (Laughter) It  went through math.  Milligan Amazing.  10  McBeath Through math, yes, it was through math. (Laughter)  Milligan When did you graduate?  McBeath May 11, 1974. Richard M. Nixon delivered our graduation speech.  Milligan No way   McBeath Yes way. He flew into, a helicopter in the parking lot across from the  football stadium. It was where the patio apartments were. I can   t remember  what building is there now. I think it   s the big AstroTurf practice area right  in there. That   s where his helicopter landed, and we were in the stadium.  There were four thousand of us graduating, and we were sitting on the grass.  It was grass at that time, not Astroturf. We were sitting on the turf, and he  walked in, delivered our speech, and then left.  Milligan You remember seeing the helicopter come in and   .  McBeath Oh yes, oh yes. It was pretty awesome.  Milligan Do you remember what you were thinking about or how you felt about him  delivering the graduation speech at the time?  McBeath Just like today, I was in awe that the president of the United States was  coming to my graduation. I didn   t care about the other 3,999. I cared he was  coming to my graduation, and of course, the next year, he resigned and all  that sort of stuff. Watergate had just really gotten started at the time. I was in  awe. I   m still in awe. You know, I don   t care what people say about him. He  was still the president of the United States, and he took out of his time to  come to Oklahoma State University.  Milligan That   s pretty amazing. I   m wondering how they got him to do that. (Laughs)  McBeath I don   t know. I don   t know, but I loved it. (Laughter) No, don   t ask me what  he said. I don   t remember. I was in too much awe, I think. (Laughter) Too  much going on. I got married the next week.  Milligan Did you really?  McBeath Yes.  Milligan (Laughter) Then you did have a lot going on. I didn   t know that. That   s  really interesting. Let   s talk a little bit about what you did after you  graduated and stayed in Stillwater for another ten years, right?  11  McBeath Right. My junior year, one of the gentlemen that I had met through Rainbow  was the director of the food service, and I told him I needed a part-time job.  He got me a part-time job. My junior year and all of my senior year, I  worked part-time for the food service. Well, then when I couldn   t find a  teaching job handy, I went back to him, and I said,    Do you have a fulltime  job?    Within three years, I was promoted to assistant to the vice director,  doing all of the accounting, the warehouse, the meat supply, the bakery,  basically all of the physical things out in the big warehouse area and all of  the accounting and all that kind of stuff. I was second in command for all of  that. It was incredible. Absolutely a wonderful job, wonderful job.  Milligan Did that suit more with your business minor then? Did you feel prepared to  do that?  McBeath Yes, yes. Mr. Blair took me under his wing, and he taught me how to read  the futures market so that I knew when to purchase the meat and all of the  different products to go into the warehouse and when to cut back. Oh yeah,  he really trained me well. I loved that job. It was great. I got to travel across  the nation to other universities to check out their food services.  Milligan That   s pretty neat.  McBeath Oh, it was wonderful. I really cried when I left. Didn   t want to leave. I  wasn   t ready to leave, but you know, I hadn   t been teaching yet, either.  Milligan Did you know that you were going to be there that long after you graduated  and after you got married? Did you know you   d be in Stillwater for that  length of time?  McBeath No, no. We had no idea. Scott was a pre-optometry major, and he had goals  of going either to Houston or Chicago. We actually traveled both places, to  get into optometry school, and he just looked at me one day. He said,    I   m  tired of school,    and he became a golf pro. We stayed in Stillwater. They  hired him as assistant pro out at Lakeside, and he worked out there until he  got the head pro job here in McAlester. That   s what brought us to  McAlester.  Milligan That   s what made you move. I   m just thinking about the teacher aspect.  Were you disappointed that you didn   t get to go onto teaching earlier?  McBeath Very.  Milligan Even though you really liked   .  McBeath If I hadn   t have had such a great job, I probably would have tried harder, but  I got into that job and just, you know, they kept promoting me and moving  12  me around and feeding me and encouraging me. I didn   t think about the  teaching aspect of it for a while. (Laughter) Once I got down here and I had  my daughter and was sitting at home, that   s when I started missing teaching  a lot and wanted to get back. I had to take one semester of classes in Ada,  and they had one math course that I had not taken. Brian Masters told me, he  says,    That   s a horrible class, Peggy. You will hate that class.    I loved that  class. (Laughs) It was another theory class, and I loved it. I ate it up. The  funny thing is to get my teaching certificate back again, if I went back to  OSU, they   d needed fourteen hours. At Ada, they only needed the twelve  hours. I went over there to enroll. They wanted me to take college algebra.  Well, you know, college algebra is your entry math level. I CLEPed   College Level Examination Program  out of it, but they didn   t have it on  my transcript. They immediately put me into trigonometry at Oklahoma  State. Ada was now saying,    No, you have to have college algebra.    I went  ahead and signed up for the college algebra class and this other math class,  and I went over to Dr. Hobbs, who became my advisor at the time. I was a  day late. I went in, introduced myself, and I told him, I said,    I know I   m a  day late. I   ve missed one class. Could you give me the syllabus?    and so  forth. He asked for my transcript. I don   t know why. I gave him my  transcript, and he looked at me. He laughed, and he said,    Would you like to  teach the class?    I laughed, and I said,    Well, honestly, I thought it would be  an easy A.    He said,    Yeah, too easy an A,    and he signed off. I didn   t have  to take college algebra, and the funny thing is that   s now what I   m teaching.  (Laughter)  Milligan It   s interesting. I think he would have figured it out really quickly even if he  hadn   t have looked at your transcript, though. (Laughter)  McBeath Possibly. (Laughter)  Milligan Let   s talk about your move to McAlester. What did you think about when  Scott said,    I got a job in McAlester. This is where we   re going.    It   s not  exactly big. It may be bigger than Claremore, but not quite too much  probably.  McBeath Well, at the time, you came in out of west McAlester, and the old  dilapidated hospital was there and all kinds of houses falling down and the  prison on the other side. I looked at him, and I said,    Oh no you   re not. I am  not moving to this ghetto place.    He said,    Just wait. Just wait. Let me show  you,    and then we get to the south side where the country club is and all  that. If it hadn   t been for the church, I probably would have not been very  happy, but the house that he had rented was across the street on Tennessee  from the parsonage. The minister at the time was my little sister   s in-laws.  They took me under their wings, and Stephanie was born here. I was seven  13  months pregnant when we moved here, and they took me under their wings  and brought me into the church. The church is what really got me going.  They loved me at the country club, and I got a really good group of ladies  that I play golf with. When Stephanie was old enough to leave her with a  babysitter, then we even traveled around southeast Oklahoma playing golf.  It was fun. I got to teach the junior golfers. You know, I was teaching them  the etiquette, not the golf swing and so forth. I would play golf with the  junior golfers and go out on the course and teach them,    No, you don   t step  in front of this person. No, this is out of bounds. Here are the rules,    you  know, these kinds of things. I really got into that. When I first came, no, I  was very reluctant, but I   m glad I stayed. It   s been a great experience for  me, and Stephanie has moved back here. It   s been a good experience for us  all the way around.  Milligan Hi, Sadie. Speaking of Stephanie, this is Stephanie   s daughter.  McBeath Yes, yes. (Laughter)  Milligan Just for timeline clarity, what year was Stephanie born?  McBeath Eighty-four.  Milligan So 1984. What year did you start teaching?  McBeath I started teaching in the fall of    93.  Milligan In between    84 is when you went to Ada. Well, at some point in there you  went to Ada and finished up your last   .  McBeath I stayed home with Stephanie for two full year, and there were a couple of  years that I kept the boys in the summer. I had your brother and Kevin  Bishop and the two Flugal boys. I had four boys and my little girl and  started working at the church. Started getting back into teaching, you know,  through the Christian education part, and that   s what drove me to say, you  know,    It   s time to go back to teaching. I really, really love what I   m  doing.     Milligan Where did you start teaching then? At what level were you teaching?  McBeath I started in seventh grade.  Milligan Was that at Puterbaugh?  McBeath Yes. When Dr. Smith hired me, she said,    The only position I have is in the  seventh grade,    or I think it was a junior in high school. She said,    I   m not  14  sure which one would fit you better,    and I said,    Please give me the seventh  graders.    She looked at me like I had completely lost my marbles, and one  of the teachers for Christmas that year handed me a jar of marbles and said,     I know you   ve lost your marbles, so here   s some to replace them.     Within a year, I was teaching seventh and eighth grade, ande I was there for  fifteen years and by the time I was at the end of those fifteen years, I was  head of the math department, teaching the honors classes in both seventh  and eighth grade. Then I went onto the high school because I   ve always, my  favorite math is geometry, and there was a geometry job that came open. I  took it and went to geometry and taught there for another three years, and  honestly, the principal was leaving. The education in the public education is  getting so difficult in the state of Oklahoma that a teaching position at  Eastern Oklahoma State College came open, and I applied and was hired  there. I   ve been there for the last four years.  Milligan Well, I want to come back to several points in that. The first is why did you  like seventh grade teaching? People think you   re crazy for a reason. It   s a  difficult, difficult age.  McBeath Seventh and eighth grade is where I was the orneriest, and I thought there   s  nothing they can pull that I haven   t done. (Laughs) It   s also the transition  from arithmetic to algebra, and I did not have a good transition teacher in  high school. Obviously, since I was going back and teaching it in high  school, I wanted to make that transition better. My goal was to come up with  games, and I did a lot of research. I went to a lot of workshops, and I had a  game that we could do, a mathematics game every other week for the entire  school year that transitioned them from arithmetic on into algebra. I have a  lot of students that have come back and told me that was the smoothest  transition they had. I loved it. The kids loved it. The parents loved it. I have  parent volunteers come in just because the kids were talking about what we  were doing.  They would come in, and I had no trouble getting volunteers to   I had a big  probability fair, and I invited all of the students from Puterbaugh to come to  that. Well, I had twelve students from the high school from the learning  service class that came over and ran the probability games. I had anywhere  from six to ten parents that would come in and kind of crowd control and  giving out the prizes and that kind of thing. It was never any problem to get  volunteers to come in and work with them. That   s where I wanted to be. I  loved it. Like I said, I wanted to always teach geometry. With my father  being a carpenter, we used geometry all the time, and once a month in  geometry, we would build something. A lot of the kids still have their  icosahedron hanging on their Christmas trees that they built in my geometry  class. I was getting older, but it was the math that I   d always wanted to  teach. That   s the reason I jumped on it.  15  Milligan Let   s talk a little bit about how the politics around teaching changed over  that time period. I know that you   ve said that a big reason why you chose to  leave the public school, public high school, was because it was just getting  harder to teach in Oklahoma. Maybe let   s just talk a little bit about some of  the things that you felt that were restraining or that drove that.  McBeath Do I get to use a name? (Laughter)  Milligan I don   t care. You can do whatever you want.  McBeath Governor Frank Keating did the absolute most damage to public education  in Oklahoma. I mean, he really   I   m sorry. I don   t have much nice to say  about that governor     Milligan You don   t have to.  McBeath    and he was there for eight years, unfortunately. There was a lot of damage  done.  Milligan What were some of the things that were enacted during his time that you  think did the most damage?  McBeath Oh, he was trying to push the private schools, the charter schools and so  forth. He was cutting funding to public education, and he was requiring  more testing. In the testing, he was putting the blame for the failure on those  teachers, and if you couldn   t make your students all succeed, then you lost  your job. It was pretty bad. It was pretty substantial chopping block there for  a while. He never took into effect southeastern Oklahoma. President Obama  now has recognized southeast Oklahoma as one of the five promise areas,  the original five, first five promise areas because of the low economic, the  low education down here in this corner of the state. I   m sorry, but Oklahoma  City doesn   t consider that.  We have great representatives and senators from here that just absolutely  preach and preach and preach. They   re very definitely for education, but you  know, there   s only so much one or two voices can say or three or four or  whatever. There   s not a whole lot when you   ve got all of these other people  saying,    Ugh, it   s the teachers    fault.     Well, it   s not the quality of the teachers. You know, most of the teachers  that I have worked with in these twenty-four years have been outstanding  teachers, best in their field, fantastic morals. They   re fabulous people, but  when you don   t have students that are interested   you know, McAlester is a  meth capital of the world, and you   re dealing with drugs. You   re dealing  with guns and knives. You don   t have much of a chance. When I first started  16  (I guess it was about three or four years into my teaching career), we started  working on the PASS (Priority Academic Student Skills) objectives, and I  got into that program first and helped write the PASS objectives. What we  were trying to do was connect them, to make them fluid from kindergarten  all the way through the high school, the twelfth grade, and make sure that all  of the objectives were covered. Well, then the state legislature came down,  and they gave us something like thirty-seven objectives that had to be  mastered in one grade. You can   t do that.  You know, there   s no possible way to do that. It was like the people that  were setting down all of the rules and making all of the decisions had no  clue about education, and we teachers are in there doing our level best,  doing everything we possibly can. I even, before the PASS test for Algebra I  in the eighth grade, we had a huge breakfast. I had them come in early. We  sat down. They had their calculators in hand. We were working problems,  but they had sausage and biscuits and gravy and oranges. I handed  peppermints to all of my students right before they took their tests, trying  just to make sure that they were awake, that they were ready, engaged, and a  lot of my kids didn   t have, you know, it was the first time they   d ever had  that kind of a breakfast, for whatever reason. The politicians are just  clueless, and if they would just had come and watched us teach   even to  this day, I mean, they   re still struggling.  When Clinton put in No Child Left Behind, well, you know, that   s a  wonderful thing to do, but when they   re left behind in the kindergarten  because they   re still not able to read for whatever reason   you can   t leave  an eighteen-year-old down there. When I had an eighteen-year-old in my  seventh grade class, seventh grade class, I went to my principal, and I said,     We can   t do this. You can   t put this eighteen-year-old who   s in, you know,  he   s eighteen for a reason. You can   t put him in with my seventh grade  students. It   s not a good influence.    Even though he never said anything  derogatory or violently or anything like that or out of pocket, it shouldn   t  happen, and they didn   t leave him there long. They moved him up to Key  Academy, but you know, those are the kinds of things that teachers face day  to day. These politicians just, they don   t get it, and Frank Keating was the  worst of all.  Milligan How have things changed, if they have, since he   s been out of office?  McBeath Not a whole lot. Sandy Garrett was a great school superintendent, you know,  state superintendent, but she kept banging her head against every wall that  was around there and so forth and so on. Mary Fallin, I can   t really say a  whole lot because I   ve been out of the public education, but I don   t see it  improving. I talk to my friends that are still in the public education, and the  testing, you know, we go from one program to the next program to the next  program to the next program. Nothing   s ever really resolving. Whatever  17  governor is in the house at the time says,    We need to do this educational  program. You   ve got to do all of this training    and so forth and so on, and it  lasts for four or five years or until that governor is no longer governor.  Then there   s a whole new program. It   s a constant retraining and relearning,  which, you know, teachers have to have seventy-five hours in five years to  keep their teaching certificate, and that more than met the seventy-five hours  when you   re doing that kind of training. You know, to have to keep  constantly shifting gears and changing everything, it   s hurting the process of  just getting down to the basics of teaching a child how to add ten plus ten.  You know, seven times eight, a lot of my college students still have trouble  with that. Well, in college, I can   t teach arithmetic. I   m working on algebra.  I   m working on getting them to   I hand them a calculator. Unfortunately,  elementary teachers have done the same thing too many times.  I   m really encouraged that they are departmentalizing as far down as the  elementary schools so that a person who loves math is actually teaching the  math, a person who loves English is actually teaching the English, and I  think that   s been a big stride forward, big stride.  Milligan What are some of the other things that, in your mind, would be solutions to  some of the issues? Have you given it much thought? If you could fix the  education system, what would some of the things be?  McBeath To fix the education system. Oh my gosh, Sarah. (Laughter)  Milligan I know that   s a big thing.  McBeath That is. I don   t think that broad scan. (Laughter)  Milligan If there were things that you could have identified while you were still in  public school that would have made your job easier   .  McBeath If they had left me alone to teach the students the way that I was trained to  teach the students and still tested them at the end of the school year, the  grades would have been higher or as high as me preparing, teaching the  tests. If they would just let us do our thing. You know, I had a science  teacher who loved his science classes, but a lot of the things that he did, a lot  of the things that I did, we couldn   t match with an objective, but it gave the  kids such a great foundation that they weren   t just floundering. They were  enjoying the classes, but if we couldn   t match them with an objective, then  we weren   t allowed to teach them, even though they were essential just for a  foundation. The kids leave our class with rocky foundations. The teachers  need to be left alone and do what they   ve been taught to do, what they love  to do, and 90 percent of the teachers out there today love what they   re doing.  We have to. We   re not paid enough. You know, you   re not paid enough to  18  just sit there and do something that you don   t like. You have to love  teaching in order to stay in teaching in Oklahoma.  Milligan How does the salary issue for teachers in Oklahoma reflect the teachers  that   we   ve got teachers in training. I know, for example, my class of people  that I know that went into teaching, a lot of them went to Texas because the  salary   s higher. I don   t know. How do you see that that   s been an impact in  Oklahoma, as far as   ?  McBeath Very definitely. Of the six people that were in my student teaching class,  there   s only me that   s still teaching. The other five have gone into  engineering or computers or something like that. They got out of the  teaching field very quickly.  Milligan That   s hard. Have you mentored a lot of students in training?  McBeath No. I have not.  Milligan I bet you would be really good at that.  McBeath Oh, thank you. (Laughter) No, I   ve never had that privilege of having a  student teacher.  Milligan I know this has come up since you   ve left the public school, but I wonder if  you   ve thought much about the whole Common Core discussion as it   s been  going on.  McBeath Common Core actually started just as I was leaving the high school, and I  still have the Common Core app on my phone. (Laughs) When I sat down  and really analyzed, the Common Core objectives were not any different  than the PASS objectives that we had been working on. As far as I was  concerned, Oklahoma, McAlester, was already a step up on the nation that  we already had those objectives in place. They might have been called  something else, but they were the same objectives. I felt like Oklahoma, as  far as that was concerned, there   s nothing wrong with those.  Milligan What did you think when Oklahoma government decided that they weren   t  going to adopt it? They were going to redo   that is where we   re at, right, in  the conversation?  McBeath Yes, ma   am. My own personal opinion, the textbook companies that supply  the books that then give perks around, we   re going to lose a lot of money if  we went to Common Core because we were going to have to change all of  our testing, the books, everything, and I feel like the textbook companies are  who pushed it, pushed Oklahoma more away from it than towards it. We  19  already had it all in place. Like I said, our objectives were so similar to the  Common Core. It would have been an easy switchover, but   yeah.  Milligan That   s interesting. I didn   t hear that.  McBeath That   s my opinion. That   s my opinion.  Milligan Oh no, definitely. There   s no reason why I would think you   re wrong. It   s  been interesting to watch that conversation. When you took the job at  Eastern, how have things changed in your teaching objectives, I guess,  going from geometry to   ?  McBeath We don   t have as many games. You know, I still try to come up with  something that   s more lighthearted, but the students that I have are just  wanting to get out of that math class. Their skills are not wonderful. Most of  the time, I   m spinning my wheels getting them to get their foundation under  their feet so that then I can add to it, the algebra, and keep them going. Now  my college algebra students are kind of fifty-fifty. You know, you have to  have college algebra for about 60, 70 percent of the degrees that you want  out of the college. It   s one of those things.    I have to have college algebra.  What can you do to get me through?    Instead of spending the time as a  general class, I work more one-on-one with the students.  I spend a lot more time walking around and sitting down next to the students  or looking over their papers and that kind of thing. It   s become more of a big  essential for these people. My office hours here in McAlester, in  particular   I   m giving finals tonight. I open my office door at four o   clock.  There will be three to four students standing outside my door when I get  there at four o   clock. I have moved extra chairs into my office because one  time I had seven or eight students in there that I was going from just around  my desk working with them. That   s what they want. They want the personal  attention because they   re all in different places. I may lecture, but then the  bulk of the class is spent working one-on-one or two-on-one, something like  that.  Milligan That seems like it   s a little bit full circle to some of the things you  appreciated at OSU.  McBeath Coming right back, yes.  Milligan Where are your students coming from at Eastern? Are they mainly from this  region, or are they from   ?  McBeath They had been, but since we have added soccer this last year, I had a student  from New Zealand, and I had a student from England, a student from  Scotland. Since I had been to Scotland, he and I just chatted constantly  20  about Scotland. The basketball players come as far away as Wisconsin and  Florida, and I have won over the hearts of the coaches that they put their  players in my classes because I do, I work with them better.  The first semester I was over there, the basketball team went to the national  junior college tournament, and they missed a week and a half of school.  When they got back, I actually stayed in Wilburton and worked with them,  the boys from the basketball team, to get them caught up so they could be  successful in their class.  A lot of the students are from this area. This last year, I had a young man  from Texas that came up to Texas because even paying the out-of-state  tuition, it was cheaper to come to Eastern than to go to Texas. He had two  friends on the baseball team. He just came up here to be with them and pay  for his first year of college, and now they   re all back in Texas. You know,  it   s not surprising just to hear where they   re coming from. It   s interesting.  Milligan The main campus is in Wilburton, which is pretty small and pretty rural.  McBeath Oh, very small, very rural, yes.  Milligan Yeah. I forget that even sports draws a lot of people from all over the world,  part of it, to come for that aspect of it, too. You teach at the Wilburton and  the McAlester campus then?  McBeath Yes. I teach during the day in Wilburton and at night here on the McAlester  campus.  Milligan How many classes do you tend to teach? What   s your load?  McBeath This fall, I   ll have eight classes.  Milligan My goodness. (Laughs) That   s a lot.  McBeath That   s what everybody says. I love it. I feel like I   m semiretired. (Laughs)  It   s not nearly the load that I had at the high school and then teaching  adjunct at night, so I feel like I   m semiretired. (Laughter)  Milligan Do you see a lot of McAlester high school students over in your college  classes now?  McBeath Yes, I do. This summer, I   ve had several of them that I had way back when  they were in high school or even eighth grade, and now they   re married with  children. They   re going back to school. Here they   re in my class again, and  it   s been awesome reliving all of that. It   s been fun.  21  Milligan That is neat. (Laughs)  McBeath Rarely does a teacher get to see the child grown. This is awesome to me that  I actually get to see them grown up and what they   re doing for a living.  Milligan Yep. I   m one of those students. (Laughter)  McBeath Yes, you are. (Laughter)  Milligan Let   s talk about that. Is there anything else you want to touch on from the  educational perspective or from the math fields in general, or do you feel  like we   ?  McBeath I think you   ve done really well with that.  Milligan Let   s talk about, a little bit, the community. Come back to the McAlester  community a little bit, and maybe specifically, I know that you do a lot with  the church here. You have other things going on besides what you   re  teaching. Maybe just talk a little bit about all the other things you have your  fingers in or things that you   re interested in.  McBeath Well, I play Bunko. (Laughs) That   s the night out. Stephanie and I are in a  Bunko group, and it started out teachers from Puterbaugh. We   ve been  together for, I think it   s almost nine years now. We   ve all diversified. Many  of them have retired. We have other schools represented, Stephanie coming  in. We do that once a month. I   m a member of Kappa Kappa Iota, which is a  teacher sorority. I   ve been president of that group and now just, well, I   m  secretary. It   s just a great group of ladies that we get together, and we talk  about the education concerns, because we   re all teachers. Some of them are  retired. I   ve moved on to the college, but we   re still very concerned about  the education. I   m a member of PEO, which is Philanthropic Educational  Organization.  Education is very primary in almost everything that I do, whether it   s here or  not, and this summer, I   ve had the very distinct privilege of being Grandma  to that little girl that just came in. She   s my buddy. We play in the rain  together, and we finished swimming lessons today. That   s what I   m getting  to do, and I   m working with her at home like I did her mother with her  reading and her writing. We go to the library once a week and do all kinds  of things like that. The rest of it   s just family and friends that we do dinners  and just fun things with. The Fourth of July, I went out to another teacher   s  house. I think there were forty-five of us there, and we just had a wonderful  social time. She and I are connected through the church and through the  school. That   s how we got started with that friendship.  Milligan Do you go to many OSU events or still have connections with OSU?  22  McBeath I was a member of the Foundation. I wasn   t able to pay my dues yet. I   m  going to next month. Stephanie and her family and I try to go back at least  twice a year to a football game or a wrestling match. (Laughs) Her husband  likes the baseball. We   ve even gone back for a weekend where we had  baseball and wrestling. (Laughs) I still have friends. One of my best friends  is still in Stillwater, and I try to get back to see her. She doesn   t travel as  well as I do. I try to go back there, and I just love the town. It   s just a great  town. Yes, we try to go back when we can, but it   s not very often. My  nephew was Pistol Pete from 2002 to 2004, something around in there. I  made a lot of appearances in Stillwater through that time, and he and I are  the only OSU graduates here in our family anywhere. We have a really big  bond, and he now is the camp director at Camp Egan. I go over there, and  we still have a really good OSU bond.  Milligan What   s his name?  McBeath Josh Pulver. He was a six-foot-five Pistol Pete, and then they put that head  on him. He was fantastic, and he loved that job. He didn   t ever thought of it  as a job. It was a privilege to him, and he still works with the Pistol Pete  Association and all that kind of thing.  Milligan Where did your siblings go to school, to college?  McBeath My brother went to, started out at TU  University of Tulsa  and graduated  from the University of Central Oklahoma. Both of my sisters graduated from  OCU. That was one of the funny stories I was going to tell you.  When I was a junior, my older sister was a senior, my brother was a senior,  and my little sister was a freshman. We all started school the same time.  Sally had her own car, the senior, and we loaded up her car. She and I were  in her car, followed by Momma and Bonnie, my little sister, in the family  car, followed by my dad in his pickup truck with all of our stuff. We  caravanned because at the time, you didn   t have cars like that.  We caravanned, and we went to Stillwater first and dropped me off with all  of my belongings. Then they headed on down the road to OCU to drop off  all of Sally and Bonnie   s. Mike was already married and living in Oklahoma  City. We didn   t have to do anything with him.  I still very vividly remember Daddy planning it out. He had a rod across the  back of the pickup truck to where we could hang our clothes. These were  Peggy   s, these were Sally   s, these were Bonnie   s, and Peggy   s things had to  go to the back of the truck because she   s getting off first and that kind of  thing. (Laughs) It was awesome. (Laughter)  23  Milligan I can really visualize that, too. (Laughs)  McBeath Yeah. We looked like The Grapes of Wrath going. (Laughter)  Milligan Did they come to campus to see you very often?  McBeath Bonnie did. She did the first couple of years when she was still at home in  high school. She would come to a football game, but again, you have to  realize I would go to Stillwater and wouldn   t go home until Thanksgiving  because I didn   t have a way. I didn   t have a car. If I could hitch a ride  somewhere, yes, but for Bonnie to just drive over and spend a weekend with  me, it was not easily done. She came once in a while. Sally, no. Sally was so  big into her school, and when she graduated, she immediately went into  teaching. They both had also grown up on OSU through the Rainbow Girls.  Milligan That was one thing, the Rainbow Girls. When you moved to McAlester, did  you know this is where the Rainbow Girls    headquarter is, national  headquarters?  McBeath Yes. Oh yes. I got into the state officers for Rainbow Girls and traveled  around the state, and everybody knew the home of McAlester. Yes.  Milligan Have you been involved with them at all since you   ve lived here?  McBeath No, I haven   t. I stayed with the girls in Stillwater. I was their mother advisor  for several years right after I graduated from college, and then I moved away  from it. Once I got here, I had a child, a baby, and brand new business that  we were trying to set up and just never really got into it.  Milligan Which I think is also normal with organizations like that when you progress,  and then you usually move away. It   s just interesting that you were in it for  so long, and then you   re here in the headquarters. I like that. Well, I think  that   s the bulk of what I had in my head to kind of ask you about. Are there  other things that you wanted to talk about or anything else you wanted to  make sure gets on record?  McBeath You said I could leave something for my grandchildren?  Milligan Yeah.  McBeath For Sadie and Gideon, going to college was not just my mother and father   s  dream. It was my dream. It was my way to get out of the small town, and  then I end up in another small town. (Laughter) Education is your way to get  anything that you want, to follow your dreams. Don   t chase them. You catch  them. Going to OSU was a dream of mine. I loved every minute there all the  time I was in school, all of the years that I stayed after school. I look back  24  on it as some of the sweetest memories that I have, and to be able to learn  from people who have the same passion for mathematics that I had was  something that you don   t just get every day. I hope that you two little ones  love it. Love life enough to follow your dreams but to realize that education  is your way to get there. I love you all, I love your mom and dad, and I love  you, Sarah. Thank you so much for every bit of this.  Milligan Aw, thank you, Peggy. I think that   s wonderful advice for not just your  grandkids. All right. We   ll stop there.  -------  -------   
