 Gill. Today is January 7, 2009. I   m visiting with Rick  Wilson, a former Pistol Pete mascot in the Library of the Oklahoma  State University campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for  the O-STATE Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Rick, I appreciate you taking the time to visit with us today.  Thank you, Jerry.  Pistol Pete is a pretty famous guy around here at Oklahoma State, but  let me back up and ask you first of all, can you share a little bit about  where you grew up and about your family and some things that shaped  your life before you got to Oklahoma State?  Sure. I was born in Chickasaw, Oklahoma. I spent some time as a small  child in the Panama Canal Zone. Moved to Duncan, Oklahoma then  from there, after my mother   s death, my father and I moved to  Oklahoma City. I went to junior high and high school in Oklahoma City.  I   m a fourth generation Aggie. My great-grandfather was here early in  the 1903 era sometime.  What was his name, Rick?  Borden was his last name. And my grandfather Frank Borden was here  and my dad Don Wilson and my uncle Joe Borden. So I   m the fourth  generation. I really didn   t have a whole lot of choice.  So your great-granddad was here right at the turn of the century, early  1900s. And then your granddad was here     In the    30s. He was actually just here a couple of weeks ago. I brought  him over for a basketball game. He hadn   t been here since I graduated  22 years ago. So we went around and looked at the few buildings that  5  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  are still standing that were here like Old Central and Morrill Hall. Other  than that everything else was gone. But he   ll be 94 at the end of this  month. So he   s seen a lot of changes.  And your dad was here on campus?  My dad was here in the late    50s.  Did they have different majors or were they in the same field?  On the Borden side they were all engineers. On the Wilson side, my  father and I, we   re sales oriented. I   ve got that internal fight that goes on  within me. Not smart enough to be an engineer (Laughter) and thank  goodness I have some golden tongue at times that I can make a living.  Did you have any brothers or sisters?  No, I was an only child growing up, until later in life when I was in  college my father re-married again and I have a little brother that   s 25  years younger than I am. I   m an only child but I do have some brothers.  Where did you go to high school, Rick?  Putnam City North. It was actually brand new. I was in the second  graduating class at North. We kind of set tradition which was really a lot  of fun. The fight songs and all the traditions that came to follow there  were started in the first couple of classes.  You answered one of my early questions, how did you get to Oklahoma  State, but you didn   t have any choice, you   re one of four generations, I  understand.  My dad told me   matter of fact it came out in an interview when I was  Pete one time. He didn   t quite like it, but I just told the truth. And that  was, he told me I can go to any school I wanted   as long as it was in  Stillwater   that would be fine with him. So I just relayed that  conversation and he didn   t really like it very well. But it was the truth.  What was the first time you recall having seen the Pistol Pete mascot?  Well two weeks after I was born, I was in Gallagher Hall for an event, or  so I was told. I was here all the time. My dad had season basketball and  football tickets and we were a big wrestling family, so we spent a lot of  time here. My earliest memory, I was about five or six years old. I was  at a wrestling dual in Gallagher. I don   t recall who the Pistol Pete was at  the time, but I   m sure I could go back and put a name with it. I   ve got a  6  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  number of Pete autographs through the years. But that   s really what kind  of put forth that first impression on me. I actually got to put the head on.  He held the head up, I got to stand there and he lowered the head down  on my shoulders and I   ve talked about that quite a bit, on what an  experience that was.  Was that an era when it was still okay to take the head off without going  back in a private area?  It was at a dual and Pete was walking behind the wrestling chairs where  all the wrestlers were seated. He was signing autographs and gave us  some bullets and those kinds of things. He had gone over to take a break  and so we went over and I just, being who I am, I had to ask a question,     Could I put the head on?    He said it was a little too heavy for me but  he   d hold it while I stood there.  What was your first impression of Pete as a younger kid? You probably  don   t remember your first, but your first earliest impression. What did  you think of this guy?  Well you know, part of our family, the Wilson side of my family we  were all ranchers, cowboys. So I thought that was pretty cool that he was  a cowboy. I didn   t realize that he was actually a character of a person,  Frank Eaton, until I got into college. At that time I realized that there  was somebody behind that. I just remember thinking it was cool. It was  just like most kids, you wanted to shake his hand, see the gun, shoot the  shotgun, shoot the pistol and have him pay attention to you. Kind of  larger than life.  Can you tell us a little bit about some of your try-out experiences? What  year did you try-out?  It was actually my fourth year, my senior year. I was a fifth year senior.  My fourth year I tried out for Pete. I was around Pete a year prior to that.  Rob Reynolds was Pete in    83-   84 and I had the opportunity to meet  Rob. He and I got together and we started an organization called Pete   s  Partners. I don   t know if you remember back then in the    80s we had     remember the old band, the big bass drum that we used to pull out on the  field, been around forever? Gave me an idea,    Hey, let   s put together  Pete   s Partner   s program,    and so we assisted Pete and we pulled him  around after we scored touchdowns. It   d be interesting to see where that  drum is now. But that was what my first introduction to what Pete was.  And then in    84 after watching Rob, I was a three sport letterman in high  school and I wanted back on the field but wasn   t talented enough to  play. So I said,    How can I get on the field?    And that looked like a  pretty easy way to go out there and have fun.  7  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  So your interest in being Pete was sparked in Pete   s Partners and being  around the bass drum and you thought that was neat and you wanted to  do it.  And traveling with 24 beautiful women wasn   t a determent at all, either   It was kind of a combination of all of those things.  Can you remember a little bit about that time, the try-outs? What was it  like?  It   s similar to what it is now. That   s probably one of the things that I  really enjoy about our organization, our fraternity, is that we   ve held true  to those traditions, or at least since I   ve been around it, you get  interviewed by guys that wore the head. They know what it   s like to go  out there. A lot of situational questions,    What would you do if this  happened?    being able to express some emotion, which is pretty difficult  because you   re talking about a 35-pound fiberglass plaster head that has  one emotion to it.  You can   t speak.  Can   t speak, can   t raise your eyebrows, can   t smile. So you   ve got to be  able to get creative on how you   re going to create emotion. And as I  tried out the first year at the try-out, I was nervous just like anybody else  would be. It was something I really, really wanted. I don   t think that  there   s ever been other than marrying and getting my wife to say yes, I  can   t think of another decision that I wanted so bad. I mean truly, truly,  wanted it so bad. If I had not been chosen, I would have hated to be the  judge the next year because, I mean it was just one of those   as a matter  of fact, my second year it was a lot tougher.  Your first year you were not selected?  The first year I was, I was selected. Dave Treece and I were Pete my  first year. Back then we had Pete and an alternate; Dave Treece was  chosen as Pete, I was the alternate. Dave was actually in professional  school in architecture at the time and I was going to be a senior. So it  worked out well for the both of us and then the second year I tried out  again. As I said, Kurt Carter and the other guys that were on that  panel   they were ruthless.  So who was your alternate the year you were Pete?  Scott Petty. And after my year, we had two Petes from there on just  because the appearances were so numerous.  8  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Did you receive any compensation at all at that time? Not talking about  uniforms and that stuff, but any compensation at all?  Well we got some books taken care of at the time. Prior to that, Pete had  been a part of the band. So when I was Pete my first year, when Dave  and I became Pete, that was the first year the Athletic Department took  over the Spirit Squad. Before that, they were all a part of the band  organization. Which they got nothing. As a matter of fact, Rob  Reynolds, I remember Rob saying that he had to provide everything  other than chaps and the gun and the head, he had to provide everything  else. So it was a blessing for Dave and I and all the Petes that would  follow because with Dave Martin, who is the godfather of Spirit Squads,  you   re given so much. They   re provided everything. So we got some  books taken care of, but shirts from Tener   s, jeans, boots, belts, all of  that stuff was provided whereas before it wasn   t. As a matter of fact, my  very first appearance was at an elementary school on Boomer, and I  didn   t know what to wear. I had chaps, a pistol, and a Pete head. So I  went on and put a shirt on and put a vest on and kind of took off.  So you were right in that transition? Your first year you were with the  band actually?  My first year was actually with athletics. It was the year before.  But you didn   t have an outfit yet?  We didn   t have any sponsors; we didn   t have anything when I first tried  out.  So tell us a little bit about   everyone knows about the Pete head   but  the rest of your year. What else did you get?  Well Tener   s stepped up and became the sponsor and I imagine they  may still be the sponsor, I don   t know. But they gave us western shirts,  belts, we provided our own belt buckles, boots, we could get some boots  at discount. They provided jeans for us, we could get two or three pairs  of jeans and several shirts to wear, the vest. Then the OSU Tech, over in  Okmulgee, the saddle shop over there went ahead and built us new chaps  that were orange colored. The chaps that I originally had I was allowed  to keep and are actually in Heritage Hall right now. I gave those so that  they could be put on display, and they   re brown.  The ones that are leather color?  That   s right, and they weren   t all jazzed up like they are now with the  fringe. They made that and they made new gun holsters for us and took  9  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  it to the next level.  What about some dos and don   ts and regulations for Pete? Can you  remember the things that they said are accepted in public that you can  or not do?  Well that was (Laughs)   use good judgment. Back then, Myron  Roderick was the athletic director at the time and you know Myron quite  well. There's a million stories that can go with Myron. Basically it was  just use your good judgment. As a mascot, to be the best you have to  walk that line and that line is, you don   t fall over but you push the  envelope as much as you can. But you have to have good judgment and  you have to be respectful and that goes in line with any of your  interaction with referees, with the players and mascots and all of that  type of stuff.  A onetime short story, I had Paul Hanson, that was Paul   s last year in the  fall of    85 as basketball coach. There was high emotion on Paul staying  and high emotion on Paul leaving and I unfortunately crossed the line  because a fan had a sign that wanted Paul Hanson to stay,    We love you  Paul. Please stay     and I grabbed the sign and I held it up to the stands to  the fans and they all went crazy. Immediately Myron Roderick informed  Dave Martin to go get that sign out of my hand. So Dave shares with me,     Don   t hold that sign up anymore.    Just because it put the Athletic  Department in a difficult situation. So I learned early that what seems  like a great idea sometimes isn   t the greatest idea. Myron and I had  always had a great relationship. He later hired me to work for the  Athletic Department, so it was just one of those learning processes.  How many appearances would you make in a year   s time?  Back then it probably wasn   t as much as they do now. I actually still  have my mortar board at the time that had all my appearances in it.  There   s close to 400 appearances in a year.  For yourself?  Right. And then Scott. Birthday parties, weddings, visiting people in  hospitals, a lot of schools and then parades. There   s a lot of events that  go on and it just becomes one of those things where you have to manage  your time.  What was a typical week like for you?  Depending upon the season, basketball   wresting season you had more  going on during the week, whereas with football you would just have the  10  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  football game. But it   s going to school   we were at the time taken over  by the Athletic Department and then put on weight programs, we had to  go lift weights just like the athletes were going to lift weights.  And the reason for that was?  To be in shape and to get body fat down and be representative of the  school we were at. It was that whole mindset of just taking it to the next  level, instead of having people out there freelancing it on their own  we   ve got standards that you have to meet. So go to class. Go to weight  lifting. As Pete, I didn   t have to go to cheerleading practices   I would  every now and then because it was kind of fun. I was never a gymnast  by any stretch of the imagination, but there were things that they did that  I wanted to learn how. We were always an inconclusive group.  Did you ever create some combined activities with Pete and the  cheerleaders?  There   s been Petes that have been involved in different routines with  cheerleaders in the last several years. I was in a routine, Curtis Davis  was the coach at that time and he wanted me in a routine, which is  somewhat cumbersome because of the weight and you can   t really move  without breaking your neck. There were some things, I had cheerleaders  that would put me in liberties and lift me up over their head over at  Gallagher, which really puts you in a danger situation. Fell one night at  Gallagher and was fortunate because I fell straight down instead of  tipping over. Tried not to get in the middle of too many of those.  Didn   t want to be on the top of the pyramid?  That was when I fell. So it was one of those deals when you kind of stop  and go,    Uh, this may not be a good idea.     Thinking back on it, was it what you thought it would be, being Pistol  Pete in terms of the schedule and things you did? Did it match up to  your expectations of what you thought it might be?  It didn   t even come close to what I thought it would be in the sense that  it was so much more. The work load wasn   t, that didn   t bother me at all.  As a matter of fact, I could have done it every day of the week. It   s what  took place from the time I said,    Yes, I want to do this    and I tried out to  today. It   s been interesting because there   s not a facet of my life  basically since I left 22 years ago that Pete has not affected, and I mean  major influences of my life, from jobs, to meeting my wife, to every one  of those, if I wouldn   t have been Pete, it wouldn   t have happened. Now  something else would have happened, but it wouldn   t have happened the  11  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  way my life has been put forth. And that   s the thing, I would have never  imagined. Never imagined.  Did you have difficulty balancing your    two lives    when you were doing  it?  No. Maybe some do. I didn   t. I always liked being in the middle of it,  having the attention. Whether it was sports, I wanted the ball. Where it  was being Pete, I wanted to be in the middle of what was going on. It  was fun to walk across campus. People say hi to you, you have no clue  who they are,    Hi, how are you?    a lot of people that you meet that you  never would have met before. I didn   t realize but I think at the time that  so many people   Pete   s different. You go to different universities and  ah well that   s a mascot. Pete to most people, he   s not a mascot. To a lot  of them he   s Pete.    Oh he   s a mascot, but he   s Pete, he   s different.    And  that   s the part I didn   t understand. But going to class trying to balance  those, it was something that was enjoyable.  I wanted to ask you about the Pistol Pete persona   how was Pistol Pete,  in your mind, different from mascots at other schools, different from a  tiger or some kind of mystical jay hawk bird? What was special in your  mind about Pistol Pete as a mascot?  Well it starts with Frank Eaton. If you   re chosen as Pete, you   re not just  representing OSU, that   s big enough as it is. That   s kind of  overwhelming to the point of thinking,    Oh my gosh, I   ve got all these  eyes.    Someone somewhere is always watching you. Don   t do what  you   re not supposed to do. Always put yourself and the university in the  right light. But beyond that you have the Eaton family that you   re also  trying to make sure that you   re doing the right thing and that you   re  putting forth Frank Eaton in the right light. And those were things that I  just never really realized until you kind of get out there and you go,     Wow.    And that   s why I think Pete is so much different: he   s not a  tiger, he   s not a horse, he   s not a jay hawk. And you   re walking around  with the .357 on your hip. I was raised on a farm so I got pretty good at  bullwhips and doing rope tricks and stuff like that and I incorporated  those into being Pete. You just don   t see a lot of, you know, Trojans  running around with bullwhips and   they have a horse and a sword and  just stand over there in the corner until someone is ready for them. Pete  is different. He   s a living embodiment of a guy who was a real character.  We use character in all sorts of terms. He was a character.  Were there some characteristics of Frank Eaton that you tried?  I tried to incorporate the old Pete. The raggedy old Pete. The bowlegged  Pete. That was one of the things   I was never in drama, I was in music  12  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  and did a lot of vocal stuff but I was never in drama so I never had any  acting background. But one of the things that I always did and it sounds  corny and I   ve said it before and if you ask Scott Petty and some other  Petes that were around me at that time, they   ll back it up and say,    When  Rick would put the head on, his whole body would transform.    It would  go from being an upright positioned person, to as soon as that head went  on, I   m naturally bowlegged so it was easier, but my legs were bowed,  my back bent over and my arms were out and I just took on that old   if  you look at a picture of Pete, he   s an old cowboy. He   s broken down, but  don   t mess with him and that was the persona that I tried to portray. I  remember when I was at a camp I had a judge, he gave me his little card  that he wrote on when they gave their comments, and he put down,    I  love that walk.     Did you have the swagger?  I had the swagger. The bowlegs helped me because it was natural. But  everything was over-exaggerated. If you looked at a photograph of  Frank Eaton, you might feel like you wouldn   t want to meet that guy in a  dark ally. Doesn   t matter how skinny he was, he just looked mean.  Did you dip too?  No I tried not to dip  (Laughter) You didn   t really have anywhere to spit.  Well just going back to earlier conversations, you were in competition,  were you the All American mascot?  I was. I was humbled by getting chosen as the first Pistol Pete All  American. That was in    85.  What was that like? Can you describe the competition?  Well they all go through it now. They had been doing it years before, we  just hadn   t had anybody that had received that award yet. I don   t know if  they felt sorry for me or what, but I was able to accept that award. It was  a process where you go to a camp for a week and it   s really a  culmination of that camp, things that you   re doing, things that you   re  learning. There   s a lot of pantomime type stuff that was put together.  And then you perform for the judges. You perform for the group and for  the cheerleading staff that are there and then they pick five per year.  Where was your camp, Rick?  It was in Dallas, at SMU. The mascot instructor there, I can   t remember  his name now, but he was actually a gymnast instructor and he had  13  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  coached Naudia Comaneci at one time. That was his background but he  took a liking to mascots and he kind of veered that way and was able to  help a lot of folks like myself that just wanted to go out and have a good  time and relive their childhood to make other people laugh. He was there  and he was one of our coaches and helped significantly.  Was that special to you? Was that pretty gratifying?  You know, it was. The year before I had seen   we were at camp and I  saw the guys that got awarded All American and there were a few of  them that were just phenomenal. Their costumes and outfits allowed  them to do things that Pete can   t do and that was really one of the most  rewarding aspects of it because Pete is so hindered. And people say,     Well what do you mean hindered?    I can   t jump around. I can   t do  back flips. I have to do other things that stand out and I have to do them  just like a basketball player would. He   s got to be technically sound or a  wrestler has to be technically sound in order to be the best. That   s what I  really worked on was, I wanted to be the best. I want to be better than  anybody else has ever been up to this point. There   s guys after me that  are far greater and have done things that just blew my mind, and I  thought they were just phenomenal Pistol Petes.  But at the time it was pretty rewarding and I think the thing after that  was that I was also the first Pistol Pete that was ever selected as a mascot  instructor for the National Cheerleading Association. They awarded a  couple of those a year to guys they felt could join the staff and I  joined   there was a gentleman by the name of Jeff Ayers. He was a  midget. Jeff was the cardinal for    I don   t know, he was a little cardinal.  Hilarious. You would just crack up watching him. He could do things  that would blow your mind and he and I were both selected as mascot  instructors and had a great relationship. He went on to be in the Barney  the Dinosaur Series. So Jeff did well.  Speaking of the ties with the guys around you, you had a little bit to do  with Scott Petty who followed you and Lance Millis? Can you share  some about your relationships?  Scott Petty and Lance and I were fraternity brothers at Delta Tau Delta;  they were all a year behind me and Scott was one of my best friends. I  was the best man in his wedding and when I became Pete, my first year  he kind of watched and saw what was going on and the second year I  said,    You really need to do this    so he tried out and there   s probably  not anybody better than Scott Petty, the guys    just got a huge heart and  loves the university. Lance kind of did the same thing. He watched Scott  and he was like,    Well heck, I can do that     so he became a part of it.  The thing about Lance is that he is such a student. He really is a student  14  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  of whatever he gets involved in, he wants to know everything. And so  Lance has become a student of Frank Eaton and has been very, very  instrumental and some remarkable things are happening with Pistol Pete  and Frank Eaton. When we inducted Frank into the Cowboy Hall of  Fame, Lance was in the middle of that. He was leading that charge.  That   s something that I always admired about Lance because he took it  beyond just being a guy in a head and emulating what the other guys did,  but he wanted to know all of the background. You ask Lance Millis a  story about Frank Eaton and he will tell you. He   s got the Campfires   Campfire Stories: Remembrances of a Cowboy Legend . He   s got the  whole book memorized. He   s got the Veteran of the Old West  memorized. So if you   ve got a question, ask Lance.  Going back to a little bit earlier in our conversation, what do you think  the Pistol Pete mascot symbolizes about the spirit of Oklahoma State  University and the old west?  There are so many things I think that he symbolizes. Independence, I  think that   s the first thing is independence, justice, doing the right  thing   you might say hunting down the murderers of your father may  not be the right thing to do nowadays, but back then the law was in your  own hands a lot of times. But love of his country, I mean the guy loved  his country. He really did. I   ve read Veteran of the Old West several  times. Matter of fact over the holidays I read it again. I love reading the  old stories. He was faithful, loyal, true, he had vices just like everybody  else but he didn   t let those vices hinder him.  He was a man of action, good guys, bad guys, that was black and white.  He was a man of action. Black and white, that   s right. There was never  any grey area. And I never met Frank. He died in    58 and I was born in     62 so I never had the honor of meeting him, but I   ve met a lot of people  that have. And I   ve read his autobiography and I knew his youngest  daughter Elizabeth Wise very well. That was one of the things she said,     Daddy was just a man of his word and if he said it that was what was  going to happen.    I think Oklahoma State and our state itself, he  symbolizes everything that we hold true as our heritage.  The romance and the persona of the old west and the cowboy arts motif?  That   s right. And he was flamboyant. He could take a dull story and turn  it into something you couldn   t get away from. Just a couple of weeks  ago I actually went to Perkins and they have set up that new plaza with  his house and the statue of Frank Eaton and I took my boys over to it.  And I said,    I want you guys to see Frank   s old house,    and we were  standing there taking pictures of the statue and a gentleman and his wife  15  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  pulled up and got out of the car. I started talking to him and they were  from Kentucky or somewhere and he was from Perkins originally, they  were there for the holidays and they were about to go home and they  wanted to go by and see the statue of Frank. We get to talking and he  said,    Are you from Perkins?    and I said,    No but I do have a loyalty to  Frank Eaton. I   m kind of tied even though I haven   t met him.    And he  said,    Really? You know as a kid I grew up here in Perkins, and Frank  Eaton was the best babysitter in the county.    And I said,    Well what do  you mean?    and he said,    Because anytime someone was looking for  their kid, we were all on his front porch. He could take a story and turn it  into the best adventure ever.    So I thought, hearing that from a guy that  actually sat on his front porch and listened to the stories   now were they  embellished a little bit? Probably. But the true tone was still there.  Going back to some of your experiences, what was your first of being on  the field at your first athletic event? How did you feel the first time in  front of a crowd?  The first game was the fall of    84 and it was an away game at Arizona  State. It was Pat Jones    first game. Dave and I were there and we would  trade off. Just the excitement of all of it, of being there, the experience  was kind of overpowering. It was exciting to watch Dave and to see the  fans away from home at a visiting game to see how they would react to  him. But I don   t really remember my first home game. I   ve got a  thousand and one memories other than when you put the head on and  you start walking down the street, walking into the stadium, when you   re  at home and all the people are yelling and hollering in the back, just that  excitement. It reminded me of being in high school, getting ready for a  game and that excitement of,    Okay I   ve got a job to do but I   m going to  go out there and I   m going to do something to make people laugh.     Are there some special memories that stand out in your mind?  There   s so many of them. Probably the ones that folks like to hear about  the most is the Ice Bowl; I was Pete during the infamous Ice Bowl. That  was a crazy day, it was crazy weather. The thing that I remember the  most about that is the week before we were in Ames, Iowa and I was  freezing to death. I   d never been so cold in my life as when I was in  Ames, Iowa. There   s nothing between Canada and Ames except barbed  wire fences. It was cold. I remember a guy on the Iowa State  cheerleading staff said,    You need to put bread sacks over your socks  and put another pair of socks on and you   ll be fine, even with cowboy  boots.    So the next week it was supposed to get cold and I thought,     Well I   ll try that.    That was the only thing that saved me through that  game. I didn   t put a coat on until the end of the fourth quarter and  everybody else was freezing. I had seven inch icicles hanging off the  16  Gill  brim of the hat. I   ll never forget digging a hole in the ice just to try to  make a field goal. It was crazy.  Another memorable time was the night the lights went out in Gallagher.  In the middle of a basketball game the lights went out. It was pitch  black. I think the thing that I was good at, probably the best, was close  interaction with people. I didn   t really like football games near as much  as basketball and wrestling. I liked being right there with them. A lot of  folks or Petes didn   t like that because you   re in people   s way. But I liked  it because it was fun. If there   s a dull moment, I   m going to be doing  something. The lights went out and I yelled,    Gimme a lighter, gimme a  lighter.    I got a lighter and I went out on the court and started taking  guys back to the bench. Nothing was on except the exit lights and all you  could see was this lighter going around the floor.  Probably the one that I remember the most, I think that touched me the  most, was at a basketball game, a little boy was up, this was back when  Gallagher only had two levels, a little boy was screaming,    Pete, Pete,  Pete, Pete      just screaming Pete. I   d wave to him but that didn   t satisfy  his quench for Pete. And I motioned to him to come down on the floor at  half time and half time came and back then we didn   t have all the  activities that we have now at half time. I   ll never forget, I was at the  south end of Gallagher and this little boy comes down the stairs on the  north end and he ran diagonally straight across the court as fast as his  little legs would go. He was probably five or six years old. As Pete,  you   re overpowering because you   re so tall, the hat   s so tall, so you  always get down on their level. So I got down on my knees so that when  he got to me we would be pretty much looking eye to eye. He never  slowed down. He ran flat over me and I of course over exaggerated the  impact and I fell back, threw my arms back on the court, my legs were  doubled back over me and this little boy laid on my chest and hugged  me.  I just laid there and I thought,    You   re doing a good job.    I don   t know,  that emotion was just incredible. It was incredible. Just from that  interaction and how much this character meant to him. There was  nobody else in the arena to him. The place was packed, he had no clue.  It was just him and Pete. And of all of the memories I have, that was the  one that just, it blew me away. I remember when I had my first child, my  first son, they put him in my arms and it was that kind of emotion. It was  just that    Wow     You   re everything to this little bitty guy. And that was  kind of my first interaction.  Kids love Pete, don   t they? I was talking to a couple of Petes and they  had to be careful because kids would come running up and they can   t  see them. Do you have some interesting stories of working with kids and  17  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  parents?  We actually cut a hole in the bottom of Pete   s chin and put a screen there  so you could see underneath you. You could see up in the holes there,  but you couldn   t see anything down here. So the first thing you would  do is I would always kind of sweep my hands so you know and you can  do that with over-exaggerated movements, just to make sure I don   t run  over anybody. You   ve always got to be careful with the gun because  kids come up and you can   t see them and they want to get the gun out. I  had a kid shoot my gun off in my chaps, in the holster one day. He  cocked it and I didn   t know he was there. Bang  He shoots it right down  my chaps. There was a burn mark on the side of my chaps. That was one  of those things where you use your other Pete to make sure you don   t  have those kinds of things happen. But that   s just part of that thing that  you learn; it   s dangerous. You   re talking about the blank that could  actually hurt somebody.  Did you have some safety training? Can you describe some of the things  you   re supposed to not do with your gun and some of those regulations?  Captain Tye was the Chief of Police at the time when I was there. The  first thing when I became Pete, we went through gun safety and how to  operate a Ruger .357. The gun was not plugged. It was a live .357 gun at  the time. I don   t know how they are now and I had blanks and they were  just waddings in there. But the thing   s going to shoot a flame out so far  and so he went through all of that and tested the guns and cleaned the  guns and he    (laughs) Captain Tye. We had to have a talk one time  because I was going through ammunition like it was candy. He was like,     Rick, you   ve got to slow down on the pistol,    because I liked shooting  that gun.  And the spent cartridges, you would give those to the kids?  Every one of them, I   d give them to the kids, and they all want one. One  semester I remember he goes,    Man, we got to slow down shooting the  gun.    And I was like,    Okay, alright, Captain Tye. We   ll do that.    I  don   t know that I did but I told him we would.  Are there any special appearances or memories of weddings or visiting  kids in the elementary school? Some special times you can share with  us?  Yeah, you   re always going to the reading classes. And I   ve still got all  the packets of letters from little kids,    Thank you for coming to my  class.    I had one that I always remember and that was going to see a  little boy in the hospital that was dying of cancer. That was meaningful.  18  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  I mean, to think that he could have had a clown or Ronald McDonald; he  could have had whoever he wanted. He wanted Pete to see him. I went  and did my appearance and spent my time in there with him for a little  bit.  Is that one of those times that you were glad you had the head so they  couldn   t see the tears in your eyes?  That   s right. I was bawling. When I walked out of the room, I was  bawling. Doesn   t take a lot to get me bawling, but I was bawling   (Laughs)  And I   m sure you   ve got some interesting kid stories about schools and  so on?  Yeah, I remember, we were at a school and a kid was yelling,    Pete   Pete     and I turned back around and went back down the hall. I forgot  there was a doorway and about broke my neck, (laughter) I took off for  the door and you have to remember, that Pete head   s a good eight  inches, ten inches higher than the top of the door frame on an eight foot  door. I just plowed it. It almost took me to my back. Fortunately I had a  couple of cheerleaders that had gone with us that caught me.  Speaking of that, Al McGuire, he was at that camp in    85 when I became  All American. Al McGuire had a weird interest in mascots. He loved  mascots  Matter of fact, he did a number of specials, interviews on  mascots. He came to our camp that summer and did a special on  mascots. And I remember that he took a liking because Pete is so much  different than the Red Raider and Duke Demon or whoever that was. I  was standing there and he said,    Hey, I want to put that head on.    And I  normally wouldn   t let any adult put the head on. I   d hold it up and let a  kid under it but it   s just one of those things that I felt was kind of sacred  territory as an adult. And he said,    I wanna put the head on.    I was like,     Alright.     So they had cameras, they had all of this on film and Al was a tall guy,  so I   m holding this thing up and I said,    Okay, we   ll get it down on your  shoulders.    The first thing I told him was,    Don   t lean back. You have to  lean forward as Pete. If you lean back you   ll go back.    The first thing he  did on that big, tall, skinny 6   6 frame of his, he leaned back and the guys  literally caught him. He fell back. It   s 35 pounds top heavy and it just  took him over backwards. So we got the head off of him and after it was  off of him I turned to Petty and I   m like,    We were that close to  breaking Al McGuire   s neck. Can you imagine how bad that would have  looked     Scott was laughing and he said,    You told him not to lean  back.    I said,    He   s a basketball player, what do you expect? He   s not  19  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  listening      Did you feel a special sense of responsibility representing Oklahoma  State University as Pistol Pete? What did that mean to you?  It meant the world, it really did. First of all being a fourth generation  Oklahoma State student at the time, it meant that there weren   t very  many guys that had this opportunity. It was something that I cherished. I  held it dear to my heart and I still do. Even now to do this day, I get  introduced to someone and they say,    Rick was Pistol Pete.    You know,  that was a long time ago, but you   re still Pistol Pete. So at that time it  was everything in the world and still is, always will be. I had the  opportunity when we did the statue over in Gallagher, Sandra Van Zandt  did the statue of Pete that   s over there. Myself and Scott and a couple of  others got to actually be a part of that, to kind of direct that process as  far as they should have us over to look at it. Is it all looking good? She  wanted to hear from Petes. Then she heard from the university that  everything looked the way it was supposed to. That meant a lot to me  because it is a special, special thing.  We were over there one time with Scott and I actually had my oldest son  who is ten now and he was with us. We were over there making sure that  the statue looked great   it   s a big statue  I   m not an artist by any stretch  of the imagination. Scott and I are talking and Sandra asked me,    Is your  son Parker going to be Pistol Pete?    and I said,    Heck, I don   t know  His  mom wants him to go to Harvard, but I   m trying to brainwash him into  going to Oklahoma State.    She said,    I think he   s going to be Pete.    And  I said,    Why is that?    and she said,    Because it   s destiny.    And I said,     Well I don   t know about destiny.    And she said,    It is, because his  finger prints are on the backside of that gun that   s on that statue.    And I  said,    What are you talking about?    Well it was still in the clay mold  and she had gone over there and actually taken his hand   he wanted to  touch the gun so when he reached up to touch the handle she put her  fingers on his and kind of pushed his fingers in just a little bit so his  finger prints were on the gun. And I said,    I don   t know if that   s destiny.  I think it just means he came over on the right day.    I know that it means  as much as to me as it does to any of the other guys that put the head on.  And I think for future Petes, whether it be him or anybody else, I think it  will be just as sincere.  There   s a pretty small fraternity of guys that were former Petes. You  guys stay pretty close?  Yeah, we do. I see Kurt Carter all the time. Rob Reynolds is one of my  closest friends. Scott Petty, of course, and Lance and even some of the  older guys. One of them is my insurance agent and it was because he  20  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  was Pete. I figure if you can   t trust a Pete, you can   t trust anybody.  What do you think is the collective history and heritage of Pete through  the years?  In what way?  What legacy do they convey collectively as a group to Oklahoma State?  What   s important? You said people recognize you as a former pistol  Pete. What does that legacy mean? What do you think it means to  Oklahoma State people?  I think that the character is such an icon and that the character has such  value to the alumni. We went through that exercise a number of years  ago with a couple of universities over Pete. And I know as a Pistol Pete  and having conversations with other alumni that never knew that that  went on, they were just floored to the fact that some other university  could think that they could take ownership of Pistol Pete. With  everything that is here and I asked,    Well why is that?    and they go,     Because when you think of OSU, who do you think of? You think of  that big head  And you think of the great scholarships and the academics  and the sports programs.    But I mean as far as the legacy, I think it   s just  that people hold him to such a standard because he   s Pete. He   s not a  mascot. He   s Pete. He   s different.  You said when you put the head on you   re not Rick Wilson, you   re Pete.  What do you mean by you   re Pete?  You   re taking on every student that has ever walked through this door.  You   re taking on that pride, that spirit, that determination, whether it   s a  student that   s barely getting through a class that,    I   m going to pass, by  golly, I   m getting my degree.    Whether it   s that nose guard out there  getting his head hammered every day at practice that will never see the  field on game day. Or it   s that OSU wrestler that is in the practice room  that is turning out national champions but he never saw the mat wearing  an orange singlet, he always had to wear black. That   s who he is. That   s  who you   re representing, in addition to the Eaton family, in addition to  the things we talked about as far as the true spirit. The right, the wrong,  there   s good, there   s evil. There   s black, there   s white. There   s being  independent, making sure that you   re not going to back down from  anybody.  I had to perform with a San Diego chicken one time. I didn   t care for the  San Diego chicken much. He wasn   t a very pleasant guy to be around.  He   s funny, but he was not a very enjoyable person to perform with  because he wanted to completely stage the show; he wanted to up you.  21  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Pete   s not going to be upped by anybody. I don   t care if you are the San  Diego chicken. We   ll play your skits but I   m not going to back down  from you. And I think any Pete that puts that head on ought to have that  attitude. We   re not backing down from anybody, doesn   t matter who  you are. Doesn   t matter how great a team you   ve got, how many Rhodes  scholars you   ve got.  He is the cowboy?  He is the cowboy. That   s a great way to put it. So he   s special.  Going back to mascots, did you ever do any enactments with other  mascots at other schools? Any other Big 12 schools or universities?  Willy the Wild Cat at Kansas State, I can remember doing a number of  skits with them. I never would allow them to win though. Whatever it  was, I won. It   s easy to do that when you got a double barrel shot gun  and a .357 on your hip. I tried to stay out of Chip   s way up at Colorado;  the buffalo I tried to always stay out of his way.  Ralphie?  Ralphie. They had a Chip   s invitational one time, a ski invitational, that  Dave and I went to. They invited 25 mascots from around the United  States and I got to be one of those. And we actually skied at Winter Park  with Pete on. So I   m skiing down the mountain with this head on. I tried  to stay out of Ralphie   s way, the Missouri Tiger was like the Wild Cat  with Kansas State. I always got the last say cause I   d always shoot them  at the end. There wasn   t much they could come back with.  You were talking about the collective legacy of Petes. What do you think  about your legacy as Pistol Pete? What do you think people think about  when they think of Pistol Pete Rick Wilson?  The thing I hope   it   s just those that were around you and the alumni  that watched you at that time. I   ve met a number of people that I never  knew and they said,    When were you Pete?    and I say,       84,    85,    86     and they were like,    I remember you. You were the one with the  bowlegs. You were the one with the rope. You were the guy with the  bull whip, aren   t you?    The thing that I hope that they always remember  and that I   ve heard from is the fact that,    Man you never stopped.    And  that was something that, as I said earlier, and it went back to that day  when I was 5 or 6 years old and I got to put the head on. I literally said,  every time I put that head on and however many appearances   300, 400,  whatever it is   every time I put that head on, whether it was to take a  picture with the spirit squad or whether it was an event or a special  22  Gill  Wilson  event, I put the head on and I said,    I   m doing this for that five year  old.    It   s living that dream, getting to be a little kid again. I want to be  the best. I never want to stop moving because there   s somebody  watching at all times. Doesn   t matter where you   re at somewhere,  somehow somebody is looking at you. Out of all those eyes, somebody  is looking at you. And I want them to walk away and say,    Man that guy  wore me out  He never stopped.     I think I   m the only Pete   I   ve been on the board since I left, choosing  all the Petes. I can   t remember a Pete since that has done rope tricks, that  has incorporated rope tricks and bull whips into it. I had an experience in  Washington, the University of Washington game when we were up in  Seattle with the bull whip. I got high-lowed by two Washington  cheerleaders and it literally knocked me senseless   blacked me out.  They came at me at about 20 yards full steam; one hit me high, one hit  me low. Never saw them. Just KO   ed me. I wanted to fight (laughs) is  what I wanted to do  But I couldn   t fight, I had to stay in character and  so I got that whip out and I started cracking that whip about three, four  feet in front of their faces and they started moving backwards. They  realized I wasn   t very happy, but I wasn   t going to get into it. They were  all dressed up in Mohawks and their thing.  So those props come into play sometimes. They   re kind of handy to keep  people away from you if you want to. A double barrel shot gun will get  your attention. Those are things that my legacy will hold up. I did a lot  of props. I did the blind man and the cane and the pretty girl posters at  free throws. I was always playing with the refs, trying to stay on their  good side. Sometimes I kind of rubbed them a little raw. Those are the  kinds of things that when you talk to the Scott Pettys and the Rob  Reynolds and the guys that were after, Lance Millis, those are the things  that they say,    What can I think of next? How creative can I be?     because you have to remember, it   s just a face. It   s a stern face. It  doesn   t smile. So you   ve got to do other things to make him soft. I can  make Pete soft. I can make him cry. Or I can make him meaner than a  dog. But it was all about trying to be creative.  Why don   t we go back to your other experiences with other mascots and  schools, can you share some of your not so memorable moments?  You try to forget about them but it   s hard to sometimes. You have to  have good judgment, it comes back to that, and understand that when  you   re in a visitors home they   re not always so hospitable. The only  times that I really had a lot of problems were Colorado   you   ve got to  stay out of Ralphie   s way. The security there even told me, they said,     Stay away from the student section. Don   t get near the student section,     because they have literally taken mascots from other schools, hoisted  23  Gill  Wilson  them over their hands and have taken them up to the top of the stadium.  Not that they want to throw them off the other side, but you know what  college students are like. They get in the moment and next thing you  know, something happens that you don   t want to happen. So I would  stay away from those.  The University of Washington incident was probably the worst  physically that I had received because it literally knocked me out, it  blacked me out. And it was painful. You get two guys 170 pounds  running at you both ways and not see it, it   s painful. But OU was never  fun, it was never enjoyable. Probably the worst memory I have as far as  not remaining calm was probably in Norman in fall of 1984. We went  down there with the anticipated possibility of us winning. And they were  scared that we were going to win. And after that game, they rushed the  field, their students and everybody rushed the field. Pete was down  there. I wasn   t   Dave Treece was dressed up as Pete at the time. But we  had the drum there. We had a number of fans spitting on us, throwing  beer on us, cussing at us. I had one gentleman in particular that had had  a few too many Toddys and was trying to punch a hole through that big  bass drum. Fortunately he didn   t. The unfortunate part was my reaction  to him. I just tried to get him to leave us alone, just leave us alone. And  since he wasn   t going to get to punch a hole through the drum, he tried  to punch a hole through me. We had a little bit of a scuffle on the  football field after the game. That was probably my low point of ever  being Pete, but it was to be expected. We were in Norman.  There are a lot of low things in Norman that I don   t really want to try to  go back and remember, but that was probably the lowest. As far as any  other school, never really had a problem with it. Just use your common  sense and stay away from students. Missouri, they were always fun.  They   d take me and kidnap me one time and took me and split my legs  against the goal post and I played it up like it really hurt me. They were  good about it. They said,    We   re not gonna hurt ya.    And I said,    Okay,  if you   re not gonna hurt me.    Then when they got done I shot them all  with the gun and we all lived happily ever after. So I won   Going back to the head. A lot of people don   t realize how massive that  thing is. But you had some personal experience with the designer at Walt  Disney, can you share some of that story?  Yeah, it was in the fall of    85 and Dave Martin, Associate Athletic  Director, had received a message from a gentleman in California, his  name was Mr. Johnston, I think Bob Johnston  Oliver    Ollie    Martin  Johnston, Jr. . Something to the effect that he had a cowboy head in his  garage and he wants to know if we want it. Dave had relayed the  information to me,    call this old gentleman and figure out what it is that  24  this old guy has.    And he really just pretty much just wrote it off.    It   s  just some guy that   s got a cowboy head and he thinks we need it.    So I  called him and visited with him on the phone. Couldn   t quite understand  at first what he was talking about. He was a gentleman that was pretty  sure in his conversational tone and pretty much commanded the  conversation and kept telling me that he had an old cowboy head in his  garage and wanted to know if we wanted it. I tried to get him to expand  upon that and he shared with me that he was the one that back in the  early    60s had created a cowboy head for our university. Then a light  bulb came on and I realized he was talking about he   d created the  original Pete head that we use today. There was the papier-m  ch   head  that   s in Heritage Hall, which was created in    58,    59. But he had created  the Pete head.  At that point it sparked my interest to what he was talking about and he  said,    I   ve got the head that I used to make the mold of the one that  you   ve got right now. Do you want it?    He said,    Because if you don   t  want it, I   m putting it out on the curb and letting the garbage man have  it.    He had retired from Disney Studios. He was one of the original  character artists for Walt Disney and he had created this head. And I  said,    Well yes  We do want it.    At this point, I   m thinking how much  this is going to cost and I   m just Pete  I   m not in a position to negotiate  charges for buying a head. Because we had just had another head made  two years prior to that with a company in Minnesota and it cost us   10,000 for that head and it was absolutely hideous. In fact Rob  Reynolds used it and he was the only Pete that ever used it because I  wouldn   t wear it. It was just an ugly head.  And I told him,    Yeah we do want it. What are we talking cost wise?     And he said,    No cost. I   m just going to ship it to you. If you pay the  postage and shipping charges then it   s yours.    And I said,    Well  absolutely, sure     I asked him,    This is the Pistol Pete head for  Oklahoma State University?    and he said,    Yes.    I said,    It looks just  like the one we have now?    and he said,    Except for it   s got shamrocks  on the hat brim and it   s got a sheriff   s badge on the front of the hat.     And I thought,    Okay.    And he said,    The reason it has that is because  when I was at Disney, we had gotten a phone call from some  organization in Dublin, Ireland that wanted a leprechaun for a parade.  We didn't have any leprechauns and the closest thing I had that looked  like a leprechaun was this cowboy head so I put the shamrocks on there  and I shipped them this head. They used it in the parade   it   s been used  one time   and they shipped it back to me.    And I said,    Well great.  Yeah, we   ll take it.     So we get off the phone and in the back of my mind I   m thinking,     We   re not going to get a head. We   re not going to get anything in the  25  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  mail.    A week later this huge crate shows up at the athletic department  and Dave Martin calls me and says,    Your shipment has arrived.    I go  over there, we open it up, and sure enough, there   s that Pete head inside  the box.  From your description, they made two of them then at the time in the  early    60s and he kept one and sold one to us. So this is almost the exact  replica of the one we   re using?  This is the mold that they used to create the one that we had that I was  using at that time. The only thing different about this head is that, well,  there   s two things. It didn   t have all the plaster around the fiber glass  mold portion of it so it wasn   t as heavy, it was real light. The second  thing is that the hat would come off and the head was bald. It had hair  around here and you   the hat is, what, three and a half feet wide on the  brim, and four feet tall. You could take the hat off and then you   d just  have this ugly bald head of Pete. And that   s how it arrived.  So there was a mold and then there   s actually the cowboy head and hat  both?  No, that cowboy hat and head was the mold. And then they went ahead  when they got the call from Dublin, he went ahead and painted the face  up so it would look like something. So when we received it and I pulled  it out of that big crate, it looked just like the head I was using except it  was about half the weight. Instead of being close to 35 pounds or so, it  only weighed around 12. And I actually used the head without the hat a  few times. When the University of Colorado had that Chip   s ski  invitational where they invited all the mascots, I tried to ski down the  mountain with the hat on and it was just so cumbersome, I was afraid I   d  break my neck. I took the hat off and skied with the bald head instead  and put a big stocking cap over it. When I came back, I then used him at  one basketball game and I used him at one wrestling match. What I had  done, the first half of the game I was Pete, just like everybody sees. At  half time I took the hat off and I put a Santa cap on and I walked out   it  was during Christmas   I walked out on the basketball court. And the  fans   it was like I   d suddenly walked into church. I mean it just   the  whole arena just   nobody knew what to say  They   re looking and trying  to figure out what   I   ve been looking at this guy since 1958 and he   s  never had his hat off. So there wasn   t a real good response to that so  after those two     And then I did that at a wrestling match, I came out with a singlet on and  I took off the hat and everybody freaked out and I figured it was  probably good that we just leave the hat on. So now that head they re-plastered  around it to give it strength cause without that then it would  26  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  deteriorate. They   ve now permanently mounted the hat onto the head.  The star is actually in Heritage Hall also.  Still using that exact mold with the changes you described?  So both Petes have the exact same head, whereas when I was Pete, we  had the head that I used, which was the old head that was built by Bob  Johnson  Ollie Johnston  in    62 and then that new head that we   d gotten  which I   m sure they threw it in the trash somewhere because it was  falling apart. That   s information that a lot of people don   t know about.  Bob Johnson  Ollie Johnston  died a couple years ago, didn   t he?  He did. I actually was watching the news one night and he was the last  artist that worked directly under Walt Disney and he passed away either  last year in 2007 or it might have been 2006. I think it was 2007. And he  was old then, so he must have been in his 90s when he passed away. Oh  the stories he could tell.  How has your experience as Pistol Pete influenced your life?  You know, it   s everything. I can   t imagine where I would be today and  the experiences that I   ve had outside of college if it wasn   t for Pete. I  owe him a debt of gratitude I can   t repay. I can   t. I mean, there   s not  enough words, there   s not enough money, there   s not enough gratitude  to express my sincere thanks for him being where he was at a particular  time to want to hang out Oklahoma State, that he would get to have the  honor of being asked to be the caricature for this university, and also  those five or six guys that were on that board that chose me. As I stated  earlier, there   s not an event in my life, a major event in my life   and I  consider major events being jobs, meeting my wife which leads to my  children. All of those things, after I graduated and went to work for the  athletic department, worked for Myron and Kurt. Rob and I and Kurt  and I worked together. Matter of fact, got to be responsible for the first  renovation of Gallagher Hall in    87,    88,    89 and learned that process  right out of school. Building those relationships with alumni when I  never would have had that opportunity. That was all Pete. Getting that  job was because of Pete  Myron, God love him for something he said,    I  like the guy, we ought to hire him.     From there to after leaving Oklahoma State and I was there for four or  five years, left there and went into the medical industry. Got that  interview because of a relationship with a donor that I had   I didn   t get  the job but I got the interview. And then I got to go in and prove what I  could do. From that position, leaving the state of Oklahoma for a  number of years, coming back to Oklahoma for another   Public Service  27  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Company of Oklahoma. Biomet was an orthopedic implant company,  then coming back to Oklahoma and getting to interview with Public  Service, was there for over ten years because of Rob Reynolds who had  mentioned my name to a gentleman who said he was looking for the  right person. Talked to me over the phone, I fly in to the interview, I get  the job. It was Pete. I mean, all of those are Pete generated.  Meeting my wife. I met my wife because I moved. I   m not a big fan of  Lawton, Oklahoma but that   s where my wife was and that   s where I got  transferred with Public Service. That   s the best thing that ever came out  of Lawton was Rebecca  I met my wife because of that short stint in  Lawton, Oklahoma. My children because of meeting her, which led from  a Pistol Pete introducing me to a guy that hires me. My occupation now  as a National Vice President of Sales for Onholdworx is from a  relationship I built in college. The owner of the company, the reason is  because he wanted to meet me because we were in school together. He  wanted to meet me because he thought being Pistol Pete was cool and he  wanted to try out. So I mean all of those things that kind of transpired,  it   s all because of Pete.  Speaking of that connection, people knowing you were Pete, how do  people react to you today when they find out that you were a former  Pistol Pete?  It   s admirable. As I stated earlier, it   s one of those things, if I   m being  introduced to someone that I don   t know by a good friend or someone  that knew I was Pete, they   ll always introduce me and say,    Rick was  Pistol Pete.    And they   re like,    Really?  You were Pete?    and they want  to hear the stories,    When were you there? You were there with  Thurman and Gundy and all those guys.    They want to hear the stories  of the trips and the travels and all that stuff that goes on. You know, it   s  interesting and it really kind of blows me away. And it   s humbling  because, as a Pete, even though it   s very, very close to my heart   I have  a wedding ring and I have my Pete ring on and there is a reason they   re  there. My wedding ring is closest to my heart and Pete is right behind  her. (Laughter) He   s pretty important to me. But it still blows me away  from the fact that, gosh, I was Pete, it   s not a big deal. Well it was a big  deal. And I think because there   s just not very many. I don   t think I  would get that response if I was a jay hawk.  How was Homecoming this year? The 50th anniversary of the first year  that the first Pete was on the field. You got the letter jacket?  Right.  Can you share that Homecoming experience?  28  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  That was incredible. That was the best reunion. We get together  periodically, but that was the best reunion ever. When I was Pete, we did  a reunion and I got a proclamation from the Governor, Governor Nigh at  the time, and we got about 20 guys back. We thought that was a good  turnout. We had 40-some odd guys back this time. It was incredible   And not just the turnout of all the guys that were Pete, but just the  appreciation from the athletic department. And a lot of that all goes back  to Dave Martin. I can   t thank Dave enough for what he   s done for the  Spirit Squad and for Pete. He   s taken Pete, and I always say with a little  bit of money he can do a lot of things. It   s not that you   re gonna get  there, but a little bit of footing to possibly get there. Dave has been that.  He   s really been the traction behind Pete getting the national recognition  that he gets, all of the 50th anniversary stuff this year, that   s all due to  Dave Martin.  You guys got the letter jacket and what else did you get?  We got the letter jacket. We were grand marshals of the parade this year.  They had dinners for us and pictures.  Did the interviews.  Interviews, did the interviews. And you   ve been very, very hospitable  and I   ve enjoyed the process to be able to at least talk about these things  that we forgot about. I was telling you that I brought that box with all the  memorabilia. I knew I had a box somewhere and I opened it up and  started going back through it and going,    Oh, I remember that.    So it  was just an incredible experience. It   s one of those things that it   s a once  in a lifetime, I   d like to be here when it   s the hundred year anniversary,  but I don   t know if that   s possible  I sure enjoyed this one. It was a good  time. It was fun, also for those of us that have small children that aren   t  even close to getting to college to just get an opportunity to see through  our eyes how cool it was. You know my kids are like,    Yeah, my dad  was Pete.    He walks in my office and my whole office is full of Pistol  Pete. I   ve got Frank and pictures of me as Pete. Three foot statues and  all that stuff and,    Oh, my dad was Pete. Big deal.    That weekend they  got to relive it through us and that was cool because we had that big  meeting in the O-Club room and that was really a neat event. The letter  jackets were just   that was incredible. We   re O-Club members because  we were on the spirit squad, but we never got a letter jacket in the past.  And that was something that said   that was just a great sign of  appreciation. We all truly truly enjoyed it.  I heard that that was the only group that had received a letter jacket,  other than actual letterman, you as a group.  29  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  That   s exactly right. And our letter jacket is a little bit different. The O  has a Pete in the corner. So it   s a little bit different than the letter jacket  that you received for playing football which keeps it separated from the  true athletes. But we all have to train. Petes aren   t out there at football  practices and basketball practice, but they   re in the weight room with all  the athletes and have to go through the diets and do the body fat test and  all the stuff that they go through. It   s nice to have that shared  community.  Speaking of the discipline, you go through all of the hours and 400 or so  appearances, what would you tell a young person that   s thinking about  being Pistol Pete?  I   d tell them, first of all they need to stop and really contemplate  whether this is something that they truly want to do. What I mean is stop  and really contemplate that thought process because this isn   t something  that you do now. This is something that you are going to be doing  forever. This is a major decision. Because you   re going to be a part of  this fraternity and you   re going to be held accountable to maybe a level  that you hadn   t really thought you wanted to. And there   s been guys that  came through that process and,    Oh gosh I didn   t know it was going to  be all of this.    But it   s something that is going to follow you for the rest  of your life. And if you can answer,    Do I want to represent the  University?    number one.    Do I want to represent the Eaton family?        Do I want to be able to have the time of my life?    More fun than you  could ever imagine. And basically, if you   re a little bit immature and  want to go back to being a little bitty boy, being a little kid again and  doing things that if you take the head off, then people might say,    You  might want to check him into that hospital down in Norman.    You can   t  do that without this head, but you put that head on and you can have the  time of your life and you can do things that people will laugh and you   ll  do things that people will cry. And you   ll do things that people will  remember.  Can you tell a little bit about the discipline as well?  Absolutely. And that   s where you have to really think. There   s going to  be expectations that are going to be laid and you   re going to be held  accountable. This isn   t a freelance job. There   s regulations that you   ve  got to follow through the athletic department. There   s expectations that  you   re going to be held to, whether it   s doing weights and building up  muscle process or whether it   s the expectations that are held to you by  former Petes. And I can tell you, being a former Pete, there have been a  couple of times that I   ve stood in the stands and I   ve gotten to the point  where I look at Pete every now and then, but there have been a couple of  times where I had to take note of a couple of things. And when we go  30  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  back through the interview process, if that individual was trying out, we  had to have a    come to Jesus talk      a heart to heart. These are things  that you will not continue to do if you want to wear that head.  Would you encourage them to try out?  Oh yeah. I can think of one individual that unfortunately I had to have  that talk with and I told him,    You know, it   s up to you; it   s your  decision. But I can   t imagine you not taking that step and doing it  again.    I can   t imagine anyone not wanting that job because I know  what   s on the other side. It   s kind of like going to heaven, you know.  (Laughter) I know what   s on the other side. Don   t be worried about it.  That   s kind of how the Pete situation is. We see these Petes coming in  here and what   s fun about the interview is that you see these kids and  they   ve got hunger in their eyes. I mean, they want it. You just see it.  Some of those others, they   re just sitting there going through the  motions. But those guys that you see it and you see,    Whoa, I want that.  I really, really want that.    Those are the guys that are going to be good.  Those are the guys that you   re going to be proud of. Those are the guys  that, as an alumni, you   re going to want to follow. You asked a question  earlier, what do you think alumni think? They want to see somebody that  they respect representing their university. Alumni just like you and I, we  enjoy seeing people that were younger than us that have come along and  they   ve succeeded beyond where they were at. You look at the guys, the  great athletes, but they   ve gone on to own their own businesses. And  you go,    Wow, I knew he was going to make it. He   s just that kind of  guy.    Those are the things that you look at some of those kids and you  go,    You need to try out. And if you didn   t make it this year, you need to  try out next year.     If you had to do it all over again, would you do it again?  Absolutely. Not even a hesitation. Yes.  Is there anything that you   d do differently?  I don   t think there is, Jerry. And the reason I say that is because my life  leading up to that, I had had events that took place in my life in which I  realized there were fleeting moments, that things changed in the blink of  an eye and that person wasn   t there any longer. Or boy, I really would  have liked to have held onto that memory a little bit longer and enjoyed  the process. I have a saying that,    Life   s not a destination. It   s a journey.  Enjoy the journey.    And so when I became Pete, and I mentioned earlier  that I still have my mortar boards from    84-   85 and    85-   86 that I kept  because I wanted to at some point, just like the other day when I opened  up that box 22 years later, I got to enjoy the journey again. But when I  31  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  became Pete, I made a commitment to myself, two commitments. One  was every time I put that head on I want to remember that five year old  boy; when I was five I got to put the head on and remember what that  meant to me. And the second thing was that I   m going to savor the  moment. I can   t tell you how many times I can remember standing in a  basketball arena, on a football stadium, at a wedding, wherever, a parade  and just taking it in. I can remember. I can remember my last event as  Pistol Pete was the    89er parade in Guthrie, Oklahoma. And I remember  taking it in and savoring that moment and going,    This is the last time.     Just like you did on senior day. The last time you   re going to be on that  field. So every time I was Pete I just tried to take a moment and savor  the moment. I remember wrestling matches and basketball games and all  sorts. I can remember pictures at Theta Pond and I can remember just  stopping and taking it in. Just take it in and remember this. It   s not going  to last long. It   s kind of like raising kids. So enjoy the journey. Life   s a  journey. I   d do it again in a heartbeat but I don   t think I   d change  anything. It was too good the first time.  Anything else we haven   t covered that you   d like to share that you   d  want people 20 or 30 years from now to hear you say?  It   s interesting when you look at old footage, whether its old home  movies or old tapes. I was actually on the website earlier today, clicked  on the Pistol Pete page and I realized now, and it   s probably through you  guys, the archives of Pistol Pete talking, it   s voice recordings of Frank  Eaton talking. And I   d never heard that before. They   re in the Special  Collections. So I was listening to that and I thought, you can read it in a  book, you can watch videos and listen to recordings, but that   s real stuff.  That   s people living in the moment. That   s people   and especially with  that recording of Frank Eaton, he   s telling a story. He   s telling the story  of what it was and what it was like. I don   t really have any  enlightenment or words of wisdom, just the fact that it was fun. It was a  great time. Twenty years from, 40 years from now, 80 years, 100 years  from now, there   s going to be somebody that puts that head on. It   s  going to be another Rick Wilson, somewhere in Nowhere, Oklahoma is  going to put that head on and put those boots on. He   s going to  remember when he saw Pistol Pete and suddenly it   s real life. It doesn   t  matter whether it   s now or 40 years or 100 years in the future, for that  person it   s real and it will never be the same.  Another Rick Wilson that has the bull whip?  Yeah, I need to work on some of those guys  We need to get the rope  and the bull whip back in the picture again.  Any interesting stories that you want to tell about that are off the wall?  32  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  Gill  Wilson  As I was going back through my memorabilia, I   ve got a tape that   s got  some video clips, a couple of television stations that did some specials.  There was one of them I had even forgotten about. Bob Berry, Jr. was  doing a special when we were at the Gator Bowl and I had told him a  story about I was dating a girl here in college at the time, her name was  Linda Locken. She was from Bartlesville, Oklahoma. And I remember  we were in Tulsa and I went to see her and we had gone to an event  earlier that day in Muskogee. It was a U.S. Veterans Armed Services  Parade. I was coming back and I stopped through Tulsa and I had the  Pete head in the car with me, in the truck. We were going to go to a  movie and I didn   t have anywhere to put this thing. I remember going up  with her and I had this in this video with Bob Berry, I remember going  up to buy our tickets, and I asked the fellow, I asked,    By the way, have  you had any burglaries or any people breaking into cars?    And he said,     Yeah, every now and then it happens. It   s a big parking lot, you know,  over here at Woodland Hills.    And I go,    Well I got a question for you.     (Laughter) I said,    This is going to be the craziest question anybody has  asked you today. But I am Pistol Pete at Oklahoma State.    And he   s like,     Oh you are?       And I   ve got Pete in my truck with me. Do you mind if I  take him into the movie house with me?    and he said,    Sure.    And I was  like,    I don   t want to buy another ticket for him, but he needs to tag  along.    So Linda and myself and Pete went to the movie. And you talk  about getting some strange looks. She   s sitting on one side, I   m in the  middle, and I   ve got him sitting on the seat and people would walk in  and they   re looking and I   m like,    Don   t ask. Just enjoy the movie.     (Laughter) There   s story after story like that but that one kind of jogged  my memory the other day because as I was going back through there I  was showing these videos to my kids.  Do you have any more like that? That was great   I can   t think of any. That was just one that was so odd. I told you about  the Ice Bowl and Gallagher. We have to get onto a topic and it will jog  my memory.  I appreciate it Rick.  Thank you, Jerry.  -------  -------   
