 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Friday, March 25, 2016, and I   m in Comanche County Oklahoma, visiting with Ira Kennedy. Mr. Kennedy is being interviewed as part of our Cowboys in Every County oral history project. Mr. Kennedy, let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell me the year you were born and where you were born?  Kennedy Okay. I was born in 1938, October the fourth, in south central Oklahoma, a little town of Elmore City in Garvin County.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. Tell me a little bit about your parents.  Kennedy Okay. My parents, on both sides of the family, homesteaded in this area. On my father   s side, they came in from North Carolina, and on my mother   s side from Tennessee. They came to a little town of Katie, Oklahoma, and that   s where my grandfather on my father   s   or grandparents on my father   s side is buried. My grandfather lived to be a hundred and three years old, so he had a very long life. They came into that area, farmers on both sides of the family. That area was a big broomcorn producing region, which is a crop we don   t grow anymore, but that was the main crop in that general area at that time. Was a big family on my father   s side, ten children, and on my mother   s side, there was six children, and still   I was born and pretty much grew up there.  As a   lot of times during the Depression era, some of them finally   I don   t why they were going to California, but they were going that direction, and I had one uncle and aunt that stopped on the high plains of Texas, at Lamesa, Texas, and then had an uncle that went on over in the Rio Grande Valley. We moved out there in 1941, it was an irrigated region. That was during the war, World War II. We moved back to Oklahoma, the same place, in 1945, and that was when the war was over, and have lived in that area pretty much ever since. Grew up, went to school at a little, two-teacher country grade 5  school named Parks until I got out of the eighth grade, and then we went to high school. Little town there, like I said, Elmore City. When we got out of school, didn   t know what we were going to do. It was mostly either farming or oilfield, big oilfield country.  I didn   t have the resources to make a go of it, but we wanted to stay in farming business, and I didn   t particularly want to go in the oil field. Several of my classmates were going to college, and I came home one Saturday night   . We all went to town on Saturday night, us country boys, and all my friends were going to take off to college that Sunday. I came home and told Mother I thought I   d just go to college, and I was the last resort. She had had three brothers and a sister, and all of them had made attempts at going to college, and not any of them succeeded. When she found out that I was interested in going to college, she was totally elated, and so she said,    Well what are you going to need?    I said,    Well I don   t know. I   ve never been to college before.    (Laughs)  Anyhow, when we got ready to go that afternoon, everything she thought I   d need, she put it in my pillowcase and a paper sack, and that   s what I took off to college. I went the first two years at a little, junior college down at Murray  State College  in Tishomingo,  Oklahoma . At that time, I thought   I didn   t know whether I was going to continue or not. Well, I was very unfortunate. I lost my father my second year, when I was a sophomore, in fall that year. He passed away, and they were in the poultry business, had about ten thousand laying hens, and I told Mother, I said,    Well you know, if you can make it until the semester is over, then I can stop, and get out, and come home.    For some reason or another, she had gotten out of the poultry business before I had a chance to come home from college. I don   t know whether that was intentional or what, so anyhow, after that I went on up at OSU in the fall of 1956.  Nykolaiszyn Why OSU?  Kennedy Well, I guess that   s a pretty good question. About all we knew was agriculture, really. We farmed, and I was in FFA, and very big in the FFA, was a state officer, and I don   t know, we never did consider anywhere else. You know, that   s kind of a good question. I   when we moved to Lawton here, I got acquainted with an attorney here, and I did a lot of work for him. I often said,    You know, if we had been shown other occupations and other things, we might have done something else. We might have been a lawyer, we might have been a doctor, we might have been a   .    I think we could   ve of, if we wanted to, but it was just pretty much, you know, in the agriculture part, straight on, and so   .  Nykolaiszyn Had you ever   before going to OSU, had you ever been to Stillwater before? 6  Kennedy Yeah, we   d go   went up there in or   we had all of our FFA conventions there on campus, and we made it up there. Back in those days, I remember we stayed in   that was before they had the big dorms, you know? We stayed in   there was several buildings. We did stay, I remember, in Cordell Hall some. Cordell Hall was really, I don   t know if it   s even still there or not, but it was of the newer, and then Bennet Hall was new at that time. Of course, they built all these others, all new ones since then, and I guess some of those, if I understood it, have already been torn down, so   . (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn After Murray College, you   re getting ready to go to Stillwater. How do you get to Stillwater?  Kennedy Well, my first car was a little    39 Chevrolet, and I drove it back and forth when I was going to Murray, and then my brother had a little better car than that. We went   I had Dad, and we drove, but we didn   t ever come home very often. Another era, when I was at OSU I worked at the barns. At that time they had the sheep barn, and the hog barns, and the beef barns, and as I indicated a while ago, I worked for the animal husbandry department. It wasn   t the animal science department. I got acquainted with some of the professors and I think this was one of the real advantages. The fact that where we worked, the department, we got well-acquainted with most of the animal husbandry professors at that time.  The first year, I worked and stayed at the sheep barn. The sheep barn is still there that we stayed and lived in, and we worked. Of the morning we would have to get up and do chores about four thirty in the morning, and then we   d go to class, and come in the afternoon and do chores. We did that five days a week, and then we got off at noon on Saturday, and then just did chores on Sunday. Back in those days, we lived in the barns and we eat in boarding houses. There was a lot of boarding   I don   t know if they still do that or not, but there was a lot of boarding houses. In fact, the one that we eat at was where Eskimo Joe   s is at   Ms. Borland   s boarding house right there, and we were pretty   the ladies that we, you know   they pretty well took care of us. Sometimes we   d be late, you know, because we couldn   t get there in time. They   d usually stay around so we could get our suppers.  It wasn   t that bad. We had a   there was a whole bunch of us that did that, and we just kind of had a little fraternity of our own, you know, because of the number of us that did that. But it was a way of going to school, I guess. If it hadn   t have done that, we might not have been able to go. We made, if I remember right, they paid us forty dollars a month, and then you got to live in those facilities, and the boarding houses let us eat for forty dollars a month. When I was a senior, we got a five-dollar raise, and the boarding houses went up five dollars. (Laughs) You think that sounds pretty cheap, but consider the time, before so much of everything has gone up. It wasn   t 7  probably all that bad, and I remember also that the tuition at OSU at that time was nine dollars a credit hour. Considering now, and what   s happened, that   s changed a great deal too.  We had a good time. My college era was very enjoyable, I   ll put it that way. We had a lot of   I made a lot of real good friends, and it was just something that   I didn   t have any problem at all. The biggest problem, I think, we didn   t get out of school at the end of the first semester until after Christmas, usually. We   d start to school in September, and we usually got off two weeks for Christmas. The ones that stayed there the first week got to go home after they did chores on Christmas morning, and then the ones that got to go home, then they came back and had to do chores on Christmas night. That   s the way they divided it. That used to be a pretty lonely period of time. I think everybody wants to be home on Christmas, and you get up early Christmas morning, and you   re   that   s a pretty lonely period. Not anybody   not hardly anybody left on campus, you know.  Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh   Kennedy That was one thing I do remember you might   ve liked to change if you could, but somebody had to stay and take care of our jobs, and that was okay.  Nykolaiszyn Describe your sleeping arrangement in the barn.  Kennedy Well, the one there at the sheep barn, we had a three-high bunk bed. There was three of us that worked there, and that   s about it, and then we had just a restroom facility with a shower, and that was about the extent of it. It   s just as you come in the doors, the big doors of the barn, right there on the right was where you went into the little room. My senior year, I stayed in the experimental swine barn. I worked for a professor that was in charge of animal breeding back in those days, Dr. Whitely. Some of the older people would remember him because he went on to be pretty much the head of the experiment stations and things like that. That was up on the hill there, close to the old dairy barn. Anyhow, I stayed up there by myself, and we had a little cooking facility there, and again, one little room with a bunk bed in it. It was adequate for what we used it for, and then the old hog barn is still there on Sixth Street. It   s still there     Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh.  Kennedy    and I spent a lot of time there. That was a tough deal, I tell you what. A lot of people would come and just couldn   t hardly imagine that we would live in a facility like that. My family, the same way, they   . (Laughs) Again, you got to do what you got to do, I guess. We really didn   t have a lot of help from home, not that we thought we needed to, but we   d preferred to make it 8  on our own, and we pretty much made it on our own. It was all right. We didn   t complain. We were just ole country boys and didn   t really have to have the   I had a lot of real, good fraternity friends.  Another thing that was real fortunate I think, everybody that was involved in the agriculture era for the last forty years knew Dr. Bob Totusek, and I was on Dr. Totusek   s judging team in 1959. That was really   if you were on the judging team at OSU, that was pretty good you know, because at that time, the animal husbandry department was probably one of the most highly recognized division of agriculture in the United States. Probably Oklahoma State University, and Iowa State University, and the University of Illinois, University of Nebraska   those were the really, really top. I think at that time, probably, because of the professors that we had there, OSU was probably the top animal husbandry department in the United States at that time. We had a record of just winning most all those big shows that we went to, and at that time, we went to International, which was in Chicago, Illinois. We won Chicago twice when I was in school there, which was   and then they had the big fire there, and it burnt the old stockyards down, and when that happened, they moved it to Louisville, Kentucky.  That   s where it   s at now, the International, but that   s basically some of the things, and also we had a real   we had a Block and Bridle club, which was the club of the animals husbandry boys. We had a little rodeo every year, which is always a highlight, and we had what we called a Little International, which was a showing and breeding contest. I don   t know whether they still do that or not, but it was always really   it was something that students could do and enjoyed doing, as far as that   s concerned, but it was a good era. You know, Dr. Oliver Willham was the president, and he was a animal breeding specialist when he was a professor there. Dr. Al Darlow was the dean of agriculture, and probably one of the more highly recognized animal science guy in the United States, at that time.  I might also mention when I worked at the sheep barn, the shepherd was Alec McKenzie, and he was probably recognized pretty much worldwide. He   d come to this country from Scotland. He was on a cattle boat that went to Canada. Dr. Darlow was judging the show in Canada and found him and brought him to Oklahoma State University, and he stayed there until he retired, for about thirty-five years. Showed lots of sheep for all the big shows, and judged pretty well all the big sheep shows. That was another, I think, something to be able to say you worked for Alec McKenzie, because he was so highly recognized in the sheep industry. Those are eras and things that happened back in those days that these youngsters don   t have the opportunity today.  I think another thing that I might mention is that if you   ve ever been in the animal science building, the bronze bull still sets there. While I was in 9  school there, the engineers stole the bronze bull and castrated him, (laughter) and that almost brought a stop to the college. I mean that thing   the way they come to this thing, a great, big, bronze stock   you may have seen it. If you haven   t, you ought to go look at it. Anyhow, it   s a huge bronze statue of this old bull. Only way   you had to win the International judging contest three times in a row, or three times to   . It is one thing that, I guess, is probably most well-recognized when people come because of the history of it. Anyhow, that   s something that   the engineers and the Aggies was always pretty much at odds all the time, I   m telling you, and I guess maybe still are  (Laughter) That   s another thing that was kind of fun.  I got out of school there in 1960 with my B.S. degree, and because we had worked at the barns, I   d pretty well been assured a job for the department when I got out of school. At that time, all the research projects were at Fort Reno, down at El Reno  Oklahoma . I had been promised a job at Fort Reno. Well at the time, it hadn   t materialized at that time, and so like everybody else, I got out of school that spring and went back home. Well, my brother and my father were in the dairy business, so I was pretty handy around there, hauling hay and doing all those things. I thought,    Well I   ve spent an awful lot of time going to college. I thought it   d sure be better than this when I got out of college.    (Laughs)  Anyhow, I had a real good friend that was buying hogs for  Myrneur  Meat Packers at Arkansas City, Kansas. That was back when these huge sow operations, hog operations were coming into being, and this guy had a twelve hundred sow operation at Dodge City, Kansas, and was just about to go under. They didn   t know anything about the hog business, so this guy called me, and he said,    Are you   have you found a job yet?    I said,    Well, no. I haven   t yet.    He said,    Well I have a friend that   s got a huge swine operation, out at Dodge City, that really needs somebody to come up there and help him,    and we went up there and looked at it. I thought,    Well, this would at least be a good experience, if nothing else, until maybe something else materializes,    so I went up there. Lo and behold, about two months after I went up there, they call me at Fort Reno, and that   s when I   . I think in that two month period, I went through a sandstorm at Dodge City, Kansas, and I thought,    Well, there   s got to be some place better to live than this right here     (Laughs)  When I had the opportunity to go back to Oklahoma and Fort Reno, I did, and I started my era working for the State of Oklahoma in the fall of 1960, after I graduated in the spring. I worked out at Fort Reno there for two years, and then I changed over to Extension Service. We moved to   well, that was before I got married, and my friend at Fort Reno wound up being my future brother-in-law. My wife   they were from Fort Worth, or by Fort Worth, and....  10  Nykolaiszyn How did you meet your wife?  Kennedy Well, she would come up there, and like I say, her brother worked there at Fort Reno with me, and that   s how we met. Anyhow, he moved on up   he got to come back to OSU to finish up his degree, so I went there and took his job there at Fort Reno. It was kindly a job where, more or less than training type position, and then I went to Fort Reno   I mean, I went to an Extension Service, and I went to Ardmore, Oklahoma, spent six months in training, and then I went to a job over at Durant, which is in the southeastern part of the state. Went to work for the Extension Service and was there three years, and then I had the opportunity to come to Cameron University, or at that time, Cameron State Ag College at Lawton  Oklahoma . It was still a junior college and that was in, actually the fall of 1965, and what was so different back in those times is we didn   t have any contract. We didn   t have any Affirmative Action, we didn   t   they would tell us in April if we were going to have a job next year, and that was about the best they could do   we didn   t know.  We came to Lawton, and those of you   if you think back, that was the beginning of this Vietnam War, in the early    60s there. By 1965,    66, and    67 was when the Vietnam War was at the height. That was really an era at Cameron. When I came over here and went to teaching that thing   a lot of the young people, you know, if they could get into school and stay in school, they could get an educational deferment. We had to as teachers, at the end of every six weeks, turn the grades in to the Registrar, and anybody that was on the D and F list, that was when we still had the draft, those names went to the draft board. Educational deferment was 4A, and when you lost that you went to 1A, and 1A was this trip right straight to Vietnam. Lots of times I   d get to school on Monday morning, and there   d be mothers of those boys that had been notified that they were   and they would be there trying to figure out some way to keep them in school, and it was really a touchy thing. It was something   you had to treat everybody fairly, and had to treat everybody the same, because I don   t know how you could live with yourself if you didn   t do that, and somebody went to the war and didn   t come back, and somebody that stayed at home that should have went. You know, I   m saying     Nykolaiszyn Absolutely   Kennedy So that was an era that was really different that we taught in, and   .  Nykolaiszyn What did you teach at Cameron?  Kennedy I taught in the animal husbandry department. I taught the introductory animal sci   everything was animal science then because it changed, but I taught the introductory courses, and then when   see, Cameron was still a 11  junior college at that time, and then it went to a four-year school in    68, and they graduated their first class   four-year class, baccalaureate class in 1970. The ag department didn   t change until    71, and then our classes were   we were graduates after that, but I had all of the animal science classes, then we had   and I might also point out, we didn   t have any sabbatical at all back in those days.  Well, in the    70s, Oklahoma hit another oil boom, really  They got to getting quite a bit of money for education. They give us that hadn   t had a chance to finish our degrees   we could go take a sabbatical leave, and we could go six months at full pay, or twelve   or full two semesters at half pay. Well, like everybody else, I had a wife and children at home, and trying to maintain there. Again, I had to have a place to live at OSU in Stillwater, so that was one reason that I didn   t have any problem living in the barns, because I couldn   t afford other things, but anyhow, we made it through. That was kind of tough, probably tougher on them than it was me because they had to stay at home, and make it through the summer, and keep the home fires kind of going. Anyhow, we did that   .  Nykolaiszyn You went back to earn your master   s?  Kennedy Yeah, yeah. I got my master   s, and then after that, I got another sabbatical to go back and work on my doctor   s. I finally   I had gone to school, you can just about imagine, every summer, and I finally got a break in it. I could   ve   that was the only regret, I guess, probably I have of myself, and I think the only disappointment they have of me that I didn   t finish. I lacked about nine hours and my dissertation of finishing my doctor   s, and I really wished I had of. That was one thing I really wish I had of done. If I had it to do over, I   m sure I would   ve, but anyhow, that was a period that   we started out and we didn   t know how long we would be at Cameron. I always thought that we   d stay in a place until something maybe better, or we would like more so than, and it just never really happened.  I got to coach a judging team here at Cameron, which I really liked, especially being on a judging team there at OSU, and we had quite a bit of success. We won in Houston a couple of years, and we competed with all the other junior colleges in the state, and not only just in the state but I mean in the southwest part of the United States, and so we got to do that. That was a fun time during the early stages that I was at Cameron. When I went back to work on my doctor   s, they hired another animal scientist, and he was the shepherd at University of Illinois. He came, and that   s when we went into four-year   became a graduate degree program. Anyhow, there was two of us, and we covered all of the animal science courses together then, which was quite a few more when we had to start teaching graduate   not graduate, but upper division classes. We did that, and the whole time I was there, we 12  went through, I guess, about four presidents at Cameron during that period, and so I had a real good era at Cameron.  Nykolaiszyn You were there a long time   Kennedy Yeah, I was there thirty-five years   Nykolaiszyn What year did you retire?  Kennedy I retired in the year 2000. I started in 1965 and retired in the year 2000, and I was sixty-two years old the spring   and I always said that when I got   almost with this health insurance, it just kept going up, and I would   ve liked to have retired maybe sooner, because I was farming all the time that I was teaching school too. I just couldn   t really make it, retiring earlier, because the insurance   so when we finally got to where we could get, of course, the teacher   s retirement and also our social security, then we could afford to get out. That   s how come me to retired, I guess, at that age.  Nykolaiszyn Were you farming this whole period that you were at Cameron?  Kennedy Pretty much so. I came over there in    65. I wasn   t farming much for myself at the early stages, and then in    76 is when we bought one of the first farms we had, and that   s when we went to farming pretty much fulltime. I mean, still school teaching was the one thing that allowed me to farm, I   ll be real honest with you, but that   s when we really started on our own, and was really fortunate. This land is just absolutely skyrocketing, and especially here, if you look across the road here. One thing, we   re close enough to Lawton. Lawton is the   I guess about the fourth largest city in the state. The area, about twenty-five-mile radius, of Lawton is pretty much close enough in that we   ve seen that affect land values, people wanting to get out and this type of thing.  Anyhow, we bought our first place, and back in those days, the Federal Land Bank would loan you 65 percent of the loan. Well, I was very much like a lot of the other people that had a wife, and at that time, Jolene, when she was a little youngster, she was sick quite a bit. I told everybody,    You know by the time you pay your bills, and especially your doctor bills and medical bills, and all that kind of thing, we didn   t have   pretty hard to come up with that 35 percent.    We got to farming school land. In Oklahoma, there   s lots of school land, and how this come about was when Oklahoma become a state, there was certain amount of land in western Oklahoma that was given to the School Land Department, and the revenue off of that was used to operate these small schools.  There   s still quite a lot of school land, and that   s the way we got started was farming school land, was leases. Anyhow, we did that, and we finally got 13  together enough money to pay that 35 percent, and we bought our first place. Fortunate enough, we got some equity in that and was able to use the equity in that to buy another farm. I guess just like any other farmer or anybody that owns land, you can   t ever get too much. (Laughs) Anyhow, we wound up   we   ve gotten three or I think it   s four quarters of lease land and we farm, before I went to cutting back, we was farming about seventeen hundred acres, and part of that was, a lot of it was lease land.  Nykolaiszyn What were you farming?  Kennedy Mostly wheat and cattle. The cattle end of it has been the main thing, but this is big wheat country, in our area here. I say big wheat country. It   s one of the major crops. Wheat and cotton, and I   ve never been a cotton farmer much because it   s a row crop. Cattle and wheat is just two things that go together. We grow wheat more for forage I think than we do for the grain because wheat pasture and cattle is just the best combination in the farming business, I think, that you can get into, so that   s why we do that mostly. Anyhow, we got to farming and then we   ve been very active in our community, I think. I like the   we have our little volunteer fire department that we   re active in. I was on the board of the Farm Service Agency for about twelve years, which is the board that manages government money for all the farm operations.  I was a board member on our Federal Credit Union, or it used to be Lawton Teachers Credit Union, for about seventeen, eighteen years, but I thought it was something   I didn   t do much of that as long as I was teaching school because I didn   t think I had enough time, but after we quit teaching, you know retired, we   ve become pretty active. My wife, she   s very active in our church, and they always   one of the big things they do is provide a meal for anybody, when they pass, for a funeral, and she   s done that for gosh, I don   t know how long. Our kids, I guess, are just like everybody else, or I guess, we   ve always thought was the pride of our family. Pam, our oldest daughter, she got out, and she went up at OSU, what one year or two years, one year, and I think kind of realized that you could go other places, (laughter) especially after she got her grades that first  time .  Anyhow, she came back and started out at Cameron, and she got a degree there at Cameron, vocational home economics at that time. She   the first job she took was back in that time when OSU had this what they called an energy program. What they did was to teach or train these lower income families how to fix their homes so it would be more energy efficient and things like that. She went to work, and it was really supposed to be kind of a short-term job. Wasn   t nothing   before she completed that six months, she got to go to work for the Extension in Cotton County. It   s the little county next to us here, very small county, and that job come open, and she got to go 14  down there. She has been down there, right there at Walters, and been the county Extension director for I think about thirty     Jolene Thirty-four.  Kennedy    thirty-four years now, and that   s a long time in one spot. (Laughs) Jolene come along, and she decided she wanted to be a nurse, and so at that time Cameron had a nursing program. It   s connected with OU now, but at that time it was strictly at Cameron. So she got her RN there at Cameron, and she got out and went to work. She and her husband got married there in    81     Jolene Four.  Kennedy    Eighty-four, and she went to work for the Pauls Valley Hospital. They live over at Pauls Valley, and her husband worked for the post office and farmed, and then she went to work for the county. She was a county nurse at that time, and worked there for how many years?  Jolene Twenty-five.  Kennedy I mean before you went to   anyhow, presently, she   s a four-county nursing director, more in the administrative part of it. Had good jobs and stayed with them. And our youngest grandson, he went to school at OSU and has just recently gotten out, and he farms with his dad. Our other two grandsons, one of them is the Extension director in Johnson County, at Tishomingo, and the other one is with Soil Conservation at Oklahoma City. All of   they went to school and got their degrees here at Cameron. The youngest went to school at OSU though. My sons-in-law both are graduates of Cameron. Roberta worked for the post office on campus for twenty-two years, so Cameron   s been good to us, so we have to be somewhat aligned to Cameron too.  Nearly all my education has been through OSU, so we   ve been pretty much pro-ed. Going to school in our family, really whether you went or not wasn   t an alternative until they got out of college. We know that that   s paid big dividends for all of them. We recently got a two-year-old, three-year-old. Three-year-old grandson   great-grandson and fixing to have a great-granddaughter. The first one female in our family in fifty years. (Laughter) You can imagine, getting a little granddaughter, you don   t think she   s going to be spoiled. (Laughter) Anyhow, we   ve had a good family life. I will put it that way. All of us enjoy getting together. In fact, Sunday, or tomorrow is Roberta   s birthday, but we   re going to have the big deal Sunday. They   re all coming here Sunday, so having a big birthday Sunday.  Nykolaiszyn There are a few things I kind of want to ask you some follow-up questions on. 15  Kennedy Okay, yeah  Yeah.  Nykolaiszyn Did you do any judging while you were at Murray?  Kennedy Yes. I had an opportunity to judge there two years, still got the medals in there. I was high individual at Houston when I was a freshman, and Houston was a big time. The next year we judged at Fort Worth, and I was high individual in swine judging and high individual in oral reasons, overall. That was the second year. We had a real, real good coach when I was at Murray. I think that was part of the reason that as much time as we spent in that in a junior college, when I got to OSU I had an opportunity to make the judging team up there.  Nykolaiszyn Which was tough then.  Kennedy Yeah. Real tough, real, real tough. I   ll tell you, Dr. Totusek is also another one of those guys that   s pretty much world renown. If you had an opportunity to know him, and he was an Oklahoma boy and OSU graduate. We had another thing that I think that was something worth mentioning. At that time we got absolutely no help. Everything was volunteer on our part. When we would go to meets, or to contests, we each paid our own way. We have spent up there almost every weekend, when we could get off from the college. They were pretty good since we were working for the University in the animal science, or animal husbandry, to let us off if we were making the judging team, because that was part of the same school. We did a lot of traveling, just in the practice. Again, you had to want to do it pretty bad, just pay your own way, but that was okay because it was worth it. Yeah, if you can say you were on the OSU judging team, that   s pretty good   something to put on a resume too.  Nykolaiszyn You took two trips to International. How did you get there?  Kennedy We went in   I remember we had a    56 Ford station wagon, and this was in    57,    58   I was on judging team in    59, and we drove up there. I never will forget one time we were up there and coming home, while we were up there it come a bad, bad storm. We drove on ice almost all the way. That was a   I   ll tell you another thing that might be interesting. When I worked at the sheep barn, Alex McKenzie, he was   they did a lot of   back then the University showed at these big   Chicago and Kansas City and Houston, and back then, there wasn   t a railroad that went   I don   t think still there   s a railroad that runs through Stillwater, or if it was   but anyhow, what I remember, they would send us a boxcar over at Perry. You know where Perry is?  Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh. 16  Kennedy We   d go over there and fix pens and the deal, and he and another one of the students would ride that boxcar all the way from Perry, Oklahoma, to Chicago, Illinois, and take care of the animals. That was sheep in that particular case. They had a whole boxcar load of sheep. (Laughs) Anyhow, he used to tell us that sometimes they   d get kicked off on a spur or something, in a railyard, and they didn   t know when they   they knew when they were going to be there, but they didn   t know, if they   d get kicked off, when they were going to start again. You can imagine cold weather   this is November, and you   re going north in November, it was   I never did make that trip. I did go to Kansas City one year, but we went by car and truck up there. We didn   t go in a boxcar. But it   s   golly, you tell these youngsters today, it   s pretty hard for them to imagine. Back those days, just something that, again, that was really kind of an honor, to get to do that.  Nykolaiszyn You mentioned the Block and Bridle Club. Did you do much rodeoing?  Kennedy No, I wasn   t. Another thing that I might point out   I was kind of unfortunate, I was crippled. I got crippled when I was about seven years old, and I was crippled almost all of my junior high or my school period. Back in those days, I wore a buildup shoe and a brace for about eight or nine years. When I got out   finally I went to McBride Hospital in Oklahoma City. Anyhow, to make a long story short, it pretty well took me out of being able to be any type of athletic participant.  Nykolaiszyn Was it polio?  Kennedy No. It was during the polio period, but the doctor told my mother and dad, we had a brother that was that way, that we had Perthes    disease. This was   it caused your bones to get soft, and my right hip just crumbled off. Their theory was that by not walking on it, and that   s reason for not putting any weight on it, and that   s the way they could prevent putting weight on it is by using this brace and this buildup shoe, and that it would grow back because I was young. It never really did. In fact, when they finally gave up, they told me that I   d eventually have trouble as I got older. Sure enough, it finally just got really, really bad, and I never will forget. They kept trying to get me to go   that was when they first started putting these prosthesis in, and I had a brother that he had his fixed, there at McBride.  It just got to really causing me a lot of trouble and lots of pain. I remember we were getting ready to sow wheat, and I   d been farming, and boy, putting a lot of hours in, and I came in one day for lunch, and just moaning, and I said something about,    I believe I   ll just go up to Oklahoma City to have my hip fixed.    My wife heard me say that, and I come in in about a week, and she said that,    I have you an appointment with Dr. Rice at McBride in Oklahoma City,    and I didn   t refuse it. You probably   and again, after I did 17  that, that was probably   you look back over things that you do during your life that changed your life, and that was probably one of the greatest things I   ve ever done, because I   d been crippled so long  When I had that hip fixed, it was just   and I can still say I still don   t have any problem, and that   s been a long time. Had my first in 1979.  Nykolaiszyn Oh, I can see that it could really hurt you with farm chores     Kennedy Oh yeah, yeah  Well, that was one of the things that they were   . I was wanting, I was trying to get on rehab when I was in school. Rehab didn   t want to give me any assistance because I was in agriculture, because they didn   t think because of my condition that I would ever be able to make a go of it in the farming business, but I did and that wasn   t a   you know what I   m saying? That was just a   it was a miracle when I had that done, so I will credit that as being one of the major things that helped me, as far as being able to improve my health.  Then I had to have a bypass surgery in about    93, and I   ve had good luck ever since. So had a few health problems but for the most part, still able to get out and do all my farming, and take care of my cattle. That   s just been a big part of my life. I said several times, I got out of high school and if I could have had the resources to have made a living in the farming business at that time, I probably wouldn   t have ever went to college.  That was just out of the picture, and finally wound up working for the State of Oklahoma forty-one years and finally, after that, I got started farming. (Laughs) I did, I had forty-one years in higher education with OSU and Cameron, and then I had enough sick leave. They give me one year for my sick leave and went up to forty-one years. Wound up   turned out to be a good retirement. Dr. Bennett was our division chairman. He and I together wrote a grant and got a grant to do a lot of embryo transfer. My degree   all my advanced degree was in reproductive physiology. That was when they really started doing much of this   they   ve been doing a lot of artificial breeding, but this embryo transfer was something relatively new. I mean, it ain   t right now, but when it was coming in   .  I think we got a  160,000 grant there at Cameron, and this give us a chance to go out and buy some really, really high quality females that we would have to get the embryos out of, and we got to do that for students. We got to doing it right there on campus, which was really something big for a small school. If we hadn   t have got that   which also, it helped me   it gave me   we always   it   d give me a full month employment my last few years, which really helped my retirement. Now, all that was good for Cameron, it was good for the students, and it was certainly good for those of us that were involved in it. We still got a lot of really good cows that became those real 18  high-producing, high quality females through that program, so that was another thing that was kind of fun.  Nykolaiszyn Taking you back to your Cooperative Extension days down in Durant, what was your role? Were you a county agent?  Kennedy I was assistant county agent in charge of mostly 4-H.  Nykolaiszyn Okay.  Kennedy Yeah. Another thing that we got involved in, all of us in the part there, there   s a lot of   see, Bryan County is a county below Lake Texoma. It   s on Red River, and Lake Texoma is when Washita River and Red River come together, and they make Lake Texoma. Well, all the water in Red River   s got too much salt in it to irrigate out of. The Washita and Red River come into the lake, then when they turn it out the salinity goes down where it   s irritable. They went to   before that, those guys farming down there in that valley was mostly, they just had dirt irrigation ditches. After they got some federal money, they went to building concrete-lined irrigation ditches. We were there, and the Extension was really, really involved in that. We had an ag engineer that worked in Extension, and through our office and this ag engineer we did a big part of the engineering work for those things, and that was one thing that I did for the farmers. Mostly my job was pretty much in the 4-H end of it. Of course, I was the youngest person in the office too, so     Nykolaiszyn It made sense.  Kennedy    yeah. That was a big thing I did probably, or my main, probably, responsibility when I was in Extension, but I liked the Extension. I think one thing, probably, that the reason I got out of it, the old gentleman that was the director of Extension had been there for many, many years. He retired and we had just   hadn   t been there very long, and we were at a county agents    convention in Stillwater. A guy came out of Missouri and he told us there that day that he expected all the agents in Oklahoma to become mobile, that we   d be in a county about three years, and we   d have to move, and I didn   t like the idea. It was really   how can you ever get started and accumulate or do much if you   re going to move every three years?  That   s when we found out, and in fact, we were coming home, and she and I both agreed that that wasn   t something that we were going to want in life. If you were going to do that, you could join the military, and they   ll help you  We wound up having an opportunity to come over here to Cameron, and we knew as long as we taught school at Cameron that we would be here, and we   ve been here ever since. (Laughs) I   ll tell you another era that I didn   t mention a while ago that was really, really   became an important period 19  was the end of that Vietnam War when all these veterans come home. Of course, Lawton being a military town with Fort Sill, those guys had quite a lot of GI benefits     Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh.  Kennedy    and they had ten years to use them, and we went to having oh, night students. We had night classes four nights a week, those soldiers or retired soldiers, and...  Nykolaiszyn Sure.  Kennedy    it was a period of nonconventional students. These guys, most all of them were older than I was. In fact, I had a lot of students when I came to Cameron that was older than I was. I was twenty-six years old when I started teaching out here, and we had a lot of students, and that was   but when we went to having all these veterans coming in   and those guys, I mean, my opinion   I felt like those guys pretty much paid their way. Hey, they spent a number of years during that war period that nobody much approved of to begin with, and so if they want to go to college, I thought that was great. Anything we could do, and this was kind of the way we felt in our department, that we could do to encourage them to go to school, and come to Cameron, that   s kind of the way we approached those older students. We got to make a lot of really, really good friends that later on was really supporters of our department. Another thing that I think was kind of unique   well, I thought was something that we as teachers should do   being able to remember faces and names, and things like that and I got to where   I worked at it some too  If you want to you can do things to help you remember, and those guys, I think, when they were in the military, were just numbers, and     Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh.  Kennedy    by the time I   d have those   we   d have them   there were eight-week classes, two eight-week classes in a semester, and by the time our class was over, I was pretty   I knew most of them. I could call them by name, most of them. And the one thing I remember more than anything, one day I run onto one of those students up here in the grocery store. And this was several years after, and I walked up to him, and called him by his first name, and I hadn   t seen him, and he just grabbed me around  Just gave me a big old hug, and he said,    Mr. Kennedy, how in the world could you ever remember my name?    He said,    There was many of us and only you, and I cannot imagine anybody could remember our name     I think it was because in the military   and they thought that was just something great  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn What was your trick? 20  Kennedy Well, you try to associate them with somebody else that you know with a name like that. That was one thing, and then we did a lot of things that really associated with them that really wasn   t particularly in class. We always   during the stock show   Lawton and Comanche County has a great big stock show every year, livestock show. Used to   we   d have four, five hundred hogs in the stock show, and we would have to weigh every one of them before the stock show. Well, that was a big, big deal for those guys. We would take them down there   with night class, we   d take them down there and weigh those pigs, and they   d never had an opportunity to do something like that, personally. We just did a lot of things that associated yourself with them, and that was one thing, and it helps you, and I think they appreciated something like that.  Nykolaiszyn Does this part of Comanche County that we are in have a certain name? I know we   re kind of outside of Lawton.  Kennedy This right here, we   re in Hulen Community, Hulen. Right over here, about four miles, used to be a little town, had a cotton gin, and right now they still have a grain-buying elevator, and there   s a Methodist church over there. That   s about all that   s left, but at one time, they had   it was kind of a pretty good size   not big, but they had several businesses, but it   s just like a lot of the others. Over the years, they just finally   people went to going away. The biggest thing there right now is the grain elevator. We grow a lot of wheat in this area, thousands, quite a number of acres. Of course, wheat is big in Western Oklahoma, but in this area right through here, it   s pretty good wheat country. I mean, as far as wheat production, we make pretty good wheat crops here. The biggest problem, of course, is the fact that, like a lot of other crops, the wheat market sure has been sporadic in the last few years and drought problems.  Really   and the big thing that helps wheat   course, like I said a while ago, the use of it in cattle production. We   ve come a period   through a period just recently that is an all-time record as far cattle prices. Cattle prices have never been what they   ve been the last   of course, they   ve gone down some too, but went through a period there where a market   s calf that we   d send to Oklahoma City to the market up there, off a wheat pasture, would bring 2000 dollars. Now you think about that. A truck load of cattle would bring a hundred and fifteen, twenty thousand dollars. That   s lots of money, and we   ve never seen   anybody in the cattle business, and it   s very profitable too. That   s why the cattle business has been big time. The big thing is   also we still have what we call cattle/calf operations. We have mama cows, and raise calves, and ween the calves and put them on the wheat pasture. That   s pretty much the way we operate, as far as our cattle business is concerned.  Nykolaiszyn You   re also farming land in Cotton County as well? 21  Kennedy Well, now I don   t have any in Cotton County, but Cotton County is just three miles down.  Nykolaiszyn Oh, okay.  Kennedy Yeah, I used to have one place in Cotton County, but I don   t have it anymore. It just got to the point where   you know you just go to running your machinery. You get so much money tied up in farm machinery, and you go to running it up and down the roads, but I had forgotten about that, it is. That was in Cotton County.  Nykolaiszyn Do you   have you seen much no-till in this area?  Kennedy We   re starting to see   I have a neighbor that   s got a place just across the road from me over here is starting no-till. I think no-till is probably going to be   I think it is going to find a place. The big problem starting out in no-till is the fact that you have to change your equipment. You go spend seventy-five, eighty thousand, a hundred thousand dollars for a new drill, you got to be committed. Probably another sixty thousand dollars for a spray rig. Where you really get to putting a dollar to it and a pencil to it, you can plow, if you want to sit on the tractor long enough, for about the same price that you can buy glyphosate   Roundup. You got to spray to control all your weeds. Well, by the time you spray three or four times, that gets to be kind of expensive too. We   re seeing it really get a hold. There   s probably more of it down   the Kinders down in Cotton County were really kind of some of the forerunners. They   ve got into it.  Another thing that is really promoting no-till is these varieties of cotton. We don   t have any varieties of wheat, but we   ve got varieties of cotton that you can plant, and spray, and go back with the cotton picker. That Monsanto, of course, you got to buy   that seed is about a hundred dollars an acre to plant it, and then you got to use Roundup. You can   t use a generic form of Roundup to spray it, so it   s just absolutely revolutionized the cotton business. The cotton business was about gone in this country until they controlled the boll weevil, and then they come along with these genetically-altered seed, and it   s the only way to go. I mean, nobody questions that at all.  I never will forget. I had a neighbor over here that I come by one day. He was there in the road, and so I asked him, I said,    What are you doing?    He said,    Well I   m planting cotton,    and I said,    Where abouts?    He said,    Well he   s planting cotton right there,    and I said,    You mean you   re planting cotton out there in that?    I thought he was crazy, and he said,    Yeah     I thought,    Well, whatever.    (Laughs) We have a lot of farmers that farm for insurance and...so anyhow   government payments and insurance, 22  you know? I said,    Okay,    and I came back by there in about two weeks, and that was as pretty a cotton field as you   d ever saw. Just rows   he had plowed it, you know, after it   d come up, and rows of cotton. There wasn   t nothing but a row of cotton, and everything else was just as clean as it could be, because the chemical killed all the weeds. Naturally, kill the weed, you got   it was just a beautiful crop, and that   s what you can do with these genetically altered seeds, but   .  We   re getting a lot of resistance to Roundup. Roundup, I   m sure you probably know what Roundup   that variety, it   s Monsanto. They   re   we   re getting a lot of resistance to glyphosate. Another problem that we run into   glyphosate won   t kill cotton, and if you   ve got a lot of volunteer cotton, where you leave the seed on the ground, you got a problem there, because how are you going to get rid of that volunteer cotton? A lot of people didn   t realize that, but anyhow, we   ve seen   we have to admit and have to pat ourselves on the back some. We   ve come a long ways in this technology, as far as cotton production is concerned. I tell you what, there   s lots of good farmers in this country. In fact, I had one of my former students that went to work for Syngenta, I think it   s the seventh largest chemical company,  which  developed a product called Axial. It   s to control ryegrass in wheat, and he was one of the R and D, research and development, guys for that.  He lived at Lubbock, and out in the high plains they grow mostly cotton. They don   t grow much wheat, and they were needing some area back here to do some research with wheat. He said,    Well I   ve got a former professor that farms wheat out there.    He said,    I bet he would do that for us.    Of course, just I really   I   m glad and just appreciate him offering to let me use some of my property. He came and they put a lot of research plots on, and he put some of them right out here.  This road right down here is another thing. It doesn   t mean anything, but it   s what we call the Base Line. If you live in Oklahoma, all of the plots and all of the surveying in Oklahoma was off of this road right here, the Meridian Line. Meridian Line, if you come east   it   s west of Stillwater, before you go   when you go back   you know where the Meridian Line is?  Nykolaiszyn Yes, I do.  Kennedy Okay. The Meridian Line runs north and south, the Base Line right there runs east and west, and those two come together over here, south of Pauls Valley. Everything south of that road right there is south, when you take the   everything north of it, this farm right here is One North. Anything on the other side of that road is One South, in legal description, and that   s significant. A lot of people don   t realize that, and the Meridian Line   that   s how Oklahoma was surveyed.  23  Anyhow, we   ve done a lot of work in helping   we have to give those chemical companies credit. I tell you another thing that   s not set very good with lots of people, but you got to admit, and OSU is one of them, is we   re developing this high producing lines of wheat. I mean, OSU has really done a lot of good work in wheat breeding. Boy  That costs a lot of money. I mean, and up until that, the seed companies were about the only ones that were willing to spend that.  They can determine those varieties with DNA, and boy, I   m telling you what, they   ve got this thing worked out. If you use these improved varieties of wheat that   s been developed and don   t pay the premium on them, boy, you can really   in fact, I had one neighbor down here   and we   ve always.... If I grow a wheat crop out here, I can replant it myself, but I can   t sell it to you, and if you get caught in me selling it to you   I had a neighbor down here done that, and he   s an older farmer, and they fined him fifty thousand dollars, and he got their attention when that deal   it come down to a court case. We always thought,    Since we pay taxes, and OSU is a tax-supported institution, that if they produce a variety up there, then we should have privy to that.    Well, we don   t do that anymore. OSU has produced a lot of really, really good wheat varieties. Well, Texas A M has done the same thing.  See, everything that Texas A M has produced is TAM, like TAM 101 or...and OSU has produced a lot of varieties that most of them have got Indian names or   but still, they   re getting a lot of revenue. Now, in fact, I saw a deal the other day, I got it to publication, where I think it   s approaching a million dollars that OSU has gotten off of royalties, off of wheat, which is good  I   m for it  I realize what it costs to produce those things, and it takes a long time. We as farmers have gained and benefited from that, so these people (and some of them are still planting these old varieties) just not willing to pay. I have a neighbor up the road here that sells a lot of seed wheat, but he   s still selling those old varieties because they   re not willing to pay for the certified seed, to start out. Which is all right if you want to use them, but there   s so much difference in production of these improved varieties compared to the old ones, that I can   t hardly imagine still doing that. That   s their call, as far as that   s concerned.  Oklahoma has been very, very supportive, particularly Oklahoma State, in their research and not only just in crop production but animal production too. Very, very supportive, and another thing that   s helped a whole lot of course is this Beef Checkoff  Program , what we   costs us a dollar every time we sell an animal for   and a lot of that goes for research, so I   m kind of pro when it comes to anything that will in the long run help us stay in business, really.  Nykolaiszyn Well, these days, how do you stay connected to OSU? 24  Kennedy Well, I   m, of course, a member of the Animal Science Alumni, which we have a meeting up there every year in the spring. I haven   t gone to one in several years, but we get publications. I tell you another thing we do, OSU is connected with Noble Foundation. I don   t know whether you   re familiar with Noble Foundation over at Ardmore. They work together, and we get a publication from them. Usually, we get a newsletter from the Extension every month, and we have a number of our graduates from Cameron that work for OSU Extension.  In fact, the new livestock specialist that lives in Duncan is one of my former students, so we have a   the Extension does a pretty good job of getting information, and that   s really their job. Not just in having an office, but the Extension basically is extending Oklahoma State University out to where it could be useful. That   s one way, but we get several publications, especially in new research projects, as far as that   s concerned. I think OSU does a good job getting information out, and most of it really is through   I think probably a lot of it is through the Extension, probably, that   s one of their main sources of getting their information out, so that   s good. That   s a plus, as far as that   s concerned.  Nykolaiszyn Do you have a good relationship with your county agent?  Kennedy Yeah, real good. Real good. I have a number   we   ve had a number of county agents that   and here   s the thing that a lot of people don   t realize now a days. When I was a youngster growing up, I mean, the county agent was looked on as one of the persons that   s got all the knowledge. They did have a lot of knowledge because they had a source of it. What a lot of people don   t know now, a lot of these guys out here farming are about as knowledgeable as the county agent. You know what I   m saying     Nykolaiszyn Oh yeah   Kennedy    and they   ve had to be. Just like we   re talking about these chemicals, what to use. Here   s another real source of information is, we   ve got to give them credit, these commercial companies. Every one of them. I have a young man lives over here, works for Helena Chemical, and his job basically is to scout cotton and wheat, and it   s a service that costs very little. I can plant wheat crop. I don   t ever worry about bugs. When I need to spray, he lets me know when I need to spray or will even order the guy to come spray it. That   s where we   re at. That   s a source from the private source, and those guys making their living at that, and boy, don   t you think those guys don   t know what you   re doing, so that   s another source. I tell you, we in the farming industry today probably are about as knowledgeable in all of these new things that   s come down the pike as anybody.  25  Not only   it   s made our business more profitable, and it   s allowed us to stay in business. Sure, we never would   ve thought we   d of paid a hundred dollars an acre for a cotton seed, when you used to   you could pay it fifteen dollars an acre, or we never would   ve thought we   d be paying twenty-five dollars an acre for seed wheat. Somebody   s got   when you look at what it costs to produce those things, somebody   as the old saying,    There   s no free lunch,    and that   s about what it amounts to. If we have it, somebody   s got to pay the price. I think that if it wasn   t the fact that by golly, it would pay, we wouldn   t use it, or if it hadn   t been paying, we would quit using it.  The same thing we can say in the animal business. I think, right up here at Cameron, where we got into this embryo transfer. Course, we can take the seller   s side of it. We can collect semen from basically one collection, we may go breeding. The dairy people proved this   they don   t even   very seldom do you ever find a dairy herd or a big dairy that has a bull on the place. Everything  Ninety-nine percent of it   s artificial bred. Well, we can spread the genetics through the seller   s side very easily, but when you think about the time it takes to produce a female and get her in production, you   re looking at probably close to three years from that side of it. Well, on this embryo transfer, if we get lucky, especially with hormones and things like this, that we can increase ovulation. Using all those, we can detect heat   we can know when animals are coming into heat. We can use AI  Artificial Insemination .  We had one cow   you probably may be familiar with Express Ranches at Yukon, the biggest seed stock producer in the world, right here. My grandson, he shows heifers that he   they   d go up there. Well, we got to buying some of those heifers. We   d buy just half-interest. We just wanted half-interest. We didn   t want to bring them home. They keep them up there, and they do all of the collection and the whole works. We had one heifer up there that they collected sixty-one viable embryos out of. Sixty-one  They   ve got them in that nitrogen tank, and they   ll use every one of them. That   s pretty profitable, when they can still do that, but that   s what you can do with embryo transfer.  Now, don   t get me wrong. There   s a lot more to be said about that than what I   m telling you. It takes a lot of work. It takes a lot of know-how. You got to be willing to do it. You got to be willing to put the time in to do it, but from the standpoint of being able to improve production in a much shorter time, that   s the advantage of it. If we can go out here and have one of the best cows in the breed and use her to collect out of, we may increase her production by twentyfold the first breeding. We can do that  That   s what   s happened, why we have so many, best in the world.  You go into a lot of places,    We don   t have that technology,    at least at the point where they   re doing it down on the farm, I   d put it that way. And I can 26  remember when we didn   t do it down on the farm. It just   maybe a few of the biggest   that was willing to spend the money, that had the money, at the early stages of this thing, but it was again, one of those things that pretty much come through the University.  When I was in graduate school, we had   I had one animal reproduction class that, Dr.   that guy   . He was, I thought, one of the smartest people I ever knew, and he went on   when he retired, developed his own company, this thing, when it was early starting, but I think we   re really fortunate. We live at a time, and fortunately, in a state that we   re farming, we   re farmers, we have people that support farming. Oklahoma   s a great farm state. Maybe not be the   we may not have the best land in the world, but we can produce almost anything we want to. The big thing that we don   t have control over is moisture. In the country where we live, right here, if we could get adequate rain, we could produce about anything we want to grow here. Right?  Nykolaiszyn Oh yeah  Absolutely.  Kennedy We could even produce vegetable crops if we wanted to. You produce whatever crop that the rainfall lets you produce, and wheat is basically a dryland crop. Cotton   s a dryland crop. That   s why we don   t produce soybeans out here. Takes a little better soil to grow soy beans, but it takes more moisture. You get on over in the eastern part of the state, and they grow a lot of soybean. Get up in the Corn Belt, mostly beans and corn, but they get a lot more rain up there than we do, get a lot more snow, so moisture   s still a big thing. Irrigation anymore   they grow a lot of corn out in the Panhandle   irrigation, but I don   t know what   s going to happen now. The cost of energy to run those pumps is almost to the point where it don   t   almost not feasible, and we didn   t think we   d ever see that. I don   t know, with this oil thing like it is, it may affect natural gas, and mostly natural gas is what they use.  Really, I think another thing that you talk to anybody in our business is the fact that the two things that control our business that we have absolutely no control over is markets and rainfall. We can   t control either one of them, and so we have to take   the only place or only business that I know of that you produce a crop, you take it to market, and you take what they   re willing to pay you. What else can you do? If we store it, first thing we know, we get more tied up in storage, and it goes to cutting in on what we can get for it. It   s just a business that we have to learn to accept, and hopefully   the old saying is,    If it   s not very good, well, it   ll sure be better next year.    (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn At least you hope so.  Kennedy Yeah, that   s what we always say, isn   t it? Anyhow, I think it   s a way of life. It   s a way most of us was born and raised in, and I think it   s one of the 27  greatest lives in the world. I don   t think I would have stayed in it   I have a lot of people just can   t imagine why people would farm, but somebody has to produce food. It   s something   .  Nykolaiszyn You   re not retiring anytime soon?  Kennedy Oh, I may be. I   ve been really fortunate, like I say, I   ve been retired now, sixteen years. Every May, I   ve put in another year because that   s when we get out of school. I   ve had a   beginning to have a few health problems. Physically, I can still get out. Here several years ago, I had some teeth work done, and I don   t know whether it was that, but I   ve been having a lot of headache problems. I went   this big hospital down at Temple, Texas, Scott and White. It   s kind of a well-known deal. We went down there about a year to different neurologists. Finally, they just told me they didn   t know anything that they could help me with, so I   ve been having some trouble there. Oh, I think there   s always going to come a time when a person   s going to have to, but we have all of our   we can farm a lot. We got good machinery, we got good tractors, you sit out there with the tractor, and air conditioner, and the radio.  Nykolaiszyn It   s a lot easier these days. (Laughs)  Kennedy Oh man  Used to   I remember my first combine. It didn   t even have a cab on it. And you sit out there in that dirt   but it makes it a lot easier. You spend   like I think another thing in this no-till crop production. When you go to looking at a tractor, you go buy a tractor   I got a    79 model tractor. After you figure that up, that   s what, thirty-something years old, but we   ve taken good care of it. A tractor of that size right now would cost you two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  You got to have to   you   re going to need to pay a lot of income tax before you can go afford to buy a deal like that, and that   s when   really, the ones you see that are driving those tractors, it   s probably because of the tax deal, but that   s good because they made money. Yeah, it   s not nearly like it used to be when we first started out, and I   ve maintained   my family still support me. They even think it   s great, as long as I feel like doing it. If you   re hurting, I don   t know if you   d hurt anymore out there on that tractor as you would if you were setting right here.  When you   re doing something   I told my wife here not long ago. We had one of them ole really, dreary, cold, wet days, and I got up and went and fed. Of course, in that kind of weather you still have to get out and feed your cattle. You come in, and man, that day just drags on and drags on, and I told her, I said,    You know, I guess if we ever retire totally, every day is going to be just like this.    (Laughs) Maybe it won   t, but you   re used to getting out and doing things. I think that   s why you try to keep going as long as you 28  can. If that   s what you want to do and feel like doing, then why not? It   s still   it   s been   we still make...it   s been profitable.  Nykolaiszyn It keeps you busy   Kennedy Oh, yeah  I   m telling you, this cattle deal right now   we did sell back some during that drought period. We had to sell a truckload of cows. That   s when I cut back some of my school land, the school leases, and been farming pretty much our deeded places, but yeah, it does. I think a good example of that   my doctor, when I retired out there, course, he knew that I farmed. I went to him after I retired, and went out there, and he said,    Well, boy  That   s great.    He said,    You can just farm fulltime now, can   t you?    I said,    Yeah.    He said,    You know I want to tell you. I had a soldier come in and told me he was retiring from the military.    And he said,    Well what are you going to do?    He said,    Well I   m not going to do nothing  I   m going to retire     He said he lived about three years. If you just come in, and sit down, and don   t do nothing, that   s pretty much what happens. Your mind, if you don   t stay active   .but anyhow, that   s certainly my opinion. That   s not necessarily the case.  Nykolaiszyn When you look back at your time at OSU, how did earning your degrees impact your life?  Kennedy Well, course, where I   ve stayed in higher education, it   s been totally my life, really. I wouldn   t have ever been able to do what I   ve been able to do in my profession without going to college and getting even advanced degrees. That was the first thing I had to do when I got here was finish my master   s. I didn   t even   at that time, when you think 1965, the only person on campus with a doctor   s degree was the president, out of the rest of them. In fact, I put in my   I found out about it. In fact, the guy that was here, there was just two in the ag department, Mr. Thomas, and he was a friend of ours where we were raised. I told him that and he said,    Yeah, if you want to apply, we   d be happy to take your application.    He said,    I can   t give you much hope without you not finishing your master   s.    So I did, and we rocked along there.  Well, they started school there in September. He called me in about two weeks, and he said,    Well you know, they still haven   t hired anybody for that opening, but I still can   t give you my job.    (Laughter) I said,    Oh, whatever     I said   that   s when I was working for the Extension Service. If you got a job, and it   s different than waiting for a job and not having one. Finally one day, I was out in the county, and I came by the house for lunch, and I walked in the door, and the telephone was ringing. I went over there and answered the phone, and it was Mr. Thomas, and he said the president called him and said that if I was still interested in coming over there and teaching, for me to come over. He wanted to talk. 29  I came over there and like I say, he was   I mean, back then, the president, he run everything. That was just   and I went in and talked to him, sat down there and talked to him about thirty minutes, kind of like we   ve been sitting here visiting, and I guess we finally run out of anything to talk about. He said,    Well Glen tells me that you   re interested in coming over and teaching here at Cameron.    I told him I thought I   d enjoy it. I   d went to a junior college. Edna Jo was his secretary, and he said,    Well go in there and give Edna Jo whatever information that you need, and be here first day of school.    Never   your education never came up or anything, and like I say, that turned into about a thirty-five year deal. (Laughs)  Didn   t have my master   s, and I found out later that they had a whole stack of resumes, and a lot of them were foreign students, and back in those days, he just wasn   t interested. He was wanting to hire, I guess, hire an old farm boy, and I guess he found him one when I come by. (Laughs) It   s sure been a   . I   d like to say, when you   ve mentioned how this has affected my life as far as   and I really give OSU all the credit. I mean, I got a good education, what I think, and I never really had a lot of trouble with grades and classes, and so I was fortunate in that respect. I enjoyed college, and I still enjoyed teaching. I don   t think I could have ever made it in the high school run of it. I don   t know if you want to be in education how it could be any better than it would be at the college level, really. I don   t have any regrets. I really don   t you know.  Nykolaiszyn Well, we took this really quick fast forward through your life. What are we missing? Is there anything else you would like to add?  Kennedy Well, when you look back, you   I   m sure a lot of people second guess,    If I had known this or something, I might have done something else.    I still say, where we were so closely involved in the farming industry, my   that   s where we made our living. When I went to high school, I was in a 4-H Club and FFA when we were youngsters. Went to high school, we never was told anything about   we were from the farm, I guess we were expected to be involved in agriculture. I loved the livestock show part of it. That was the height of the year, when we got to go to the stock shows.  When we got out of high school, we went off to school and studied agriculture, and never really, I guess, give it too much thought. That   s the way it turned out, and I don   t know as I would probably change it now. If I   d have known back then, I might have done something else, but I really doubt it. I had a brother, one of my brothers, that died very young, had a head injury with a bull one time. I had another brother that got out of high school and went to work for Rural Electric and worked forty years. I was the only one that really stayed in the farming and agriculture business, as far as that   s concerned, but I don   t know. 30  Nykolaiszyn No regrets?  Kennedy Not really. I don   t think I would really say I had any regrets. I got so many really, really good friends in the ag   . I know so many people. When you consider that I   ve been at Cameron   well, at the co-op meeting last night up at Apache, and so many of those guys are former students, are working in the Cooperative Services and things like that. You get part of your   I think you get part of your pay   when you think about   we knew that as long as we worked for the State of Oklahoma we wasn   t going to get rich, but when you look back, and you look back at the number of people that you   ve had some influence on, I think, in their lives, and a lot of them gone out in the ag industry, too, just like we did, you can sure find something to talk about when you run on to them. I think that   s a big contribution. I mean, that   s a big payback, to some degree, as far as what we   ve done in our   .  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m sure. Especially, you know, with a thirty-five-year career teaching, you   ve had a chance to impact a lot of lives.  Kennedy Yeah, we know a lot of people. Not that this is of any significance, but over that period of years, I   ve got students that are already retired. I mean, really, a full career  Those students that I had when I came here have completed a full career   that are retired, and that   s kind of fun, to talk to them and what they   ve done for so long. Goodyear   s got a big tire plant here, and we   ve had a lot of our students that when they come in, that dropped out of school and went to work for Goodyear. That   s been a good company to work for, not that we   ve had any contribution to it, but I think it   s a thing that still, when you think about where they   ve worked for a company for so long, and that   s just another example. I   m really one that don   t have a lot to   still enjoying it   I think another thing, just like we get to   we   re very fortunate to live out in a place like this. You turn the television on, and dang golly, everybody knows what   s going on. I get to thinking,    My God, if we weren   t living out here in the town of Hulen that   s no longer here, at least we   re not up that close to that kind of deal.    You know what I   m saying. How much better, more wholesome place to live could you find than a place like this right here? Not just because we   ve got it, but you think about it. We have a new car to drive, and we have a nice home to live in, and we have good friends, and we have, I hope, adequate retirement to take care of our needs. All of that has been due to the fact that we had enough staying power to go through school, and get us a college degree, and get out, and in my case anyhow, to do something I wanted to do. Like I say, I can give every bit of mine pretty much, the ability, the fact that I was able to go ahead and finish my college education, college degree, and that   s what we   ve tried to explain to our kids. They   ve all done pretty much the same thing. They   ve had good jobs. What more can you ask for? 31  Nykolaiszyn I think that   s a good place to end. Mr. Kennedy, I appreciate you taking the time out talking.  Kennedy Well, (laughs) I hope it   s something that   really, that   s pretty much the way we   ve had it through the years. I was just floored when   another thing that we didn   t mention is I used to judge a lot of livestock shows. I mean, lots of them  I mean, all over this country. I found out a long time ago, if you want to make really, really good friends, in that era, with kids    parents is you be good to the kid, and I remember I used to judge these dairy shows. These little bitty kids would that have little ole heifers. Oh, they   d come in, and I   d talk to them, and I   d brag on their kid. (Laughs) Oh man, and I got kids, I   m not kidding you, that come up to me right now and they say,    Can you still remember when I used to judge my calves?    Hey, (laughs) that   s been forty years, but I   m just   that   s just an example for you treat the kids and they remember that, and I guarantee you, you know, the parents are certainly backers that you   re   .  Nykolaiszyn That is true.  Kennedy That   s been   we used to do a lot of that, and we were, I guess   that was probably part of our job. The fact that we taught at the school, and we were supposed to know a little more than the average guy, I guess. That   s why we got asked to do it, but we had a pretty good background too. We had a lot   we   d done a lot of that as part of your college degree, so that   s been another deal. Another thing that was, I think is, great, I had one grandson that had the Grand Champion lamb at the spring stock show in Oklahoma City, and that   s first time that anybody, they go to school at Walters, and the only one that Walters has ever had, Cotton County   s ever had. He   s got a nice belt buckle to show for that, (laughs) but that   s it. I think that we, as farm people, this is part of life, really. We promote that, and   .  Nykolaiszyn It   s good to see that it   s carrying on within your family.  Kennedy Yeah, I think so. My youngest grandson, I mentioned that he bought these heifers from this--Express Personnel, you   ve heard of that, but Express Ranches. They have a scholarship program for every Grand Champion that you   if you win with one of their heifers. When he took off to school, he had put together a little over seventeen thousand dollars in scholarships, which went a long ways, then he got to go   he got a Noble scholarship, which amounted, what, was about twenty-five thousand. When it comes to what it costs to go school, he put those two together, and it went a long ways, so anyhow, he was fortunate in that respect. Going to college don   t come cheap anymore, I tell you. Jolene   s working on her master   s now in nursing, and she goes to school. She got her RN here at Cameron, then she got her BSN, and then she   s working on her master   s. Golly, what did you 32  say   how much did it cost? She goes to   does a lot of it is online, but she goes to class once a week.  Nykolaiszyn Yeah, it   s pricey these days.  Kennedy Oh my   Nykolaiszyn The cost of education is pricey, but when you think back, I mean, it was pricey for you as well.  Kennedy Well, really compared to the money we had     Nykolaiszyn The time.  Kennedy    it really was. I can remember, and I   ve got a book in there right now, it   s a feed book, and that   s a big old book is about this thick. It had the price written on the inside cover, and it was nine fifty. I still got it, and I bet you that book costs three hundred dollars today. It   s just amazing how stuff has gone up, compared. You think about it, when I started school, it was 1956. That   s when I got out of high school, and you look over the period of my lifetime, and that   s about sixty years, getting close to it, so you expect a lot of things to happen in sixty years. That   s a lifetime.  Nykolaiszyn Oh yeah.  Kennedy We expect new things to happen. (Laughs) I don   t know whether it   s all been for the better, but hopefully it has.  Nykolaiszyn I think it has.  Kennedy I hope so   Nykolaiszyn Good way to end   Kennedy Well, I appreciate it.  -------  -------  
