 Wilson with the Oklahoma State University Library.  Today is October 30, 2007, and I am in Stillwater, Oklahoma at the  campus of Oklahoma State University in the Angie Debo room,  interviewing Joanne Lawrence. This interview is being conducted as a  part of O-STATE Stories, an Oral History Project of the Oklahoma State  Library. Thank you for joining us today, Joanne.  Thank you for inviting me.  You   re welcome.  I was honored.  Well, we   re glad to have you. Let   s start off with you telling me a little  bit about yourself, where you are originally from.  I   m a Yankee. I was born in New Jersey   Asbury Park. People refer to  that area as    the shore,    so out here, somebody asks where I   m from I  usually refer to    the shore,    and then they know its anywhere between  Atlantic City and New York City. When I say I   m from New Jersey,  they say,    Oh New Joysey,    and I say    Uh-uh, I didn   t talk like that. I  may have talked funny but I didn   t talk like that.    And as you can tell,  I   ve been out here way too long to keep that accent. I did have it, but we  moved out here when I was in seventh grade. I   ve been out here a long  time. I guess I   m an Okie now.  And what years did you attend OAMC?  Oh, I started in the fall of 1948, and I graduated in    52, but I was up here  for another year, because my husband   it took him a little longer. He  graduated in 1953. So we were students and then married students and  5  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  then townspeople.  And what made you decide to attend OAMC?  I had gone to Classen High School in Oklahoma City, and a lot of the  students there were coming up here. Even though Oklahoma City is     that other school   s popular  referring to the University of Oklahoma ,  and some of them were going there, but a lot of the students were  coming up here. And I didn   t want to go away to girl   s school   my  father was suggesting that, but I liked boys too well for that. I did enjoy  coming up here to OAMC.  And then you ended up meeting your husband here?  No, I brought him with me.  Oh, okay.  There's a really neat story that I didn   t put in there. It might have had a  little something to do with me coming to Oklahoma A M. I went  through summer rush and my parents sent me back to New Jersey to get  me out of all of that furor. But I came up, went to rush, and pledged Chi  Omega. I did not know that Bob Lawrence had pledged Sig Ep, which is  right next door. We had dated some in high school, and he had taken me  to church most Sunday nights. So, I was really surprised, pleasantly, to  find out that he had pledged the fraternity right next door. They   re not  next door anymore but they were then.  What was your major?  Home economics, but I was in household arts and enjoyed it very much.  What are some of the classes you remember taking?  Oh well, I did have to take all of the home ec required courses, including  chemistry, which I didn   t do very well in. I enjoyed specifically  Wathena Temple   s design and the household arts. I had to make a  scrapbook of all the different types of the history of furniture at various  times. And that has been very helpful to me. Oh, I took a psychology of  color   actually I took that course with Bob to meet a requirement.  Some of the other courses that I took   do you want to know about the  funny one?  Sure.  I took dairy. I didn   t know that it involved going out to the Dairy Barn. I  6  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  thought it was going to be in the dairy building where you learned to  make cheese or ice cream or something like that. We went out to the  Dairy Barn and groomed the cows. I had never been that close to a cow  in my life. The professor was very nice and thoughtful. I think there was  one other girl in this huge class. It was a large lecture hall and then you  had the lab to go out to the barn, and that was quite an experience. But it  was a requirement of home ec to have an agricultural course and my  counselor   I do not remember her name   she suggested dairy, and I  took it because it fit into my schedule.  Do you remember any of the buildings your classes were in besides the  Dairy Barn?  Oh my, yes I actually think I had a psychology class at Old Central, and  the Home Ec Building was the old Home Ec Building. They built the  new one later. The old Home Ec Building, I had a number of courses  there, and again it was very convenient, because it was right across from  Gunderson Hall, and that was where the architectural students  practically lived. I think both of those buildings are gone now. I haven   t  checked it out, but I think they   re both demolished  Gunderson is still  standing . I   ve been amazed at the growth of the campus, I really have.  We   ve had season football tickets ever since we graduated, so I   ve been  up frequently to see the campus growing, but it just amazed me.  Today I got here a little early, and with my grandson we drove around a  little bit, and he questioned me,    Did you have a car when you were up  here?    Of course not, nobody had cars. It was just after the war, and cars  were hard to get, and besides, most students didn   t have cars then so  there was no parking problem, like now. I let him drive me around  Stillwater today, because I could not have found my way that easily. It  was fun.  And did some of your children attend OSU?  Yes, our daughter graduated from OSU and she majored in  sociology/psychology. As I mentioned my grandson is here now,  majoring in business and enjoying it. I guess I   d have to describe him as     Joe College,    he loves every aspect of it. Yes, he does.  Tell me a little bit about living in the Chi Omega house.  Oh well, I had to live in the freshman dorm my first year up here, and  that was an experience for an only child because I had never had to share  a bedroom and the bathroom Well let me back up to say I stayed on the  second floor of Murray Hall, that was the freshman dorm. All freshmen  had to live there, and I guess it was a little crowded because instead of  7  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  two girls in that room, there were three, so it was bunks and one lower  bed. The two girls that I roomed with were both from Tulsa, I didn   t  know them ahead of time, and it was an adjustment for an only child  with a bathroom down the hall   The next year I did move into the Chi Omega House, and it was not as  lovely and large as it is now. I don   t know if I should mention or not,  but we had to sleep in a double bed, two girls to a room in one double  bed. Closet space, you can imagine, was at a minimum. So you only  brought a few things up, and then when you went home you brought  some others and exchanged. There just really wasn   t room. It   s lovely  there now. I brought my little granddaughter up to kind of ease her into  the college scene and show her how really pretty the house is now.  Do you remember social activities involved with your sorority house?  Of course. We had our dances, dance hour, when you had to go to the  various fraternities. That wasn   t a whole lot of fun. I like dancing, but to  go around to strange places I didn   t like that too much. Occasionally I  would go over across the street to the Frat Shop, which was owned by  Bernadine Brock and her husband. They lived upstairs and the  downstairs was just a little   well you wouldn   t call it a restaurant. You  could go over and get a cup of coffee and maybe a roll, maybe a  hamburger if you wanted. And the other thing I do recall, since this is  football season, we had to dress up for football. We wore heels and hose  and of course a dress or a suit. Usually, if we were lucky, we got a mum  corsage to wear to the football game. It was a dressy occasion to go to  the football game.  Did you sit with your sorority sisters?  No, not necessarily. You could sit wherever you wanted to sit, and often  my parents would come up, and I could sit with them. I always bought  my mother a mum corsage.  And were there activities for Homecoming?  Oh yes, oh yes, we would have a parade in the morning. When I was a  pledge I had the honor of putting on very dark makeup, and wearing a  sarong and riding on the Chi Omega float. I was worried sick that it was  going to win, because then later at the football game, they would have  the floats go around. I didn   t want have to get all undressed, dressed, and  all that dark makeup off to do it. We didn   t do it as elaborately as they  do now, but yes we still had the Homecoming parade in the morning and  enjoyed doing the floats. I don   t think we did too much on house  decorations.  8  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Have you been back for a number of Homecomings?  Oh yes, oh yes. As I said, we   ve had season football tickets I think ever  since we were out of school. Bob   s parents had them, too.  What about your housemother in your sorority house?  I remember two of them. The first one was Mother Lou, and I don   t  remember her last name. We just called her Mother Lou, and the second  one was Mother Dearmond. It was interesting that she was the mother of  a girl I had known at Classen High School, and she came up and became  house mother after her husband passed away. So I knew her ahead of  time.  And what about a curfew?  When I lived in the freshman dorm, I think we had to be in by eight  o   clock, I   m not sure, I think it was about eight, a little later on the  weekends, maybe ten or eleven. When we moved to the house my  sophomore and junior years, it was probably a little later than that, but  not a whole lot. I   m sure we had to be in by midnight on the weekend,  no later than midnight.  And would you study at your house or at the Library?  They had study hall everyday for the pledges, so my first year if I wasn   t  in class from three to five I had to be at the house studying. Usually I  had a lab, so I didn   t have to study down in the   it was in the basement  of the house where they had the study hall. I didn   t have to do that too  often, but that was a requirement. You mentioned the library, we didn   t  have this lovely Library, we had a very small library on campus, so I  didn   t come to the library to study.  Did you do your laundry at the sorority house?  No. I think I probably took it home  I probably went home   oh I think  we were allowed to go home about once a month. And I don   t recall  until after I was married going to a Laundromat up here. No, there was  no laundry facility at the house.  What types of activities or on-campus organizations were you involved  with?  I had to look that up, because I didn   t really remember too much. I was  in the Home Ec club and enjoyed that, I participated in that quite a lot     Omicron Nu which was a Home Ec Group. I later was tapped for mortar  9  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  board and Phi Kappa Phi. Let   s see what else was I in   YWCA  probably. And as I mentioned before I was in Chi Omega. I was what  we referred to as pledge mistress, I think they refer to them as pledge  trainers now. That took a lot of time, because you had to keep up with all  the new girls and make sure they were doing what they were supposed to  do.  Was that a hard task?  No, not really.  What is Phi Kappa Phi?  It was an honorary organization similar to Phi Beta Kappa, I think.  Do you remember any campus traditions?  Not really, (Laughs) not really.  Do you have memories of Theta Pond?  Oh yes  (Laughs) One tradition I guess would come a long with Theta  Pond was when the boys would pin a girl, they   d get thrown into Theta  Pond   somehow Bob escaped, when he pinned me. My memory of  Theta Pond was that it was just beginning to be developed. The little  Magnolia trees were probably no taller than that, all the trees were just  brand new. And the walks, I was telling my grandson just today, the  walks all across the campus to get across Theta Pond in that area were  gravel   great big course gravel. I said,    I think we laid all the  foundation for the nice walks that they have now.    Theta Pond is  beautiful now, but it was pretty minimal then. It was pretty, but it was  just starting, and so I do remember that.  Did you go to the Student Union often?  There wasn   t one. I was here when they were building it, and by the time  I was a senior, it was brand new. I remember Miss Temple taking us  over to see the d  cor, how they had done each of the rooms, and  explaining what period and what style of furniture it was and so on and  so forth. But it was brand new. We did not have a Student Union before.  What were some of the on or off campus hang outs?  As I mentioned, the Frat Shop. There was one theatre, the Leachman,  and I think there was another theatre. I can   t remember the name of it     at campus corner. It   s gone and the Leachman building is still there on  10  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Main Street, but I don   t believe it   s still a theatre. I don   t know if they  have a theatre now. But anyway, I didn   t go to many of the hangouts. I  was too busy, I really was. I was just too busy.  What would you do for dates?  Usually there were parties to go to, either to the fraternity house, or the  girls would have the guys come to a party, that was the way it usually  was. I suppose we went to the movie occasionally, but not too often.  Money was kind of scarce. If we had to get someplace in a hurry a  bunch of us would load in a taxi and it would cost ten cents apiece. I was  telling my grandson about that today, and he said,    Now what would  that be equivalent to today?    And I said    I have no idea, a dollar and  half? Two dollars?    What would it cost? I don   t know, but we would  get in a taxi, just pile in, it would be ten cents apiece.  Did you usually eat at your sorority house?  Oh yes, yes we did and there was a frozen malt shop, about half way to  town that I really enjoyed for a treat. We would walk to it, get a frozen  malt and walk home. We did a lot of walking. We didn   t have cars until  after Bob and I were married, then we had a car. By that time I was  working, and that came later. I won   t get out ahead of my story.  Well after you were married, did you live off campus?  Oh yes, yes because that was my most   how did we put that?  Your most significant experience?  Significant experience, yes that was my most significant experience     when I got pinned, when I got engaged, and then I got married. The last  day of school we were married, of my junior year. I had one more year  and Bob had two, so anyway, we made it. I worked for Dr. Millie  Pearson in Home Ec education   I did that. And he worked one summer  for Phil Wilbur, who was the college architect, and it was hard to put the  timing there together. We lived on McElroy, in a little duplex. It is gone  now for the athletic campus that they   re building.  Were you married in Stillwater?  No we were married in Oklahoma City, because both of us and our  families were both there.  Do you remember when the name changed to OSU?  11  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Wilson  I really don   t remember. I think they sent me a letter and said I could get  my diploma changed, but I didn   t want to. I brought the regular diploma  that says Agricultural and Mechanical College.  Were you opposed to the name change?  No, not at all, not at all. But I did keep my diploma the same way.  Is there a faculty member or class that you remember played a big role  in your life?  No, not specifically. I enjoyed all of my Home Ec teachers. Dean  Patchin was very, very nice. I remember her, she was dean of women. I  guess I knew her through the Mortar Board connection, and also  Bernadine Brock, whom I mentioned before. I think she was her  secretary, so I kind of had a little bit of a closer relationship there. Dean  Lela O   Toole, she was Dean of Home Ec after Dean Talbot. She was  very, very nice. I enjoyed her. I think she   s the one who hired me. They  were trying to establish a Home Ec library, where Home Ec students  could go and not have to go to the main library and sort through. As I  said we didn   t have this lovely, big library building. She hired me for, I  think it was, about fifty cents an hour. It might not have been that much,  to sit in there, and keep track of the books, or check them out or  whatever. I was the only one and it gave me an opportunity to do my  homework. It might have been her way, in retrospect, of giving me a  scholarship (Laughs) for fifty cents an hour. I don   t know but anyway I  appreciated it, it helped.  What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty in students and  alumni?  Just the whole campus. When I brought my daughter up to enroll her, a  number of years back now, we pulled in behind the building, and first  thing, someone said,    Hello, may I help you?    They were pleasant.  Lugging those books over today, I had three different people say,    May  we help you?    with a smile. And as we went across the campus,  anyplace, it   s    hi    or    hello    with a smile. To me that goes a long way.  Everybody is pleasant and not too hurried to help one another, if they  need it.  What advice would you give students today?  Come. Come and get a great education. I think they would, and I think  they would enjoy it, just as my grandson is doing right now.  Well is there anything else that you would like to discuss that we haven   t  12  Lawrence  Nykolaiszyn  Lawrence  Nykolaiszyn  Lawrence  Nykolaiszyn  Lawrence  Wilson  Lawrence  Nykolaiszyn  Lawrence  covered?  No I don   t think so. I think we   ve pretty well covered it.  One more question, if I may. What was graduation like for you?  Well at that point, my parents came up, and of course they were very  proud. Neither one of them had gone to college. My mother had taken  some courses at Oberlin, in Ohio. She was from around Cleveland. My  father only had an eighth grade education, but had been very successful  in the retail business, and had actually had his own store for a while. So  the fact that I had made it through four years, even though I got married,  and graduated and had done pretty well in the grade situation, I think  they were really proud. I don   t think I have a picture of them, but I  know they came up and we had a good time.  Where was the ceremony held?  I want to say what is now Gallagher Hall, I think. I   m not sure, I am not  sure, because everything has changed so much. Even though I   ve been  coming back all this time. It   s changed gradually. We were talking with  a friend about the Quonset huts that were on campus. I had chemistry in  Quonset 3, way out and we walked to those places. We had to get there.  We didn   t have the number of bicycles, and we certainly didn   t have the  number of cars that they do now. But I remember a lot of the Quonset  huts. It was right after the war and they couldn   t get the buildings done.  Was it hot or cold   how was the temperature in the Quonset huts?  Hot  I mentioned living in this little duplex that we rented from a house  mother. I learned to go grocery shopping, and I spent, I think  20 dollars  a week. I would bring home my sack of  20 dollars, I kind of remember  that. And then, learning how to go to the laundry mat, and then come  home and do my ironing and no air conditioning. All we had was a little  floor fan, no air conditioning. It was hot in the summer. We stayed up  here all summer so Bob could work.  And did you move after he graduated?  Oh yes. We moved right back to the city. His father also is an architect,  or was, and he went to work in the firm. Actually they did a couple of  buildings up here, so it   s kind of neat, yes.  Well what did you go on to do with your career?  I became a homemaker   figures. But more than that, I had taken  13  Wilson  Lawrence  children   s literature, I had taken some art classes, and as I mentioned  earlier I had taken psychology of color. So I worked my way into  helping my husband, who now is   he is the firm, and I   m the other part.  I would choose the colors for buildings. I would help him in that way.  And with the children   s literature courses that I took or the teenage  psychology, it   s helped me all through. I even took some business  courses, thankfully, because after my children were grown, I went back  and was a secretary in several different places. And today, I am my  husband   s secretary, and do all the computer correspondence or reports  for him that he needs done. It   s been a very helpful degree. I never did  actually go into fashion merchandising, which I thought I might because  my father had a ladies ready-to-wear store, but that didn   t really work  out. I was more into homemaking and making a home. That   s just the  way it worked.  Well thank you for talking to us today.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
