 Gill. Today is April 24, 2009. I   m visiting with Dr.  Thep Phongparnich on the Oklahoma State University campus in  Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project  of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Dr. Thep, we  appreciate you taking time to interview with us while you   re on campus  today.  Thank you, sir.  I wanted to just ask you a couple of questions, first of all, about when  you were younger. Can you tell me a little bit about where you grew up  in Thailand and what that part of the country was like?  I was born in the Surat Thani Province in the south of Thailand. My  father was a fisherman. When I was growing up, I started high school in  my hometown in Surat Thani Province and then earned my certificate in  agriculture at Maejo University, Chiang Mai, Thailand. Then I  completed my B.S. in agriculture at Central Luzon State University in  the Philippines. After that, I came to the United States in 1972 to  complete my master   s degree in horticulture at Mississippi State  University and then worked for a year in Chicago. Finally, I came to  Stillwater and completed my doctorate degree in the Agricultural  Education Department in 1978.  Can you tell me a little bit about your family? What it was like growing  up when you were young and a little bit about your family life? Did you  have brothers and sisters?  We are a big family. We are eleven in the family, I mean, brothers and  sisters. I am the third child in the family. We are really one of the big  families in the country. Usually in Thailand, there are many children in  the family, maybe at least five and up to ten. But we are eleven and we  5  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  work in the fishery with my father and mother.  Did you help out with the family business? You worked when you were  young, then?  I did not work much in the family when I was young because I was  always studying and was far away from my hometown. I got my  certificate from Maejo University in Chiang Mai, which was more than  1500 kilometers away from my hometown, and then I finished my B.S.  in another country, the Philippines.  Getting education seemed to be very important to you and your family.  Is there a story there about why you were able to go on and pursue a  college degree when maybe a lot of other people weren   t able to do  that? Was that important to your family? Did your parents stress  education to you?  Education is one of the important things in life, according to my father.  We are in the fishery business, the whole family, but according to my  father, when you work in the fishery, especially as a fisherman, it is  really, really a difficult job because you work in the sea which is very  dangerous. But you can make a lot of money from fishery even though it  is very difficult work. Although one thing in life, according to my father,  you need to study hard and get the highest level of degree. If you get a  higher degree, you will get more opportunity to take care of your life. If  you do not study, you will face hard work in your job. It will be so  difficult to have a good job. That   s why he said,    One thing that you can  do is to study; get a higher degree.     Did your other brothers and sisters go to university?  Most of them.  Is that unusual for a Thai family, when you were growing, for all the  kids to go to college?  In that time, it was very difficult to do but you need to do it.  So, you got your bachelor   s degree in the Philippines and then your  master   s at Mississippi State.  Yes, sir.  Then you came to OSU to do your doctorate. How did you find out about  Oklahoma State University? Is there a story about how you got to OSU?  6  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  I have known of OSU for a long time since when I studied at Maejo  University. At that time, many young professors there came from here  the United States, from Texas, Kansas and especially Oklahoma. The  president of Maejo University at that time was a graduate of Oklahoma  State University. There was a good relationship between the Thai and  the United States government. The US government sent some professors  from the United States to visit Thailand. Also, some of the staff from  Oklahoma State University went to work in Thailand, of course, at  Maejo University. That is how I knew and learned about OSU. Some of  our young professors also told us stories of cowboys, of the United  States, of Oklahoma State. So, in my dream, I would like to come to the  United States if possible.  What was the president   s name that you said encouraged you to go to  Oklahoma State?  Professor Vipata Wangsai. He also graduated from the Ag Ed  Department  in 1958 .  What was your first impression of OSU and Stillwater?  Oh, I liked it, as in my dream. Also, I have liked the cowboy style and  cowboy life since I studied in Thailand. When I came to Stillwater for  the first time, oh, it fulfilled my dream.  Where did you live here at OSU? Did you live in the residence hall or  live off campus?  I lived on South Duck Street.  South Duck?  Yes, 117 South Duck Street, house number 117.  Is it still there?  Yes.  Did you live with some other Thai students there?  About four of us lived there, four Thai students. One of them  was  Dr.  Pongsak Angkasith.  Oh, Pongsak Angkasith?  Yes, also a Department of Ag Ed alumnus. Right now, he is the  7  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  president of Chiang Mai University.  Did you have any idea that the two of you would become university  presidents when you were students?  It really did surprise me, but you know, in Thailand now, four presidents  of Thai universities graduated from Oklahoma State University. I mean,  we became the president at the same time, at Maejo University, Chiang  Mai University, one university in Bangkok, and another one in the south  of Thailand. We have four universities in Thailand whose presidents  graduated from Oklahoma State, at the same time. But there are, at least,  another two or three alumni who were the presidents of universities in  Thailand, only at different times from the four of us.  Pretty impressive. So, what was your major at Oklahoma State, your  major that you got your degree in?  Agriculture Education.  Were there some professors, faculty members, other individuals that  were special to you?  Dr. Bob Terry was my major advisor who was also the chairman of the  department and the chairman of my advisory committee. Besides him in  the committee, there were also Dr. Cecil Dugger, Dr. James Key, and  also Dr. Campbell, Ray Campbell, from the Horticulture Department.  Those were my four professors and my four advisory committee   members .  And let   s see, Bob  Price  was retired at the time, was former head of  the department.  Yes.  Did you get to know him?  Dr. Bob Price, at that time, was not the head of department anymore. He  was retired, but he still did work in the department. Dr. Bob Price was  the one who gave me the idea of how to work on my dissertation. He  called me    boy    at the time. I was only twenty-four years old when I  came to study for my doctorate degree in Stillwater, so he called me     boy    and he was the one, also, who told me to work  on my   dissertation on leadership.  And, again, what year did you enroll at OSU in your doctoral program?  What year did you come to OSU?  8  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  1976.  And you got your degree?  In 1978. Yes, two years and a half or something.  Well, do you remember some highlights of your OSU student  experience? Were there some activities that you were involved in as a  student?  I joined the Thai Student Association at that time. After one year, I  became the president of the Thai Student Association, and Dr. Cecil  Dugger was the advisor of Thai Student Association. I enjoyed the  student activities. I observed many things among the OSU students. I  learned a lot about how to become a good leader when you are a student.  So, you love OSU football?  Yes.  Well, how many Thai students were on campus when you were enrolled  here?  Oh, at that time, about seventy.  Seventy? Wow, that   s a lot of students.  Yes, in that time, many Thai students came to OSU.  Have you kept up with some of those students? Are they still friends of  yours today in Thailand? Some of the students that you attended school  with, do you still communicate with them?  Yes, we still communicate in Thailand, yes. Many of them are working  in high positions in Thailand. Of course, some of them are presidents of  universities, some of them are professors in universities, and some work  in other jobs, like in a bank, in the government offices, and also in the  private sector.  Did you have a job on campus? Did you work as a student when you  were here?  I worked on an on-site job, yes.  Can you share with us what you did?  9  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Many jobs, for example, I worked with the Department of Plant  Pathology. I was what you called a student worker, with a professor in  the research station. Also, I worked in the Student Union canteen. Even  Dr. Pongsack, the president of Chiang Mai University, also worked in  the cafeteria in the Student Union.  Was that good training for being a president? (Laughs) Now, you  mentioned the Student Union. Did you have some favorite places on  campus, like the Student Union, the Library, or different places, that you  hung out?  Yes, I really liked the Library and also especially, the Student Union. In  that time, it was not like this. Now, it is much better than before, but  even in 1976 to 1978, the Student Union was already really big. It  looked like a big Student Union, but when I come now, oh, it has  become much better than before.  That   s good. Well, are there some favorite memories that you have about  your time at Oklahoma State University? Are there some highlights or  special times that you remember?  In that time, I was the president of the Thai Student Association and  during the International Week   they have International Week every  year, mainly when the different international student clubs come to the  Student Union and have their activities, we were number one. We were  then the best International Student Association.  So, you won the first place prize?  Yes, the top prize at that time, and when I was also the president of the  Thai Student Association. That gave me some power and also taught me  how to become a leader, a good leader, and gave me more experience on  how to become a good leader.  So, after you left OSU, then, you went to work at Maejo University?  Yes.  You   ve been there for thirty years now, is that right?  Almost thirty, yes. Twenty-nine years now.  Could you share some information with us about Maejo University?  Enrollment, number of faculty, size of the campus, things like that?  There are about 16,000 students now and the campus is big   we have  10  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  three campuses. The main campus is in Chiang Mai. The second campus  is in the Phrae Province in the northeast of Chiang Mai, which is about  three hours away from Chiang Mai. Our third campus is in the south of  Thailand in Chumphon Province, another major campus. We have about  400-something faculty staff and another 700-something support staff.  So, all about 1,300-something.  Could you share with us some areas of educational excellence, areas  that you emphasize? You know, strong majors that you have at your  university?  Of course, Maejo University is strong in the agriculture area because we  are the first agricultural school in Thailand, about thirty-five years ago.  We try to concentrate in the agriculture area, but, anyway, Maejo now is  not only agriculture. We have about twelve colleges in Maejo University  but we are still strong in agriculture.  Well, I understand that in some ways you   ve kind of modeled Maejo  University after OSU and the American land grant system.  Yes.  Why has this been helpful to you?  We get some ideas and some concepts from land grant universities such  as Oklahoma State to develop our agricultural colleges in Thailand.  Also, in Maejo in that time, thirty-five years ago, the first director   we  the president the    director    in that time, we did not use    president    yet,  graduated from Wisconsin. And when he went back to Thailand, he  developed Maejo. He got so many ideas and concepts in agricultural  education from the United States to develop Maejo in Thailand. After  him, many presidents of Maejo University graduated from USA,  including myself. So, when we develop some education at Maejo, we get  some concepts and ideas from the USA and of course, from Oklahoma  State University. We bring in some ideas and some concepts from OSU  to develop Maejo University.  I understand you have a very strong extension program where you take  your knowledge and your information out to the people.  Yes.  You even have programs similar to our 4-H Clubs. Can you share a little  bit of those outreach programs that you have?  Some of these programs are called the Future Farmers of Thailand; FFT.  11  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  We got this concept and idea from Oklahoma State University. A young  Thai professor came to study in USA, especially in Oklahoma State  University and Texas A M University at that time. When he came back  to Thailand, he got the idea of FFA and used it to develop FFT, the  Future Farmers of Thailand. And it has become the first chapter of FFT  and was developed at Maejo University which I think was maybe more  than forty years ago.  You were a member of FFA when you were at Oklahoma State, weren   t  you?  I was a member but not of FFT (in Thailand). When I came to Oklahoma  State, I became a member of FFA.  Well, let me give you an opportunity to brag. Would you consider that  you   re probably the outstanding agriculture university in Thailand? You  have all the majors, as well, like a major university, but you probably  have the strongest agricultural program in the kingdom of Thailand?  Yes. We are one of the best agriculture programs in Thailand. We were  the first school teaching agriculture in Thailand. We were the first one.  And also now, we are one of the strongest   we   re not the only one  anymore. We have many universities in Thailand that teach agriculture,  but Maejo is one of the best ones.  Well, another thing, maybe, you borrowed from Oklahoma State  University   I understand you created a mascot for the University, the  American cowboy and Pistol Pete. Can you tell me about that?  (Laughs) Yes, Maejo also has a mascot in the cowboys. The actual  cowboy may be different from Oklahoma State, but it   s the same  concept. I knew a cowboy before, but not exactly an Oklahoma State  cowboy. We like style of the cowboy, same when I was young and was  studying at Maejo. Many young professors also graduated from the US,  from Oklahoma State and Texas, and they brought some concepts of the  cowboy but it did not become the mascot of Maejo yet. And then when I  came back to Thailand in    78,    79, something, and became a teacher at  Maejo University, I brought some concepts and some mascots from  Stillwater to become a mascot of Maejo University in that time.  And universities didn   t have mascots at that time. Weren   t you the first  university to have an official mascot?  Yes, the only one and the first one in Thailand that has a mascot for our  university, unlike United States where every university must have one  mascot. But in Thailand, we have another tradition about this. We don   t  12  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  have the mascot for the university. So, right now, only Maejo has a  mascot, and we selected the cowboy.  Is that popular with your students? Do they like that idea of the mascot?  They like it. Also, we are an agriculture university, so when you   re  talking about agriculture, this means you are really close to the cowboys.  Now, let   s see if I recall. There   s a statue of a Pistol Pete-like character  that I saw when I was on your university recently in front of your new  Student Center.  Yes.  A large statue?  Yes, sir.  To me, it looks a lot like Pistol Pete. Is that right?  It looks like, yes. We put the name Maejo University also as the    Home  of the Cowboys.     Home of the Cowboys.  In front of Maejo University, there is a board that says    Welcome to  Maejo University, Home of the Cowboys.    (Laughter) It has the same  concept. Also, I try to explain the meaning of the cowboys. The cowboy  is one of the people, he is a gentleman, and the cowboys, they are really  good leaders. The cowboy also gives a lot to the people, takes care of the  people and he also works hard, that is the concept of the style of the  cowboys of Maejo.  I understand that in your home you   ve got a room and then in your  office you have a lot of OSU Cowboy and Pistol Pete memorabilia,  photos and statues and things, is that right?  There are many in the wall.  Well, Dr. Dugger says you   ve got more than anyone he   s ever seen, and  certainly in Thailand.  Yes, even in my house, even in my house. Not only the cowboys from  OSU but also many pictures of the cowboys from the US. I collect  cowboys.  13  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  During your thirty years there at Maejo, what have been some highlights  and major accomplishments at the University during your tenure?  When I started to work at Maejo almost 30 years ago, in 1979, Maejo  had less than 1,000 students. After that, we developed to get more  students and now there are almost 16,000 students.  Your enrollment.  I became an ambassador and leader. I have been in leadership at Maejo  University, different leaderships. I was head of division, I became head  of a department, then the dean of the faculty, and then many times the  vice president and then after that, about six years ago, I became the  president of Maejo University for two terms, I mean for eight years. But  now, I have finished six years and a half already, so after one year and a  half, I leave the university.  You were talking about enrollment has grown to 16,000. What was  enrollment when you went back in 1979?  That   s a lot. Yes, in 1979, there were only about 300 or 500 students.  Wow. And it   s grown to 16,000.  Yes.  And you were vice president for Student Affairs for several years weren   t  you?  Vice-President for Student Affairs, for three years or something.  Dr. Thep, during your presidency, you   ve maintained close working  relationships between your university, Maejo, and Oklahoma State  University through student and faculty exchanges, contract agreements,  frequent visits. How has this ongoing relationship been important to  both universities?  Just one of the most important things when you become a president of a  university; you become a developer of a university. One thing you need  is a good relationship with another intelligent university not only inside  Thailand, but, most important, from abroad. If you do not have good  relations with another university abroad, you cannot say you are a good  university. So, we just select a university from abroad that becomes our  partner in academic partnership. Of course, we selected Oklahoma State  University first. Especially in the United States, we have a good  relationship between Maejo and OSU, and we consider OSU as one of  14  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  the best partners of Maejo University. Of course, we have friends not  only in United States. I have friends in other countries like Taiwan or  Philippines, yes, but one of the best ones, I think, is OSU. And we try to  make and develop more and more of our relationship between the two  universities. But this is the most important thing for us.  Has it been helpful in your faculty development?  Yes sir, yes sir, because if you develop your faculty and if you never  send your young faculty to another country, it   s really difficult to  develop them. You must let them have some experience outside the  country. And you need to select that university outside of the country  that you can consider as a good friend. Of course, we select OSU as one  of our good friends. And now, I can say that OSU is one of the best  friends of Maejo University.  Have you had any family members that have gone to Oklahoma State  University? Have your sons or daughters attended Oklahoma State?  Not yet as my son is still young, but I have the daughter of my older  sister. She   s my niece and now she is working on her PhD in agricultural  economics at OSU. She   s not finished yet, but almost.  Well, also I want to say, and I speak for Oklahoma State University, we  have learned a lot from the Thai people from our exchanges, as well. It   s  been beneficial both ways. It   s just been an amazing relationship over  many years now, the past twenty, thirty, forty years.  Right now, Maejo receives every year a group of students from OSU to  study about international agriculture subject from many departments,  handled by Dr.  Paul  Hsu and Dr. Adele  Tongco . They visit Maejo  every year with a group of students. Maejo receives them and takes care  of them every year. We are really happy and also really proud to do that.  In addition to the things you   ve done as university president, I know  you   ve been engaged in a lot of international organizations. Can you  share some of the professional achievements and personal recognition  that you   ve received? Honors and awards through the years for higher  education, international education?  For myself?  For yourself.  Yes. I have received the International Alumni Award.  15  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  The OSU Distinguished International Alumni Award?  Yes, about four or five years ago.  Is that pretty special for you?  That was the best thing of my life. That was really an honor for me and  my family.  As I recall, you were honored in front of about 40,000 fans in half-time  of the football game, is that right?  Yes, during the football game. We were playing against Texas Tech and  we won. (Laughter) And that was a surprise, to win over the Texas Tech.  We had a good team at that time and we beat them. And, I also got an  award from Central Luzon State University-Philippines, one of the  Outstanding Alumni.  You   ve been very much engaged and very active with the Thai alumni in  Thailand and the Thai Alumni Association.  Yes.  In fact, you   re on the advisory board of directors right now, as I recall,  and have been. What are the benefits of having an active Alumni  Association in Thailand?  They call the alumni and we just organize. It   s really difficult to  organize them in Thailand, you know. They work in different parts and  different areas in Thailand, but anyway, we still work together  sometimes. Every year, we just call them to meet together and talk  together. Of course, even if it   s difficult to organize them, we are still  able to do that.  On a personal note, I had the opportunity in person   last summer when  we visited Thailand, we had the Alumni Banquet there in Bangkok. The  quality of the people there that worked in the government and higher  education is amazing. In your estimate, how many OSU alumni do we  have in Thailand?  Oh, I think many   you need to ask the Dr. Dugger. Maybe he knows the  exact number. I think it   s about 1,000. The first Thai student to come to  OSU has passed away already. He was the Minister of Education of  Thailand more than 60 years ago.  And we   ve had some people in several areas, like the telephone company  16  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  of Thailand, currently the Chairman of the Board is OSU-Thai, is that  correct?  Okay, many high positions.  And you mentioned all the presidents.  So now, maybe more than 1,000 Thais have graduated from OSU who  are in Thailand, more than 1,000.  Well, Dr. Thep, it   s evident that OSU is very important to you in your  life. Why is OSU so special for you?  I came to the U.S. when I was only twenty-two years old. Of course, I  studied for my master   s degree at Mississippi State University first, my  M.S. there. I spent about a year and a half there and then one year in  Chicago. Then I came to Stillwater. I was very young when I graduated  with my doctorate degree, only about twenty-eight years old, twenty-seven  years old. But in that time, I learned a lot. I needed more  experience so I increased my knowledge  and learned  many things from  OSU.  I was lucky, I met good people. I met Dr. Bob Price, Dr. Bob Terry, Dr.  Dugger, and Dr. Key. They were very good professors. They were really  friendly to the students, especially to the Thai students, because they  were working with international students because, you know, OSU is  one of the best  to foster  good relationships with international students.  So, it gave me some good ideas and was a good student life for me. I  remember everything that happened at OSU when I went back to  Thailand and became a professor in Maejo University. I got many ideas  from OSU to develop Maejo University, especially when I became a  dean after becoming the head of a department and then vice president  and president. That   s why OSU shaped me. I became a good ambassador  and a good leader. When you become an ambassador of your university  and if you got the experience from OSU, that will make it easier for you  to develop a university in Thailand.  Do you have future plans professionally and personally? You   ve still got  a little bit left in your career, but are there some things you want to do  professionally, and then personally, in your life?  I   m not yet in that time, you know. I am still waiting to finish another  one year and a half to finish my second term as president of Maejo  University. In that time, I am already sixty years old, so I shall retire  from the government office. I may think about those things, anyway.  17  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Phongparnich  Gill  Do you have some hobbies and things you plan to do, like fishing?  (Laughs) Maybe some sports but not fishing. Maybe just play some  sports and take care of my family, because I have been, for almost eight  years, the president, and have always been far away to take care of my  family. So after I finish my term as president, I can take care of my  children.  Spend time with your family and hope for the grandkids that come along,  right?  Yes.  Well, President Thep, you   ve obviously made several significant  contributions to higher education and to the Thai people. How do you  hope people will remember you when you   ve retired and finished your  career? How do you hope people will look back and remember you?  Well, I think in my career of almost thirty years, since I was a young  professor and became the president, I have known a lot of students of  Maejo University. During my time, I needed to take care of them, to  learn a lot from them,  become  really close to them, to these students, in  the classroom or outside the classroom. Even the alumni activity, every  time they have some activities, I try to attend so as to let them know me.  So I hope that after I finish my career or finish my presidential term, I  hope that they will still know me, recognize me forever because before  that, I already made many things, good things for them, to take care of  them, and to love them.  Is there anything we   ve left out? Is there anything you   d like to mention  or bring up or discuss in our interview that we haven   t talked about?  Well, I will just say something as one of the OSU alumni. I am really,  really proud of being an OSU alumnus and also, I shall always  remember in my life OSU made me become a good leader and a good  ambassador. As one of the presidents of the state universities in  Thailand, I need to be really proud of that because we have only twenty-four  big state universities in Thailand, although in Thailand we have  many, about ninety universities, yes, but one of the top twenty-four  universities. And I am the president of a state university in Thailand.  That makes me really proud of that, and of course, I became the  president because of OSU making me attain a good and high position as  ambassador of a state university in Thailand.  Thank you.  -------  -------  18   
