 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, December 4,  2015, and I   m interviewing Austin Kenyon for the Cowboys in Every County  interview series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Mr. Kenyon, you   ve got your  undergraduate degree from OSU, eventually taught a couple of years in the  horticulture department for this school but spent the large part of your  career in differing capacities with Greenleaf Nurseries. I look forward to  learning more about your life and career and your OSU memories. Thank  you for speaking with me. When and where were you born?  Kenyon I was born on January the 9, 1939, in Oklahoma City.  Little Thunder In Oklahoma City. What did your parents do for a living?  Kenyon My father was in agriculture in the nursery business and then the irrigation  business both in Oklahoma City and in the little community of Dover   Oklahoma  in Kingfisher County.  Little Thunder You   ve been around the nursery business from day one.  Kenyon Yeah, well, that   s third generation. My grandfather was in the nursery  business, and my dad and I was. Then because of that, I majored in  horticulture at Oklahoma State.  Little Thunder Right. Any brothers or sisters?  Kenyon I have a brother who   s deceased and a sister who lives at Kingfisher   Oklahoma , and she and her husband are, they   ve been wheat farmers  forever.  Little Thunder How about your mom? What did she do for a living?  5  Kenyon My mother was a mother. (Laughter) She worked in the business with my  dad. She kept the books and did the thing, but she was, primarily raised the  three kids.  Little Thunder Okay. What activities did you do for fun when you were     Kenyon For fun?  Little Thunder Yes, when you were young.  Kenyon That   s a long list because almost everything, I guess.  Little Thunder School age?  Kenyon When I was younger, I, we, of course, hunted and fished and rode a lot of  horses and did a lot of camping along the Cimarron River, and then I was  very active in basketball and baseball at Dover. Dover   s a small high school.  We didn   t have football. We played baseball in the fall and basketball in the  winter and baseball again in the spring.  Little Thunder Did you have duties at the nursery? What were they?  Kenyon Oh yeah. I worked in my dad   s nursery since I was twelve.  Little Thunder Okay, but younger than that, they didn   t put you to work. (Laughs)  Kenyon No.  Little Thunder What were your favorite subjects in school?  Kenyon Science and horticulture, but I mean, I learned a lot at Oklahoma State,  which allowed me to be very successful in the nursery business. I took, I  guess you   d say, the whole cross-campus of your science courses at, botany  and agronomy and horticulture and all those, chemistry and studying the  soils and nutrition and all of that.  Little Thunder Wow. That   s a good blend. As a youngster, were there any particular plants  that your father grew that you were especially interested in?  Kenyon Well, yeah, probably junipers. I brought junipers because my dad was a very  talented horticulturist in his own right, and he made a lot of selections of  different junipers. There still are some of the junipers that are grown in the  trade now that he developed.  Little Thunder I see, and were they specially tailored for the west, for that part of the state?  6  Kenyon For that part of the, junipers are primarily, are hardier plants, and they grow  from here clear up to Minnesota. He was selecting either the unique shape or  unique color or a combination of the two, but there was one called Kenyon  Nine. There was one called Dewdrop, and there   s a lot of them that are of  the species that   s copied junipers that   .  Little Thunder Oh, one named after the family that   s still around. That   s cool. Well, how  about in high school? Did you do any sports at all? What were some of your  activities? You were still focused on science, I take it.  Kenyon No. (Laughter) I was much more focused on sports, on baseball and  basketball, and did it full time. That   s all. All I just lived and breathed was  to play baseball and really basketball. Basketball was my favorite sport.  Little Thunder What position did you play?  Kenyon Well, depending on what year you   re talking about. (Laughter) I was center  in my junior year, and then in, this is kind of a unique situation. This was  back in the fall of 1956. Dover High School and Dover Booker T.  Washington integrated in 1956.  Little Thunder Wow.  Kenyon Dover Booker T. Washington had a record of thirty and one the year before,  and we were twenty-four and six. Each team had one senior. We took the  eighteen best players and put them together and picked out the best team,  and we had a really good basketball team.  Little Thunder That sounds pretty   .  Kenyon My senior year, we went to the state tournament, and then I ended up going  to OSU and playing for Mr.  Henry  Iba.  Little Thunder Oh, you did. Well, we   ll talk about that a little, too. That was a big shift.  How did it impact the athletic part of the school, it sounds like, integration  happening in    56?  Kenyon Really, I think, because of the basketball and the success that we had that  there was absolutely no problems at all. Of course, I was grown up with  most of those kids where I worked in the fields with them. There are lots of  watermelons grown at Dover, and see, Dover   s just north of the Cimarron  River about three miles. That   s all sandy ground, and at one time, there was  probably 600 or 700 acres of watermelons being grown in Dover. They  formed what they call the Dover Watermelon Marketing Association, and  we were shipping boxcar loads of watermelons to Kansas City and Chicago  pretty well much the month of August. I worked in the fields with most of  7  those guys. I knew them. It really wasn   t that big of a deal. The only thing  that I thought was noteworthy was about Thanksgiving my senior year, there  was a big black Cadillac pulled up outside. Four black men in suits got out  and came in there with the NAACP  National Association for the  Advancement of Colored People  and wanting to make sure that the black  children were being treated properly, but we really had no problems. Some  of those guys are still my good friends.  Little Thunder That   s great. Can you describe Dover, growing up in Dover?  Kenyon (Laughter) Dover   s very small. Now it   s almost nothing, unfortunately, but  growing up in Dover was great. It was just a small town, but there were two  grocery stores and two cafes and a locker plant and a couple of filling  stations and population maybe 300 people.  Little Thunder No movie theater.  Kenyon Oh no. You went to Kingfisher for the movie theater. Everybody in  Kingfisher can   t believe there were nine high schools in the county at that  time. Only Kingfisher and Hennessey  Oklahoma  had movie theaters, and  basically everybody went to Kingfisher. That was, again, a very unique  situation growing up because I knew almost all the kids in the county  because we played basketball against them. We saw them on Wednesday  nights, and we dated some of the girls in some of the other towns and  everything. It was great. My high school, I wouldn   t trade it for anything.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder I think there   s quite a Mennonite presence, isn   t there, in Kingfisher     Kenyon No, no, that   s   .  Little Thunder Maybe that   s a little further south.  Kenyon Yeah, it   d be either south or, then there   s some up here in this area of the  state, but no, we didn   t   Kingfisher County was   how would I say this?  Loyal and Omega, the two small rural schools, Loyal used to be named Kiel  because it was a German community, and during World War II, they  changed their name to Loyal to show that they were loyal to the United  States. Then Okarche is a German Catholic community. Hennessey is  basically Bohemian Catholic community. You had all of these old ethnic  groups around. It was pretty interesting.  Little Thunder A Cheyenne-Arapaho population down there, too. Did both your parents go  to college?  Kenyon Neither.  8  Little Thunder They encouraged you to continue your education?  Kenyon Yeah, for real. My dad was way smarter than I   ll ever be. I remember when  I was a sophomore in college we had a large greenhouse when I was in  Oklahoma City, and I went by later one evening. I was talking to the  gentleman who   d worked there twenty-five years at the greenhouses, and  they had a coal-powered furnace that heated the thing in the wintertime. I  was talking to him. My dad dropped out of school when he was in eighth  grade, and they had a brick plant in Oklahoma City. You   ll see a lot of  Kenyon bricks with the name Kenyon on them. They   re paving bricks. He  said that my dad would go home at five-thirty, eat supper with the family,  put the kids to bed, and then come back to the nursery and study until two or  three o   clock in the morning. (Laughs) He was much smarter than I was, I   ll  promise you. He was an engineer by his self-training, and he was somebody  I was very proud of.  Little Thunder Designed his own buildings, too?  Kenyon No. My uncle was an architect, but my dad basically, he designed and  engineered irrigation systems and put in big systems all over the state along  with the nursery.  Little Thunder How did you end up choosing OSU?  Kenyon (Laughs) Basketball.  Little Thunder Basketball, okay, and Mr. Iba. Tell us about doing basketball at OSU.  Kenyon I wasn   t a very good player on the college level. I guess I had    white man   s  disease.    I couldn   t jump very high, and I was a little bit slow. Our team,  honestly the freshman class of 1956 was the beginning of the end of the  better teams that Mr. Iba had. The only thing significant about it was the  first black player that Mr. Iba ever recruited was a freshman with me. He  was L. C. Gordon from Memphis, Tennessee, and L. C. and I were pretty  close when we were at school.  Little Thunder What was it like practicing under Iba, playing under Iba?  Kenyon Well, actually, since I was a freshman, Mr. Iba really wasn   t my direct  coach, but we scrimmaged the varsity some. He was very   he was a  wonderful person, but he was tough. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Just in terms of vigorous practice?  Kenyon Oh yes. Thanksgiving vacation, you had three practices a day.  9  Little Thunder You did not go home?  Kenyon Oh. No. (Laughter) You hardly got out of the fieldhouse, but he knew what  he wanted. He demanded that, and he was a great coach. There   s no doubt  about that, but in my opinion, Mr. Iba   s strength and abilities were offset  when they started shooting the jump shots. His thing was defense first, low  scoring games, and when you   ve got these guys that shoot these jump shots,  you just couldn   t defend them that way anymore. I know when I was a  freshman in high school in there (would   ve been about 1955), we went to  Norman to watch OU  University of Oklahoma  play Ohio State, and Ohio  State had a player by the name of Robin Freeman. Then Furman University  had a player by the name of Frank Selvy, and they were the first two people  to shoot jump shots in college. Oh, we saw that game, and the next day,  everybody was out learning how to shoot a jump shot. It changed basketball.  That   s why I think Mr. Iba   s way of ball   defense is still important, but you  couldn   t dominate a game anymore with defense like they used to. At least  that   s my opinion.  Little Thunder Yeah, thank you for sharing that. What years were you at OSU again?  Kenyon I was a freshman in the fall of    56 and graduated in    61. I was there all four  years. I graduated in the spring of    61.  Little Thunder You, right away, knew you were going to major in horticulture.  Kenyon No. I went to OSU to be a vet and was actually accepted for vet school, and  Raymond Kays, who was my advisor in agriculture, was the head of the  horticulture department. He was that because he knew of my background,  and he convinced me, finally, that I needed to stay with my roots. (Laughs)  I   m glad I did because I   ve got several close friends that I took a lot of the  pre-vet courses with that are vets now, and I don   t, glad I didn   t become a  vet.  Little Thunder It   s sort of a high stress   .  Kenyon Well, if you don   t have a partner, you don   t have a life because you   re on  call every weekend, and it   s just a real tough deal. I don   t know. I took a  bull over to the vet clinic here about three weeks ago, and I was amazed that  every person in the large animal clinic was a female. There was not a single  male. Either the practicing vets at the clinic or the students becoming large  animal vets were all women.  Little Thunder That   s been a big shift.  Kenyon I don   t see how those little bitty girls are going to do some of the things that  are required with large animals, but we   ll see. (Laughter)  10  Little Thunder What was a professor or two who stood out for you when you were at OSU  in any of the classes?  Kenyon Raymond Kays and, or Dick Payne probably was the most in horticulture. I  learned so much from him. You   ve got to understand my background. There  was a professor in chemistry. I went to Dover High School. I   d never looked  at a microscope. I   d never taken any kind of a science course. I took four  years of vo-ag and four years of English. That was half of my high school  education. (Laughs) To say that I was a little bit over my head is an  understatement, and I took that first chemistry course my first semester  freshman year. I was playing basketball. Dr. Webster, the first day of class,  he said,    Everybody who has not had high school chemistry, hold up your  hand.    There were probably thirty-five of us that   that   s how bad it was  back then. He just grinned and said,    Well, those of you that have had high  school chemistry, just sit back and relax. For the next three to four weeks,  you   re going to get a real quick review of your high school chemistry. For  the rest of you, if you think you   re going to pass this course, we   re going to  have help sessions on Tuesday and Thursday nights,    and he did. I mean, he  did it, and he just took us by the hand and led us through. If it hadn   t been  for him, I probably wouldn   t have ever made it in school. I   m very grateful  for him.  Little Thunder Right. What buildings did you have your classes in?  Kenyon What buildings? Oh, a little bit of everything, the botany building,  Classroom Building. What was that old building that   s over by the fire  station? That   s where I had English. You had to walk there, and I had a class  in the meat lab, which was on the northwest side of the campus. That was on  the southeast. You had ten minutes to walk there. I   ll always remember that.  I took English there, but most of mine were in botany and the agriculture  building. The core agronomy and horticulture courses were taught, and then  you might get chemistry or something in Classroom Building.  Little Thunder What was the environment on campus outside of your program?  Kenyon (Laughs) It was good. Enrollment was about 9,800. You spoke to everybody  you met on campus, looked them in the eye, none of this staring down  walking by people, and it was a wonderful environment. I feel like, that the  strength of Oklahoma State is still the student body because the student body  comes from the rural areas, and these kids are just a little bit better off than  these city kids, unfortunately. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Yes, they   re very good, nice students, yeah. Where did you live on campus,  or did you live on campus?  11  Kenyon Oh, I lived in the jock dorm my freshman year, which was West Bennett at  that time, and then I lived in Cordell Hall my sophomore year. Then I got  married between my sophomore and junior year, and we lived in married  student housing.  Little Thunder Did you have to work while you were going to school?  Kenyon Yes. Basically, I think they allowed us to work twenty-four hours, and I  always worked at the hort iculture  department in the greenhouses with one  of the professors.  Little Thunder Oh, a work study. What did that experience provide you with?  Kenyon It just gave us more background, things that we were going to be using later  on, especially with Dr. Payne. I did a lot of things with him on plant  nutrition and soil mixes and things like that and some with insect and  disease control. All of this is stuff that later that   s how I made my living. It  was extremely helpful, and the money was needed. (Laughter)  Little Thunder How often did you go home?  Kenyon I went home quite a bit. It was fifty-five minutes from Stillwater to Dover,  and I   d go home at least a couple of times a month.  Little Thunder You had a car?  Kenyon Yeah, I had a car, and I wasn   t in a fraternity. I played basketball my  freshman year here. I didn   t ever join a fraternity, and Wes Watkins and I  were big buddies. We always told people that we were, belonged to Gamma  Delta Iota,    goddamn independents.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s great. I thought I understood you were on a track team, though,  briefly. Were you on the OSU track team?  Kenyon No, no, no.  Little Thunder Okay. That is wrong. Tell me about meeting your wife. Where and how did  you guys meet?  Kenyon My first wife was my high school sweetheart. We met in high school. When  she graduated from high school, we got married.  Little Thunder Did she also go to OSU for a while?  Kenyon No. She was the one who helped push me through. She worked while I was  there, and the same thing in graduate school when we went to Iowa State.  12  Little Thunder I know you   re a big football fan now, but were you going to the games as a  student?  Kenyon Oh yeah. I don   t think I   one of the things I became there, I had never seen  a wrestling match until I came to OSU, and I became a huge wrestling fan. I  hardly ever missed any athletic event. Baseball games, football games,  men   s basketball games, and wrestling, I went to all of those, and then I  played intramural sports a lot.  Little Thunder What was the policy in terms of tickets for students at that time?  Kenyon Well, then, a wrestling match, they   d open the gates forty-five minutes  before the match, and it would just fill up, every bit. It was Gallagher Hall,  and there would be anywhere from 6,000 to 8,000 people at a wrestling  match.  Little Thunder Wow.  Kenyon I think my sophomore year, Myron Roderick was the coach, and we had a  great team. I think the Big Eight tournament was held at Gallagher that year.  If I remember right, we won all ten weights in the Big Eight Conference out  here. Wrestling was great. I   ve been to a lot of really unique wrestling  matches. I was there the night that they busted lightbulbs in the Big Eight  tournament there.  Little Thunder Tell us a little more about that.  Kenyon I can   t remember all of the names, but Iowa State had an undefeated 191-  pounder. We had Jimmy Jackson as our heavy weight, and no one was going  to beat him. It really came down to whoever won the 191-pound was going  to win the Big Twelve Tournament, or Big Eight Tournament, at that time. It  was real crowded. I knew Pat Quinn real well, and Pat told me later that he  was involved with getting things set up. Right before the match had started,  it was so full that the fire inspector came by and told the PA announcer, he  said,    You got to make some of these people leave before I   ll allow this  match to start.    (Laughs) Then the PA announcer just got ready at the mic,  and he says,    You tell them.    He didn   t do it. (Laughs) Everybody was  sitting in the aisle. You couldn   t have gotten another person in there at all,  and when this kid that was a 177-pounder that moved up for OSU and beat  this boy, it just, well, it actually knocked the radio off for about three  minutes and busted lightbulbs     Little Thunder Wow, the explosion of noise?  Kenyon    just from the noise.  13  Little Thunder That is a great story. What do you recall about any campus tradition?  Kenyon (Laughs) Well, there   s a lot of them. Back then, anybody who started going  steady or got pinned or got engaged, the guys took them over and took their  pants off and threw them in Theta Pond, and then the sorority house right  across from Theta Pond had a little cupola around the front door. You   d  throw their pants up on top of that, and then you   d have to go ring the  doorbell. They   d make you sing a song before they   d give you back your  pants. (Laughter) That was one of the traditions that I remember.  Little Thunder You didn   t have to go through that because you married your high school  sweetheart.  Kenyon Right, but my freshman and sophomore year at Oklahoma State. Yeah, I got  thrown in Theta. (Laughter) I guess it   s a felony now. Things have changed  so much, but used to, it was very common to get thrown in there. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, in that spirit, what about a prank that you remember?  Kenyon I don   t know whether I should tell this or not, but in my sophomore year in  the spring, they have Western Week. They had the Western Week dance on  a Friday night, and it was on the fourth floor of the Student Union. I had a  buddy that lived across the hall from me in the dorm, and he was a rodeo  clown. We went and got his Brahma bull and took it up on the fourth floor  of the Student Union and got caught. As we were going up the elevator, the  director of the Student Union got on the second floor. (Laughs) I   ll say this  for him. He got on the elevator with us, and he said,    Nobody   s getting out  on the fourth floor.    We went right back down to the basement. He took our  IDs, but it wasn   t a big deal. We had to go see the dean, and man, we were  put on social probation. Why? I wasn   t in a fraternity or anything social.  Probation didn   t hurt me at all. (Laughter) The rumor that there was a bull  up on the Student Union is true.  Little Thunder That   s a pretty famous prank, I   ll have to say. (Laughs) What was your  favorite place on campus?  Kenyon Probably Gallagher Hall. I really liked that, and then probably the Student  Union. I studied in the basement of the library. I learned that graduate floor  and graduate students had desks assigned to them, and I found out pretty  quickly there   d be one that, I   d find somebody that didn   t use it. That was  just my desk, and I studied in there.  Little Thunder It was quiet there.  Kenyon Well, yeah. It   s a great place to study if you   re really wanting to study.  14  Little Thunder What activities did you do for fun?  Kenyon Intramural sports. I played basketball and played softball and played  volleyball, flag football, played everything. We had a group of guys that  were athletes as freshmen that had dropped out. We had four or five all-staters  on our team and everything. We pretty well dominated for about  three years. We were called the Black Knights, and we were an independent  one, which was the toughest level. We won basketball two years and softball  one year. We never did win touch football, but we got to the finals. A  fraternity team usually beat us in that, but before we found out there   s more  to volleyball than we realized, we never could do anything in volleyball.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder What were some popular places to hang out off campus?  Kenyon That   s the one thing that I maybe, I guess I   m a bookworm because I really  didn   t do much of that. Swim   s, which is now, what? It used to be the  Gray   Fox, and now it   s the apartment or a branch   it just opened up about three  weeks ago. It   s a hamburger joint and a bar. That was a pool hall, and we   d  go there and shoot pool and stuff. That was about the extent of my  extracurricular life, activities.  Little Thunder You mentioned memories of the library, Theta Pond, the Student Union. Did  you play cards there, too, or were you just     Kenyon No. I   m not much of a card player.  Little Thunder What are your memories of the town of Stillwater?  Kenyon It was just a little agricultural center that happened to have the university in  it. I mean, really, that   s about it. It was a nice town to be in, but back then,  there wasn   t really a whole lot to do. (Laughs) The Student Union was really  the center of all the activity back then. Kids would go up on the fourth floor  of the Student Union, even between classes, and dance. Then the Jitterbug  was the main dance and everything. There was a lot of activity up on the  fourth floor of the Student Union at that time.  Little Thunder Did you do that after you were married, go up there and dance?  Kenyon Yeah, occasionally.  Little Thunder What are your memories of graduation day?  Kenyon Just relief. (Laughter) I mean, I already knew, in fact, I   d left just a matter of  a few days after graduation, went to Ames, Iowa, there for graduate school.  15  It was really just a whole lot of stuff going on trying to get organized to get  out of town.  Little Thunder You really had no break between undergrad and graduate.  Kenyon No, no.  Little Thunder What was that experience like at Ames?  Kenyon I about froze to death. (Laughs) I went there because of John Milstead, who,  it turned out to be a little bit unfortunate. He was probably the leading  horticultural nursery production person in the nation. I had a chance to go to  Cal Poly  California Polytechnic State University , San Luis Obispo in  California, the University of Hawaii were two that I was considering, but I  went because of Milstead. On my trip to Ames from Oklahoma, the head of  the horticulture department had a heart attack and passed away, and they  made Milstead department head. Therefore, I didn   t get near as much  interaction with him as I originally hoped for, apparently, but it   s still a good  deal. It   s a good school, but the housing, the married student housing up  there was called Pammel Courts. They were World War II prisoner of war  barracks that Iowa State bought from the federal government for one dollar.  Put them on concrete slabs, and they had corrugated metal roof and side  walls, interior walls of plywood with no insulation. You had a coal oil stove  that sat in the middle to heat the whole thing, and as a graduate student, you  couldn   t afford to run it all night long. You shut it down when you went to  bed and turned it on the next morning, and it was cold. (Laughs) It was  miserable.  Little Thunder I can   t imagine. How did your folks feel about you going on to graduate  school?  Kenyon My dad was very much in favor of it.  Little Thunder Once you finished, what happened?  Kenyon Graduate school? Well, I got out of graduate school and went to Manhattan,  Kansas, and worked as an extension horticulturist for the whole state of  Kansas. Just out of school, you talk about learning a lot of things, but I did  learn a lot. The extension entomologist, the extension pathologist, and the  extension horticulturist, we traveled together and go and talk to these groups  of ladies about horticulture. I found out real quick that in every town there  was one little old lady that knew everything in the world about one thing,  and she was just dying to show how smart she was and trap you. (Laughs) I  learned real quick that if somebody asked me a question I didn   t know the  answer to, I didn   t try to bluff my way. I just said,    Ma   am, I don   t know,  but I can find out for you,    but it was   it wasn   t bad. I just did that about a  16  year, but it was a good experience. I went to Wichita every Thursday night,  and on Friday morning at six o   clock, I was on the farm show, giving a little  program each week or something about horticulture, home horticulture,  sharing our     Little Thunder In Wichita?  Kenyon Yes, in Wichita, and then other than that   .  Little Thunder I   m surprised the women, that they were your audience. They were  homemakers that were the audience, as opposed to farmers?  Kenyon Yes, in garden clubs, garden clubs and stuff, but there   d be groups all over  Kansas we   d go. There   d be a large group that we   d go, and basically, it  would be ladies. I left there and came back to Oklahoma State in fall of    63,  and Raymond Kays was still the head of the hort iculture  department. I had  my office next to Dick Payne, who   d been my major professor there and  everything and was there until February 1 of    66. At that time, I came to  work with Greenleaf.  Little Thunder What was it like to go back and have that graduate degree and be working  alongside your former professors?  Kenyon Well, working with the professors was good. They helped me a lot. It was a  good deal, but there were students there that I had went to school with that  were there working on graduate degrees. They took all my courses, and you  talk about somebody giving someone a critique. If I made one mistake, man,  they   d all be on me. (Laughter) It was very interesting. I had to grow up  pretty quick on that. I got in there right at the middle of August, and I went  in to see Professor Kays. I said,    Well, what am I going to teach?    and he  said,    Well, you   re going to teach nursery production.    I said,    I didn   t take  a nursery production course. I don   t remember one.    He says,    Well, there  isn   t one. You   re going to be the one who   s going to do it.    It was just like  taking a test every day. I had to prepare a lecture three times a week from  scratch. There was nothing for that. The second year, it was easier, but the  first year was   .  Little Thunder No textbooks.  Kenyon That was the fun part. There was a guy who became the extension pecan that  was a student there named Glenn Taylor. They called him    Cat    Taylor, and  Cat was known for being on the fourth floor of the Student Union. He wore  boots, a great big hat with a big feather sticking out of his hat, and he   d  whoop and holler and dance and everything. Well, I walked in there for my  first day of class in that nursery production course, and Glenn was sitting at  the back of the room. I just went back there and sat down by him. (Laughs)  17  He didn   t know who the professor was. He said,    Who   s teaching this  course?    I said,    I don   t know. I heard he   s pretty tough.    (Laughs) We just  sat there and let everybody come in. Then I got up and walked right to the  front of the room and started calling role. (Laughs) He was back there  shaking his head and laughing and everything, but it was interesting.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s neat. Why did you decide to leave OSU?  Kenyon Oh, part of it was just basic philosophy. I   m a relatively high-energy person,  and the university research life moved a snail   s pace compared to what I  wanted to do. Then the fact that horticulture was a minor department, and  basically, if it wasn   t beef or wheat, which is animal science and agronomy,  it really wasn   t very important to the dean at that time. I   d always had this  interest in the nursery anyway. When I got the opportunity to take the job,   O.  Burr Ross was the dean of agriculture at the time, and he invited me  over to his office and wanted to know why I hadn   t given them an  opportunity to try to keep them. I said,    Burr, nothing negative towards you  or the university, but when I want to dig a hole, I want to get a shovel and  dig a hole. I don   t want to file something and then wait six weeks to get the  damn shovel.    I   m just not university   I love teaching, but I didn   t like all  of the other stuff.  Little Thunder Was there a reason that you didn   t go back and work for your dad?  Kenyon Yes. It   s very simple. My dad wanted me to go back there, and we had a  nursery there. He wanted me to enlarge it, but my dad   s operation was in  Dover, Oklahoma, which is in the western part of the state. You were doing  good to get one person to operate a tractor over there, and for what I had in  mind, we were going to need several hundred employees. It had to be in a  different place.  Little Thunder You had ambitions of building a nursery operation.  Kenyon Yes, yes. We   I had a vision of what I wanted to be involved with, and John  and Gil Nickel, who were my partners   it was interesting. In 1958, when I  was a sophomore, Professor Kays took a group of us over to this part of the  state on a field trip. We went over to Stilwell Foods, which is a big canning  factory over there, went to Ozark Nursery, which is in Tahlequah, and then  we went down to this little containment operation that was just starting up  on Lake Tenkiller. That was around, with John Nickel. This is emotional of  me. I apologize. John said at the time, I was a sophomore in college, and this  was the first year he   d planted the crop there. The nursery was just starting,  and he said that he made a mental note to himself that if he ever had the  chance, he was going to hire me because he said I asked all the right  questions, that I understood. Then I went on and went to graduate school.  18  Well, then when I came back to OSU in    63, John   s brother, Gil, who had  graduated from OSU the same year I did but he was in physics (I didn   t  know him, never met him or anything), he went out and worked for the  federal government plotting missiles in California at some rocket deal out  there. Well, he came back to work with John   s nursery at the same time I  came back to work at Greenleaf. The first thing I did because my dad was in  the nursery business and I basically knew all the nurseries, I went around  and introduced myself and told them that I was getting ready to start doing  research in nursery production and I   d rather work on real problems than  imaginary ones. If they had any problems to let me know, and I   d work with  them. I knew John from that earlier visit, and I never met Gil. When I told  John that, well, John said,    Well, come here. I want to introduce you to a  problem,    and that was Gil. (Laughs) Then three years later, I went to work  for them, and this February 1, it   ll be fifty years.  Little Thunder Wow, great.  Kenyon The Nickel family   s very unique. Gil, see, he left and started wineries in  California. Unfortunately, Gil   s deceased. He passed away from cancer  several years ago, but he developed two of the best wineries in Napa Valley.  That was just an Okie from Muskogee with no background. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Can you explain the importance of Greenleaf Nurseries for us?  Kenyon It   s now the large   see, Greenleaf   s got four divisions. The Oklahoma  division was the original one. Then we put in the Texas division, which is  southwest of Houston about sixty-five miles. It   s straight north of Palacios,  Texas. It   s twenty-six miles off the Gulf Coast, and there   s a reason for that.  You   ve got to be at least twenty-five miles inland so that the hurricane can   t  put saltwater on your crop. Then we   ve put a nursery in at Tarboro, North  Carolina, and it   s about forty miles inland from the Atlantic Ocean. Then we  have a   one of the last things we did, we put in a tree production area. It   s  the only thing we can grow in the soil is we grow trees where we can bud  them and have all the different varieties of the trees, and that site grows  plants for all three nurseries. We ship them out there and put them in  containers and grow them for one year or two years until we sell them.  Little Thunder Are you saying the other plants are grown in aquaculture stuff?  Kenyon Well, they   re grown in a synthetic soil mix, yes. That   s something that   s,  that   s part of our strength. We designed our own soil mix, and actually,  there   s three different mixes to fit different types of plants and everything.  You can say that the advantages and the disadvantages of a container  nursery are the same. The advantage is that you can control every aspect that  affects growth, and if you do it right, you do a real good job. If you do it  wrong, the plant will die. It   s a very precise   I would hate to go back and  19  start from scratch for what we   ve developed over fifty years because it   s  very, very complex. We have a lot of really good production people that  have got degrees in horticulture, and they   ve been with us twenty, twenty-five  years. They do an unbelievable job, but the important, in each one of  the communities, then, we work a lot of people. We   re definitely an  economic factor for that point, and nationally we   re probably the largest  wholesale container nursery in the nation now. We ship into thirty-eight  states and have twenty-seven salesmen that work for us full time on the  road.  Little Thunder How many different kinds of plants do you     Kenyon (Laughs) Several thousand.  Little Thunder Wow.  Kenyon I mean, we grow a complete line of woody and ornamental trees and shrubs.  Plus we grow a lot of perennials and annuals, and we also sell a lot of other  crop. Our Texas nursery, of course it   s, we grow tropicals down there along  with that, and the Texas nursery is pretty good because we can grow azaleas  and all your different broadleaf evergreens in half the time we can grow  them up here. We want a growing season down there because the growing  season is longer and better, the Texas nursery, but it was located in the  triangle between San Antonio, Dallas-Fort Worth, and Houston. That in  itself is a huge market. Plus it grows a lot of plants that come up to  Oklahoma and then shift it out for this crop for that, and then the nursery in  Tarboro, North Carolina, is right on I-70 just up the road a short ways. It   s  Boston, New York City, Washington, DC, Philadelphia, everything, the  northeastern population, and that   s what that nursery is for is to serve that.  It   s getting big enough now that it   s starting to impact the Oklahoma  nursery. We   ve had to shift, we used to ship to the northeast out here, and  now then we   re shifting more into the Midwest and Chicago and that area,  Ohio and Minnesota and all that.  We changed our crop mix somewhat, but the three of them together do a real  good job of covering the states from the Rocky Mountains east with the  exception of Florida. Florida   s a very unique market. You can   t compete  with them because there   s all these little bitty mom-and-pop operations.  They   re all over the place, and they   ll deliver free. They grow the plants so  easy, and it   s such a benevolent climate down there that we just don   t, we  just act like Florida isn   t down there. (Laughter) It   s the states from Texas  and Oklahoma, Kansas and Nebraska and the Dakotas east with a little bit in  New Mexico and a little bit in Utah, but our big competition used to be in  California. Big nurseries do a real good job. For us to go over the Rockies  and compete with them when they had the freight advantage, we couldn   t do  it, but now then with increases in trucking and fuel prices and everything,  20  they really have a hard time competing with us on this side of the Rockies.  Certainly, there are other good nurseries on the eastern half of the Rockies,  but I   ll be biased and say we   re the biggest and the best.  Little Thunder Right. What do you consider your biggest success, then, at Greenleaf,  expansion?  Kenyon Just the overall success of the   I mean, our expansion was unbelievable. It   s  changed so much. When we started out, our big challenge was to grow  plants, and we perfected all sorts of different techniques to make it more  efficient, less expensive, better quality. That was a lot of fun.  Little Thunder You were appointed to the Board of Regents at OSU at one point. Were you  surprised?  Kenyon Yes, I was surprised and had no idea of the involvement or anything. They  laughingly tell you that it   s going to take one day a month, and that   s the  biggest fallacy that   s ever, you   ve ever seen. (Laughter) I enjoyed my time  on the board a lot, although I was a little bit amused at my ignorance when I  was appointed. Well, then I got a call from the senator here. He said,    I  understand you   re being appointed to the Board of Regents.    I said,    That   s  what they tell me.    He said,    Do you realize that you   ve got to have my  approval?    and I said,    I had no idea.    (Laughs) I   m just not very political. I  love Oklahoma State, and I tried very diligently to make decisions that were  best for the university. I didn   t have any agenda. I didn   t have any political  thing. I know one time   I won   t say what government it was, but one of the  government staff members called me. We were going to have a meeting on  Friday, and he said,    Now this issue is coming up for a vote on Friday, and  we expect you to vote.    I   m known to be rather blunt, and I said,    I   m  funny. I will vote on this issue after I decide what is best for the university,  and secondly, I don   t like people telling me what to do. I will suggest you  not call me again    and hung up and never heard from him again.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. In 2003, you were the distinguished alumnus honoree.  What was that like?  Kenyon It was just a very nice honor. I mean, I   m not saying I   m deserving of it, but  I was pleasantly surprised. My partner, Gil Nickel, went into the same  group, which was real nice. He was from California, and I was from  Oklahoma. (Laughs) That made it also, and Gil also was sick at that time. I  was real glad to see him get that.  Little Thunder Made it special. I understand you   re in Stillwater quite a bit, especially  during football season.  21  Kenyon Well, I   m only in Stillwater quite a bit during the athletic season, which is  year-round. This is my fifty-third year, consecutive year to have football  tickets, and I   ve had basketball tickets since we changed coaches and hired  Leonard Hamilton, which, remember was going to be, that was the upswing  of our basketball program. Then when Eddie  Sutton  came in, we really did  well. I got out of the board meeting when we hired Leonard, walked across  the campus, went in to see the ticket agent, and I said,    I want four tickets  on that second row.    We   d just redone the inside of Gallagher Iba  Arena ,  and they had those seats down on the floor. I said,    I want floor seats across  the court from the bench on the second row,    and they said,    Well, Regent  Kenyon, you don   t have any problem getting tickets.    I said,    Ma   am, you  don   t understand. In a few years, basketball tickets are going to be very hard  to get. I won   t be on the board at that time. I want these tickets in my name.  I   m paying for them,    and I still got them.  Little Thunder That was really prescient of you, farsighted. Speaking of just another area  you   re in, I guess, you raise Brangus cattle?  Kenyon Yes, I do.  Little Thunder How many do you have, and how long have you been raising them?  Kenyon I   ve been raising Brangus cattle for thirty-five years, I guess. I was real big  in the registered Brangus for a number of years. When I got out, some  people said,    How come you   re getting out of the registered business?    I  said,    Because I   m tired of paperwork and the politics,    and I   m raising  probably better cattle now than I used to because with the registered cow,  they   re more expensive. If you go out and pay ten thousand dollars for a  cow and she doesn   t breed, well, you   ll give her another chance. If these out  here, if they don   t breed, they learn the McDonald song. They   ve got to raise  a calf and breed back every year because that   s the only way you can make  money with them. Betsy and I were very, very active in the Brangus  Association for, oh, fifteen years or so, and I was on the IBBA  International  Brangus Breeders Association  board of directors and very active and  enjoyed a lot of wonderful people. Still have got a lot of good friends that I  met in the Brangus business.  Little Thunder How did attending OSU and earning your degree impact your life?  Kenyon That   s a hard question. It just totally turned my life around. I mean, it gave  me the training and the background, and I already had the   knew what I  wanted to do by the time I graduated. I wanted to be in the nursery business,  and even though I got into education to start out, I knew pretty quick that  this isn   t what I wanted to do the rest of my life. The background,  educational background I got in the basic sciences allowed me to really  22  excel in growing plants. That   s something that I   m very, very grateful for to  the university and I try to show any way that I can.  Little Thunder Are you connected to the other cowboys in Tahlequah? You know each  other?  Kenyon Oh yeah, yeah, I mean, there   s a lot of us that   the nursery out there, we  have lots of OSU graduates out there because we need horticulture grads.  We   ve got some in K-State and some from Texas A M, but we   ve got a  large number of ag majors.  Little Thunder What can you tell us about your Tahlequah? What should a person see or  experience here in Tahlequah?  Kenyon Well, Tahlequah   s got two main things that have helped it in spite of the  people, and that   s the Illinois River and Lake Tenkiller. The tourism factor  is extremely big. The fact that Tahlequah   s the home of the Cherokee Nation  is another thing, but they   re making so much money off the gambling  casinos now I   m not sure it   s that good a deal. It   s just something we have to  put up with, but Tahlequah   s a nice town to live in. Northeastern State   s a  nice sized university, and just, I learned when I was on the Board of  Regents, when you   re around these young kids, they will vitalize you. They  make you feel younger just being around them, and it   s the same way here.  Little Thunder I understand two of your daughters attended OSU.  Kenyon Yes. Both of them graduated, and then I   ve got two grandchildren that are in  school now. One is a senior, and one is a sophomore.  Little Thunder Great. You can hook up with them when you go to sports games.  Kenyon Oh yeah. We bought a home this last October, a small home in Stillwater  that Betsy refers to as our game day house because we go to every  basketball game, and it   s getting more difficult. I   m not very pleased with  that program right now, but I   m getting too old to drive back at night after a  basketball game. We got where we can spend the night and come home the  next day. It   s been a real good deal. We   re glad we did it.  Little Thunder Well, I noticed a sign for OSU Avenue when I pulled in here. (Laughs) What  advice would you give to students at OSU today?  Kenyon Well, they   ve got a real tough future ahead of them. I mean, I   m not very  political, but I   m not very impressed with our political leadership right now.  The debts that our federal government is getting into is going to be a real  challenge for them. These kids are so much more talented than I was when I  was a freshman at the time. They   re going to do well, but they   re going to  23  have to work harder than we did to be successful just because of all of the  governmental challenges and all of that.  Little Thunder What advice would you give to faculty or administrators?  Kenyon I think that a big part of the faculty is doing a great job. I think that our  president   s the best president that we   ve probably had in the history of the  university. I think he and his wife are just, such a good feel about them. The  kids love his wife, and they   re just really good. I think he   s really, really  done a great job over there. I shouldn   t say this, but when I was on the  Board of Regents, about the second meeting I went to, the faculty council  invited me over for a session. They were asking me about my feeling on  merit pay, and I said,    I   m all for merit pay. I   ll gladly champion that effort  for you with just a few adjustments in a few things.    They were getting all  excited, and finally one of them said,    Well, what adjustments are you  talking about?    I said,    Well, the first thing we need to do is get rid of  tenure.     Well, that didn   t go over very well, but that   s, to me, and in education  period, the biggest problem we   ve got is tenure because when I talked to  Burr Ross when I was leaving the university, he said,    You realize you   re  qualified for tenure next year?    I said,    Burr, if I   ve got to have tenure to  keep my job, I don   t want it. What   s wrong with this university right now is  I   ve never seen so many guys in their early forties that have already shut  down because my feeling is, I think what they think is if they don   t do  anything wrong, they can   t get fired. If they don   t do anything, they won   t  do anything wrong. That   s not all of them, but that   s some of them. Those  people need to be replaced.    But education   s a tough deal. Oklahoma   s in a  real tough situation economically right now. I don   t know whether it   s a lack  of leadership or a lack of money, but we have a problem at our capitol.  Little Thunder What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty, do you think?  Kenyon The people, the student body. I mean, it was that way in 1957. It   s that way  now. The kids are just a great group of kids. You go over for Homecoming  or go over some of these things and just be around them, and I think that   s  the strength of the university is the area that we draw our students from.  Little Thunder Is there anything that we didn   t talk about that you   d like to add?  Kenyon Not really. I mean, I can just say that I   m very glad that I   m an OSU alum,  and I   m very grateful for what the university   s done for me. I try in any way  that I can to pay them back.  Little Thunder Can I just ask, as a final question, what is your favorite plant?  24  Kenyon What is my favorite    (Laughter) That   s actually easy. It   s a willow oak.  It   s a tree. You see all those trees out there in the pasture?  Little Thunder Yeah.  Kenyon We had some diseases come through and kill a lot of the native oaks,  especially the red oaks. I   m having to plant trees back so I   ll have shade in  there. This willow is an unbelievable plant, and I think it   s very much  underused.  Little Thunder It   s got a pretty shape to it.  Kenyon Yeah, it   s got a nice shape. It   s called a willow oak because it   s, the leaf is  shaped like a willow. It   s very narrow, not very big. It   s not messy at all.  There   s no foliage that you have to rake up or anything. It grows extremely  fast, and it   s long-lived. Most fast-growing trees are brittle and fall apart.  This one doesn   t. It   s a good tree. There   s a joke out at the nursery because  I   m always pushing willow oak. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, thank you very much for your time today, Austin.  Kenyon Okay. I hope this is what you wanted. (Laughs)  -------  -------   
