 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, December 6, 2007 and I am in Oklahoma  City, Oklahoma interviewing Rita Matthews. This interview is being  conducted as part of O-STATE Stories, an oral history project of the  OSU Library. Thank you for joining us today. I   d like to begin, Rita, by  having you start off and tell me where you   re from originally and tell me  a little bit about your early life.  Well I originated in Idabel, an unlikely name, Oklahoma and we didn   t  stay there very long. My father was with the Bell Telephone Company  and they moved him around. And we were soon back in Oklahoma City.  He was in the military quite early. I just found a picture today dated  1923. And I think it must have been the Army Reserve because when  World War II started, he was already in the service. So in fact, that  seems to be one of the reasons that my parents divorced. When they  divorced, we were living out   I walked up a dirt road to the first grade,  which is now Douglas Boulevard by Tinker Air Force Base. So things  changed very rapidly after that.  Mother decided that if she was going to have to raise two daughters, that  she needed to have a good education and to the surprise of all of her  family, I think she was the first girl to go to college. The next door  neighbors moved us to Stillwater with all of our belongings in the back  of their pick-up truck and she found a little downstairs apartment right  by the campus. Of course, it was quite different   having her going to  school and working part time. She tried to have college girls take care of  us, my sister was 10, but that never seemed to work. They had dates or  class or something happened, they didn   t always show up.  I remember wandering around the campus where my mother was  working, that   s how free things were   not when I was six, but a little  older. And it was always so fun for me to go into the buildings and peek  5  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  into the classrooms. I particularly liked the art building and would like to  peek in on the classes there. One summer she arranged for me to have  tennis lessons there at the campus courts. One of the things that I  remember was in Brownie Scouts, this was really very early in 1942-  1943   of course, we moved there June 1941 and you know what  happened December 7. And I remember that too, by the way. We had  gone to a movie at the Campus Corner movie theater, which is now I  think part of Hideaway and when we came out of the theater everyone  was running up and down the streets screaming,    The Japanese bombed  Pearl Harbor.    Which I didn   t know what it was or anything about it.  Let   s see, we were right there by the campus      What was her major?  She started out in business and she had a hard time with that so she  switched to home economics. And it worked out beautifully because she  had met Dean Nora A. Talbot at church. And Dean Talbot hired her as  her private secretary there on the campus. That was really wonderful  because that first year we were there, she was the hostess for the music  hall. That   s where the students would go to practice, they   d use practice  rooms. Some had big pianos, some were just for other instruments and  she had to make sure there was no hanky-panky going on in those  rooms. Once or twice I went with her and listened. I liked to listen to the  students playing.  It was much better after she worked for Dean Talbot and was right there  where she was taking her major. And she thought that she would go into  the home economics in the Home Extension Service but by the time she  graduated   let   s see, she graduated in June   May or June of 1946 and  she decided to become a Girl Scout executive, and that   s what she did  for about the next 12 years. She was very active in the church there  while she was raising us. We had no automobile, of course. And there  was rationing of everything. I know that she would fix a pot roast for  Sunday dinner and leave it cooking on the little heater in the bedroom  (Laughs) to make double use and we   d go to church and when we got  home why we had a tender roast beef dinner. She would stretch that into  sandwiches and things like that.  I love the atmosphere of the campus. That   s really why I came back  years later because I enjoyed being around the students and all the things  that were going on. We did go to a few different things and a little later  on I got to go to one or two basketball games, which were in Gallagher  Hall. I don   t think I ever went to a football game and I don   t think she  did either because she was pretty busy on the weekends making up for  working and going to school during the week. I don   t know when she  did her studying. (Laughs) I never really was aware of that except when  6  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  she was at the music hall, then she would do her school work while she  was there, just being present to see what was going on.  Now, as a young girl did you have much interaction with Dean Talbot?  Oh, she was a wonderful influence. I always thought she was the  loveliest lady because she had that snowy white gleaming hair and she  wore beautiful colors that just   that I can see them in my memory. She  would wear a mauve or a teal, Wedgewood blue and researching her  later on I discovered she bought a Paris garment every year because she  thought it was good for the girls in home economics to see something  like that. And she would have us to her home now and again. She had a  music box from Switzerland about this big that totally enchanted me. It  played many different things.  She had little receptions and I was also there when I was in college, too.  But she was a great influence. In fact, she anonymously gave me dance  lessons because I had expressed an interest in that. So I had tap dance  and ballet with Mrs. Lynch, I think she   s a well-known name for many  years in Stillwater with her dance school. And she also gave me art  lessons. So she was a big influence in a lot of ways. She also came to  visit us in Washington state while we were living there.  Now what year did your mother graduate?  1946.  And do you remember going to her graduation?  I do.  Tell me a little bit about that. Where was it? What was it like?  Well, what was the auditorium called before they built the Seretean  Center? I remember it was probably 98 degrees, (Laughs) very hot. We  sat in the balcony, some of my grade school friends and I, and watched  them down below. I don   t remember too much except being very proud  of my mother. I thought she was amazing to do all of these things and do  well in school too.  Now you told me on the phone some early memories you had when you  were younger with the Japanese little girls.  That   s what I started to tell you a while ago and I got away from it.  When I was a Brownie scout, I was trying to think   since I was in  Brownies, it had to be around    43 which to me seems pretty early for  7  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  them to have been thinking about this. But they brought in Japanese  families and I think it was only the men   I don   t remember hearing  about any women   that were teaching military personnel the Japanese  language for the occupation forces, and the campus was full of them. Of  course, the campus was full of other military personnel, too. I know we  often had some at church that we would bring home for dinner. But  these two girls, especially, became very good friends, and I can only  remember Joyce Nagiyama, not the other girl. But, Joyce drew a lot and  I was so fascinated because she always drew Caucasian pictures and I  could even draw the picture myself now. It would be a face with kind of  a pointed chin and a big smile with full lips, big eyes with big eyelashes  and flowing blond hair. (Laughs)  Wow. That   s great.  They were there about a year I think.  After your mother graduated, did you guys remain in Stillwater?  We were there until December. In December, she took her first job in  Aberdeen, Washington and we traveled across the country by train. And  as I said before, that was a cultural shock   very different in every way.  And my fellow students there in junior high had a lot of fun with my  Okie accent (Laughs) which I was unaware of, of course. But it was sort  of like an alien coming (Laughs) in to them.  Now how did you decide to   well you didn   t originally attend OSU. You  went to Northern Iowa University.  I did.  What was your major then?  Well as a freshman I didn   t really have a major but I had a really  wonderful teacher for humanities. In fact, the students would be in line  to sign up for his classes at Northern Iowa. And I loved it because it  encompassed everything I was interested in   language, art, music,  history, the whole thing. So when I decided to come back to Stillwater to  go to school, one reason was because in the catalog it said they had a  humanities major. But I found when I got there that I   d already had, in  his courses, a lot of what they had to offer. So I stayed in humanities and  I took all the things I was interested in. I didn   t graduate. I suppose I  would have had a teaching degree if I   d done that. One reason I left   it  was a teacher   s college at Northern Iowa, I guess it still is. The teaching  courses were not very good and I did not want to be a teacher. And my  first job after we were married was teaching (Laughs) kindergarteners.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Did your mother encourage you to go to college or were you motivated  after growing up and living in a college town?  Oh she wanted both of her daughters to graduate from college. And I  don   t know how she felt about my leaving because I lived at home part  of the year with her. But she certainly never said anything other than  encouragement about going down there for school. We still have friends  we   ve kept in touch with through the church and in the community. So I  felt a real sense of home there in Stillwater. I had all through those  years.  And did your sister attend college?  She went to the University of Washington but unfortunately I followed  her pattern. She got married after her junior year and so did I   Okay so you went from Northern Iowa to Oklahoma State. What was it  like returning to Stillwater for you?  Well of course seeing it as a young adult was quite different from a child  that just kind of wandered around where she pleased because it was a lot  bigger by then. It still wasn   t a real big campus, I think they had about  five or six thousand students, maybe a little more than that. And well,  one of the funny things   it   s really not what influenced me but the  teacher   s college had about four or five girls per guy and Stillwater had  about five guys per girl which was very different. (Laughs)  Now when you moved back to Stillwater, where did you live?  I went through rush  recruitment  and I became a Kappa Delta and I  lived in the Kappa Delta house because I was a sophomore, of course, so  I moved right in. My sister had been a Kappa Delta at the University of  Washington. I lived there all the time I was there, except when I was  there not during school time I stayed with friends.  Do you remember your house mother?  Oh yes. Yes, Alice Newman. She was from Hominy, Oklahoma and of  course she seemed very ancient to me   (Laughs) not anymore  She was  very gracious. She was a great influence on the house. And we were  known to have the lowest house bill on campus because of her  wonderful management.  Wow.  Yes, and we had good meals. And I worked in the home economics  9  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  department for Adeline Ledbetter; she later married Mr. Simank who  owned the meat locker and had graduated from the school of  architecture. She was the head of the Household Arts Department. I  worked there about 20 to 22 hours a week and I earned  65 a month and  that paid my house bill, which included room and board and my pledge  dues of  5 dollars.  Was it tough juggling school and work?  That part wasn   t so tough. It was tough juggling the extracurricular  activities because for the gals that worked in the house, it was hard to do  all of the things that the other girls did that didn   t have any obligations  to help with their finances. That   s the most challenging.  Well, tell me about some of your extracurricular activities outside of the  sorority. Did you participate in any groups or clubs?  I was active in our religious group, the Christian Science college  organization. I was a reader and then the last semester I was there, I was  the president. And there was a religious sorority at the time, I think it  was Pi Zeta Kappa, which was made up from girls of all different  religions and I think we met at the Baptist Student Center most of the  time. I was active in the Young Republicans, which was a pretty small  club in those days. I think that was part of my qualifications for Paul  marrying me. (Laughs)  Was he also in the Young Republicans?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. He went to the National Young Republican  Convention in Blank Hills, South Dakota. Eisenhower spoke as  President of the United States. It   s been kind of fun to look back through  things and find names of people who later became famous. Well one he  debated in high school and then I saw from college, he became after that  a state legislator   very well known and a lawyer.  Well how did you and Paul meet?  We met   it depends on which one of us you talk to. (Laughs) I had a  sorority sister named Carolyn Wooldridge and she was dating a fellow,  Clodfelter, C.R. Clodfelter. And he wanted to be a big wheel on campus.  He was always into things. But he decided that Paul should date me. So  he tried to set us up. Paul was a senior and he didn   t think he needed to  be set up with any dates at that point. So he would back out,       nope,  no.    And one date he tried to set us up for, I think Paul told you about it,  was when we played the University of Kansas and Nan Bokorny, who is  one of my best friends from grade school and I would stay with her  10  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  when I came back to Stillwater, well she was Nan Francis at that time     she and I went up to visit one of our friends from grade school who  moved to Kansas City. And so we stayed with them and C.R. had hoped  that we would go up   that he, meaning Paul and I, would go up to the  game with him. Paul wouldn   t do that, besides I didn   t know it but he  didn   t have enough money for a date. (Laughs) And so we missed each  other on that, and Kappa Delta had a Christmas formal every year. Of  course we hosted the fellows. And C.R. said,    Well why don   t you go  with that Kappa Delta?    And according to Paul, he said,    She   s still  looking for a date?    (Laughs)  Oh my.  Yes, he likes to tell it. And he said to Paul,    Well you won   t have to  wear a tux and it won   t cost you anything.    See now I wish I   d heard  that part of the conversation, I would have had more clues. But he  decided he would do it. But he found out the night that we were to go  that Mr. Clodfelter had two dates in the same place in the Student  Union   one upstairs and one downstairs and so he was going to bow out  early. And of course, I showed you the picture which you may already  have of the night that we met at the dance. It   s taken with Baker  Bokorny and Nan Francis, whom we still do things with and enjoy. In  fact, they went on our 50th Anniversary cruise with us. And that was  how we met. And he asked for another date. I guess it wasn   t too bad  after all. And another date, and we   re very different personalities. I was  very quiet (Laughs) and refined. He kind of has opened me up more.  He asked me to go steady in February and he said,    Please don   t tell  anyone.    Well he didn   t really explain why. I still don   t know why.  (Laughs) So I never told a soul. And eventually he wanted to know why  I hadn   t told anyone. And I said,    Well you told me not to.    And he said,     Well I only meant right then.    I guess he didn   t want it in the campus  paper or something. But anyway, then it appeared in the paper that we  were going steady. He graduated that May and went into the service  later. I was still there and I went the next fall also. He promised me that I  would stay and graduate, but you know when they get away in the  service, they get a little homesick (Laughs) and put the pressure on.  So     In your sorority, did you have dance hour?  Oh yes, every Monday night.  Tell me a little bit about that.  Well the funny thing about that was, that   and this is a little bit before  11  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  that. They had a ribbon dance the night that all the pledges pledge for  fraternity and sorority. And this one fellow was introduced to me by the  Melton family. The Melton men were all Kappa Alpha and Estelle  Melton was a Kappa Delta. So they set me up with a Kappa Alpha  pledge. Well he decided he was smitten and after two dates he was going  to take me home to meet his folks. He came to dance hour every  Monday night. (Laughs) But we had to look nice and we had to be there.  It was a requirement for the pledges. So I let him down very gently.  (Laughs) I met a lot of different guys that way   it was nice.  What type of music do you remember them playing?  Well, not Guy Lombardo   I don   t remember him that much. You  should have briefed me on that so I could     I   m putting you on the spot.  You are. I   m trying to remember all the dances that we went to. This is  terrible. Glen Miller   thank you, that   s it   the Glen Miller Band. That  was one of the ones. And then there was another one that came to the  campus and we went to the dance. He was jazz   you know, that was  hot. Paul didn   t dance to fast music but we went anyway. Ralph  Flannigan played at the Junior-Senior Prom. Of course, I was a great Nat  King Cole fan. He came along about that time.  Did he ever visit campus?  I don   t remember him visiting.  On campus, where else outside of your sorority house would you hang  out for fun?  Hang out for fun? I didn   t have a whole lot of time for hanging out for  fun. I didn   t spend a lot of time in the Union, which a lot of my sorority  sisters did. They would go over and play bridge in the afternoon. They   d  miss classes, too, sometimes, they were so engrossed in their bridge. But  no, I didn   t have anything like that. I can tell you about Sadie Hawkins.  That was pretty fun. I was on a very skinny budget, you may have  realized from my saying that my salary covered my room and board and  my dues. Whatever else I needed   well I hated to ask my mother. I  don   t know why but I just always felt that she   d done so much for me  that I didn   t want to ask her for anymore than I had to. I find that a very  different attitude today, don   t you? Give me the silver platter, please.  (Laughs)  But Sadie Hawkins rolled around and I think that might have been in  12  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  February and there   s a picture in the book there. Well one of the gals  said, though there were about four of us that were going to double date  together that night. Actually, we dated a lot of Pi Kappa Tau   s also   and  she said,    Well I   m going to go and make us some little corsages that  will be funky for the dance.    And so several of them got together while I  was at work and they found little toy spatulas and pancake turners and  spoons and a chore girl  a metallic scouring pad  and so they made these  into little corsages for the boys to wear in the Party Pics photos. But I  was concerned about that night because Paul was my date and I had left  in my pocket book 10 cents. And I thought,    What am I going to do if he  wants to go to the  Campus  Corner or Swim   s drugstore?    or the other  hang out places, because I didn   t have any money. So I just put aside  that I would say,    Well, God provides but I don   t know how I   m going  to do this but I   m just going and not going to worry about it.    So the  evening came to an end and I said,    Would you like to go up for a  coke?    And he said,    Sure.    And I thought,    What am I going to do?     So we slowly sauntered up and when we got there it was closed.  (Laughs)  Did you have a curfew in the sorority house?  Absolutely. A very tight curfew. We had to be in at 10 o   clock on school  nights, particularly for pledges. Pledges had to be in and have a study  hour certain nights of the week. And of course, one night of the week  was   I think it was Monday night after the dance hour we had the  pledge meeting and the member   s meeting. Let   s see, on the weekends it  was midnight. Mother Alice would flash the lights about five minutes till  to warn us. And there were lots of couples on the porches waiting up till  the very last minute. I know the last semester I was there was really hard  because Paul was out of school and he was teaching school back in  Missouri, where his mother lived, living with his mother. And he would  drive over for the weekend and he wanted every minute he could with  me. So I would have to work on Saturday and then he would want to go  out Saturday night and want to go out Sunday and he would want to  keep me there at the door until it was the last minute. I had a hard time  getting my studies ready. (Laughs) He just   that was all past for him so  he couldn   t even think about that anymore.  What were some of the buildings you remember taking classes in?  One of the early classes that I had was speech and it was in that old  Williams Hall, which was a Foucart architectural design. I   m so sorry  that they took it down. Everyone   s sorry, but the floors really were  bowed and creaked.  Really?  13  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Yes.  It was beautiful from the outside.  Oh yes, I thought it was a wonderful building. I enjoyed being in there.  And then I had some classes in the brand new Classroom Building   air  conditioned. Everyone wanted classes there because there was not very  much   well, the Home Ec Building was air conditioned but not many  buildings were.  Did you spend any time in the Library?  I did. I didn   t have a lot of time to spend there. The downstairs of the  Kappa Delta house was one place that we could study. There   s one time  I wished I could have been in the Library because I was working on a  research project or a paper on Plato for an advanced history course and I  had all my research laid out and my research cards there and somebody  decided that it was messy downstairs and they cleaned it all up. (Laughs)  So the Library would have been a very nice alternative. In fact, the  Melton   s allowed me to come over after that happened and stay a  weekend at their house to work uninterrupted without anybody moving  my research papers. But the Library was beautiful. I enjoyed going in  there.  Something we don   t hear too much about is the Varsity Revue. Could  you shed some light on the Varsity Revue?  What would you like to know about the Varsity Revue?  I want to know everything about it.  Well we had an illustrious member in the house. She had graduated and  gone away for the summer and she decided to come back and take her  master   s. And the year before I was there, Kappa Delta had won Varsity  Revue because she was so good. She could dance, she could really put  the numbers together. So she was back and we really got into it. And I  still have the little Kappa Delta newspaper that we published for the  alums with all the pictures from that Varsity Revue that year. We were  known as the group with the clean show. We were squeaky clean.  (Laughs) But we took the best of the show   the sweepstakes prize. And  that was very exciting.  I was a gymnast in high school. There was nothing to do with it then but  I had about four or five good friends   this was in Washington State     and we would spend our noon hour or after school doing   well, we  called it acrobatics but it really was gymnastics. And that was something  14  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  I enjoyed and I was really good. So I tried out for an individual act for  Varsity Revue and was selected. And the big thing that happened, the  night of the performance, I had to use the whole stage because you do  quite a bit of running and flips and so forth. When I arrived for the  performance, the director of the Varsity Revue said,    I   m just going to  have to put you out on the apron of the stage because we need to be able  to change the scenery and get ready for the next act.    Well that scared  me because I had not practiced using a small amount of space. So I  looked very serious, everybody told me. And they said,    Why don   t you  smile?    I said,    Well I was thinking about how I didn   t want to go off  the edge of the stage     But it went well. I didn   t have any problems. I  think we did two performances. But that was very special for me to be a  part of that.  And well a funny thing that happened after that was I was very shy   a  gymnast doesn   t look like she   s very shy I guess. Anyway, this fellow  came back to my dressing room and he wanted to take my photograph. I  was very nervous. I didn   t know what he wanted or why he was there.  And so I was very stand-offish to him, I   m sure. Well it turned out that  he was the photographer for the Aggievator and I missed my big chance  because he thought,    She is really weird.    (Laughs) But that was one of  the side effects of Varsity Revue. That   s about all I can tell you about  Varsity Revue. It always had a packed house.  What building was it held in?  Well it was that same auditorium   the old auditorium.  Oh, okay.  Same auditorium   it   s where all events like that were held. In fact, our  Christian Science organization would have   there were two theaters, the  big one that we   re talking about and then the Prairie Playhouse which, as  I remember, was in Williams and that   s where we usually had our  lectures because it was a little smaller auditorium. Also, they used me  for entertaining at different things. I know there was a National Pan-  Hellenic Convention on campus and I was to entertain them. I kind of  have forgotten. I know I did other groups too, but that   s all I remember.  (Laughs)  Do you remember any on-campus traditions?  Traditions? I don   t. There must have been.  Any tug-of-wars? Do you remember tug-of-wars in Theta Pond or   ?  15  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Oh, well you knew that Paul got thrown into Theta Pond when it was  announced we were going steady. When you announced you got  engaged, they came to serenade at the house and he was an  independent   very independent it turned out (Laughs) from Bennett  Hall. So they brought him over to the Kappa Delta house and they came  over and threw him in the pond. Of course, Homecoming was a really  big tradition.  How was Homecoming? Did people have a parade, house decorations,  what was it like back then?  There were not very many house decorations. All the money went into  floats. I remember stuffing   that   s not what they call it now     Pomping?  Pomping, thank you. I remember pomping until the wee hours of the  morning. And then I was in the parade. I think I wore maybe a clown  outfit. But I could only do my acrobatics barefooted and I didn   t have  any little shoes or anything. I don   t know why because they were  available. But that was a long parade and it was cold. (Laughs) My feet  on that icy   some streets were still brick   Did you attend many sporting events?  Not very many. Basketball games   well, and then, (Laughs) Paul didn   t  realize it but thanks to my boyfriend in Iowa, he had introduced me to  college wrestling and I really liked it. It has remained one of my favorite  sports because I like the fact that there   s an individual performance there  as well as team and that each one has to master himself and not just be  athletic. But they have to use intelligence to decide which move to make  when and they have to do it fast. So he asked me. We all had tickets to  various things and it was easy to get tickets to the wrestling matches  because not many went; they had a big turnout, but not compared to  football or basketball. And he said,    I don   t suppose you care for  wrestling?    And I said,    That   s my favorite sport     That was another  brownie point for me. I was republican and I liked wrestling. (Laughter)  And as I said, I didn   t go to any   well I did go to some football games  but a lot of the times I either was working or I was studying. But of  course, we dressed up and we wore high heels to the game and the guys  got the big mums and we always had to have the big mums. That was  hard for Paul to let go of.  Did you go home often?  No.  16  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  To Washington to visit your mother?  No, she was in Iowa at this time.  Oh, okay.  I went home. Let   s see, Thanksgiving I spent with her sister here in  Oklahoma City one year. And the other year I went home to Muskogee  with Carolee Montgomery, one of the Kappa Delta   s. And then I would  go home for Christmas. But that was spent at the Library because we  had to come back and take finals when you got back   really fun, you  know?  Right.  And I had to take the train. I learned how to sleep anywhere by sleeping  on the train because it was a hard bench. (Laughs) I had an adventure  going back home one Christmas because Paul had arranged for a friend  of his   he was a track man or a basketball player   who was going back  to Iowa. He was married, he and his wife   and they said I could ride  with them. Well they got up barely over the line in Missouri and decided  to stay somewhere there. And so they said,    I hope you don   t mind.  We   ll take you to the bus.    I had to wait and wait and wait. That was a  scary and miserable trip home but I finally got home.  Wow.  I got on the train somewhere. Got into Des Moines at midnight and I had   15 in my checkbook and so I called Mother and she said,    Well stay in  a hotel over night.    So I   d never done this but I explained, and well they  were a little leary about the whole thing themselves, you know?    Can  she pay?    So Mother told them that she   d be sure and take care of it. So  I got into Waterloo, Iowa the next day   very glad to be there.  Is there a particular place on campus that is just very special to you?  Well, I think some of the more special places are gone. The old Home  Ec Building and of course, I worked in the new Home Ec Building. It  was pretty new when I came back. I can   t say the Quonset huts were  special, but they had a special place. I took art in one from Miss Jack.  And the painting up there on my wall is done by one of her students,  who did work very similar to Miss Jack   s work. Any other place? Well  the Student Union   this would be in my era, not Mother   s, there was not  a Student Union but there was a Y-Shack.  Y-Hut.  17  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Y-Hut where everyone went. I didn   t drink coffee so I didn   t hang  around some of these places that others did.  Is there one particular faculty member that played a big role in your  life?  Well my boss, Mrs. Ledbetter   I didn   t actually take any classes from  her. I did take some classes   I remember, Miss Henry. I took home  design and I took one in cooking and I decided that was Mother   s thing,  not mine. Not the cooking, but just the home ec scene and that   s when I  switched to the humanities major again. I don   t really remember any     well, there were some. Dr. Knight taught 303 history, an ancient history  course that I took; I really enjoyed that. I never dreamed that some of  those places I was studying, someday I would be able to go to them.  That made it very special and a good connection there. My Sunday  School teacher was on the faculty and I didn   t have any class from him. I  think he was business mainly but   and then of course Dean Talbot was  a very special part. I don   t think that Marguerite Crossman taught any  other classes   yes, she did. She was an English professor. I didn   t take  any of her English courses, but she taught a bible class that I did take.  What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty in students and  alumni?  Well of course for me there was a deep anchor because it represented a  special time, when there was a split in the family, that Stillwater became  the home and the family place. Though none of our family lived  anywhere around there   they lived in Norman (Laughs) at that time. In  fact, all the rest of Mother   s family went to the University of Oklahoma  so it   s amazing   I guess it   s because of the home economics that she  decided to go up there because she certainly lived a lot closer to OU.  But my Kappa Delta ties all through the years have kept me close to  OSU and my friends here in Oklahoma City, our group here is more than  half from Stillwater, which is not too unusual, from other mixed areas  too. But I just, as I said, a college town has a special alertness and input  on many different aspects of what is going on in the world and in the  universe. It just was always an open door to thought, for me. I  appreciated everything that I gained there, both socially and  academically.  We talked a little bit about your mother and what happened after she left  Stillwater and then we jumped into you coming to Stillwater, but I   d like  you to pretty much take me through her life, what she did after leaving  Stillwater, career-wise and family-wise. And then I   d like you to do the  same and get me up to date with where you are now.  18  Matthews  All right. Well, you know that her first job was in Aberdeen,  Washington. As I recall at the time, she had two other opportunities and  one was in Klamath Falls, Oregon. We got out the atlas and looked it up  and we saw that it had about 80 inches of rain and we decided that  wasn   t for us. We got to Aberdeen and they had a rain derby every year.  Sometimes it rained 100 inches  It was a very wet climate   very  different and beautiful. She directed the Girl Scout camp and that was  totally different because of all the forests. And coming from Oklahoma,  all the plains, Stillwater was very dry. I remember growing up in  Stillwater, July and August, the    furnace    was turned on and everything  was baked. There weren   t any sprinkler systems or anything but we had  an    automatic sprinkler system    out there  in Aberdeen . The flowers  were so beautiful   so many flowers. That was all different to me. We  would have Pow-Wows at camp up on the big stumps of trees that had  been cut down. These are trees that are like five, six, eight feet in  diameter   pretty big trees.  She was there five years and she took her training down in California at  Asilomar, California. So this was big changes for a country girl from  Oklahoma. And her parents were farmers. She was raised on a farm,  except I guess the time they lived in Cordell. That   s where she and my  father lived, was in Cordell   got married there. She played on the  basketball team for Cloud Chief. From Aberdeen, she left the day after I  graduated from high school. I said goodbye to my friends the night  before and some of them I didn   t see for 10 years again or more. And  she went to Waterloo, Iowa, which was a whole other experience. I told  my art teacher in high school we were moving there and she said,    Oh,  you   re going to love Iowa. It   s full of little towns of a 1,000 people or  less and little round hills and little round trees,    (Laughs) which was  very descriptive.  The first thing I discovered the first winter in Iowa was we had come  from a tempered climate to a northern and I would look out the window  and see the sunshine. Sunshine to me meant warm, and I would get out  and I would just freeze on the way to class. So Mother put a  thermometer in the window of my dorm because sometimes it was only  10 degrees out. Pretty cold after that. And then Waterloo, it was a much  bigger Girl Scout council. It was a big step up for her. We made friends  there and some of them we maintained friendships with for quite a  while. From Waterloo   well we were married in Waterloo   I went back  down to Stillwater and she was there about another two years. That  would be about right   two years   and then she moved to Pontiac,  Michigan, which was Northern Oakland County Girl Scouts. That was a  big step up for her. And that was very challenging.  Girl Scouting is women working with women and I have learned there   s  19  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  a big difference between women working with men, all men or mixed  groups. It was harder to please women (Laughs) and especially if the  Executive Director was making more than some of their husbands. That  was a problem. And part, they were auto-workers at American Motors     not American Motors, that   s where we were, Kenosha   General Motors,  Ford, Chrysler. While she was there, she started taking courses at the  University of Michigan and did get her master   s degree in counseling  and guidance, which she never did get to really use. I think she would  have been wonderful in that.  Well, she left that job and then enrolled full-time to finish her master   s.  She was having a physical problem and she lived with a lawyer   s family  while she was doing that, in order to have her room and board   helped  take care of their five children. Then, I came and I took her to my  sister   s in New Jersey and that   s where she got a job that fall. She was  having a physical problem, but during the summer time she had the  healing and she was able to get a job with Long Branch, New Jersey  school system. And they had a great need for home economics teachers,  so that   s where they put her instead of counseling and guidance. She  taught junior high first and then later high school, both sewing and  cooking and so forth. They initiated a new program there, I think pretty  much before it was too many places in the United States, and that was  trying to give girls a more rounded background. She would teach them  budgeting, parenting, family relations and build it into it. She   d take  them grocery shopping and so forth. And some of their big discussions  were about what   s wrong with shoplifting. She was a wonderful teacher.  She was there about 12 years before she retired and came back to  Oklahoma.  Good. Were you a Girl Scout your entire time?  Through high school I was. And then, then we moved to Wisconsin, I  worked as a volunteer with Girl Scouts. Well that   s a whole other story.  I got to be on an international broadcast   well I went to an international  encampment as a United State delegate during my junior year of high  school. They selected five of us to be on this program. And so after I  was married and we moved to Wisconsin, I volunteered to do radio  publicity for them. And that was a learning experience for me. I did a  few interviews when executives would come from the New York City  office.  Well that   s great. I was a Girl Scout so I think it   s great your mother  was an executive for so long.  Yes, she was for 10 years.  20  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  That   s really good.  And then taught for twelve.  Rita why don   t you catch me up on your life after you left OAMC.  I went back to Iowa and worked at John Deere Tractor in an office while  Paul was in the service until we got married. Let   s see, I left school in  January and we got married in September. So I was there all that time.  We didn   t really have a honeymoon. We left immediately for North  Carolina because he had to report back on the base. In fact, we had  picked a date   the date is 9-1-1, 9/11   and he could not get his  commanding officer to okay his leave, and it got closer and closer. He  finally called me and said,    He finally okayed it.    And I called the  printer to print the invitations and then I called the church to tell them.  The minister said,    Oh I didn   t hear from you and I booked the church.     (Laughs) But we worked that out. Anyway, we left from there and went  straight to Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Then from there we were able to  go up and visit in Washington D.C. because his groomsman was  stationed there. He was in the Navy. The man was actually from  Waterloo. His wife was one of Mother   s field executives in the Girl  Scouts and that   s   Paul didn   t have any other friends there  in  Waterloo .  We were at Fort Bragg for a year and a half and the first thing I was  pressed in to was, one of the women at church was the principal of the  kindergarten on the post and this was not a small kindergarten. It was a  very large   I think they had about four or 500 children, so she asked me  if I would consider. So I taught four-year-old preschoolers. And it was  fun. It was a real learning experience for me except that I worked with  younger children in Girl Scouts. I suppose that   s why she asked me. But  that was part of our military experience there. And my sister was in New  Jersey, so when Paul would be on maneuvers I would go see her. I went  up and helped Mother move by bus across country. I went by bus to  Waterloo to help her move to Michigan after she received her master   s.  Then when we got out of the service, we took a trip up the east coast and  went to New York City and Boston and that was an all new experience  for me.  Then he chose a job in Mendota, Illinois. Mendota   we always say,     You draw a line from Chicago to the river   Mississippi River   and  one from Rockford, Illinois straight down to the bottom of Illinois. And  the dot where they cross is Mendota.    And it was in the midst of all the  corn fields. Actually Waterloo was too, so I learned a lot about corn and  corn packing and that industry. That was a very different experience too  because most of the citizens there were German and they still had at  21  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  least two churches that spoke German at their services. And being a  small town and his being the executive of the chamber, we got well  acquainted with all of the business leaders. And there the superintendent  of schools asked me, again, if I would substitute teach. So I did up to the  sixth grade. You know, substituting is not that much fun. (Laughs)  No, I can imagine.  The kids try to pull everything on you and you hope you   re right where  the teacher was when she left. But it was all part of the growing  experience. Actually what I found was that with a humanities major and  such a wide variety, I was able to use it in many different ways with  civic groups that I worked with or the school and with my children. So it  turned out to be really valuable.  From Mendota, we went to Kenosha, Wisconsin where he was the  second in command. He was the assistant executive director. That was  quite different because it was a blue collar town spread along the border  between Illinois and Wisconsin and right on Lake Michigan. One of the  fun things that happened while we were there was that they opened the  St. Lawrence seaway and we had Russian ships coming into Kenosha.  So we went to do things to welcome them and so forth. Then again, too,  it was another very different experience living right beside a big lake  like that. Paul would go to work in the morning in the summertime and it  would be hot. He   d come home at noon. He came home every   he left  at 9 and he came home at 12 and then he came back at 5:30. So he was  home a lot there. And he   d get home and he   d change clothes and go out  on the back porch and try to read the paper and he   d come in,    I can   t sit  out there. It   s too cold. I can   t believe it   s too cold.    (Laughs) But that   s  the way it was. The wind would blow in off the lake and we were only  about two blocks from the lake. And downtown was always much hotter  with all the buildings.  We were only there about three years. And our first son was born in  Mendota. So he was a pretty small baby when we moved there. And  Kenosha is where I volunteered with Girl Scouts and did radio publicity  for them. I don   t think we got them on tape about my experiences on the  radio. When we moved to Oklahoma City, Paul took this job that he had  for 30-some years. Our second son was born here. I don   t remember   I  don   t think I even contacted the Girl Scouts so that was the first time I  was really disconnected from that after all those years. I was active in  the Kappa Delta alumnae here and served as their president and the state  president. And then I was on the advisory board at that other university   OU  (Laughs) of the chapter down there. And that was very hard for  Paul   very, very hard. (Laughs) Even though he did enjoy the parties  we would chaperone.  22  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Where did your sons end up going to school? Did they go to college?  Yes, they did. Our oldest son, Douglas, went to a rush party at OSU and  he had never been a drinker and he got drunk at that party and he came  home miserable and sick and he said,    I just can   t go there, Mother.     (Laughs) So he went to a small private school in Illinois with a campus  of about 700 students. Then eventually   he didn   t finish there, but  eventually he did finish at Southern Illinois University   Edwardsville  campus which is not very far away from where we had been.  The younger son, there   s a five year difference between them, had heard  all about,    My sons better go to OSU.    And they also heard,    You can  go to OU but you   ll pay your own way.    (Laughter) So they never  considered that. They weren   t that rebellious. But he went up to  Stillwater as a freshman and he had been in a rock band and he   d also  entertained in the talent shows at Putnam City Original School. He was a  percussionist. He   d been in the Putnam City Band and he was in the  band at OSU   it was OSU by then. (Laughs) And he also worked at a  bakery. He bicycled to a bakery about five in the morning. I could hardly  imagine this, but he did to earn a little extra money. He wanted to major  in music and when he got there he found out he had two choices   you  play it or you teach it. And his assessment right quick was he wasn   t  good enough to be a professional and he didn   t want to teach, like his  mother. (Laughs) So everybody was saying,    Well you can combine it  with business. That would be a good combination.    So here   s where the  Library came into use. He spent a lot of time there going through  catalogs looking for where he could find what he really wanted to take.  And he only found about two schools, one was in Florida   actually  there was one in Tennessee right outside of Nashville. And the other was  Ohio State. So he came home at Christmas time and he took his dad   s  hand and he said,    Dad I know you wanted me to graduate from OSU  and I   m going to. But it   s going to be Ohio State.    (Laughs)  So brokenhearted dad, but he took it in stride. And he  Dave  got  notice   it took a long time to get the acceptance. In fact, it was  December. He had called me from Stillwater and he said he was  changing roommates and changing dorms. And I said,    What if you hear  from Ohio State?    And he said,    I don   t know what to do.    Well the  next day he had the letter and he had about a week and a half   about 10  days to get up there during Christmas break. So we packed really fast  and we said,    Oh you   re going into a cold climate. We need to get you  different clothes.    Well it wasn   t. He never did run into that. But he  went from OSU, which I think was around 15,000 maybe at that time. It  might have been even more than that   to 54,000 on campus. But he was  a sophomore so   he also worked up there and delivered pizzas and  walked dogs and so forth because he wanted to go to Europe and we  23  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  said,    Well we   re doing real well to put you at Ohio State with out-of-state  tuition. But he worked enough to be able to qualify eventually as an  in-state student and then he did these extra jobs to go to Europe, to  which he did. And he did graduate there. So he   s loyal to both OSU   s.  That   s good.  Yes it is.  That   s good. Do you have any advice for current college students today?  Any advice? I don   t know that they   d like it. (Laughter)  They may not.  (Laughing) Well, we just got through reading in the paper that 41  percent of the babies born are from unwed mothers and no partners and  that   s been probably the biggest change from when we were in school  because girls were afraid, mostly, to have sex. And of course when the  birth control pill came along, oh the freedom, the great freedom. Well  we   ve learned lots of lessons along the way but then the movie stars and  the entertainment industry has made it seem quite alright. We   ve been  married 52 years, of course, so we have a different view of it. And a lot  of young people will say,    Well how did you do that?    Well, that is what  we vowed and that   s what we set out to do. It   s kind of like a rose  garden. It   s got thorns but you just have to work the soil and feed it and  nourish it and be careful of the thorns.  Sure.  But there are beautiful rewards. So that   s my marriage advice. The world  is so much more open today for women. So many more things   I see by  our magazine from Kappa Delta unlimited possibilities, and there were a  lot of things I would have liked to do that I just never even thought of  doing so that   s really wonderful that they have all of these opportunities.  The other big change is the drugs because alcohol and cigarettes were  the only things on campus. And they just mess up the life. They interfere  with clear thinking. Even the prescription drugs, people are taking so  many of those and over-the-counter drugs. So being someone who   s  never taken a drug except a cup of tea or coffee, I   ve enjoyed good  health. And clear thinking is just very important in making choices.  That   s the best I can do on the spur of the moment.  That works. Is there anything you   d like to mention or tell us before we  end today? Anything I left out, any stories you want to share? Something  I forgot to ask?  24  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Well you didn   t forget much. One of the funny things   well, two of the  funny things when I pledged Kappa Delta, I was just back in Oklahoma  after five years of being away. No more than that, six years. And so I  moved right in to the sorority house and one of the girls came in the first  week and yelled up the stairwell,    You all, come here.    I thought,     Where am I?    It was so funny because I had forgotten how I used to  sound I guess. (Laughs) And I still hear about that from nieces and  nephews occasionally.    Yeah, we like your accent.    I don   t think I have  much of one anymore. And one of the other funny things was that it was  forbidden to wear colored socks   bobby socks.  Wow.  And not only that, but from Washington I had brought back something  that was very in fashion out there. They were suede Dutch shoes     wooden sole. And I liked to wear them. In fact, they   re almost back in  fashion now because they just came around the back of the heel and over  across the top. Well I would wear those and I would wear my green  sweater with my matching green socks and I would get demerits. I  thought well that   s the silliest thing I ever heard of.  How would they keep track of demerits?  Oh there was someone in charge of that.  Really?  Oh yes. I can   t remember all the things you could get demerits for.  Obviously, if you stayed out too late or didn   t dress appropriately on  campus. I don   t remember any jeans. In fact I don   t remember slacks  very much then which is funny because in junior high in Stillwater we  wore jeans all the time. And I went out to Aberdeen and jeans or slacks  were not allowed in school, at all. Skirts and dresses only.  If you get so many demerits, what would happen to you?  Then you were grounded. You couldn   t go out on the weekend.  Oh.  Terrible punishment.  It   s horrible. Horrible for young college students.  Look how we were caged  (Laughs)  25  Nykolaiszyn  Matthews  Well we do appreciate you sitting down and sharing your stories and the  history behind, not only you and Paul   s life at OSU, but your mother   s  as well. We do appreciate you taking time out today.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
