 Peters Please say your name, and spell your first and last name.  Dambach Chic Dambach, Charles Chic Dambach, C-h-i-c, D-a-m-b-a-c-h.  Peters Thank you. I   ll refer to you as Chic, if that   s all right.  Dambach That   s what I want.  Peters Okay. I   m David Peters. It   s September 15. We   re recording here at Edmon Low Library in the University Archives Department, the Angie Debo Room. I   ve got a few questions for you, Chic. Let   s get started. If you wouldn   t mind, where did you grow up?  Dambach I grew up in Ohio, just north of Columbus, a town called Worthington. It   s a lovely community. Went to Worthington High School; graduated in 1962.  Peters Is there anything else about your background you   d like to share with us, your family or   .  Dambach My father was a professor, Ohio State University, and I like to think that I came to the better OSU. I have a lot of friends from high school who all went to Ohio State, and I always poke them and say I went to the better OSU. They can   t stand it, but I did. (Laughs)  Peters Any siblings?  Dambach Brother and sister; went to Ohio State like everybody else in the family.  Peters Everyone went to OSU. (Laughs)  Dambach Everyone went to OSU, but I went to the better OSU.  5  Peters Why did you come to this OSU?  Dambach For the worst of all possible reasons: I came to play football. I was pretty good in high school. Thought I was pretty good, anyway. The coaches at a lot of places thought I was pretty good, so I was offered scholarships to a lot of places, including Ohio State. Woody Hayes offered me a scholarship. Turned that one down and came here, played football. It turned out to be a very unpleasant experience, which I   ll explain a little bit more in a minute. To be totally honest, when you   re being recruited back then (it   s probably still the case now) they   d set you up with a date with a student. Of all the places that I got recruited, the best date of all was here, so I had to come here.  Peters Do you remember who the coach was?  Dambach Oh, yes. The coach who recruited me was Cliff Speegle. I liked him a lot, but he was fired at the end of my freshman year. They brought in a new coaching staff headed up by Phil Cutchin, and it was awful, just awful.  Peters Did you play past your freshman year? You couldn   t play your freshman year at that time, could you?  Dambach That   s right. We played freshman ball. We had an incredible coach our freshman year: Sammy Baugh, the great Sammy Baugh. One of the greatest football players of all time just happened to be friends with Cliff Speegle, happened to be available, and he came. It was the only year he was here. It was my freshman year, and I got to play under the tutelage of the great Sammy Baugh. That was phenomenal, just phenomenal.  Peters What position did you play?  Dambach Believe it or not, I was a lineman. Weighed about 210, 220, and back then you could do it. It was small, but you could still do it. Today, I   d need another eighty pounds to be able to play the interior line.  Peters Offense or defense?  Dambach Pulling guard on offense.  Peters Pulling guard, left or right?  Dambach Left.  Peters Left guard, okay, interesting, all right. So Cliff Speegle recruited you.  6  Dambach Cliff Speegle, good guy. We won some games, lost some games, and it was a good experience. The coach they brought in, Phil Cutchin   they wanted to beat Oklahoma in the worst way. Phil Cutchin had been an assistant to Bear Bryant, and if you know anything about Bear Bryant, you know he was one tough coach. Phil Cutchin was determined to be tougher than Bear Bryant, and he was. The practices were so incredibly awful that the first spring he was here, which was the spring of 1963, we had over a hundred scholarship players. By the end of spring training, we were down to about forty-five. Everybody else quit, gave up their full scholarships because it was so awful, the brutality of the coaches. We came back the next fall, and we were down to about thirty-five or forty. By the end of the season, we were down to almost thirty people on the entire team. We go to play Oklahoma, the big end-of-season rivalry; we had thirty players on the entire team. You need twenty-two just to have an offense and defense. We lost the game. If you don   t mind, I   ll go ahead and share     Peters Go ahead. Please share some more of your experience.  Dambach    something that   s really illustrative of how awful it was. I had become friends with a guy named Earl Jones our freshman year. Earl is African American. There wasn   t very much social interaction between the black and white players then, but Earl and I had become good friends. Come our junior year, both of us got hurt. I got hurt. My fifth shoulder separation, they finally let me get out of the program. (Laughs) Earl had a devastating knee injury; couldn   t play anymore. The rule was, if you got hurt, they had to keep you on scholarship until your graduation day. It was fine. I was a white guy. That was okay. Earl was black. He couldn   t play anymore, and they wanted to force him to quit. They set up   and I   ll never forget this. It was a transformative experience in my life. They set up the defensive line. We were getting ready to play Tulsa, who had a fabulous quarterback and passing game. For the defensive line to practice rushing the passer, they had Earl, who couldn   t run, couldn   t do anything, banged-up knee, stand where the quarterback would stand for a drop-back pass, which is what the Tulsa quarterback did.  The instructions to the defensive line was to hit the quarterback, Earl Jones, as hard as they could on his bad knee. The whistle wouldn   t blow to stop play until everyone on the defensive line had hit him as hard as they could on his knee. The first play, nobody did it. Of course, when they hit him, hit him gently. The coach, Jim Stanley, went up to every one of them, grabbed them by the facemask, ripped their helmets off, whacked them on their own head with their own helmet and said,    I said hit him in knee  You hit that nigger in the knee     After a while out of self-defense, they had to do it. This went on, play after play after play after play. The coach would say,    When are you going to quit, nigger? When are you going to quit?    He wouldn   t 7  quit, and he finally couldn   t stand. He was on his knees.    You going to quit?       No.       Run it again; do it again; hit him again.     Finally, he was laying on the ground, couldn   t get up.    When you going to quit?    He wouldn   t quit. Finally, Phil Cutchin, who watched the practices from a tower, came down from his tower. Came over just angry as he could be, said,    Get out of here, nigger.    Earl crawled, crawled, off the field. That was the last I saw of Earl Jones for forty years. I felt so guilty that I did nothing to help my friend. Back in the dorm that night, I was saying,    How could this be? How could they do this, and how could I do nothing to help my friend?    That   s when I started to become an activist, saying,    Never again will I stand on the sidelines.    Pardon me, but I get emotional about this. By the way, Earl and I reconnected forty years later. I was writing my memoir. I wrote that story, wondering where he was, and I got an email from Earl Jones. Incredible.  I picked up the phone, called him with tears in my eyes, said,    Earl, you won   t believe this. I just finished writing up your story. Do you mind if I send it to you, to get you to validate that I got it right?    He said,    By all means,    so I sent it to him. He said,    Yeah, you got it right. That   s what happened.    I also said,    I hope I didn   t bring back bad memories that you would rather get away from.    He said,    I   ve never been able to get away from those memories, but because of what you did, what you wrote, I   ve now crossed over from the dark side, and I can sleep at night.    Earl and I then renewed our friendship; we were very close. Just this spring, he passed away. I had the honor of organizing and making his funeral arrangements possible. I miss him. Pardon me.  Peters No, that   s quite all right. I   m so appreciative for you telling the story, and I   m glad you had the opportunity to reconnect with him after that to kind of resolve some of those feelings. Thank you. All right, wonderful. You came to OSU on a football scholarship. You played football, then, through your junior year?  Dambach Yes, though there   s a little wrinkle in that, too. I was hurt badly my freshman year. My dad insisted that I quit. He said,    You   re going to have permanent damage if you keep playing,    so I dropped out for a year. Went to a different school; went to Ohio Wesleyan  University . Foolishly, I was determined to come back. I was going to make that football team. I was going to do it, so I came back. I had to re-earn my scholarship. The coach said,    You   re welcome to put on the pads, but you   re going to have to show us that you   re worthy of a scholarship.    After several weeks of practice, coaches came up and said,    You   re pretty good. You got your scholarship.    I came back and played again. Then what would have been normally my junior year, I got my fifth shoulder separation. Doc Cooper, who was famous here, of course, Doc Cooper came up and said,    No more. You can   t 8  keep this up.    So that was the end of it. Then I had time on my hands. Football practice takes a lot of time, so I had time on my hands. I thought,    What am I going to do now?    I started reading books. I started studying. Do you know that books have a lot of information and knowledge in them? I had no idea.  Peters I   ve heard that rumor. (Laughter)  Dambach I did the minimum to get by, but all at once discovered books and how wonderful they are. Then I went from a barely-passing, C student to a straight-A student, and several things were happening. Part of it was what had happened to Earl. Recognized the civil rights movement and that I needed to do something about that. I got involved with the debate team and with the speaker series, became chairman of the Forum committee that brought speakers to campus. As you probably know, there were some real issues with that back then and the whole academic freedom and so on. That got me involved with that. Then, of course, the war in Vietnam was building up, and because of the debate program, I studied about Vietnam. We developed a case built around the war in Vietnam because an obscure senator from South Dakota spoke at the conference of   .  All the debate teams in the country come together before the season to look at the issue. The issue was, the United States should reduce its foreign policy commitments. Everybody is looking at foreign aid, economic aid, people all over the place. George McGovern, this unknown senator from South Dakota, had been a national debate champion. He was there as a speaker. Nobody was paying any attention to him. I got to have lunch with him. He said,    Look into Vietnam. Look into Vietnam. It is a colossal mistake. The premise for it is totally wrong. It is a colossal mistake. Do your research. Build a case around it.    We did our research, and I went from being a hawk, ready to go fight and kill the Commies, to being a total anti-war advocate. I thought,    I   ve got to do more than just make this a debate case. I   ve got to do something about this. This is wrong. We   ve got to do something about it.     Peters You arrive here in the fall of    62     Dambach Yes.  Peters    so the time period we   re talking about is    62 to   .  Dambach I finished    67, yeah. I managed to squeeze my four-year education into five for a number of reasons.  Peters You did go to Ohio Wesleyan   .  9  Dambach Yeah, just for that one year, and that   s part of it. I lost some credits by doing that, but I   m glad I did because    67 was the year when the activist community really started coming together and doing things. There was some of it going on, but it was    67 that we really came into our own. I was still here; I got to be part of it.  Peters But your epiphany was, about,    65 or    66?  Dambach Yeah, yeah, when Earl went through his dreadful experience.  Peters Did you ever come to this library building?  Dambach Every now and then. (Laughs) Before 1965, rarely. After    65, almost every day because I literally set out to read   . Outside of classroom assignments, I read a minimum of one book a week to catch up on all the stuff I   d missed out on all those years.  Peters What was your major?  Dambach I was a speech communications major. The reason for that was that the first A I ever got in a college course was in a speech course. I thought,    Okay, I   ll major in speech.    Not thinking about what it was all about, what it would mean, it turned out to be the best decision I ever made, in large part because of a man named Dale Stockton. I don   t know if you   ve heard anything about Dale Stockton.  Peters Please share.  Dambach Dale Stockton was an incredible force in my life and many, many other students here. He came to teach speech, which you   re thinking,    Okay, speech, big deal.    Dale was absolutely brilliant. He was a moral authority, and he taught us life lessons. I   ll tell you the thing that he taught me that enabled me to do some pretty significant things on the world stage, in terms of making the world more peaceful (helped end two wars in Africa because of what Dale Stockton taught me): he taught me to listen. I thought when I took a speech course, you   re going to learn how to talk and how to convince other people that you   re right. Dale said,    No. Speaking begins with listening. If you can   t listen to and understand other people, you can   t give a worthwhile speech.       Oh     (Laughs) Dale would bring people together at his home. He had picked out about eight or ten students he thought were really outstanding, (they really were, with exception being me) really, really good students, and he was our Socrates. We would meet at his house, usually about nine or ten o   clock at night, stay up until midnight, one o   clock, two o   clock in the morning, and he would pose questions, moral questions, intellectual questions, challenging questions. We would think 10  them through, we would talk them through, and no answer was ever good enough.  He would always challenge us to go deeper, think deeper, think more critically. This was two, three, four nights a week, and that   s where I really got my education. I ended up doing pretty well in the rest of classes, as well, but Dale did that for us. He was amazing. I went into the Peace Corps in 1967. Graduated    67, went into the Peace Corps, was determined to come back and get my graduate degree with Dale. I literally moved into his garage to be that close to him to learn as much as I could from this phenomenal human being. By the way, he was the debate coach, and he took the debate program from mediocre to being national class. We were in the top ten in the country because Dale was the coach. I came back to get a master   s degree under Dale Stockton. We   d even planned our careers together. In the spring of 1969, I came back in 1969. Spring of 1970, he was murdered, murdered in Dallas. It was devastating for me and for all those of us who were close to him. With that, I wasn   t able to finish my graduate degree.    What   s the point? Dale   s not here anymore.    They asked me to teach his courses through the end of the semester, which I did. Did a lousy job of it but did the best I could, and then moved on. I just couldn   t continue with Dale gone.  Peters Do you remember the names of some of the other students   .  Dambach Oh, yes, absolutely. In fact, one of them is very well known here: Leonard Court, who was president of the Alumni Association for many years and very, very active in OSU-support things. Leonard was on the debate team, one of the superstars on the debate team, went on to Harvard Law School, and now practices law in Oklahoma City, another guy you ought to talk to. Leonard is wonderful, totally, totally devoted to Oklahoma State, drives an orange car, all of that stuff, a brilliant man, very close to Dale, and very significant on that debate team.  Peters Others from that group who you remember?  Dambach Yes, Leland McKeeman was on that team, and I   ve stayed a little bit in touch with Leland. A guy named Jim Gilchrist, and Jim is now provost at Western Michigan University. He may have retired recently, but I stay in a little bit of touch with Jim. He is the twin brother of a guy named Coleman  formerly Joe . I don   t know if you   ve heard anything about Coleman yet.  Peters No.  Dambach Here   s another one you need to look into, except Coleman never went to Oklahoma State. Jim did. They were twin brothers. Coleman became a major figure nationally in the anti-war movement. Was sentenced to prison 11  for avoiding the draft, resisting the draft, close to the Berrigan brothers, major figure in the nationwide anti-war movement. His twin brother, Jim, was on the debate team. It   s not that they had a falling out, but they followed different paths. Jim is a great guy and a very significant academic career, again, at Western Michigan. Those are some of them. Janet Weathers, who had grown up here in Stillwater, was on the debate team, and she ended up in   . I don   t know if she   s actually at the theological seminary, but she teaches theology at Princeton. I think she   s retired now, as well, but also a brilliant young lady. We were really, really good friends back then and very, very much a part of this whole experience with Dale Stockton.  Peters Were there other faculty members that had an impact on you during your time here?  Dambach Yeah, yeah, several did. Judson Milburn, Jud Milburn taught English. He opened my eyes to an awful lot of things. I took his course, and I took his course before I had gone through the epiphany. I didn   t totally catch on to it, but I had the sense that there   s something here that I   m not fully grasping. Then after I had my epiphany and started getting involved, he and I reconnected. I was no longer taking his course, but we became good friends. He, along with Dale Stockton, helped me with my out-of-classroom education. There   s a musician, and it   ll come to me in a second. I apologize. At our age, (Laughs) we   re allowed to forget these things.  Peters Was it Cyclone Covey?  Dambach Cyclone Covey was another one. He was not the musician that I have in mind. Victor Wolfram was the musician. Victor and his wife, Esta, and I became very good friends. He would invite me over to his house before he was going on a concert tour. He had a few of us come over so he could practice his music. We   d listen to him and give him our feedback. I became quite devoted to music, as well, along the way. Victor and Esta were wonderful friends; live out in California. They were also influential. Milburn and Cyclone Covey, part of the Cyclone Covey is that I did my graduate work at Wake Forest, and he, of course, also went to Wake Forest with Dr. Scales. The other one I have to mention is Dean James Ralph Scales. I don   t know if you   ve heard anything yet about him.  Peters I   ve heard some, but please   .  Dambach He   s worth a whole book. Dr. Scales came here, and my background with him is a very fun story. He came here from Oklahoma Baptist University; would have been about 1965,   66. A lot of us who were on the progressive side, a little bit concerned.    Dean of Arts and Sciences coming from OBU, are we sure that   s really what we want for the   .    If it   s business school, fine, but arts and sciences, that should be the progressive movement. We 12  were a little bit nervous about this guy. I was teaching as a graduate. I hadn   t graduated yet, but they gave me a teaching assistant position anyway. I went to this faculty meeting, and he gave a speech in which he said   because this was when turmoil was all abounding.  He wanted to comment on that, and he said,    I don   t want the boat rocked because I   m in it.    Here I was out there, this young firebrand. I said,    That   s just totally wrong.    A guy named Bill Dawson and I went back, and we wrote a letter to the editor of the O   Colly, just blasting Dr. Scales. We blasted him. Sure enough, within an hour of that paper hitting the offices, my phone rang. It was the dean   s office.    The dean would like to see you now.       Okay.    Of course, we were kind of proud of our resistance, so I proudly walked over there and got ready for whatever he was going to say. Walked in, and he said,    Good letter, very well-written, but you totally missed the point. That was satire. It was satire. I want to rock the boat. The boat needs to be rocked. Let   s work together to make that happen.     You   ve got to be kidding. The dean wants to work with us, the student activist movement? The next day   I had a little office. As a graduate teaching assistant, they give you a little office. The next day I walked in, and there was a hand-written note on my desk from Dr. Scales saying,    Now that we   ve met, don   t neglect me.    And I didn   t. As we were going through the student activist stuff, I stayed in close touch with him. He would advise me on how far we could push without getting into too much trouble. He became our confidant within the administration. One of the great honors of my life was a year later. He was being considered for president of Wake Forest University. The trustees from Wake Forest came to Stillwater, and they wanted four people recommending.  They wanted a faculty member, they wanted somebody from the administration, somebody from the community, and a student. I was the student. I was so deeply honored. Then I also thought,    This is Wake Forest. This is a, pardon me, but a Southern Baptist school in North Carolina. Are you kidding me? If I tell them the truth, there   s no way he   s going to get the job.    The trustees came into my little cubicle of an office there, and they said,    Wake Forest has to change. It   s got to catch up with the times. Can Dr. Scales do that?    Given what I   d just been through with him, I said,    You   re darn right     I told them the story, and they hired him. He became a great, great president. He took that from being a sleepy, old, do-nothing school to an intellectual academic powerhouse. That was Dr. Scales.  Peters He served here as dean only a short period of time, and he had come in to replace  Robert  Kamm, who had been the dean and moved up into the presidency. Then Scales, which is a different perspective on deanship than Kamm had had   ..  13  Dambach Absolutely, yeah. I hope I   m not being too candid. I don   t want to get you into trouble. (Laughs)  Peters No, I think you should be as candid as you feel comfortable.  Dambach This is the story as I remember it. Others have different memories, but that   s my memory of it. It   s pretty intense memories because these were intense times.  Peters All right, so tell us about some of your other on- and off-campus activities during your time here, organizations you were a part of. You mentioned some of these. Were there things you were doing in the community as well as campus?  Dambach A little bit in the community with regard to race relations. We started working with the high school, the black and white students. We created something that we called the Black and White Society that would bring together black and white students, talk through some of the issues and what they were dealing with, both from the black student perspective and the white student perspective.  Peters This is still during your undergraduate time, so now we   re in the    60s,    65,    66.  Dambach Yeah, during that time. Then when I went into the Peace Corps and came back, we reactivated that group, so I did it again. I wasn   t involved in a whole lot of formal organizations, but I was chairman of the Forum committee that brought speakers to campus. That was pretty intense unto itself; took a lot of time and effort. There, part of what we wanted to do was challenge the old establishment rules and the restrictions they had on the kind of speakers you could bring. We pulled off, one could call it, a stunt, but I   m awfully proud of it. Every now and then we would propose speakers and might meet with Dr. Kamm, and he would say no and walk out. Say,    Okay.    It was a phenomenal speaker series. We brought Barry Goldwater to get a strong conservative. We brought Hubert Humphrey, and even though we were very strong anti-war, Humphrey, of course, was defending the war.  We brought the vice president of the   this is a student speaker organization, and we brought the vice president of the United States to this campus. We brought the candidate for president, Barry Goldwater, to this campus. We also brought Henry Steele Commager, who had been a significant anti-war activist and intellectual leader. Julian Bond, who you   ll remember, one of the great leaders of the civil rights movement, we brought Julian Bond here. The coup was Dr. Han Suyin. Dr. Han Suyin is the author of a romance novel called A Many-Splendoured Thing. It had been made into a movie and 14  a very popular song, and when I told Dr. Kamm we were going to bring Dr. Han Suyin, he said,    Finally, Chic is going to bring somebody that   s safe. This is good.    Somehow, it slipped my mind that she was a close friend and confidant of Mao Zedong  Tse-tung . I don   t know why I didn   t remember to tell him that, but I didn   t, so he said,    Fine.     As we promoted, all we said was,    this romance novelist,    but we let it slip, of course, intentionally. Said word of mouth,    Don   t miss this. This is big.    People saying,    Why?    We   d say,    Come and see.    It was at the Student Union theatre, and it was jam-packed, standing room only. The only reference to A Many-Splendoured Thing was in my introduction of Dr. Han Suyin, and she went right into the Chinese Communist Party line, all the way through. It was quite an experience. She said something there that to me was transforming, not that I agree with her. I happen to think Mao Zedong is one of the worst human beings in the history of all of humanity. What he did to the people of China, the mass murders, the mass starvation, is worse than Hitler, worse than Stalin. This guy was absolutely awful.  I would in no way endorse him, but it was important for us to hear from that side of the world and that perspective. What Dr. Han Suyin said to our audience was,    I know you   re concerned about what   s going on in China. Please understand. We look out on our border, and we look at Vietnam. Tiny country, totally inconsequential on the world stage, and you have four hundred thousand soldiers. You invaded South Vietnam with four hundred thousand soldiers. Why would you do that if not to prepare to invade China? You got fifty thousand troops in Cambodia, another fifty thousand in Thailand. Thailand is right on our border. Why would you be doing that if not to prepare to invade our country?    Hadn   t thought about it that way.  Then she said,    You think we   re dangerous? When you had the possibility of a few missiles on an island ninety miles off your coast, you were prepared to launch a nuclear holocaust that would destroy all life on this planet, and you think we   re a threat?    Whoa  I rocked back in my chair. Oh, my god, I had never looked at the world that way. The difference that made in my life in my ability to help negotiate peace treaties was being willing to listen to, respect, and understand people with whom I may totally, totally disagree. I became friends with a man who is known as the most hated man in all of Africa. I got to know him because I was willing to listen to him, and respect him, and understand him, and help get him to take a different path because of what I learned on this campus and because we brought in a speaker that we were not supposed to bring, so there.  Peters Who was the African leader? Are you willing to say that or not?  Dambach Sure, his name is Azarias Ruberwa, head of the RCD  Rally for Congolese Democracy , the rebel group in the Congo, backed by Rwanda. They carried 15  out, as you may know, a brutal, brutal civil war in the Congo, trying to overthrow the Kabila government. I got to know Ruberwa very, very well. We became friends. We   re still friends. Helped them, his rebel group and the MLC  Movement for the Liberation of the Congo , the Ugandan-backed rebel group, come together with the Kabila government and agree to form a coalition government. We did that, a couple of Peace Corps guys. We got them together and because we were willing to respect and listen to them. Nobody else would. Everybody else, certainly in the US Government, would not talk with them.    They   re terrible people. They   ve got to be eliminated. They have to be destroyed.    I said,    Well, let   s find out why they   re doing what they   re doing. Show them some respect.    Listened to them, and they were willing to totally change their course. Ruberwa, he still comes to the US. We get together for breakfast, lunch, or dinner whenever he   s here. Every time he stops, he says,    You know, Chic, this whole process that ended the civil war in the Congo, it all began with you and your group.     Peters Your willingness to listen.  Dambach Because we were willing to show him respect and listen to him, that changed everything.  Peters Okay, thank you. How did you get involved with The Drummer? Did you have a role with the publication at all?  Dambach I did. (Laughs) In fact, the article on volume one, number one, there   s a front-page story that I wrote about Barry Goldwater because we brought him as a speaker. I was complimentary to Goldwater as a person. Indicated a strong difference on the war and most other policies, but found him to be a very intelligent, articulate, and genuine human being. I wrote how much I enjoyed and appreciated the fact that while we had totally different opinions, he wanted to hear from me and from our group. He was curious about why we were so adamant in our opposition to the war, genuinely interested in that. I wrote about that and said,    I really appreciate the fact that this man, a former candidate for president, a US senator, cared about our position, respected us and our position. Didn   t change his mind, but he respected us.    I wanted to acknowledge that and did it. I wrote several articles for The Drummer. I forget what my title was. I had some sort of title with the paper, so I did it.  Peters Why was there a Drummer? Why didn   t you do that in the O   Colly or   .  Dambach That particular article would have been acceptable in the O   Colly. Most of what we put in The Drummer, most the other stuff I wrote for The Drummer would not be acceptable in the O   Colly. The other, what we called, underground newspapers all across the country at that time, by god, we were going to have our underground newspaper right here and do it. We did, and 16  we had so much fun. We   d come together, totally informal gatherings, and divide up what each person was going to write about and how we were going to get it published and distributed and so on. It was fun.  Peters How would you get them published? Where would you go to have them printed?  Dambach I didn   t do that. I don   t know who got the printing done, but somebody got the printing done. We divided up responsibilities among all of us to take them around and put them in places where people would find them and pick them up. The administration, for one thing, they sent a mole from the administration to our editorial meetings. It was so obvious that he was from Kamm   s office, I mean, just laughable. We   d have a meeting, and then when he was gone, we   d go ahead and do what we were really going to do. (Laughter) We   d use some diversion to get him out of the office and out of our meeting rooms, and then go ahead and do it. They also sent people around to follow where we were distributing to pick them up so that nobody would see them. We beat that, too. We found ways of getting it out   . Cost was a little bit more, print more copies of it, but we got them out there.  Peters You distributed on campus? Did you distribute off campus?  Dambach Both on campus and off campus. We knew where students were living off campus, so we   d take them to those places and get them out there.  Peters Any involvement with the Wesley Foundation or the Methodist student center?  Dambach Yeah, yeah, they were very, very supportive. I wasn   t a member of the Wesleyan Foundation, so people like Ron Stevens and others can tell you more about the specific role that they played. Yeah, they were very, very, very supportive.  Peters Okay, side note: Dr. Kamm was also a United Methodist...  Dambach I   m well aware. I used to see him at the church. (Laughs)  Peters    and attended First United Methodist Church. The Wesley Foundation, it was the Methodist student center on campus. Were you aware of other similar kinds of publications, if not here, at other campuses?  Dambach We knew about it at other campuses. It   s part of what stimulated us to do it. We knew that a lot of other universities had    underground newspapers.     Peters Would you share with them? Would you get copies of their papers? How would you interact with them? 17  Dambach I can   t remember if we did or not. I think somehow we did. I think some of the people in our group had contact with some people. I was not one of those people, but we were aware of others. I assume someone at OU did, though I can   t say that specifically.  Peters You were involved with the, was it the Forum   s committee?  Dambach Forum committee, yes.  I was the chairman.   Peters Your primary objective was to bring in outside speakers to make presentations on campus. At some point, there   s a university response to speakers, and they create a speakers policy. Can you tell us a little bit about that?  Dambach There was a policy before we got there, which basically said (I can   t quote it specifically) no communists and no atheists. However that was worded, I don   t know, but that was the policy. Kamm was determined to enforce it totally, and we were determined to rip it down, not because we were necessarily atheist or communist (we weren   t) but because we   re college students. We   re supposed to be learning about things and learning about things from a different perspective. To deny the student body the opportunity to hear and listen to and learn from these other perspectives was plain wrong, so were determined to change that.  Over a period of time, we did. During that period,    66,    67, is when we started really aggressively challenging it. It didn   t get changed until a few years later. This is where the Wesley Foundation and others   we would invite speakers to speak on campus, and the university would prevent it. The Wesley Foundation would say,    Well, then we   ll sponsor them. They can speak at our facility.    After a while, we realized,    Well, if they   re going to speak just off campus, then what   s the point of the ban?    The fact that the   are you familiar with what happened with the sociology department?  Peters Yes, and we can talk about that. I was going to ask you about that.  Dambach I wasn   t a sociology major, so I wasn   t close to it, but I was certainly aware of it and knew a number of the people. A number of things happened that really put pressure on Dr. Kamm and the administration. When you have almost the entire sociology department, which was a highly-respected department   .  Peters All but one; one person was on sabbatical.  Dambach That   s right. They resigned en masse. It was national news. It was a huge, huge embarrassment for Dr. Kamm who had been dean of arts and sciences, 18  and here, his stellar sociology department resigns in protest. These are tenured faculty, giving up their tenured positions in protest of these policies. It was very powerful. AAUP came out with a report on it that was awfully, awfully critical of university policies. Those things put enough pressure on, and they began to realize the futility of it. What   s wrong with students listening to a speaker who may have totally different opinions and positions? Of course, as we know today, the pressure is almost the other way around. It   s the conservative speakers who are being denied the opportunity to speak on campus, and liberals who are trying to keep them from speaking, which outrages me. I said,    What do you mean? What do you mean, Ann Coulter can   t speak at Berkeley? Are you kidding me? Let her speak  Let her speak and then engage in a dialogue and present the other side of it, but for god   s sakes, don   t deny her the right to speak.    Give me a break.  Peters The sociology department resigns; AAUP gets involved. That   s American Association of University Professors, something like that. Are you familiar with any individuals there: Ted Agnew, Alexander Ospovat, Richard Cummins?  Dambach I knew them, met with them occasionally. We were part of the cabal that was dealing with all of these things. Didn   t have classes with them but knew them, and every now and then we would gather and strategize on what we were doing. Knew them and admired them greatly for their courage.  Peters Margaret Brooks?  Dambach Knew Dr. Brooks. She was an absolute hero in this whole thing. As you may or may not be aware, we have established a fund in the name of Dr. Brooks and Dale Stockton to support the Difficult Dialogues program, which, to the best of our knowledge, does more than anybody else to continue the spirit of what we were all about. It wants to engage the students and faculty with speakers on difficult, challenging issues, which is what we were all about. We generated enough revenue to endow that program so that it will carry on in perpetuity.  Peters Are you aware of some of the impacts that their involvement, like for Dr. Brooks, for example, that it had on their careers?  Dambach Ruined it for Dr. Brooks. In part, people respected what she had done, and so she was able to move on. In terms of her career here at Oklahoma State, the administration made her life absolutely miserable, and she finally was forced out. It was tragic because she was a dear part of the campus. She loved this institution, loved the students, and did not want to leave, but they made her life absolutely miserable and forced her out.  Peters Very similar to your first story about your football teammates. 19  Dambach Yes, that   s right. Same kind of thing.  Peters Different tactics.  Dambach Different circumstances, but yeah.  Peters Okay, all right. Thomas Altizer,    God is dead,    did he speak on campus?  Dambach Well, no. (Laughs)  Peters Was he invited?  Dambach Was he ever, over and over and over again, and he   s one of those that ended up speaking off campus. It was part of what helped point out the utter stupidity and the folly of the policy, saying,    This guy can speak across the block from the campus, and this is an academic institution, and he can   t speak here?    He was famous throughout the country. His whole    God is dead    thing, he was not an atheist, and he wasn   t saying God is dead. It was, granted, a provocative title, but that wasn   t his point, and yet just because he was identified with that title, they wouldn   t let him speak.  Peters Timothy Leary?  Dambach I don   t know that we did much with Timothy Leary, at least not that I was involved with. I wasn   t all that, personally again, and I think most of the people I was with, weren   t all that interested. We really weren   t into the drug culture. Give me a break. Who cares about you getting high on LSD? I don   t care.  Peters The impression I had is his name was simply mentioned as a provocative   .  Dambach It certainly came up, but we weren   t willing to put our reputation on the line to try to bring Timothy Leary. Somebody else want to bring him? Fine, but we weren   t going to do it.  Peters Adam Clayton Powell?  Dambach Adam Clayton Powell, we certainly were interested in. Bringing Julian Bond was our, when I was chairman of the committee, our movement in that similar direction. Powell, as you know, had some things other than race relations in his reputation that were somewhat problematic. Admired him in many ways but also said,    You   re also messing up your message with some of the things in your lifestyle,    whereas Julian Bond, he was a super champion in every way.  20  Peters What about Dick Gregory?  Dambach We didn   t   . He was on our list of possible speakers. Never really pushed that, particularly. Maybe after I left, some people may have pushed for it.  Peters He did come later.  Dambach And he did come later. That   s right.  Peters Stokely Carmichael?  Dambach Same thing. We were a little bit afraid that Carmichael would be too controversial and stir up too much animosity, and we weren   t into creating animosity. We were simply trying to bring good speakers that people would listen to and learn something from, to make our point but not to be provocative so much in the way that Stokely Carmichael would.  Peters I think Stokely shows up in about    71 or    72. Reverend Philip Berrigan?  Dambach Good one to bring up. Again   while I was doing it, he was just coming into prominence. Was not yet a major, prominent figure in the anti-war movement but was certainly on my list of awfully good people to be involved with. I never got to meet the Berrigan brothers, but if you get to meet Coleman, Joe Gilchrist   . Dan Berrigan testified at his trial as a character witness, and they worked very, very closely. One of my very dear friends (I was supposed to have dinner with her the night before last) co-wrote a book with Dan Berrigan. I don   t know either of them, was never in their direct circle, but certainly held them in high regard and admire what they did.  Peters Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin, also names are mentioned.  Dambach Yeah, sure. All of these names came up. We would go through our process. At least when I was chair of the committee, we didn   t invite any of them, but certainly they were among the prospects, the possibility. They were more the academic freedom, the free speech side of things and certainly on the prospect list. We just didn   t actively pursue those particular names.  Peters They did show up years later.  Dambach They showed up later, that   s right, after we finally got the gates opened and they were able to start bringing all these people that we would have loved to been able to bring.  Peters Are you familiar at all with something that   s called Sexpo   68? Now, see, if you were here from   62 to   . 21  Dambach I was in the Peace Corps.  Peters That was   . You hadn   t come back yet.  Dambach I was in the Peace Corps,    67 to    69. Yeah, I heard some reference to it.  Peters You talked about you   re aware of some of the pressures that Dr. Kamm felt really as the head of the institution. Where do you think that pressure was coming from in his world? Who was he trying to satisfy?  Dambach Trustees.  Peters The board of regents?  Dambach The state legislature, the governor, and the board of regents was very, very, very conservative. As far as they were concerned, he should have kicked us all out of school and run us out of town.  Peters Did newspapers throughout the state, The Daily Oklahoman, did they have any impact at all?  Dambach They did some. Not a whole lot of stories, but there were certainly some. They weren   t exactly embracing our student movement. They were acknowledging it and acknowledging that it was part of what was going on around the country, but I don   t recall seeing an editorial in support of what we were doing.  Peters Let me mention some personalities (some of these we   ve talked about) if you   d like to add anything else about them. Abe Hesser, he was the director of the Student Union.  Dambach (Laughs) Yes, he certainly was.  Peters What do you remember about   .  Dambach He was certainly part of the Kamm team to try to squelch whatever he could. I didn   t know him well but knew him well enough to try to avoid him (Laughs) and circumvent him and people like him who were trying to keep us from doing what we were doing.  Peters Okay, Robert Kamm?  Dambach Yeah, I got along very well with President Kamm. We disagreed dramatically, but I think there was a mutual respect. I got to see him. I was brought back to the campus about ten years ago to get an award, and we got 22  together for lunch and had a very pleasant talk, reflecting on those challenging times. I respected the fact that he was president of the university and that he had pressures from the trustees and others. That   s part of the reason   and part of this came from Dr. Scales. He and I would talk about it, and he would say,    I know you   re young and vigorous and so on, but please understand that there is another point of view, and respect that. We do need to bring about these changes. They   ll come about better if you do it respectfully than if you do it with burning down buildings and things like that.    By the way, my kids to this day are convinced that I was a hippie because I was part of the activist movement in the   60s, so, of course, I was a hippie. My hair was the same length then as it is now, and I was dressed more formally because I had a tie on. When I was a student on this campus, I wore a coat and tie and kept my hair short because I wanted to be taken seriously. If I had grown my hair long and become a hippie, it would be too easy to dismiss me as some radical crazy hippie.  Peters The stereotype would   ve got in your way.  Dambach The stereotype would   ve gotten in the way, and I did not want to let that happen. That was true of our whole group. This whole group that   s gathering this weekend, I don   t think there was a one of us that had long hair or smoked dope. There may have been some doing a little bit of dope, but we didn   t do that.  Peters You were more concerned with social issues regarding free speech, freedom of expression, those kind of things.  Dambach Civil rights was a part of it, but yeah. We took the issues seriously. If we were going to be effective in persuading people to change their mind, don   t do things that are going to turn them off by your appearance. That   s just stupid. If you want to be successful in changing policy, then you dress in a way and you speak in a way that people will listen to you. If you come in yelling and screaming, and long hair, and throwing things, then you give them the excuse to kick you out, and you accomplish nothing.  Peters After Dr. Scales leaves, who taught you how to turn up the heat but not reach the boiling point, George Gries comes in, I believe, as the next dean. Any interactions with Gries at all?  Dambach Not really. When I came back for my one year of graduate school, I really didn   t   I got involved in the anti-war activities and worked very closely with Dale Stockton with the debate team and so on. That   s all I did during that time. Really didn   t have any interaction at all with the dean   s office.  Peters I want to mention a few other names here, and you may or may not have   . William Hammons? 23  Dambach No.  Peters Frank McFarland?  Dambach Some. I liked him, and his daughter was one of our classmates. I liked him, liked his daughter, and liked him.  Peters He was dean of men, or what was his role? He was in the administration.  Dambach He might have been dean of students. I   m not   .  Peters Dean of students perhaps.  Dambach He might have been. I can   t remember for sure. He was one who was willing to meet with us and listen to us and show respect for what we were doing. Didn   t necessarily agree, but he was very respectful of us and willing to talk with us and work with us.  Peters Our governor at the time was Dewey Bartlett.  Dambach Dewey Bartlett.  Peters Any impressions?  Dambach Interestingly, he really didn   t get involved with what we were doing here. The one other activist thing that we did was we staged a big demonstration in support of funding for education because the legislature was going to dramatically cut the budget for higher education. We knew how to stage a demonstration. We pulled off a big demonstration in support of funding for higher education, and this was the one time when The Daily Oklahoman came out in support of us. I   ll never forget, they had a big editorial cartoon that had an Oklahoman busting the buttons on his vest, showing pride, saying,    This is the way our students protest.    We were protesting for education, and they thought that was a pretty good thing.  Peters What are the keys to staging a good demonstration?  Dambach I   m not sure I   m the expert on that, but I   ve staged a few. (Laughs) In fact, I   ll tell you about one in the Peace Corps. If we get into talking about the Peace Corps, I   ll tell you about a demonstration. You   ll enjoy this little story. I think, number one, there has to be a worthy cause, something that people will   . What we did was totally organic. There was no leadership. You say,    Who   s in charge of this group that   s gathering here?    Nobody was in charge of it. Some people had shared a similar passion, and it was spread by word of mouth. We got together. Nobody called the meeting; 24  nobody was in charge of the meeting. We just got together and talked about it.  Peters You didn   t have email or smartphones?  Dambach No email; no smartphones. It was all word of mouth. I don   t think we ever sent letters to anybody. It was literally all, all, all word of mouth, but it has to start off with a cause that people are interested in and concerned about. Then you get the word out, and you do it in a way that is appealing to people, that they   ll feel that they want to be a part of it. Again, at least on this campus, had we turned violent or even extreme, I think we would have turned people off in a heartbeat, and it all would have collapsed. We did it with short hair, with neckties, and with respect, even with respect for Dr. Kamm. We did not call for his firing. We simply said we happen to disagree, and we want the opportunity to express our disagreement.  Peters Let   s see. Some of these are your co-conspirators, Ken Dahms. I saw Ken again this morning.  Dambach Yeah, good guy.  Peters Bill Streck.  Dambach Bill Streck, another one of the good guys. Again, part of this group that organically gravitated to one another. Most of us didn   t even know each other. Some knew each other through the Wesley Foundation, or maybe they were sociology students. People came from all different backgrounds and ended up finding each other somehow and came together. Most of us can   t even remember who did what. We just did it. Somebody did something, and somebody else did something else, and we all know the names. I stayed with one of our colleagues last night. A couple of us stayed together near Tulsa.  We were saying, for example, Bill Streck,    You remember Bill Streck? What was his role? I can   t remember for sure. I know he was there. I knew he did a lot of good stuff, but I can   t remember specifically what he did.    I   m sure people would say the exact same thing about me. I was chairman of the Forum committee. That was my main, official capacity in doing this stuff. You ask somebody,    Well, what did Chic do in all of this?       I don   t know. I just know he was there. He was part of it.     Peters And Doug Caves was involved in some kind of speakers program.  Dambach He was on the Forum committee. He was on the committee that I was chairman of.  Peters Okay. Ron Stevens was really the editor for The Drummer. 25  Dambach I think he was   to the extent that anybody was a prime figure on anything that we were doing, Ron and The Drummer would certainly come together.  Peters     Was there any affiliation with other organizations off campus in other states? Were there ever any kind of larger connections?  Dambach Very little. Some. We knew some of the people doing similar things at OU and had a little bit of telephone interaction with them. They knew what we were doing, and we sort of knew what they were doing, but very, very little. Because I came from Ohio State, my father on the faculty there, I got in touch with some people there to find out what they were doing and exchange some ideas. Back then, that kind of communication   . As you may recall, a long-distance phone call in the   60s was a big deal, a big deal. You just didn   t make long-distance phone calls.  Peters You were so, you said, word of mouth, locally, so oral in how things were being transmitted. Were there any lawsuits or any other kind of legal activity related to this?  Dambach There was some after I left. I can   t tell you even who it was that did it, but Keith McGlamery is here. He and I flew in together from Washington. He   s a lawyer and was aware of and connected with some people who did file lawsuits about what we called the gag rule and a few other things. I wasn   t directly involved in any of the legal activity. I knew about it. People talked about it, but it wasn   t something that I personally got involved with.  Peters You mentioned your involvement started in two ways. Part of it was anti-Vietnam War. You began to realize some of the challenges in that war, but you also mentioned your first story about     Dambach Civil rights.  Peters    civil rights. Does civil rights play into this? What interactions     Dambach It does.  Peters    with black students?  Dambach It was largely the same set of students. There was some difference, but to a large extent it was the very same set of students and the same methodology. That is word of mouth, getting word out to people who might share our interest in this set of issues. Very much, same set of people got involved with civil rights, got involved in the academic freedom, freedom of speech issues, and got involved with the anti-war activities. We   re not doing 26  anything about the environmental movement here with this group, but starting in 1970 with the first Earth Day, there was a big demonstration here.  Peters April of 1970.  Dambach That   s right, and there was indeed the beginning of a movement. You look at the people in the room, and it   s the same people, not totally. We brought in some others, but to a large extent it was the same people.  Peters Were there African American students or black students?  Dambach Yes, yes.  Peters And who were some of those leaders?  Dambach Harold Fields is here, and he was very much a part of it. His primary focus was, indeed, civil rights. He   ll be telling his story on Saturday night when we have our dinner at the Hideaway. He and Keith McGlamery took a trip through the Deep South and barely survived it, and very much a part throughout his career of the civil rights movement. Melvin Wade is here. You   ve met Melvin.  Peters I   ll be interviewing him after we   re finished.  Dambach He was very much a part of both the civil rights movement and the academic freedom and all of the other things. I   m trying to think who else. There was a faculty member who is coming. Earl Mitchell is his name. The first African American to be fully recognized     Peters And granted tenure.  Dambach    and granted tenure. I knew him back then and admired him greatly. I   m so excited that he   s coming. He was the last one to register, and he only registered about three days ago, long past the deadline. He sent me an email, says,    Am I too late?    I said,    Anybody else would be too late, but you   re not.    (Laughs)  Peters He retired here   .  Dambach Yeah, yeah, I know that. Good man. I really admired him. Can   t wait to see him.  Peters Is Bernice coming with him?  Dambach I don   t think so. I can   t remember for sure if   . I don   t think so.  27  Peters Okay. Were you involved in any residence hall issues? At the beginning of your time period and maybe even further, there were different rules for men and women.  Dambach Oh, were there ever      Were there ever. Several of the people who are here really got their start in being activists around those issues, not so much the others. Once they became activists, they were ready to become activists in other things, but that was the first thing with regard for them. I was a guy on the football team, and so what? As far as I knew at the time, that   s just the way things are and nothing you can do about it. Boy, there were several of the women who were furious. Later, as I thought about it, I said,    Well, yeah, they   re right. That   s just totally wrong that they   re treated differently than the men.    Yes, there was a movement and, again, successful. After a while, the rules started to ease up and started to change.  Peters It was quite a period of transition on a number of fronts.  Dambach You bet.  Peters Kent State, is that in    69?  Dambach Spring of    70, I believe.  Peters Spring of   70, so are you back here in graduate school?  Dambach I was back here when it happened.  Peters You do have a connection to Ohio. Any response locally to Kent State?  Dambach Yeah, yeah, word certainly spread on campus and within our group very quickly. We gathered together, had a dinner, not a formal memorial but a group mourning for what had happened, and an energizing, saying,    Damn it, they can   t get away with this. It   s plain wrong.    It gave us more of a sense of solidarity with the whole national movement. We had that already, but that helped galvanize the whole student movement, saying,    We   re all in this together. They come after students like that, by God, we can   t let them get away with it.     Peters Personally, I think that was an incident where you mainly had separate organizations throughout the nation who really didn   t have much contact with each other. That was a catalyst for them beginning to explore how they connect. A name I forgot to mention early on, a speaker who was proposed to come here, John Kenneth Galbraith. Are you familiar with that   .  Dambach Oh, yes, and he wrote a letter saying the reason he wouldn   t come was because of the policies, which we were very proud of. We would have loved 28  to have had him come as a speaker, but it was even better to hear him to say,    I don   t want to come to a campus where they have these ridiculous rules.     Peters I have the letter in a folder.  Dambach I   m sure you do.  Peters I forgot to mention because Galbraith, in response to leaders within the student activist community, after being informed of the policy, he responds that he would attend once the policy was changed. If we could step back, what do you think were the causes for this period of conflict and dissent? What builds to lead us to this point where now there are all these issues that are on the stove?  Dambach I think (I put it in a broad national, even global, context) there was a convergence of factors. We had come through the Depression. We had come through World War II. We had come through Korea. Then we had this tranquil, what people think of as a tranquil period in the late   50s, Eisenhower and so on. The country is healing the wounds from all of that and recovering economically and so on, and all well and good. But the fact that things were going well also gave people an opportunity then to step back and say that there   s some things wrong, too.    This is a great country, but....    The big    but    started to come up, that equality we are not. We claim to be a country of equality. We are not. The civil rights movement started to take hold and then the academic freedom thing. It didn   t start here. I don   t know if it even started at Berkeley, but Berkeley certainly drew attention to it. We were very well aware of that.    Wait a second. They think they got problems at Berkeley? Come to Stillwater. We can show you problems with academic freedom.    That one caught hold. Then, of course, the war in Vietnam came along. Early on in it, I was among those who said,    We got to go kill the commies. Got to stop the spread of Communism.     Peters Was there a draft at that point?  Dambach Oh, yes.  Peters Had you registered for the draft?  Dambach Absolutely, and early on, I was ready to drop out of school and go put on a uniform and go fight. It was that experience with the debate team where I did research into it and discovered that the Gulf of Tonkin was totally fabricated. That was known early on. If you did any research at all, you found out that that was fabricated. Then you read Bernard Fall and other people like that and say,    Wait a second. The Vietnamese people are not fighting against the United States. They   re not even fighting for Communism. They   re fighting for their own freedom and their own 29  independence. That   s what they   re fighting for, and we   re sending hundreds of thousands of soldiers over to conquer them on their territory when they   re fighting for their own independence? That   s just plain wrong. How can we possibly do that?    As far as I was concerned with regard to the draft, I was not about to submit to the draft. I was lucky. That old shoulder injury from playing football, the Peace Corps doctor wrote a letter saying,    This guy   s injury is too severe for him to be able to serve in the military.    I went for my draft physical and showed them the letter. They looked at it with disgust and said,    You   re 1-Y,    so I got my 1-Y deferment.  Peters Was the Peace Corps, couldn   t it also be used as a deferment at that time?  Dambach For that two years. When I came back, though, the war was still going on, and that   s when I was called up for the physical.  Peters Then you showed the letter?  Dambach I showed them the letter, yeah.  Peters You would   ve been on campus in the fall of 1963 with the assassination of President Kennedy in November. What kind of response was there on campus?  Dambach Actually, the fall of    63 is when I was at Ohio Wesleyan.  Peters You   d been here the year before.  Dambach The year before. I was at Ohio Wesleyan for    63, so I can   t tell you what the   I can tell you what it was like there. It was devastating, just total shock throughout. I would like to think it was the same thing here, but the Kennedys were never all that popular in Oklahoma, so there may have been some people saying he got what he deserved. I hope that   s not the case, but you   ll have to ask other people about that.  Peters There was a memorial service that was held in front of the Library. It was a very somber   .  Dambach I   m sure it was, yes. Everywhere throughout the country and throughout the world.  Peters Do you think that was a possible point where people thought,    Maybe things aren   t as good as we thought?     Dambach I think so. I think so. Then you had the other assassinations. Then you had the riots and so on, and so things just   . There was a growing reality that, yes, it   s a great country, we   re proud of the country, but we have not yet 30  reached perfection. We   ve got a long ways to go, and here are some of the issues that are troubling. Now that we   ve become prosperous enough, we can afford to address some of these things.  Peters Do you feel that what was going on here mirrored other campuses around   .  Dambach It was certainly influenced by other campuses.    Mirrored    may or may not be the right term, but it comes close to it. We certainly read the newspapers and magazines and knew what was going on on other campuses, and learned from it, and applied some of those same concepts. The same spirit certainly caught on here.  Peters Have you ever heard that some of the hedging that was planted along sidewalks was used as a crowd control mechanism?  Dambach I had not heard that, but I   m not at all surprised. You probably heard about our picnics that we did on the lawn.  Peters The lawn area to the south of the Library is kind of considered a sacred space, in such that there were probably no building placed in that area, all the way down to University Avenue. It is a space that could be reserved by groups. As I said, the Kennedy memorial was held there. President Kamm   s inaugural was held on the lawn.  Dambach Yes, that   s right. I was there for that, yeah.  Peters So talk about that space, if you wouldn   t mind.  Dambach As I recall, there may or may not have been any specific rules prohibiting you from going there. It was just everybody considered it to be sacred. There may have even been rules, but it was certainly sacred ground, and we were out to challenge almost anything that was sacred to make a point. We started, and again, it was totally word of mouth. We started gathering to have a picnic lunch on the lawn. What   s wrong with students having a picnic lunch on the lawn? Why can   t we do that? We did it. One of the really amusing things, back in those days as you   ll recall, cameras were these big, black cameras with the bellows and so on, not this discreet stuff that you have now. The whatever authority they were coming from came out with those big cameras taking our pictures. (Laughs) Good God, if you want to know who I am and that I   m involved with this, I   ll tell you who I am. You don   t have to take my picture. It was downright comical.  Peters It   s hard to be subtle with those cameras. (Laughter) So you meet on the lawns   .  31  Dambach It was a social gathering. We would talk about whatever the next protest movement might be, but mostly it was a way for our group of people, that are coming here this weekend, to gather socially and enjoy one another   s company.  Peters Did you adopt a name?  Dambach We did. We called them the Provo Picnics.  Peters Provo Picnics.  Dambach I   m not sure anybody remembers specifically the source of that. I   m thinking it was to be provocative.  Peters Where did F-A-T-A-G-S come from?  Dambach That   s different. We had the picnics were called Provo Picnics. The organization itself, a word nobody   s even sure how to pronounce it, fay-tags, fa-tags, I don   t know, that came about. It might have been Ron. I don   t recall for sure who it was. We talked about getting organized as an official campus student organization, but there was no way they were going to approve us as an official campus organization for what we were doing. Somebody found out about an organization that had been chartered, had been recognized as an official organization, that was dormant, was no longer active. There was nobody involved with it, but they were still on the books as an official student organization, so we adopted it. (Laughs) Started calling us the FATAGS, and it was perfect because we said,    We   re the Friday Afternoon Tea and Glee Society. We get together on Friday afternoon to drink tea and have a good time. What   s wrong with that?    Of course, totally flippant and facetious and snubbing our noses at the whole system, so that   s how that came about.  Peters But you were an official authorized   .  Dambach Official authorized organization, that   s right. They had no basis for dismembering us.  Peters It wasn   t the Cowboy Communist Club   .  Dambach That   s right. That   s right, yeah.  Peters Did you feel   you mentioned there was a mole in The Drummer gatherings and that there were these photographers. Do you think there was other surveillance going on?  Dambach Oh, yeah, yeah. 32  Peters What kind of surveillance do you think was occurring?  Dambach We certainly had every reason to believe that other meetings that we had, not just The Drummer but other rally events that we were planning, that there was somebody there. More often than not, we even knew who it was. Probably not always, they may have been more successful at getting some people who could actually pull it off, but we had every reason to believe. What we were doing was stuff that was certainly not violent, and under any normal circumstances of free speech, freedom of assembly would be considered totally legal and legitimate. How are you going to deny us the right to do these things?  Peters Did you ever experience or feel any kind of threat or violence during any of these activities?  Dambach No, no, no, no, never. We read about the violence going on in other places, and we said,    Why would you do that? It   s counterproductive. It   s wrong to go violent in the first place, and in the second place, it   s counterproductive. It gives your opponents a reason to criticize you and shut you down. Don   t go violent.    We didn   t even come remotely close to doing anything violent.  Peters You think that the board of regents and maybe Dr. Kamm had a fear of potential violence?  Dambach Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, they read about stuff going on elsewhere, and I think they were scared to death that we were going to turn violent.  Peters You come to OSU from    62 to, well, spring of    63. Then Ohio Wesleyan    63   .  Dambach Fall of    62 was my first year.  Peters The spring of    63   .  Dambach Spring of    63, then Ohio Wesleyan, fall of    63, spring of    64, came back fall of    64.  Peters Then you graduated in    67?  Dambach In    67, yeah. I actually had enough credits in December of    66 to graduate, but I   d kind of identified with the class of    67. I wanted to graduate with my   . In fact, I was describing this to Keith when we were coming in. My football identity was the class that graduated    66. My activist identity is the class that graduated    67. I identify with the activists, so I consider myself class of    67. 33  Peters Joined the Peace Corps, two years in the Peace Corps.  Dambach Two years in Colombia in the Peace Corps.  Peters Colombia? What was your job?  Dambach I was a community development volunteer where they drop you in a village and say,    Figure out what to do and come back in two years and tell us what you did.    Hopefully, it was good.  Peters What kind of training did you have before they dropped you there?  Dambach You just opened the door for a little story that I   m sure you will enjoy.  Peters Let   s save that. We   ll save that because I want to finish up with our OSU time, then I want to get back. After your two years in Colombia, then you return to OSU to work on a master   s degree.  Dambach Master   s degree in speech communications mostly because of Dale Stockton.  Peters Then with his passing     Dambach With his passing     Peters    in    70     Dambach    what   s the point.  Peters    you leave.  Dambach Yeah.  Peters Let   s return to Colombia. I want to hear about the   .  Dambach Now Colombia and the Peace Corps. I went into the Peace Corps. A whole bunch of us went into the Peace Corps out of our activist group. People say,    Why   d you join the Peace Corps?    I said,    Why not?    I don   t remember even making a decision. Of course, I   m going to go to school, then I   ll go to the Peace Corps, and then do whatever I   ll do after that. I went into the Peace Corps. Was originally accepted to go to Micronesia; then that got changed to Ethiopia; then that got changed to Colombia. That   s the way things were at the Peace Corps in those days, so I went to Colombia. I was in training. We did our first half of our training in Washington, DC. Training up until then had all been done in the United States, and then you went 34  overseas. They were going through a transition to in-country training, so ours was one of the few groups where we did the first half in the US, then went down to Bogot   for the rest of it.  In Bogot  , the director of the training program was head of a consortium of universities. He had gotten the contract to essentially host the training, and he was awful. The trainers were fabulous, but this guy was just awful. We couldn   t stand him. Near with about three weeks to go in the training program, we got word that he was trying to deselect. Remember the term    deselection.    He wanted to deselect a married couple that was in our group, Joe and Sarah Walsh, and we were furious. Hell, we loved Joe and Sarah, and the trainers liked Joe and Sarah. One of the trainers in particular, a guy named Sam Farr, went over this guy   s head to the Peace Corps country director and objected to this guy trying to deselect them. Sam was fired, along with some of the other trainers. As soon as we got word that Sam   we loved Sam and the other trainers. We went on strike. As far as we know   and I know every single Peace Corps director, among the few people, every director from Sarge  Sargent Shriver  up through Carrie Hessler-Radelet.  Know every one of them, good friends with most of them, and I   ve asked them,    Was there a strike during your period?       Are you kidding?    As far as we know, the only time in the history of the Peace Corps the trainees ever went on strike was our strike in Bogot  . Guess who the strike leader was: a guy from Oklahoma State who had been leading demonstrations. (Laughter) They elected me to head up the strike team. We went on strike. We had forty-five trainees. We said,    We got to have 100 percent participation. If anybody breaks ranks, we   re dead, and they   ll kick the rest of us out. We have to have 100 percent participation.    We did, every single one, knowing they were risking the possibility of being sent home. We refused to go to training. Sam and the other trainers set up an alternative place for us to meet so they could keep on training us, and they so appreciated what we were doing.  Word got up to Washington. Jack Vaughn was director of the Peace Corps at the time, flew down to Bogot   to find out what the hell is going on.    Trainees on strike? Are you kidding me?    He met with Dr. Martin, the head of the program, met with Sam and the trainers who had been fired, and met with our little leadership group for our strike. I   ll never forget, and I don   t know if you ever knew Jack Vaughn. He and I became very close friends over the years. He came down, and he has a way of getting a little twinkle in his eye and a grin on his face. After we had talked for a little while, he got that twinkle in his eye and his grin on his face, and he said,    Get everybody together.    We had a way of getting word out to everybody, and everybody came together. He said,    I   m impressed. If you guys can pull this off, you don   t need any more training. You already know what to do.    (Laughter) He swore us in. We were supposed to have two more weeks of 35  training. He swore us in, said,    Go out to your sites. You   re Peace Corps volunteers.     Peters You   d had enough theory, and you were putting it into practice.  Dambach Put it into practice, yeah, yeah. That   s what we did.  Peters Were you all community development   .  Dambach Yeah, the whole group was community development. Fast forward: Sam Farr became a member of the US Congress. He and I remained friends over the years. Another very personal part of that story is in 1992, I went to Washington as head of the National Peace Corps Association, the organization of Peace Corps people. Great privilege to do that. Sam, in that year, got elected to Congress. Here we were, back in Washington, so we   d get together and so on. I had a personal challenge. Our youngest son was born with kidney failure. He   s had three transplants, and we discovered the fallacy of US health insurance. We thought we had insurance until we started needing something covered, and we found that tens of thousands of dollars a month in bills were not being covered by insurance. I was fast-tracked to total bankruptcy, and Sam knew about it.  He kept saying,    We want to help you. We want to raise the money to cover your medical expenses.    I kept saying,    No, there are other people with greater needs than mine. It   s my responsibility. We   ll take care of it.    Finally, one night, late on a Friday night, the phone rang in my office. It was Sam. He said,    All right, you   ve spent your whole life doing things to help other people. When you do that, you expect them to accept it and appreciate it. We   re going to help you, and it   s time for you to accept it and appreciate it.    (Laughs) What can I say? Sam, and Maureen Orth, and Steve Warner organized a fundraising campaign. Maureen Orth was Tim Russert   s widow, Peace Corps Colombia, and Steve Warner happens to be Vince Lombardi   s nephew. They all were in a position to do things that were very helpful, so among the three of them, they raised the money to pay our medical bills.  Peters Another wonderful story.  Dambach Another wonderful story.  Peters Chic, you   ve got a few of them. (Laughs)  Dambach Oh, I   ve got a lot of them. Just getting started.  Peters What did you do after leaving Oklahoma State University?  36  Dambach I went to the Peace Corps, of course, fabulous experience. Community development volunteer on the Caribbean coast of Colombia, built a school and organized a fishing co-op. The fishermen were using dynamite, and they were losing their arms and killing the fish population. By getting a co-op, they were able to get loans to get better nets, and motors for their boats, and a viable alternative to the dynamite, so I   m proud of doing that. For the school, I could   ve written home for the money to pay for the materials to build the school, and it wouldn   t have cost all that much. I didn   t want to do it that way. I wanted the community itself to build the school. We found four molds for cement blocks. We were right on the coast, so we had plenty of sand.  The few people in the community that had jobs usually worked construction, and somehow, bags of cement would show up every now and then. I didn   t ask how they got there, but bags of cement would show up. At the rate of four cinderblocks a day, we made the blocks to build a school. They made the blocks to build a school. It was theirs. I was just the catalyst, but they built the school at the rate of four blocks a day. Finally, it took a year and a half, but when that school was finally built, we went to the Department of Education. Said,    We   ve got a school. You have an obligation to provide teachers,    and they provided teachers. A point of great pride to have done that, so that   s what I did in the Peace Corps.  Peters After the Peace Corps, you returned here, and then in 1970, where do you head off at that point?  Dambach I went up to Kansas, El Dorado, Kansas, to run a community action agency. Great experience, we did some good stuff. Then I kind of meandered through a number of things, all nonprofit organizations, all social cause kinds of things, but also returned to my athletic interests and became a kayak racer, a marathon runner, but kayak racer. I did well. Raced nationally and internationally. Got a drawer full of national championship medals.  Peters Shoulder didn   t impact your kayak career?  Dambach Well, it did. In fact, I would like to think that if it weren   t for the shoulder, I would   ve made the Olympic team, and I probably would have. I was good. I was good, in the top ten in the country. Trained really, really hard and overcame to compensate for the weak shoulder, and thoroughly enjoyed it. Close friendship with some of the best athletes. The godfather of our youngest son has two Olympic gold medals, and we are very close friends. We enjoy one another   s company. I got to train and race with these extraordinary people and travel the world. Then became chairman of the board of the US canoe and kayak team, president of the Pan American Canoe Racing Council, on the board of the International Canoe Federation, on the board of the US Olympic Committee. It was neat to do that kind of 37  stuff, so I did that for several years. It didn   t pay. In fact, it cost me money to do it, but I had other jobs to supplement what I was doing.  Also worked in the arts, became the founding director of something that was then called the National Assembly of Local Arts Agencies, all the arts councils in the country. They hired me to be their founding executive director. The organization   s now called Americans for the Arts, and if you listen to National Public Radio, you hear announcements of them, Americans for the Arts, being a major sponsor of NPR. That   s the organization that I was the founding director of. I love hearing that announcement on the radio every day, on my way to and from wherever I   m going. I did that. Then ended up getting invited to provide leadership for the National Peace Corps Association, the organization of people that served in the Peace Corps. I was troubled that it really wasn   t doing anything. It was a database for people that had served in the Peace Corps. We published a nice magazine called WorldView, a little bit of advocacy on behalf of the Peace Corps, but didn   t do much. I said,    Damn it, we   re Peace Corps people. We need to do something      We started energizing the community to do things. Developed a global education program. Thirty percent of returning Peace Corps volunteers are teachers. Third Goal Peace Corps, you   re supposed to bring the world back home. If you   re a teacher, you ought to be bringing the world back to your classroom, but they weren   t getting any support for that. We developed a support mechanism to help returned volunteers who are teachers to bring a global perspective to their classroom. Regardless of what you   re teaching, there are ways of incorporating that global perspective, so we developed that. The thing that bothered me the most was the Peace Corps has the word    peace    in it but doesn   t do much directly about peace. One could say building good relationships and community development and so on is helpful, but there   s a lot more to building peace than what we did in the Peace Corps. There are reasons the Peace Corps doesn   t get directly involved in conflict resolution because then you get in a political realm. The Peace Corps can   t do that, but former Peace Corps volunteers can. There are no restriction on us and what we can do.  We know the language, we know the cultures, and we   re motivated to do this kind of thing. A lot of people come back and develop careers and skills that can be extremely valuable to help bring an end to violence or prevent the outbreak of violence. When the genocide broke out in Rwanda, we mobilized, organized people who had served in Rwanda in that area to go back and help deal with the genocide and help restore safety, stability, and security in Rwanda. Did an awfully good job of it. We   re very proud of what we did. The Friends of Liberia group had also done terrific work in Liberia to help deal with the violence there. Between those two initiatives, we then latched on to the idea of mobilizing returned Peace Corps volunteers to deal 38  with conflict and violence prevention around the world. Then in  1999 , I had just left the National Peace Corps Association. I was exhausted, and I was broke. I got a job that paid a lot of money, and I didn   t have to do any work. That was a good deal. I got a phone call from my friend John Garamendi. John had been a Peace Corps volunteer in Ethiopia, had become deputy secretary of interior in the Clinton administration.  We were good friends. By the way, he was an all-American football player at Cal, while I was a less-than-mediocre player here. John turned down a contract with the Dallas Cowboys to go into the Peace Corps. We   d become really, really good friends. He called and said,    Chic, my friends are killing each other.    He was talking about the Ethiopia-Eritrea border war. He said,    We got to do something about it.    I said,    John, I don   t have a clue what we can do, but let   s give it a try.    We got together, talked about it, contacted the two embassies, and offered our services if they felt it would be helpful. If they didn   t want us involved, we were not going to get involved. They said,    Please help. We respect the Peace Corps.    Both the ambassadors had been taught by Peace Corps volunteers. The heads of state of the two countries had been taught by Peace Corps volunteers. We met with them, and it   s a long story that I won   t go into. Buy my book, and you get the whole story. (Laughs)  Peters You sent me a copy of it.  Dambach That   s right. You can read    To End a War    and then    To End Another War    because there   s two chapters about ending these wars. What we did is what I learned from Dr. Han Suyin and what I learned from Dale Stockton, was to listen. Nobody else was doing that. Susan Rice was deeply involved in it, and she screwed it up big time. I don   t mind saying that and saying it on camera. It   s true. She screwed it up big time because she came in saying,    Here   s what you foolish people need to do.    The United States wanted Ethiopia to beat up Eritrea, so we were on Ethiopia   s side. We weren   t on the side of peace; we were on Ethiopia   s side. Our group was not. We were purely, 100 percent on the side of peace. It took a while to build that trust with them, but we did.  They ended up inviting us to Asmara  Eritrea  and Addis Ababa  Ethiopia  to meet with the heads of state. When we went over, we thought,    In Asmara, we   ll get two minutes with President Isaias  Afwerki , and then he   ll send us off with somebody.    He spent three hours with us. We started working through the issues and finding resolutions to the multiple issues, and he was willing to make concessions. We said,    We   re on our way to Addis Ababa. Can we say this to your adversary, Meles Zenawi?    He said,    Absolutely.    We clarified each of the points that he was willing to make concessions on. Flew down to Addis, again not sure if we   d get any time at 39  all with the prime minister. Got two and a half hours with the prime minister of Ethiopia, and we started going down the list.  He   s saying,    Isaias will never compromise. All he wants is to fight a war.    Said,    Well, he   s willing to do this on this issue. Here   s what he   s willing to do.    He said,    Really?    Said,    He gave us specific authority to say that   s what he   s willing to do.    We went down the list and got almost to the end. There was one last issue. I won   t go into the details of what it was, but we were down to one last issue keeping those two countries at war. We tried and tried and tried, going back and forth. End that issue, and the war would have been over. Weren   t able to do it, but we were close. Another year of fighting went on, and finally John and I called Isaias Afwerki, the president of Eritrea. Said,    We   re down to   .    It narrowed down even further. It was one side or the other has to make a concession on this issue.    Will you do it?    He was reluctant, but he finally said yes.  I jumped into a cab, went to the Ethiopian embassy, and said,    Let   s go over this one more time. You   ve told me that if Isaias is willing to make this concession, the war will be over. Is that right?    He said,    Yes, it   s right, but he   ll never do it. All he wants to do is fight.    I said,    I know how you feel. We   ve been through this many times, but I   m here to tell you he just did.    I was meeting with the Deputy Chief of Mission. The ambassador was out of town, so I was with the DCM. He said,    I can   t believe you.    I said,    Have I ever told you anything that wasn   t true?    He said,    No, but I can   t believe it.    I pulled out my cell phone and said,    I got him on speed dial. I   ll call him.    He says,    You can   t do that.    There was a total prohibition, any communication between the two embassies on anything. I said,    Okay, I know the rules. Please tell the prime minister what I just told you.    Two weeks later, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi is in Washington; invited John and me to have breakfast with him. Over breakfast, before we even started the meal, he leaned forward, and said,    I want you to know the war is over, and I want to thank you for making it happen.    A couple of Peace Corps guys.  Peters Did you know that Oklahoma State University had a campus in Ethiopia?  Dambach Absolutely, I know a lot about it.  Peters Okay, and it would have been active during the years you were here.  Dambach You bet, and I made sure that they knew about my Oklahoma State connection. In fact, Eritrea   s ambassador to the US was a student here, so he and I enjoyed reflections on our times here at Oklahoma State. We did that. The real, for me, the emotional capstone to all of that was about two months after, and we were invited to the treaty signing ceremonies in Algiers. After that, we got a letter from Meles, thanking us for creating the spirit and the 40  momentum that made that achievement possible. About two months after that, I went to buy a hot dog at the kiosk at the corner of Eighteenth and L in Washington. Almost all the hot dog vendors in Washington are from Ethiopia and Eritrea.  I stopped to buy a hot dog. I thought the vendor was probably from Eritrea, so I asked,    Where are you from?    She said,    Eritrea.    I said,    I thought so. I know your president, Isaias Afwerki.    She glared at me like,    Who   s ever heard of Eritrea, let alone knows the name of it, knows the president of the country?    She glared at me and said,    Who are you?    I said,    I   m Chic Dambach.       I know you  I know who you are  You brought peace to my country.    Hot dog vendor knew everything we had done. They   d been following it in the newspapers, and that to me was the total validation of the importance of what we had done.  Peters I got one last question for you, and then if     Dambach All right, pardon me for going on and on.  Peters    no, if there   s anything else you want to add, too. What I   m looking for is how did the events and experiences you had while you were a student here impact the rest of your life?  Dambach Totally. Totally.  Peters In what way? How?  Dambach When I came here, for one thing, I had no idea what I was going to do with my life. I envisioned myself playing a few years of football here, becoming a coach and a teacher, not that there   s anything wrong with that. That would be a perfectly noble and worthwhile thing to do. Zero interest in social causes of any kind whatsoever. Because of what I experienced here, because of what happened with Earl, because of what happened with the free speech movement, because of what happened with the anti-war movement, and the fact that I could become a part of it   . I often reflect on this.  If I   d been at any of a number of schools where these movements were enormous and almost everybody   s a part of it, I would have been caught up in one of many, and it wouldn   t have meant that much to me. Here, it was a small group of really dedicated people who had to overcome a university that wasn   t particularly welcoming of this kind of thing, so that gave us all the more intensity to what we were doing. Because of that, and then the Peace Corps experience, and because of Dale Stockton and his commitment to moral issues and to social justice that set me on this path, from then on I had to spend my life doing this kind of thing.  41  Peters Anything else you want to add, Chic?  Dambach Yeah, I   ll add one small thing, and then I   ve got to get over to this Difficult Dialogues program. Among the people I got to work with later on is Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul, and Mary, and as you probably know, a true champion of social justice, and all this kind of thing. Peter and I have become extremely close friends. In fact, I   m working with him now. While we   ve been talking, I   ve probably gotten three emails from him. Peter has a song called    Sweet Survivor    that was written for those of us who were part of the activist movement in the   60s, then years later, wearing out and saying,    Gee, did we really accomplish anything?    The song    Sweet Survivor    says,    Carry on my sweet survivor, carry on my lonely friend / Don   t give up on the dream, don   t you let it end / ... For everything that matters, carry on,    and that is what we   re trying to do, is carry on.  Peters Thank you.  Dambach You bet. Pardon me for getting emotional. I get emotional about this stuff.  Peters If we don   t feel things, there   s   .  Dambach Yes, why bother?  Peters I think that concludes what my questions are. I appreciate your time.  -------  -------  
