 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Wednesday, August 26, 2015, and we   re in Stillwater,  Oklahoma, interviewing Bruce Waterfield. Bruce is joining us today for our  Cowboys in Every County oral history project, representing Morrison,  Oklahoma, in Noble County. Bruce, thank you for joining us today.  Waterfield You bet.  Nykolaiszyn Well, let   s learn a little bit more about you. Let   s start with the year you  were born and where you were born.  Waterfield Okay. I was born in 1962. I   m actually a Texan. I may not want to admit  that being in Oklahoma now, but I feel like I am an Oklahoman now.  Anyway, I was born in Canadian, Texas, in 1962. I don   t know if you want  me to go on about   .  Nykolaiszyn Why don   t you tell me a little bit about your parents?  Waterfield Okay. I go back a long way with OSU. My parents actually met here at OSU  in 1957 at a thing called Dance Hour. It was a fraternity-sorority function  where they paired the men and women up and they made them dance  together. Yeah, my parents met at that, and it   s amazing how many people  I   ve run into that either met at Dance Hour or knew what it was. Today   s  kids probably don   t. I was in a fraternity as well and had no idea what it was  other than what my parents had told me. Yeah, my parents did meet here at  OSU. I guess I can say that I wouldn   t be here if it weren   t for OSU.  Nykolaiszyn Where are your parents originally from?  Waterfield My mother   s originally a Kentuckian, and she followed her big brother here,  who came here for vet school. He went on to be the track veterinarian for  Churchill Downs in Louisville, and my grandfather, their father was actually  racing secretary at Churchill Downs. I have quite a history in the  5  horseracing business. My father, originally from Canadian, Texas. I grew up  on a ranch. He met my mother here at OSU and dragged her to Canadian,  Texas. She doesn   t stay that much in touch with her Kentucky roots  anymore. She considers herself to be from Canadian, Texas. What   s sort of  interesting now is it all comes full-circle. She will be moving here to  Stillwater at the end of this week, as a matter of fact. She   s had some health  issues and wants to be closer to family. We   ve actually built her a house  here. She   ll be moving to Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you mentioned your family has a ranching background. Now when  your father graduated from OSU and then returned home to Texas, tell me a  little bit about his work.  Waterfield My father was a rancher first and foremost, but he actually had a career in  politics. He was a state representative from the Texas panhandle. Canadian,  I don   t know if most people know it   s just right across the border from  Oklahoma. I always identified more, really, with Oklahoma. If we needed to  come to the big towns, so to speak, we would come to Oklahoma City. He  was a state rep from the state of Texas. My parents actually spent a good  deal of time in Austin, and I also did that as well. I moved to Austin. Spent  about twenty years there.  I   m an OSU sports junkie. I always kind of had in the back of my mind that  I might retire to Stillwater, and when I turned fifty, I just up and did it. Even  though I   m representing Noble County, I   m so close to Stillwater, I always  say Stillwater. I guess I should say I   m from Morrison, which, that is my  post office mailing address, and I do live in Noble County but work for OSU  and spend a lot of time in Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn When you were a little boy growing up, did you split time between Canadian  and Austin, or   ?  Waterfield No, not so much. The politics came along later in my dad   s life. We actually  owned a couple of businesses together in Austin. I still consider Canadian,  Texas, my home. I still go back there. I have a lot relatives there. The family  still has ranching interests there. So not really. When I was little and lived in  Canadian, we spent a lot of Saturdays coming to Stillwater. We came to  football games. You know, I remember the old Lewis Field, of course, and  just came to a lot of games. I was trying to figure out, before this interview,  when I came to my first game, and I believe it was 1969. I hate to admit that.  I   ve been coming to sporting events here in Stillwater for a really long time.  Nykolaiszyn How long of a drive was that when you were younger?  Waterfield Three hours. Oddly enough, it   s really not that far. You know, there are  places in Oklahoma that are further away than we were in Canadian, Texas.  6  If you get on Highway 51 and head west, you   ll run into it. The number  changes at the state line, but it   s just due west of Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn Talk to me a little bit about your schooling growing up, your elementary  school.  Waterfield I had a pretty typical raising, I guess, in Canadian, Texas. It   s a small town  of about three thousand, much like any small town in Oklahoma. Mostly  ranching kids. There   s a lot of oil and gas activity there. Maybe a bit more  transient than most small towns just because a lot of people come and go  with the oil patch, but pretty typical raising. Went to high school there in  Canadian and graduated and came to OSU, which was sort of  predetermined, I guess.  I   ve counted. I think there have been fifteen of us now that have come to  OSU, counting the cousins and extended families. OSU is definitely our  school, and Canadian, Texas, is funny in that it   s probably, OSU is probably  the predominate school there. It would either be OSU or Texas Tech. A lot  of the Ag kids would either come to school here or would go to Tech, but  mainly here.  Nykolaiszyn Whenyou   re younger and you   re going to school, you have this connection  to OSU at a young age. You   re attending the football games. How are you  showing your OSU spirit when you   re that young?  Waterfield (Laughs) I don   t know. It just happens organically, I guess. I mean, you  come to a game. You get into it. It   s exciting. You know your parents went  to school here, and they wear all the gear and cheer at games. I don   t know.  It just happens, and I guess that   s why I   m such a huge OSU sports fan. I  will probably get into this later in the interview, but I do work for the OSU  athletic department now. It   s just always been a part of what I   ve done,  always.  Nykolaiszyn Siblings?  Waterfield I have one sister that did not come to OSU, one of the very few people in  our family that did not. She went to a small school in Austin called St.  Edward   s  University . She   s quite a bit younger than I am so was raised  more in Austin than I was, when my dad was in politics. She liked St.  Edward   s. She liked the smaller aspect. She   s always been an OSU fan. I  mean, she   s been to plenty events here as well, and now that my mother   s  moving here she   ll be spending more time here as well. It wouldn   t surprise  me if she didn   t move here at some point as well.  Nykolaiszyn You   re getting ready to graduate from high school. Did you have any idea of  what you wanted to be when you got older?  7  Waterfield You know, I   m an Ag major. Yes. I thought, at that point, I   d probably go  back to the family ranch. Once I ventured away from Canadian, Texas, I  decided I didn   t want to go back. (Laughs) My dad and his brother owned  two ranches, two family ranches together. My dad sold his because basically  I didn   t want to go back to it. I wanted to choose a little more urban area to  reside. I did that. Yeah, I was an Ag major, but I was an Ag loan officer for  a period of about ten years. That   s really my only tie to the Ag world that  I   ve had since I went to OSU, even though I was an Ag major.  Nykolaiszyn Well, let   s talk about how you came to OSU that freshman year. Did your  parents drop you off? Did you drive?  Waterfield (Laughs) I don   t remember. It   s funny. No, I guess my parents didn   t bring  me. I drove. I just remember standing in the driveway, you know, the typical  mom, tears in her eyes, driving off, and you know, just came to Stillwater,  but it was such a fit. I   d been here so many times before that it wasn   t that  foreign. It was an easy transition, and yeah, it was easy.  Nykolaiszyn What were you driving in 1980?  Waterfield I believe I was in a Bronco, a Ford Bronco, a brown Ford Bronco, oddly  enough. Yeah. (Laughter) I   m kind of a car junkie, too. I   ve traded cars a  lot. I think I had probably several cars while I was going to school here.  Nykolaiszyn You come to OSU in 1980, and where are you living?  Waterfield I was in a fraternity. I was a Sigma Nu, and it   s odd. I   ve stayed in touch  with several of those guys, and I had a son that graduated from OSU two  years ago in December. Followed in my footsteps and ended up as a Sigma  Nu as well. When I came back, I came back for his initiation ceremony,  which, it   s kind of a sacred thing. You know, you go down into the  basement of the house. Nobody else other than members are allowed in  there, but being a member that I was, I got to go down and pin him, you  know, as a new Sigma Nu, which was really kind of a cool thing. Where I  was going with that was I think there were three, maybe four other dads that  I went to school with that had sons at exactly the same time, and they were  down there as well. That was a really neat moment. It really was.  Nykolaiszyn You rushed as a freshman?  Waterfield Yes. Yeah, which is typical. I mean, back then, that   s all done really, I won   t  say that it   s predetermined. It   s not like the girls    rush where everything   s  decided in that one week. You do summer trips. You do retreats. You do  things with the guys, and then you just kind of figure out which house you  8  belong in. My father was a Beta, and my uncle was a Beta. I broke ranks and  went over to the Sigma Nus.  Nykolaiszyn Freshman year, you   re in the house, in the    80s. Describe the atmosphere  for me.  Waterfield (Laughter) How much do you   I shouldn   t say,    How much do you want to  know?    I shouldn   t ask that.  Nykolaiszyn What can you tell me?  Waterfield I think it   s a lot like it is today. I mean, I think certainly today   s environment  for hazing is not what it used to be. Certainly that went on. I don   t think it  ever goes on to the extent that people think it does, because you hear of the  horrible incidents that do happen randomly across the country. It does  happen, but by and large, it   s a bonding experience. I think if you do it right  and it   s, you know   I don   t know really what I   m trying to say other than it  was not that bad of an experience. People say,    Oh, wasn   t it horrible?    and  no, it really wasn   t. You bond with your pledge brothers, and you just kind  of roll with it. Then when you   re initiated, it   s that much sweeter. The good  thing that has happened, I think, over the years is people are realizing you  don   t really have to do that to have, you know, the bonds that you have with  your fraternity brothers. I know, you know, my son   s shared things that went  on in the house, and it was completely different from when I was there. I  think it   s a good thing that that   s gone away.  Nykolaiszyn I guess I   m more interested in how different the feeling on campus was,  potentially, in the 1980s versus today.  Waterfield The only thing that I think that is really radically different is that students  today are so glued to their devices that they   re   while they are very social. I  mean, over in the athletic department, we have a lot of interns. I have a lot  of exposure to students, and they   re still very social. It just surprises me that  everyone is just so glued to their devices. That   s the only way I can put it.  You know, everyone wants an immediate answer, and you feel like you have  to text someone back immediately when they, you know. That   s a little bit  different, but I think OSU people just kind of share a special bond. It really  is a family atmosphere, and I know that seems so overused.  I know in the athletic department we use it continuously.    Come here. It   s  just like family,    but it really is. I think that OSU does a really nice job of  making everybody feel a part of things, and I don   t know if other campuses  excel like that as we do. My feeling is they really don   t because that   s just a  theme that comes up over and over and over with anybody that went here,  and I think that   s also because we were a little bit more of an isolated  location. You don   t go home as much. You know, you can   t run home all  9  the time, typically, if you   re from Oklahoma City or Tulsa or Dallas or  Houston where all of our, you know, big part of our students are. You   re  here together. You   re kind of all in this mess together here in Stillwater, and  it creates a really nice atmosphere, I think.  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember your housemother?  Waterfield I do. Her name was Mom Simon. A lot of guys will remember her because  she lived to be a hundred or a hundred and one. I   ll probably get in trouble  for saying this. I mean, I thought she was really old when I was there, and  then she only died just a few years ago. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Oh my goodness   Waterfield Yeah, I guess she was in her seventies when we were in the house. That is  one thing that   s very different. She was pretty much totally a figurehead  when we were there. We escorted her to dinner. We escorted her back. The  housemother that was there when my son was there had a much more  interactive relationship with the housemother. I mean, she kind of was a  disciplinarian to an extent. I mean, she paid attention to what was going on.  Our house mom was more of, you know, we didn   t see her that often. We  saw her at dinnertime. She was a really neat lady. We all really liked her, but  it was very different. I mean, the one that Michael had when he was in  school here, much younger and just more a part of things.  Nykolaiszyn How do you describe your room in the Sigma Nu house?  Waterfield Oh boy. Well, we moved semester by semester, which is different. We  moved all the time. You could choose a four-man room. You could choose a  five-man room. We had two-man rooms. We had common showers, but boy,  every configuration of room you can imagine. All the guys just kind of got  together, and you figured out what you wanted to do with your room, where  you wanted to put your bunkbeds, where, you know. Now they   ve gone to  more of a suite-style format of the rooms, you know, where you kind of  have suitemates, and I think, I can   t really remember from going in there  when Michael was there. I think maybe they have separate bathrooms now, I  think, for the suites. I can   t remember, but yeah, it was neat.  It was a neat atmosphere. You kind of tried to pair up with guys that you had  a lot in common with, obviously, but also that maybe shared your same  study habits and party habits and all that. We always had these, one thing  that they don   t have now that we had back then was there was a rack room  in the Sigma Nu house. That   s what we called it, a very large, dark, cool  room where you could always go to sleep. You were guaranteed that it was  going to be quiet, and that was sort of a sacred space that everybody adhered  10  to not making noise in there, to sleeping. That   s where you could go when  you needed to get sleep. That was nice.  Nykolaiszyn I   m guessing Homecoming was a big part of your collegiate experience.  Waterfield It was, of course. I mean, for the Greeks, you know, that   s always the  biggest thing ever. Yeah, you know, you stay up all night pomping. That   s  one thing that really hasn   t changed, that really I don   t think has changed at  all. The house decs these days are way more elaborate than what we created,  and you know, they have ways of recreating photos. The way we did it was  just kind of, you picked a design, and you kind of went with it. Now, you  know, you patterned it after a photo that was a specific photo, and you can  actually recognize people in the pomping now. It   s amazing what they can  do, but the principles are still the same. You work night after night after  night after night, long hours. It   s neat. It was a good time.  Nykolaiszyn When you were a student and you wanted to hang out with friends off  campus or go party off campus, would you go to a specific place or different  places?  Waterfield Well, back then, as I recall, the drinking age changed while I was at OSU. It  was eighteen when I started and, I believe, eighteen for the first couple  years. You would think I would remember that, but I remember the bars  being a much more integral part of our lives than they are today and our  kids. When my son went through, they always had their parties off campus  at a house. They were very careful to have designated drivers, which I think  is awesome. That seems to have really taken hold here and, you know, cut  down on the drinking and driving, but when I was here, we walked. We  walked to the bars. We walked to the Grey Fox Inn, typically, which is  where Cowboy Book, I believe, is now, right there near Eskimo Joe   s. We  didn   t really go off campus for socializing that much. Maybe off campus a  little bit, but typically to a bar or a restaurant that was nearby.  Nykolaiszyn What were some of the places y   all would frequent?  Waterfield Oh gosh. Well, I already mentioned one of them. The Grey Fox Inn is one  that always comes to mind. Eskimo Joe   s, back in the day when I was here,  was a dive bar. I mean, it really had a rickety old staircase. A lot of people  remember it, but it was nothing special. It was fun, but it wasn   t the grand  showplace that it is today. All the places on the strip, too. I spent a lot of  time at the Coney. The Sigma Nu house was right across from Coney Island.  I don   t even like hot dogs now, and I think that   s why, really, because I ate  so many of those stupid conies, two or three a night kind of thing. I mean,  we would go there most nights and eat at ten or eleven. Hence the freshman  thirty or whatever it was. Yes, it was a good time.  11  The strip was largely unchanged. I mean, the bars    names have changed. I  mean, some of them, I guess, are still the same, but yeah, that part of OSU  really has not changed or that part of Stillwater really hasn   t changed.  What   s really nice about Stillwater now, as an older person coming back, is  that there are a number of adult venues that are adult appropriate, and I think  Stillwater was missing that downtown. You know, you have Louie   s. You  have Brooklyn   s. You have Zannotti   s Wine Bar, some nicer places for us  old folks. Stillwater has become such a nice, nice place to live.  Nykolaiszyn While you were in school, you were studying     Waterfield    Ag economics.  Nykolaiszyn Let   s talk about some of the buildings you remember having classes in.  Waterfield That   s easy. I was a Sigma Nu, and I had to walk to Ag Hall. I had the  longest walk of anybody on campus. I made that walk. Nearly all of my  classes, at least the last three years of my school here were, seemed like they  were always in Ag Hall. I had a long walk, and now, I mean, campus has  built beyond Ag Hall. I guess there were maybe a building or two past Ag  Hall when I was in school here, but yeah, that   s what I remember was Ag  Hall.  Nykolaiszyn Memorable professors that stand out in your mind?  Waterfield Oh gosh. (Laughter) I should   ve known you were going to ask me that. My  advisor, and also one of my professors, was Dr. Franzmann. I guess he   s the  one I remember the most because I was maybe an odd duck in that I really  liked economics. I took a lot of economics classes that were outside of  agricultural economics as well. As one of my professors, I just thought he  was really good. He had a way of explaining things to you that you just got  and I, at that point, was thinking I would be going back to the ranch. He put  things in a practical application that said,    Hey, if you   re doing this, here   s  why you need to figure out this.    You know, he had a good job of making  the correlation. He   s probably the most memorable one that I had, I guess.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a job while you were a student?  Waterfield I did not. I was lucky enough not to have to work. I had a really nice time  while I was here. I know one semester I had all of my classes on Tuesday,  Thursday, so I could have a four-day weekend. You don   t usually have that  choice because the classes aren   t offered in that manner. One time, it just  worked out. I had every Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday off, which was  nice. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn That   s pretty good.  12  Waterfield Yeah, yeah. I thought it was pretty smart. I think I had some of my worst  grades that semester, actually, even though I had four days in between  classes to study.  Nykolaiszyn Outside of your involvement with the Sigma Nus, were you involved with any  other campus organizations?  Waterfield No, we did a fair amount of volunteering, and I think the Greek community  is still really good about that. Did some volunteer stuff. Not so much  campus organizations. I   m sure I did some. I   m not really recalling anything  specific, but mostly Greek stuff, intramurals, you know, all the stuff that we  Greeks did. That was pretty much it.  Nykolaiszyn Well, without divulging any secrets or incriminating anybody, when you   re  getting together with your buddies, the stories you tell   ?  Waterfield (Laughs) Yeah, there have been some funny ones. One of the things that I,  and I think it   s kind of common knowledge. You   re not putting an idea in  anybody   s head. The underground tunnels here at OSU, I mean, I   m sure  that   s come up in a lot of conversations, but you know, after going out and  having a good time at night, I can remember several occasions going down  in the tunnels. You can really go anywhere underneath OSU. I mean, the  tunnels lead everywhere, and you can come up in a building. You can come  up in Gallagher-Iba Arena. It   s an interesting, interesting   .  Nykolaiszyn Where would you normally jump in?  Waterfield I don   t really remember it. It seems like somewhere over off Hester is where  we would go in. I only did that maybe two or three times, and I   ve heard  worse stories than what we do. We never went into a building that we  weren   t supposed to be or a space that we weren   t supposed to be in. I   ve  heard of people going into places where they shouldn   t be, and of course,  now I think there   s a lot more cameras all over the place than there used to  be. I mean, back then, you know, seems like we had reign of the place, and  nobody got in trouble for doing it, but everybody knew what was going on. I  mean, you would go down there. You might even run into somebody else  that was doing it late at night. It was just some kind of odd, cool thing to do,  I guess. Yeah, I don   t know if that still goes on or not. I know when my son  was in the Sigma Nu house a few years back, it still went on.  Nykolaiszyn Interesting. We don   t hear too much of it in interviews from our    50s and     60s grads. I   ve only been hearing it lately.  Waterfield Is that right?  13  Nykolaiszyn Yeah   Waterfield No, it definitely went on back in the day. Absolutely went on back in the  day, and they were lit. Some of the tunnels were, I remember standing up  and walking in the tunnels. It   s not like you   re on hands and knees trying to  crawl through dirt space. They were concrete, and I mean, it   s nice space.  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Other hijinks?  Waterfield (Laughs) Of course, the Sirloin Stockade steer in the Theta Pond. That   s the  one everybody   s heard of. Streakers    night, of course, used to be a big thing.  Streakers    night kind of made its   I think it was at its high point maybe in  the late    70s right before I was here. Not so much a big deal in the early     80s. It seemed like it was being phased out at that time. Everybody knew  the date. It might still happen on a really small scale, but I think that was  maybe before I got here.  The tailgating scene has grown astronomically here in Stillwater, which is  really cool. We didn   t really have that big of a tailgating scene back in the  day. I mean, a little bit of it went on, but certainly not to the scale it does  today. I can also remember the availability of football tickets. You know, it  was easy to get tickets back then. When I was here, that period that ended  with 1984 prior to Barry Sanders, but we still had some greats that were here  in the early    80s. Had good football teams, but it was still pretty easy to  come up with tickets. You know, today, that   s a little tougher, tougher to do,  but we always had a bunch of them sitting on the table at the Sigma Nu  house. I remember anybody that wanted to go to a game, you just walked by  and grabbed your ticket and went. Those days are gone.  Nykolaiszyn Lewis Field was a lot different then.  Waterfield Oh my gosh, yeah. Absolutely.  Nykolaiszyn Tell us what it was like.  Waterfield It was just like an overgrown high school stadium, really. I mean, it was big.  As a kid coming from Canadian, Texas, a 2A school, I thought it was just  the coolest thing ever. You know, I certainly have a lot of good memories of  it, but boy, it was needing some updating. Of course, Boone Pickens gave us  that. It   s just a beautiful place now. I look at it and still am in awe of it, you  know. I got to see it make the transition, as did a lot of people, but it was,  yeah, really just like a high school stadium. I mean, you could go under the  bleachers. (Laughs) Yeah, it   s way different.  Nykolaiszyn Would you attend any basketball?  14  Waterfield Some. Not as much as football. You know, that was just kind of part of our  fall routine. I think basketball   s a little tougher because a lot of the games  are during the week, school nights. A lot of the games wouldn   t get over  until ten or eleven at night, and if you   re driving three hours, it   s just hard. I  can remember coming to a few games, big ones, you know, maybe Kansas,  but typically not a lot of basketball games.  Nykolaiszyn You   re getting close to graduation. It   s crunch time. Any idea of what you   re  going to do?  Waterfield Yeah, I did. I actually did two summer internships with a company in Fort  Worth called National Finance Credit Corporation. They were the finance  subsidiary of Texas Livestock Marketing Association. I did, like I said, a  couple summer internships with them, and before I graduated, they offered  me a job. Oddly enough, I didn   t take the job. I actually went to work for  First National Bank of Amarillo because it was closer to home and worked  there for a couple of years. That was right as the price of oil was crashing. I  mean, a lot of Oklahomans and Texans remember that. I survived, I think,  the first three rounds of layoffs at the bank there in Amarillo and then didn   t  survive the last round and called the folks in Fort Worth and said,    Hey, I   m  available now.    They took me. Anyway, I went to work for Texas Livestock  Marketing and National Finance Credit Corporation in Fort Worth, which  was an Ag, you know, totally an Ag lending institution, bigger loans, usually  three to four hundred thousand and up, operating lines of credit for ranches.  With my ranching background, it was a perfect fit for me.  Nykolaiszyn It was good that you had that experience prior to graduating.  Waterfield Yes. Absolutely, yeah. They were just really nice folks, and I kind of felt at  home there because it was my people, you know, ranchers. I enjoyed my  time there a lot.  Nykolaiszyn Before we jump further into your career, what was graduation like?  Waterfield You know, I was a December graduate, and I didn   t walk. I probably  shouldn   t admit that, but my parents didn   t feel that strongly about me  walking, which is odd because we   re an OSU family. We   re all about OSU.  I   m sure if I   d have graduated in May I probably would   ve walked, but  really, back then, a whole bunch of us didn   t, most of us didn   t walk. I  mean, I know they allowed you the option, I think, to do that in December.  Since I started working immediately after school, I didn   t come back in  May, you know, to actually walk across the stage. I didn   t. I mean, I  graduated, but I didn   t put on the cap and gown.  15  Nykolaiszyn After your work in the banking industry and the mortgage industry, take me  through the progression.  Waterfield Oh boy. I haven   t done this in a long time. I   ll have to think about it. Yeah,  after I decided to leave the banking world, my dad was in Austin, and once  he was done with his political career, he and I went into business together.  We owned several businesses in Austin. We owned a video production  company, which was, at the time, in Chapter 13 bankruptcy, Chapter 13 or  Chapter 11. I can   t remember which, but anyway, in bankruptcy. We  purchased it out of bankruptcy. Kind of got it back on its feet. Recapitalized  it and operated it for, I don   t know, seven, eight, nine years, something like  that, and then sold it.  Turned around. Bought another business that was kind of in the same dire  straits called Database Marketing Group. Got it back on its feet, and now it   s  still there. It   s in a company called Invenio Marketing in Austin, and I kept a  small piece of that. Maybe someday it   ll actually pay for my retirement.  We   ll see. I think they   re up to maybe seven hundred employees now. It   s a  good size company, and that, I guess, takes me through my time there in  Austin.  I actually also worked for a company. I decided I wanted to do something  fun. I left the day-to-day operation of Database Marketing Group and went  to work for an archeological consulting company, which was really  interesting. It was fun. I kind of had an interest in archeology anyway, and it  was a fun group of people. I actually stayed there for about ten years. My  last ten years in Austin was spent doing that. I was the financial guy. I was  the CFO, but I would go out on digs occasionally. They would let me go do  stuff, and then I also had a big interest in photography. I did a little bit of the  photography there on site at Database Marketing Group, which sort of led  me to my time here in Stillwater and what came next.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you return to Stillwater?  Waterfield I bought forty-four acres of property in 2007 in Noble County, north of  Stillwater, with the intent of retiring here. I really didn   t plan to be here so  soon. Like I said, I bought it in    07 thinking that I would retire and move  here when I was fifty-two. That was kind of my plan. I   m only fifty-three  now. I say only fifty-three, but I   m fifty-three now. I   ve been in Stillwater  now for five years. I actually did it at late forties or about that time frame,  ended up. Had the property for a good while, and I   m kind of into the RVing  scene. I have a motorhome. Would always bring the motorhome up for  football games and such and use that property as a place to park it. I have  RV pads and electrical, sewer, water there, and then ended up building a  house in 2011. I guess really as a fulltime Stillwater resident, that started in  2011. Four years now that I   ve been here fulltime in Stillwater.  16  Nykolaiszyn Tell me how you became involved with the athletics program here.  Waterfield Well, other than being a fan, which has been forever, I did some freelance  photography for a guy named Brody Schmidt, who has been shooting for  Oklahoma State athletics for quite some time as also a freelancer. Anyway,  shot for him for about a year. Shot a couple of season   s worth of football  when I was actually still in Austin. Was making the trip back and forth, but  came up here every weekend for football and basketball. I burned a lot of  miles doing that, but shot for Brody. That sort of led to   I got to know a lot  of the people in the athletics department.  My buddy, Kyle Wray, who   s in charge of Enrollment Management and  Marketing for OSU, is also a good friend, and he suggested that I apply for a  job in University Marketing. I went to work for them for about a year. That  was in 2011, I guess. I   ve got to get my years straight, but anyway, I went to  work for them. Stayed about a year and a half, but I was also shooting sports  on the side for them. Any chance I could get out of the office and go shoot, I  would. Even if it was a baseball game that was during the week, during the  day or whatever, I would try to sneak out and shoot it.  Anyway, that led to a good relationship with the folks in athletics. They, at  some point, decided that they wanted to hire a fulltime photographer. Here I  am. I guess I   m going into my fifth season shooting for the athletic  department, but as a fulltime athletics employee, I guess this will be my  third year. It   s fun. I get to travel with the team. We   ll be heading to Central  Michigan a week from right about now. Actually, I think we   re leaving a  little bit after noon next Wednesday for our season opener at Central  Michigan.  For an OSU sports junkie, there couldn   t be a better job on the planet. I  shoot all sixteen sports for OSU athletics. A lot of hours, a lot of extra time  put in, but it   s fun. I mean, I get to be there as a fan. I can   t imagine having  this job not being an OSU fan because it   s pretty grueling, the schedule that  we have to keep. If you   re not actually into the sport and not enjoying  watching the athletes and really pulling for OSU, I don   t think the job would  be near as exciting as it is to me.  Nykolaiszyn All sixteen.  Waterfield Yes. Believe it or not. I believe there   s sixteen. I haven   t counted in a long  time, but it   s the ones you know. We have equestrian. We have a lot of the  Olympic sports. You got wrestling, men   s and women   s basketball, football,  you know, the list, softball, baseball. I believe there   s sixteen. I can   t really  count sixteen, but someone threw out that number. It   s in the teens. It   s a  large number of sports and a large number of events.  17  Nykolaiszyn It   s pretty challenging shooting, especially action shots. What types of shots  are you trying to compose?  Waterfield Well, it varies. I mean, we shoot a variety. We need fan shots, you know.  We need those pretty, the beautiful marketing shots of a full stadium on a  beautiful day, people having fun, the band, the cheerleaders, the pom squad,  you know, all the people that are there. You shoot just a huge variety of  shots, wide shots, close-up shots. The action shots is what I   m primarily  there for. You know, there are other photographers here that kind of do what  I do, but really the athletic department wants the action stuff. I mean, they  want their athletes. They want them showcased. They want to use those for  marketing materials later on. They want to use them in the media guide, on  the website. That   s primarily why I   m there.  You know, technology   s made it so much easier to be a photographer. I  can   t imagine the guys back in the day that had to, you know, they were  limited to twenty-four or thirty-six exposures and the inability to shoot in  low light, all of those things. I look back at the older photos in awe of what  they   ve done compared, you know, we have it pretty easy these days as to  what we   re shooting. Getting that shot is a lot easier today than it used to be.  Nykolaiszyn On average, say, for a football game, how many photos are you taking?  Waterfield I usually end up with twelve to fourteen hundred shots. That would include  the walk. That would include pregame and some post-game, not a lot. You  know, I would say eight hundred to nine hundred shots of the game itself  and then the ancillary stuff, you know, three or four hundred shots, if there  are any special events. Football has become such a spectacle these days.  There   s usually something going on over there on the north side of the  stadium, you know. They   ll have a guy motorcycle jumping. The shopping  and all the fan interaction stuff is always over there. They might have the  Heisman House over there. There   s always a lot to shoot, and if you don   t  shoot something, inevitably someone will ask for it. I try to be everywhere I  can on game day to take care of that.  Nykolaiszyn On a typical football game day, walk me through your schedule.  Waterfield My schedule   s easier than the video guys, really, because I   m kind of a one-man  show. I   m the only photographer that works for OSU. There   s certainly  a lot of photographers that go. The guys over in University Marketing  typically shoot football, as do I. I get there maybe three hours ahead of game  time, walk around, try to get some tailgating shots. You don   t want to get  out there too early because you just, you kind of lose the atmosphere. You  sort of have to ramp up at the same time the crowd does, get out there and,  you know, shoot some tailgating shots.  18  I always shoot the walk, try to shoot it from every angle imaginable. I   ve  stood on top of those flowerpots at the end of Hester or balancing up there  trying to get an aerial shot of the walk. I   ve gone up, you know, certainly, on  the rooftop. I do fair amount of rooftop shooting from the top of the stadium,  and then I try to shoot pregame. A lot of times, the players that aren   t  starters really will only be dressed in full pads and jersey, the whole get-up,  during the pregame. I shoot all the pregame, and I usually shoot that pretty  heavily to get players that might not see on-the-field action, you know, guys  that are walk-ons and those guys that give it their all but aren   t necessarily  the starters. I enjoy shooting them, and when it comes time for them to  graduate or leave the program, we inevitably always need photos. It   s not  just the stars that we shoot. We try to get shots of everybody because at  some point, you   ll need them.  That   s my typical day. I usually finish, you know, finish, it   s at the end of  the day where all the, really the work comes in. You know, you shoot twelve  hundred photos, but you got to go through them. It   s typically three or four  hours after the game that you spend in your office. Those eight o   clock  games are painful, you know, that end at eleven or eleven-thirty, and then  you   re there until two or three in the morning working up photos. That   s one  thing that really has changed is everybody   s need or want for immediate  gratification. You really feel like you need to work those up pretty much  immediately.  This year I   ll be carrying an iPad onto the field. I   ll be broadcasting photos  straight from my camera, you know, to my iPad and then emailing them to  our social media folks for immediate distribution. We   ll have stuff out on  Instagram, Twitter, Flickr. We   ll have all that stuff out there pretty much  immediately after it happens. You know, if a big play gets made, we   ll be  tweeting photos within five or ten minutes of it happening. That   s something  different. In the old days, when I was growing up, you got up the next  morning, and you looked at the Sunday paper. (Laughs) Now you don   t do  that. You get it immediately.  Nykolaiszyn Interesting. Outside of football, what are some of your favorite sports? I  know you   re a fan. What are your favorite sports to shoot?  Waterfield Football, certainly, just because I grew up coming to OSU football and just  such a huge fan. I   ve really grown to like baseball a lot. I enjoy it. I like the  team. I like the players. Josh Holliday, wow, what an incredible coach and  guy. I mean, the staff here in athletics is just awesome. They really are nice,  and I always like to say to people I probably know more people in the  athletic department than anyone other than Coach Holder, the athletic  director, because I have exposure to every single department. The guys in  Orange Power Studios that do all the video stuff and myself, I mean, we are  19  just constantly around those guys because we cover all the sports. If you  work for a specific sport, you   re kind of in your little cocoon. You know, the  football guys don   t see a lot of what everybody else does.  We get to make the rounds, and that   s fun. That   s fun for me because you  get to know everybody, but you asked me about what my favorite things to  shoot were. I got sidetracked, but I really like baseball. I like cross-country.  I enjoy shooting those guys, and they   re a lot of fun to travel with. I   ve gone  to Terra Haute, Indiana, with them on several trips now, and they   re neat  kids. They   re just really a pleasure to hang out with. I don   t know that I  could pick a favorite other than football. I just love football, but I enjoy  shooting all the sports. I really do. I   m not just saying that, you know.  (Laughs) I just enjoy what I do. It   s hard to really pinpoint, other than  football, what I really do like.  Nykolaiszyn You kind of have a dream job at OSU.  Waterfield Oh my gosh, yeah  I mean, I do, and you know, it   s funny. You don   t do it  to get rich, certainly, but it   s just a lot of fun. What really propelled me to  come up here is when I was living in Austin, had several friends who either  had lost kids or lost spouses, you know, at a pretty early age, and I   d always  wanted to come up here and move to Stillwater and come do something, you  know, really off the wall and crazy. That   s what propelled me to do it early.  I just saw, I thought,    You know, I may not ever get there. I may be seventy  years old still sitting in Austin and not having done what I   ve done,    and I  haven   t regretted it for a second. I absolutely love Stillwater, and I love  working for athletics. It is a dream job.  When I lived in Austin, I was so focused on retirement. You know, it   s like,     When am I going to get to that age where I can move up there?    Now I  have no desire to retire, which is, it   s really pretty comforting because when  you   re younger you   re so focused on that. You know, everybody tells you,     Build for retirement. Save your money. You don   t want to do this forever.     Lie  I found the job that I would like to do forever. As long as they   ll let me  haul a camera around, I   m going to be out there. It   s a really fun job. Like I  said, you won   t get rich doing it, but if you love doing it, I don   t feel like  I   m coming to work every day at all. I mean, despite the long hours and  crazy travel schedule and all that stuff, it   s just a lot of fun. You know,  sometimes I can   t believe I   m getting paid to do it.  Nykolaiszyn Memorable moments?  Waterfield In sports? Oh gosh, well, the Bedlam victory in 2011 over OU, 44-10, that   s  forever etched in my mind because growing up, I mean, coming here, we  know our football history. Good Lord, I saw some horrible games, you  know. You dreaded those trips over here when we were playing Nebraska or  20  OU, just ugh, you know, and now we   ve beaten Nebraska badly several  times, we   ve pounded OU, and even when we lose to OU, we   re competitive  now. Gone are the days when you expect to be beaten by OU.  That 44-10 game really was, you know, the high point, and the Fiesta Bowl  that followed it, I mean, that was my first season to shoot for OSU was the  Fiesta Bowl season. What a way to start. That was memorable, too. It was  like a whirlwind, but it was kind of like a dream as well, you know. I  couldn   t believe I   m out here in Arizona shooting the Fiesta Bowl and  watching my team do this. That was great. Of course the game itself, you  know, going into overtime and then winning with a field goal kick, it  doesn   t get much better than that.  Those were pretty memorable, and last year   s Bedlam game, you know,  when we took them to overtime and beat them in Norman. That was a heck  of a lot of fun, too. There   s been some fun, you know, baseball   s returning.  It   s back to prominence now. When I was in school here, baseball was  dominant. We won the Big 12 or the Big 8 every single year. It   s been fun  watching them come back, too. That   s been a high point because I love  baseball and I like following the team. Watching them come back   s been  fun.  Nykolaiszyn I   m sure the best is yet to come.  Waterfield Yeah  I think so. I mean, OSU athletics really, I mean, as far as an overall  athletic department, they really are outstanding. I mean, all of our sports are  competitive. I think there are a lot of larger schools just give it all up for  football. I mean, you just sacrifice all your other sports. OSU has a really  well-rounded athletic department. I think a lot of people do realize that, but I  think maybe we need to do a better job of getting the word out that,    Hey,  all of our sports are fun to follow, and we   re competitive in pretty much  everything we do.    That   s what makes it a fun job.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you own property in Morrison. Tell me a little bit about Morrison.  Waterfield (Laughter) There   s not much  That won   t take long. There   s a bank, there   s  a post office, and there   s Morrison Caf  . I   m a regular at Morrison Caf  . I  went there last night, as a matter of fact. It   s just typical small town. I live  about five miles, four or five miles southwest of Morrison, right on the  Payne-Noble County line, basically. You could throw a rock into Payne  County from my place. I don   t spend a lot of time in Morrison other than  going to the Morrison Caf   and eating. There   s tag agency there. I renew my  farm tags in Morrison, but that   s about it.  You know, I head into Stillwater, and I live right off 177. It   s really easy to  get into Stillwater, and with all the growth in Stillwater, Perkins Road  21  basically dead ends about where I live. I   m just a quarter of a mile past  where Perkins Road dead ends. I can just hop on Perkins Road and come  right into town, and you know, that   s where Stillwater   s growth is. All the  restaurants and shopping is out on that end of town. That   s pretty nice. I can  get there in ten minutes.  Nykolaiszyn Why did you choose that piece of land?  Waterfield Just because it was beautiful. I had given a realtor instructions when we  were coming up for a football game that I wanted to see a whole bunch of  different pieces of property, and the second one we went to, I knew that was  it. It was just a beautiful place. You pull in. There   s a pretty large pond. It  was just pretty. There   s a couple of creeks that run across the property. I  said,    This is the one. Let   s call the guy and make an offer.    He accepted the  offer, and the rest is history.  Nykolaiszyn In the nomination that came to us (if you want to talk about it, it   s fine; if  you don   t, that   s fine), it mentioned that a family tragedy brought you to  Stillwater.  Waterfield I don   t know that it brought me to Stillwater as much as it did   yeah, I don   t  know that it really brought me to Stillwater. It definitely tied me back to  OSU and made me feel connected. My first cousin, whose name was Tracey  Waterfield  Neilson , she also went to school here and was in the Pi Phi  Sorority, and she   s been in the news a lot lately. I think a lot of people will  probably know who she is. It   s a murder that   s never been solved. She met  her future husband here, who was a Sigma Nu. (Laughs) All ties together,  doesn   t it? She was brutally murdered in Moore  Oklahoma . After she met  Jeff (he graduated from OSU; that was her husband), they moved to Moore  because he graduated from OSU but at the time, OSU didn   t have a medical  school. He went to OU Medical School. They moved down there, and on her  twenty-first birthday, she was found brutally murdered. To this day, they   ve  never solved the crime, and it   s been gosh, however many years, you know,  thirty-something years. It happened in 1981. That was a really traumatic  time for our whole family.  Her younger sister and I graduated together in Canadian, and she came here  and was also a Pi Phi. We all got through it. You just kind of plow through  it, but it   s definitely brought our family closer together. She was an OSU  girl. Even to this day, I have a lot of people come up to me and remember  Tracey fondly, and just was a really neat person who died much too soon.  The family set up a scholarship in her honor. When Boone Pickens did the  Pickens Legacy Scholarship Match, we all got together and made a  donation. We do have a scholarship in her honor, which is neat, within the  College of Education, and you know, at some point, that scholarship value  22  will triple because of the Pickens Match, which was a really neat thing  Boone Pickens did. I mean, you can   t say enough time. You know, you can  put up money, and it   ll be worth three times what you put up at some point  in the future. It   s a good scholarship now. It   ll be an even better scholarship  someday. That is a really neat gift. We decided to honor her in that manner,  and I know she would be proud because she was a proud OSU girl.  Nykolaiszyn Well, looking back on your career, how did attending OSU and earning your  degree here impact your life?  Waterfield Well, in a huge way right now, (laughs) because I wouldn   t have this job in  the athletic department, which is the most important thing to me right now,  but just getting the degree. I mean, like I said, I did for the first eight or ten  years of my career use my Ag degree. I was an Ag loan officer, and you  know, just from the simple point where applying for the jobs required a  bachelor   s degree. It   s just something I   ve had for life. I mean, all the people  I   ve met here, I mean, just OSU   s always been a huge part of my life, but as  far as getting a job, just the simple matter of the fact of having a degree has  helped me land a job.  More importantly, the people I   ve met, the people I   ve connected with here,  you know, a lot of people said,    What, are you crazy?    Austin has a  reputation of being a really cool town.    What are you doing moving from  Austin, Texas, to Stillwater, Oklahoma?    I loved Austin, too, but I   ve just  not regretted it for a single second. I   ve always felt a part of Stillwater. I   m  supposed to be talking about Noble County, I think, instead of Payne  County, right? (Laughter)  Just love the people here. One thing that I didn   t realize when I was going to  college here at all (I guess we   re so self-absorbed in our school and all the  things that school is about), what a great community Stillwater is. It   s just a  nice place to live. The people are just unbelievably friendly, and that   s one  thing I really noticed, even coming from Texas. You know, Texans claim to  be the friendliest people on earth, but such a notable difference in people in  Austin. Not that they were rude, but we would come up here. You might  walk in the convenient store to get something to drink, and fifteen minutes  later, you   re still talking to the clerk. You just don   t find that there.  I really like being in Stillwater, and my photography career started with  being a storm chaser. I love the weather. That was one of the draws to  Stillwater was the crazy weather that we have here. That was another reason  that I loved being in Stillwater because the weather   s just a little more  exciting here, more to shoot.  Nykolaiszyn Storm chasing?  23  Waterfield Yeah. Yeah, I love storm chasing.  Nykolaiszyn Do you really? (Laughs)  Waterfield Yeah. My job has kind of gotten in the way of that lately because it seems  like every time we have a good chase day there   s always something going  on. You know, I either need to, there   s something to shoot in athletics, but I  try to plan. I try to plan a little bit. If I can watch the forecast eight or ten  days ahead of time and they   re forecasting a period of really stormy  weather, I try to schedule my photography stuff around it. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember the first big storm you saw?  Waterfield Gosh, there are so many. Oh gosh, I wasn   t living in Stillwater yet, but about  five or six years ago, there was a really large wedge tornado on the ground  just west of Hennessey  Oklahoma . I was out shooting that day, and  actually I was with a chase team and got some really neat shots of a big  wedge tornado on the ground, which was, that   s probably my most  memorable storm. I   ve always been into landscape photography. If it was a  good thunderstorm day or it was evening, close to sunset, I would just head  out with the camera. There have been so many storms. I don   t really have  one in particular other than that one that sticks out in my mind.  We were out chasing the day of that El Reno tornado when a couple of the  storm chasers were killed. That   s really the only time I   ve ever been scared  when I was out, because so many of us storm chasers were on the wrong  side of that storm. I mean, you know, it was heading east, northeast, and  then all of a sudden, it headed southeast. A lot of us were on the south side  of that storm and just in a really bad place. That was pretty scary. Other than  that, I guess that is a very memorable storm, actually, now that I think about  it. (Laughs) Didn   t really get any great photos, but I was scared. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn You   ve kind of, from a very early age, had this connection to OSU. You have  strong family ties to the University. What do you think sparks such loyalty in  OSU alumni?  Waterfield It   s so many things. Part of it   s the experience that we all have here. It   s just  so much fun here. I think there   s always a bit of trepidation coming out of  high school, especially someone coming from a small high school like we  did, that, you know, it   s going to be overwhelming. OSU is just a really  comfortable place to be. I mean, making that transition from high school to  college was just a pleasure because from the moment you step on campus  you feel welcome. Once you   re sucked into that, it just becomes a part of  you. I don   t really know how to explain, other than it just feels right when  you   re here.  24  People are so welcoming and friendly, but I mean, I guess perhaps a bit of  it   s brainwashing, too. You know, when I was little, my parents were all  about OSU. We donned the OSU gear, and we came over here. My parents  were very open-minded. I mean, they didn   t say,    You had to go to OSU, or  we   re not going to pay for your school.    I mean, I   ve heard of that  happening, you know. Yeah, no, I don   t know how to explain it, other than  it   s just kind of a feeling more than it is something you can put your finger  on. It   s just a great place to be.  Nykolaiszyn Advice to students? What would you tell them?  Waterfield That   s hard. As you get older, that really is something that   I say follow  your passion. I mean, I won   t say that I had the wrong jobs prior to the one I  have now, but I never had a job that I was so passionate about as I am now.  Just don   t make it all about the money. I mean, I really can   t say it any more  simple than that. I mean, I would choose the job I have right now over a six-figure  job just because I   m having so much fun. I may not be able to afford  to do some of the things that I could if I were making a lot more money, but  every day is like a reward. Follow your passion. I know that   s clich  , but  really do. Life is too short. I mean, I   ve watched too many people die young  or too many people that retired at age sixty or sixty-five and drop dead two  years later. Gosh, do what you love to do, and then every day is like  vacation. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn You mentioned your son earlier. Tell me a little bit about your immediate  family.  Waterfield Well, right now, all that   s left   I don   t know how much detail you want me  to go into. I have a partner here in Stillwater who is absolutely sucked into  the whole OSU experience. He works over in the College of Education and  has become a, you know, grew up on the East Coast in Maryland, actually. I  don   t think he ever envisioned being in Stillwater, Oklahoma, for the rest of  his life but absolutely loves it here, as do I. I mentioned my mom earlier.  She   ll be moving to Stillwater at the end of this week. My father is now  deceased. We have a pretty small immediate family. Just my sister and  myself in our immediate family, Mom, sister, and myself. My uncle, who  was also a huge OSU fan, just passed away about three weeks ago in  Canadian, Texas. He was eighty-one. All the rest of that side of the family is  still in Canadian. Yeah, we have a pretty small family, and then there   s the  Kentucky side of the family as well. That   s my mom   s side of the family. As  far as that goes, that   s about it.  Nykolaiszyn Has your son graduated?  Waterfield Yes. He has gone to work for Marathon Oil. He lives in Houston and  graduated in (the years go by so quickly) I guess December of 2013. He   s  25  been with Marathon going on two years. So far, is surviving the crash in oil  prices and still has a job. I don   t want him to boomerang home. (Laughter) I  love him to death, but yeah, I like him making his own living.  Nykolaiszyn (Laughs) Well, as we kind of wind on down, is there anything you   d like to  mention that we haven   t talked about today?  Waterfield I don   t think so. I think we   ve covered just about everything. I guess as we  end everything in OSU athletics, go Pokes  (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m sure we   ll look forward to seeing your images from football and  all the other sports.  Waterfield Yeah, next Thursday, they will start rolling off the press.  Nykolaiszyn Sounds great. Bruce, thank you so much for joining us as part of our  Cowboys in Every County Project...  Waterfield You bet.  Nykolaiszyn    representing the big town of Morrison, Oklahoma   Waterfield Yeah, Noble County   Nykolaiszyn Noble County.  Waterfield Thank you very much. Appreciate it.  -------  -------   
