 Finchum Today is July 23, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today I am in Fairview, Oklahoma, to speak with Verne Willits. This is part of our Cowboy in Every County  Project . Thank you for talking with me today.  V. Willits Yes. Well, I   ll tell you a little bit about my life to start with.  Finchum Okay.  V. Willits I was born in 1917, out fifteen miles west of Fairview on a red hill out there. At five years of age   well, first, my dad had a third-grade education. My mother taught school at a little red-top schoolhouse seven miles from where she lived and had to ride a horse over there to get fifteen dollars a month for teaching school. They put me on a school bus when I was five years old. They thought I was smart enough to start school. That was the biggest mistake they ever made. I   m sure they meant well, but it was a terrible thing for me because I got there, and my teacher shoved me up to the second grade to start with. Another month or two, they shoved me up to the fourth grade. My dad bought a house in Fairview and moved me. I started school at fourth grade in Fairview, Fairview grade school. I didn   t know nothing. I developed the most inferiority complex you could imagine. I couldn   t keep up with those kids. I   d cry; I   d do everything. My mother would try to help me. She would.  Anyway, with her help I got started and went down to OSU. I got a lot of that going to Oklahoma State at that time. I went down there and talked and got enrolled. I took the appendicitis. They didn   t have but one surgeon in Enid. He laid me down with ether, flat on my back for seven days. When he finally got me up and got me started, I was so sick I couldn   t do anything. I wanted to go to college, and I wanted to go to Oklahoma State because Fairview is pretty much an Oklahoma State town. I went back and talked to my teachers. Told them what my trouble I was. They said,    We   ll help you if you want to come, if you want to go.    I said,    I want to go to college.    They took me in. You know, chemical laboratories, stuff like that, you get so far behind you just don   t ever catch up. I never did completely, and after three years, I still hadn   t done all my chemical labs. I was so far behind. Anyway, the teachers were wonderful. They helped me. They would do anything in the world for me because they understood me. I finally got started.  I told them I could play a trumpet, and they said,    You can play in the college band.    It was the football band, so I got to see all the football games which was wonderful. I was always interested in athletics and everything else about Oklahoma State, but I didn   t get to participate in a lot of the things I wanted to because of my health. Okay, anyway, the teachers helped me get started, and I went along. I had two hundred and fifty dollars for my first year of college. That   s all I had. I had to live in a two-story house on   I can   t think of the name of that street right now. Anyway, a two-story house, and we had two of us to a room. Board and room, twenty-seven dollars a month. We had to eat that food. It wasn   t too good, but we had to eat it whether it was good or not. Anyway, I   m living with a guy from Mangum, Oklahoma, nice fellow. We had one desk with one lamp on it was all we had to study by. We   d take turns sitting up there and getting our   .  We had to eat the food, and the reason we had to eat the food was because we didn   t have the nickel to go down to Crowder   s (you remember Crowder   s, I   m sure) to get a nickel hamburger. You could buy, back in 1936, you could buy a hamburger and take your girlfriend down for a coke for a nickel. I got started the first year and made it through this house with that kind of food and everything. I   d go with the ladies. Then my wonderful teachers helping me. They   d do anything for me. They just were interested in helping people. Anyway, I made it through the first year. The second year I got started, I joined the Kappa Sig fraternity. This is what   s going to surprise you, probably. We had regulations, and they were good. No one had any money back then. Most of the college students didn   t have. They didn   t have money. There was forty of us lived in one house, and there was no alcohol allowed in the house, period.  We wasn   t ever allowed any alcohol. They   d let us smoke, but there wasn   t any alcohol allowed in our forty. We all just slept in the same place   . Anyway, we, they got along pretty good there. Oh, by the way, one of our regulations was if we didn   t wear a coat and tie to come to supper, come to dinner, we didn   t get to eat. We had to change. Girls had to wear dresses and shoes. They had to be back at their rooms at eight o   clock at night. We could dance with them from seven thirty until eight, me and another guy, a boy out of Kappa Sig. The Chi Omega was our sister sorority. I was a good dancer, and he was a good dancer, so they asked us to come over and work for them. We   d wait tables for them and carry food out. After we ate, they   d let uscome in and dance with them for thirty minutes. The girls had anytime, anytime during the week, they had to be back in their room at eight o   clock. When they had house dances or something special, they had to be back in their room at twelve o   clock.  Anyway, that didn   t   I   m getting ahead of myself. I got to be a Sigger. They made me social chairman. That was a full-time job really. I got to do a lot of things and meet a lot of people, do things that you wouldn   t do otherwise. Anyway, I run out of money after my third year. I told my fraternity brothers,    I   m going to go home and go to work.    They said,    Verne, you will never come back and finish your college degree.    They just begged me not to leave. I said,    I   ve got to. I haven   t got any money.    They said,    Well, you won   t come back.    I said,    Yes, I will. I   ll be back here and finish my education.    I went home and got me a job for forty cents an hour. They told me I could work, and I told them my problem. They said,    You can work as many hours as you want to.    Well, I   d work sixteen and eighteen hours a day at forty cents an hour. When I got ready to go back to college, I went down to Reames Motors and bought me a brand new Ford.  When I got back to Stillwater, I was the only one in the fraternity that had a car. That   s a little different than kids nowadays in high school. They all have a car. Well, I had a car in college when I was a senior. I got to where I could try to do some of the things the big boys did then    Of course, they didn   t boo me and make fun of me like they did back in Fairview High School. They treated me terrible there because you know how kids are. I was so different and so helpless about some things, and they just booed me and made fun of me until I just couldn   t hardly take it, but I kept going. Anyway, when I got back to   let   s see. I played in the college band. I took part in what little few things I could around the campus. I was interested in everything really, but I couldn   t take part in some of it. Anyway, I pinned a Chi Omega sister sorority that year. I gave her my fraternity pin. That meant we were engaged back then. A fraternity pin was the same as a ring. She said she   d wait on me, but after I graduated in    42, they started bombing Pearl Harbor.  Me and another guy said,    We   re going to go sign up.    We thought we needed to go get in there and help them. We went and signed up, and they put me in the Marines. I went through the boot camp in the Marines for the first few months, and then I transferred to the Air Corps. While I was home, I was   I remember this song,    Thank God for Unanswered Prayers.    This girl didn   t wait on me. That was the best thing that ever happened to me because I married a girl that was as wonderful, most wonderful girl in the world, I think. She was the love of my life, and she helped me raise five children. This is one of them. I was getting along pretty good then. I got out of college. The guy that made the highest grade out of my fraternity was Dale West, and he moved up north, up where this company was making tires. I can   t remember the name of it. Anyway, he moved up there and got a job making tires for a  125 a month. That was the highest paying job of any senior that year,  125.  I moved back to Fairview, and I got me a job for five dollars a day. I didn   t like it, and they didn   t like me too good, so I just went to work for myself. I got on my pony and went out in the country and started buying cattle. I made four hundred dollars the first week. From then on, I didn   t look for a job. That pretty much gives you a little history of what I was doing. Let   s see. Oh, yeah, they came to me   we got a historical society out there, (it   s wonderful) there at Fairview. If you ever get by there, stop in. They wanted me to   I was the only one that was old enough and still could remember driving cattle into a freight train. We had a freight train coming through Fairview then. I had driven cattle to this freight train and loaded them on a cattle car. I was the only one that was left around Major County that had done that. They asked me if I would help them design a deal that looked like that, so I did. That   s one of the few things I did for Fairview. I think I   ve told you about everything I can give you right now. I   ll try to answer some of your questions.  Finchum What was your major?  V. Willits Ag economics.  Finchum And you graduated in    42?  V. Willits Yeah.  Finchum High school, when did you graduate? From high school, when did you graduate?  V. Willits In    34, I graduated in    34, and there was eleven grocery stores in that little town of Fairview when I graduated, eleven. I can name ten of them today. (Laughs)  Finchum How many brothers and sisters did you have?  V. Willits Oh, I had two sisters. My older sister went to OU. My little sister wanted to follow me to OSU, and she did. She was several years later. She was eleven years younger than I was. There was two sisters. Like I say, my mother helped me an awful lot, and my dad was a wonderful man even though he only had a third-grade education. I didn   t hold anything against my parents for what I didn   t know. There was a lot that I didn   t know when I started to college. I got to where I enjoyed it a lot. I would go back and visit. I   d go to all the football games after I got out of college that I could. I had to buy tickets, season tickets every year. We had good seats. It was a real nice. I enjoyed that.  Finchum What did you think about the name change?  V. Willits Well, I didn   t   wasn   t much of anything that made me change my mind about anything. (Laughter)  Finchum A M or OSU, it didn   t matter.  V. Willits No, it didn   t matter to me.  Finchum Aggies or Cowboys? It was A M Aggies wasn   t it?  V. Willits Yes.  Finchum So your father was a farmer?  V. Willits Yeah, he would help me. He was a cattle buyer. There wasn   t any sale barns back then like there are now. Farmers would all sell their cattle out from the farm, right out in the country. My dad was a cattle buyer, so he   d go buy these cattle and get about twenty or thirty head of them. He   d have me come on my horse and drive them to the freight train. He   d help me put them on the freight train at maybe two o   clock in the morning. We   d never know when they   usually Topeka and Santa Fe would put a cattle car up there. One thing I had to do when they asked me to help design a deal where it looked like it was when I was driving cattle there, one thing I had to do, they didn   t have any more cattle cars, so we had to buy a freight car with solid sides. I made them cut all that up. They asked me how wide apart I had to put them. I had them put the slats two inches apart and two to one inches, two wide and one inch thick. That was so the littler ones couldn   t get their head through and choke them. We had a caboose there and a big engine, freight engine. They moved it over there from the railroad track. It was pretty nice. If you ever get by there, you   ll have to see what I designed. (Laughter)  Finchum I understand you knew Allie Reynolds?  V. Willits Oh, Allie Reynolds, you bet. His team made the national champion twice while I was in college. That was very unusual. I didn   t get to go to the nationals. I got to go to some of his games there in Stillwater, but I didn   t get to go to the national finals. He was a wonderful man, and all kinds of pictures up there in a special room for him. We all thought the world of him. In fact, when I started, I forget to tell you part of my story. After I got out of the service when I joined the Marines, then I transferred to Air Corps. They chose me and one other guy out of a hundred pilots to instruct. We stayed there as instructors. Why? I was a good pilot, I have to admit. I think the reason they chose me is because I was flying a C-46 airplane and I could land it out on a short airfield better than about anybody there. I had to train three students every month, to make them pilots. They were lieutenants because they already had their wings, but I had to teach. They didn   t know how to fly these big airplanes.  They   d look at that instrument panel,    Oh, Mr. Willits, we   ll never be able to figure that out.    I said,    You   ll figure it out, and you   ll figure it out in one week because that   s all I have to teach you     I taught them instruments and everything else and turned them loose. I grounded one man because he flew us into the Lake of the Ozarks over there. I looked out my window, and there was a tree that big around went by the wing. I grabbed that plane and shot it straight up in the air. I called the tower, and I said,    Get the ambulance and a fire truck. I   ve got problems.    I had a tree limb that big around sticking up through the bottom of my fuselage, but I landed it in good shape. I was a nervous wreck. My commander said,    Do you want to stop flying, Verne?    I said,    No. If you   ll let me fly tomorrow, I   ll be all right.    He said,    If you want to fly tomorrow,    (we had one silver plane down there, and it was his) he said,    you take my silver plane, and you go anywhere you want to for two days.    (Laughs) Oh, we had a time. Anyway, that   s just fun. I   ve got two funny stories. When you get through with me, I want to tell you if you got time.  Finchum Go ahead and tell.  V. Willits Okay.  Finchum Might as well.  V. Willits I know you   re going to enjoy this. I   ll cut it as short as I can. The teacher for the high school, he was principal for Fairview High School. He liked to hunt quail, and me too. This was quite a while after I got out of college. He had a lease up there by Waynoka, little ways from Waynoka, and they had a lot of quail, deer, turkey. He took me along to hunt. We got out there. He had an old, four wheel drive Jeep. We had some grain in the back of this old Jeep where we could fill these feeders for the quail, had a lease on it. We started killing quail, and we killed quite a few and got some turkeys. Along about dark, we decided we better head back. We got down, right to the bottom of the hill before we get out of the pasture, and this old thing died. He got out and went back. He came back and said,    Verne, you ain   t going to believe this, but we lost our gas tank.    I said,    No, I ain   t going to believe that.    I got out, walked back there, and we had lost the gas tank off this old Jeep   We walked back up there. It was kind of sloping hill. It had floated down. It was quite a ways after the gas tank, and it was getting dark. We didn   t find the tank that night. We got back up there, and we had too many turkeys. He said,    What are we going to do with all these turkeys?    I said,    We better throw some of them under the house up there, that old house.    We had to leave the Jeep there. We started walking down; it was about ten miles to Waynoka. He   d hang onto me, and I   d hang onto him. It was pitch dark, and we was trying to walk across this railroad track. You know how they are. We   d almost fall through. Anyway, we got part way to town, and we was played out. Here come a guy with a Ford car with about six kids in it and a wife, loaded up, and he stopped to see what we   . We told him we needed a ride to a Waynoka real bad. He said,    Well, I   m pretty well loaded, but if you can hang on somewhere, we   ll take you.    We hung onto that old Ford, got up to the motel, and we rented a room. I said,    Now, Max, we got to call our wives.     I called my wife first. I told her,    Well, we lost our gas tank, and we   re going to rent a room up here.    She said,    You better get yourself on home.    I told Max, I said,    Call your wife. Whatever you do, don   t tell her the truth.    (Laughter) That   s what we had to tell them, something but the truth, because we knew they wouldn   t believe that. (Laughs) Well, we got along pretty good there at the hotel. The next morning, we bought us   a bucket full of gas, some rope, and some baling wire. We thought we could tie that gas tank back on with rope and baling wire and put that gas in it, and we could get home. We got part of a ride back down over there. We put it in here, put that gas in there, and it wouldn   t start. It wouldn   t start. We didn   t know what we was going to do. Max said,    All the cattle will get down there and eat that grain out of the back of that pickup, and we   ll be in a lot of trouble.    I said,    Max, you can think of some of the damnedest things.    Anyway, we didn   t get it started, so we started walking back to Waynoka. Walked a ways; he hadn   t said a word. After about a half a mile, he said,    Verne, I   m despondent.    (Laughter) I never will forget that. I never will forget that. (Laughs) That was about the size of that story.  Now I want to tell you one more. We had some guys in Fairview that   U.I. Smith, he always had a new Buick, and Dick Cornelson sold Oldsmobiles. I had gotten out of school, and I   d bought me a new Chevrolet. I was president of the rotary club. We had a rotary club there at that time, and the outfit that made the   what am I trying to say, Danny? They made stuff for houses, anyway. They was down there at Southard, Southard, Oklahoma. They asked me if we   d like to go through their plant. It was a big national plant. I said,    Yeah, I   ll get somebody to come down.    I got these two hotshots. One of them is driving the Oldsmobile, one in the Buick, and me with the Chevrolet, and we got to racing. We didn   t have any pavement or nothing back then. We raced down there to get to that place. There   s a slope down to the railroad track, about this much. (Gestures) Anyway, here come a freight train. We all got there about the same time, of course. I was third to get there; I think I was on the left.He stopped and had his foot on the brake, in the middle was a big ole guy with the Buick. Here come this train going by pretty fast. He saw me there next to him, and he knew I liked cigars. He took his foot off the brake, stepped out, and handed me a cigar. That new car of his rolled into that freight train going by. Every time another car hit it, it would take about six more inches off the front end of that new Buick. I tell you what. We didn   t laugh at the time, but after it was all over, we had to laugh. (Laughs) Oh, it ruined his car, of course. He had a guy with him that was scared. He jumped out and started running back up the hill. I was sitting there, and I was afraid it was going to pull that Buick over into my car and ruin it, but it didn   t. That was my two stories I wanted to tell you. (Laughs) It was a crazy bunch around Fairview. Now I   ll try to answer any questions that you might have.  Finchum Well, when you first started at OSU, how did you get there?  V. Willits I think, I imagine   let   s see. We didn   t have any transportation. We did a lot of hitchhiking then. You ain   t going to believe this, but you could hitchhike to Stillwater and back just about as fast as you could drive a car over and back because everybody would stop and help you back then. They won   t pick up a hitchhiker now, of course. Back then, if you had an Oklahoma State cap on, boy, they   d slam their brakes on and take you where you wanted to go. It was nice. I hitchhiked back and forth, so I imagine I hitchhiked over there.  Finchum With one suitcase?  V. Willits Oh, yeah, one suitcase.  Finchum Did you spend much time in the library?  V. Willits I didn   t spend a lot of time in the library because I had an arm full of books, of course, that I was supposed to keep up on. I couldn   t keep up. I couldn   t even keep up on my chemistry laboratories. That was the worst thing. I had to work on my local books. I didn   t get to spend much time in the library.  Finchum Well, what would you do for fun?  V. Willits Nobody had money, and I didn   t have any money, as well. I didn   t have time to   well, we played cards. We danced with those girls from seven thirty to eight every night. If we had a nickel, we   d buy them a coke up at Aggie Drug. (Laughter) You remember Aggie Drug?  Finchum No.  V. Willits You don   t remember Aggie Drug? You remember Crowder   s? Finchum No.  V. Willits Well, those were the two places we   d meet. They had nickel drinks and nickel hamburgers. We didn   t always buy them, because we didn   t always have the nickel.  Finchum When you took your car your senior year, did everybody want to borrow it?  V. Willits Well, no, they didn   t ask to borrow it. They just asked for me to take them someplace. Oh, yeah, I   m glad you mentioned that. In 1941, (don   t hold me to that because that might be off a little) we had a good football team. So did OU. I had this car. Me and another guy took our girlfriends, and we drove down there to OU to see this football. We bet some guys so many dollars. I don   t remember; it wasn   t very many. Anyway, we told them,    If we win this, we   re going to buy you a steak in Oklahoma City. If we don   t win it, we   re going to eat hamburgers at Crowder   s for a nickel back at Stillwater.    At the third quarter, starting the fourth quarter, OU was thirty. We were zero. We weren   t feeling very good. We ended up winning that game by thirty-one to thirty. This is in 1941, I   m pretty sure. If you look that up, I   m sure that   s when it was. We had a good time that night. (Laughter)  Finchum So Bedlam, was Bedlam     V. Willits Yeah, Bedlam was a big deal even back there. (Laughs) It always will be.  Finchum Have you gone back for Walkaround?  V. Willits Oh, yeah, I go back. Now, of course, my health is so bad right now, I don   t get to go back much. This last year, I haven   t got to go back. I used to love to go back to Stillwater every chance I got. It was a lot of fun.  Finchum Well, of your five children, did any of them go to OSU? Your five children, did any of them go to OSU?  V. Willits No, I guess not.  Finchum Grandchildren? Any grandchildren?  Dan Willits Wesley.  Finchum One grandchild went to OSU?  V. Willits I had a lot of grandchildren.  Finchum That go to OSU?V. Willits No.  D. Willits Wesley.  V. Willits Yeah, Wesley. I got a grandson that went to OSU, yeah.  Finchum Okay.  V. Willits His dad   s a lawyer, got an office in Oklahoma City.  Finchum What was your wife   s name?  V. Willits Well, I remarried. I didn   t tell you that. I remarried after my first wife died in    84. As I say, she was the love of my life and a wonderful lady. She had to work for fifteen dollars a month, too. Anyway, I remarried this girl that was interested in American Legion Auxiliary. That was the ladies end of it. She got to be state president. Now she is the head of the Senior Citizens. We got a big building. Have a lot of senior citizens come every day for lunch. She   s the head of that now and does a very fine job of it. She has children still living, and they think a lot of me. I get to see them once in a while. We have fun together.  Finchum Well, did you ever race against Allie Reynolds? Track, did you run track?  V. Willits Oh, yeah  I   m glad you mentioned that. Yeah, my wife   s name was Elizabeth, but we called her Betty. Anyway, this track we had intercollege, intercollege track meet. All the organizations in Stillwater decided to have a track meet. I entered the 440. I thought I could come near winning that as any of them. At that time, a guy by the name of Allie Reynolds, an Indian that was an AGR (Alpha Gamma Rho) down the street a little ways, he was pitching for OSU. Well, he was a good athlete. He ran; he entered the 440. We had so many entries, we had to time them. They timed him, and then they timed me. He beat me by two-fifths of a second. I remember that. (Laughs) We had a lot of fun out of it. I   m glad you mentioned that because I   d forgotten all about that. I took part in some things in Stillwater that I can   t even remember now. (Laughs) My mind isn   t the best in the world.  Finchum You   re doing good  Did you know  Henry  Iba?  V. Willits Oh, yes, yeah, I knew him. You bet. We all knew him. Everybody tried to get a chance to shake hands with him. You bet. He was a fine man.  Finchum Well, did you do 4-H?V. Willits Oh, yeah. I was president. My senior year I was president of the agriculture FFA. We had a little program deal we went to, ask each other questions. You know kind of how that was. I got to be president of that. Then, yeah, I didn   t get to do much my first year or two of high school because I was still so far behind with my studies. They was still booing me and making fun of me and all that. (Laughs) I had an instructor there too, a math instructor. He thought a lot of me because he   d go out to my land and hunt, you know. He   d take me and help me out any way he could.  Finchum Well, when did you retire? Have you retired? (Laughter)  V. Willits There   s a sale today down here. I   d be glad to take you down to see it. We   ll be selling cattle in another hour. I   ll probably buy two or three cows or more. I buy some about every week. I   ve got a hundred cows and have babies. I enjoy that. I don   t intend to retire. (Laughs)  Finchum How early in the morning do you get up?  V. Willits By the way, I live at the   Dan may not have told you, but I live at night in the Fellowship Home in Fairview. My part of it is individual help. I stay there at nights. I go out and stay all night at home once in a while where my wife lives. Most of the time, I stay there at night because I take a whole bunch of pills every day. They keep those regulated for me, so I try to stay there at night. A lot of times I get up at three or four o   clock in the morning. I read the Bible and stuff like that until time to go out with this guy who drives for me. I drive some, but he drives most of the time. He drives me out to my cattle, and we feed them. We have fun.  Finchum You still drive?  V. Willits Oh, yeah.  Finchum Automatic or stick?  V. Willits Oh, it   s automatic.  Finchum That   s a good thing. Well, do you remember graduation day, the day you graduated?  V. Willits I can   t remember.  Finchum Can   t remember.  V. Willits I just can   t remember. Maybe he can.    I can   t remember. Sorry. (Laughter) I   ll think about it after a while, probably.Finchum May not have had a ceremony. I don   t know.  V. Willits You got a PhD, right?  Finchum Yes.  V. Willits Well, you live in Stillwater.  Finchum Yes.  V. Willits Well, that   s nice. I bet you got a nice place to live over there.  Finchum A small one. I don   t like to clean house.  V. Willits Do you have any kids?  Finchum One.  V. Willits One? Good.  Finchum He wouldn   t know what to do with a cow, though. (Laughter)  V. Willits Oh, I bet he would. I bet he   d enjoy it.  Finchum How long were you a cowboy, on your horse?  V. Willits Oh, all my life. Oh, my neighbor said,    We think Verne was born on a horse.    (Laughter) I broke horses, and we had colts. We raised colts. I always had half a dozen or more horses around. I had two good cow ponies. I   d ride one one day, and I   d ride the other one the next day. Give them a rest the second day.  Finchum Were your parents from Oklahoma?  V. Willits Yeah, well, no. My dad came from   he was just a kid. He came in a covered wagon from Iowa when he was just a young   . He was old enough to work, though, about nine or ten. Then his dad moved him to Arkansas. Then he came back and went to work for fifty cents a day to a farmer out there, fifty cents a day. He had me working, doing man   s work. He thought that was the best way to keep me out of trouble was to keep me busy, and he sure did. (Laughter)  Finchum Did you milk cows?  V. Willits Oh, yeah, we always milked cows, separated the cream, made butter. Finchum Used a horse and plow? A horse to plow?  V. Willits Yeah, I plowed a small acreage one day with one horse and a walking plow. I don   t know how come I got in on that, but it was a hard job. It was one of the saddle horses.  Finchum What were you planting? What were you growing?  V. Willits Wheat mostly. Once in a while, we   d grow a little feed. My dad and I were   at the ranch he had bought, or some land he   d bought. We raised everything we ate. We didn   t buy any groceries unless it was salt and pepper, something like that. I   d go out and shoot a cottontail rabbit. If we didn   t have a fryer chicken to cook, I   d go out and shoot a rabbit, and we   d cook that rabbit. We raised all kinds of vegetables. We didn   t have to buy nothing in town. I had to go to church every Sunday morning. When they would pass that collection plate around, there   d be more pennies in it than any other thing back then.  Nobody had any money, but there   d be a whole bunch of pennies in the collection plate. Pennies was worth, you valued them quite a bit back then. The little kid, if he had a penny, he went and would get him a sack full of candy that big (gestures) for a penny, yeah. It was sad days, but I tell you what, sometimes we didn   t have any electricity, and we didn   t lock our cars or our houses. I sometimes say I think people are better off then than they are now, in some ways. That   s saying a lot, but I really believe that. We had them ol   Dust Bowl Days. You might have read about them. In the middle of the afternoon, it   d be just like midnight. The dust would come in so thick you couldn   t see nothing.  Finchum Here in Fairview?  V. Willits I don   t think it ever got   a little of it   d probably get as far as Stillwater, but it would cover Fairview up. Of course, those farmers, they   d bought that cheap land out there in western Kansas and western Oklahoma, and the land started blowing. They had to do something about that. Now then, that land, they   ve irrigated it, and they raise big, a lot of good crops out there now. We don   t have any irrigation. We   ve got spring-fed ponds out on our ranch, and a lot of fish. You like to fish?  Finchum As long as I don   t have to bait the hook.  V. Willits Well, I could do that for you. (Laughs) You just come out sometime. We   ll catch you a fish. (Laughter)  Finchum I   ll use corn. Instead of worms, I   ll use corn.V. Willits Yeah. You get the worms out of the corn.  Finchum Do you know if he has any Depression stories, living through the Depression?  D. Willits Yeah, I   m sure he does.  Finchum Can you recall anything from the Depression days?  V. Willits Oh, I don   t know. It was just part of everybody, and everybody went through about the same thing. There was always a few people had a little money, but most of us didn   t. We just raised our own. We   d kill a pig, or we   d kill a calf, you know, and have meat. We got along good. Anybody got in trouble, neighbors come in there and help. Why, shoot, they just tried and took care of each other then. Like I say, I think people are better off then than they are now in a lot of ways.  Finchum You said you flew. How did you learn how to fly?  V. Willits How did I learn how to fly?  Finchum Yes.  V. Willits Oh, they started me out in a little ol  , what I called a grasshopper. It   s a little ol   one-wing plane. That   s what they start you on. Put me in the front seat with the earphones on. I could hear him talking to me. He sat behind me. All we had to do to move the airplane any direction was a stick, one stick, like this. (Gestures) You could move it any way you wanted to. He took me up about five thousand feet and turned that plane upside down and started down to earth, and it was spinning like this. (Gestures) I thought we was going to die. He said,    Take a hold of that stick and turn this plane back over. Right it     I said,    You go to hell. If I get back on the ground, you ain   t ever going to get me up in another one.    (Laughter) I meant it at the time, but he laughed. He got me back up. Oh, it scared me. Anyway, they taught me on a twin engine in Houston.  That   s one reason they got me into C-46s. That was a big airplane, a C-46. I could haul sixty-five parachute jumpers in it. That   s what that plane was made for was for it to haul parachute jumpers. That   s what I   d have been doing if they hadn   t made me an instructor. I had to turn out three pilots a month. I did a good job with them. I tell Dan, you remember when that plane flew into the mountain, here about a month or two ago and killed 136 people? They blamed that on the co-pilot. That co-pilot didn   t kill those people. I had a lot of experience with co-pilots, and I can tell you what happened. I didn   t dare   I started to call in one time, to call the German Air Corps and tell them they better get that corrected, but I decided that I better stay out of it. That co-pilot, he wasn   t the guy that killed them people. The pilot   s the one that did it.  What the pilot did was, he knew the co-pilot would go to sleep as soon as he turned on the automatic pilot. He waited until he went to sleep. He got up, took his key out of his pocket, went out of the cockpit, and locked it where nobody could get in. He went back to the toilet. That co-pilot, I had a lot of experience with co-pilots. I knew a little better than they did. I sure didn   t want to get mixed up in it. There   s been somebody else call in, had the same idea I did. They said,    You better reinvestigate that.    That just happened here the other day. I   m not going to say anything about it. (Laughter) I had a lot of experience with co-pilots. I knew pretty well that they didn   t have much to do but sleep after you put it on automatic pilot. That pilot had set that to where it   d fly into a mountain in about five minutes.  Finchum It   s just sad.  V. Willits Yeah. I flew two thousand hours in that C-46. I didn   t like that airplane, particularly.  Curtiss-  Wright never did make a very good airplane, but I had to fly it.  Finchum Well, when you got out of the military, did you continue to fly?  V. Willits I   m glad you mentioned that. When the war got over in    45 and they said you can get out or you can stay in, they wanted me to stay in the regular Army. If I had   ve, I   d be drawing a colonel   s pay now, probably. Anyway, I went up to Kansas City and got me a commercial license. I could fly anything from a little one on up. I got the commercial, and I thought,    I could make a living flying commercially if I have to.    I took it home, put it in my top dresser drawer. It   s still there; I never did use it. I got in the cattle business, and I didn   t have time to do anything else. (Laughter) I   d flown two thousand hours; I was getting kind of tired of it.  Finchum But you like what you   re doing.  V. Willits Oh, yeah, I sure do. Danny can tell you that. He likes to go out with me and see the cattle. He likes to see me buy them. They raise calves. We have a lot of fun, and I   ve been making a little money, been getting along pretty good.  Finchum Good.  V. Willits I don   t intend to ever retire. (Laughs)  Finchum You   re going to make it to one hundred.  V. Willits Oh, I imagine I will.Finchum Did your siblings make it to this age?  V. Willits My sisters?  Finchum Yes.  V. Willits They   re both dead now. The little sister, she died at an earlier age. My older sister   s only been dead about three or four years. She lived to be ninety-five or so.  Finchum What do you think your secret is?  V. Willits My secret? (Laughs) Oh, I don   t know, honey. I don   t know.  Finchum Riding that horse.  V. Willits No secrets. I was kind of ornery when I got back from the war. We got to playing poker. I   d play poker. We   d get in a little ol   room, and cigarette smoke so thick you couldn   t hardly see the cards. Well, all of a sudden, we decided that that was going to kill us. We quit, most of us. I just threw mine away and never did smoke another one. And we   d drink whiskey. Like I say, we   d stay up half, sometimes all night long, gambling. It wasn   t too good a deal for me. I had a doctor tell me, he said,    You smoke cigarettes?    I said,    Yeah.    He said,    How long?    I said,    About thirty years.    He said,    That   s too long.    (Laughs) I quit cigarettes and whiskey. I drink that much now. (Gestures) The doctor said that   s good for me; a little bit of alcohol is good for you. He said,    One. You can drink one.    (Laughter) I won   t kill myself drinking too much. That   s for sure. I never was an alcoholic.  Finchum So you follow the basketball team and the football teams? You follow sports?  V. Willits Oh, yeah. I can   t hardly wait until we get football. (Laughs) I just can   t hardly wait. I watch that. I go to some of the games if I can, if I   m able.  Finchum Anything you want me to ask him before we close out?  V. Willits Well, I hope you enjoyed a little bit of what I had to say.  Finchum You   re great   V. Willits Well, you are great too, hon. Yeah, I appreciate you.  Finchum All right then, we   ll say thank you and close it out.V. Willits Okay. All right.  -------  ------- 
