 Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  It is Friday morning, October 17, 2008 and I   m at the Alumni Center on  the OSU campus with Dr. Yewelsew Abebe who is a distinguished  alumnus of the College of Human Environmental Sciences. We are doing  an interview for the O-STATE Stories Program and I   m so pleased that  you are able to return to the OSU campus and to be involved in the  Homecoming activities as well as to be part of this interview this  morning. So what I want to do is to ask you some questions about your  background before you came to OSU and then what your experience was  like here, and then we   ll move on to some questions dealing with what  you   ve done since you   ve left the university.  Okay.  So could you tell us a little bit about your background and what your life  was like before you came to OSU and then how you ended up becoming  a graduate student here?  Before I came to OSU, I was working in a university  in Ethiopia ,  Debub University. Now it   s called Hawassa University. I was teaching. I  was doing various activities of the university, serving as a department  chairperson and other assigned duties in the university. When I came to  OSU, I think it was 1999, I got a scholarship meant to upgrade women  leaders by Winrock International. So I got the chance to be selected to  come to OSU.  So what was that competition process like?  Well, the competition process was like this   Winrock International had  a vision to upgrade women to serve as role models in different higher  field studies so it came to the region where I was serving   that is  Southern Nation, Nationalities in the southern part of Ethiopia. Where I  was working was given the opportunity to select candidates so I got  5  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  selected, and there were two other professionals,  women from the  Ministry of Agriculture who came with me .  Pretty stiff.  Yes, it was, because there are many applicants who like to get the  chance.  Okay. I know that the emphasis of your Ph.D. here at OSU was in  nutritional sciences. What drew you to that field of study before you even  came to OSU?  Nutrition science is really a demanded field of study; if you want to have  more professionals. We don   t have, unfortunately, many nutrition  professionals in the country because it was not part of a university  program  until recently . Plus my work was   I mean my department     we used to go out to the community to work with women so I see many  children malnourished. There is a huge need for nutrition professionals.  So I decided when I came, if I have a higher education opportunity, I  would like to study nutrition. I think it is a need for this field of study  and I just want to do something if I can. So that   s why I went into  nutrition.  And your training before you came here had been in nutrition?  I did my BSC  Bachelor   s  and MSC  Master   s  also here in a U.S.  university. I was in West Virginia.  Oh, okay. In Morgantown?  Yeah, Morgantown. The Homemakers    Council gave me a scholarship at  that time so where I studied home economics mixed with a child  development emphasis, having different courses from nutrition, child  development and other focus areas. So I had some basics there, but I  want to enhance it with further understanding and research skills.  So that made you, probably, a very different kind of applicant for the  Winrock program because you had an undergraduate and master   s  degree from an American university to begin with?  Well, that could be part of it   plus the other thing is I think there is a  need. We need to have professionals who are trained. The training in  these areas which is highly demanded by our society so that could be a  component because I had my undergraduate studies in American  universities and also the need is huge. So I was fortunate to have that  scholarship really.  6  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Who were the people that encouraged you from your earliest days to  aspire to getting an education and to being a professional woman?  I have really to stop and think. I think my auntie who raised me up was  my role model. She was not educated herself, as a matter of fact, but she  really believed in me. She was encouraging me. My parents died when I  was really young and my auntie raised me up. She was an industrious  woman to have the family   my brothers and sisters   so she always  encouraged me to continue my education, and I was really lucky.  Because in the area where I grew, in those times arranged marriage was  a really high possibility, but my auntie always insisted that I should  continue. Every word   everything she says and she models for me was  just to continue. So that was from the family side. Also my brother, my  elder brothers, my whole family believes in education so that is one  aspect.  The other thing   I was fortunate to be married to a person who always  motivates me and encouraged me to continue. As I said earlier, I did my  undergraduate studies BSC and MSC and PhD overseas here in  America. That means to leave my family behind, and my husband was  the one who was really taking care of the family. Otherwise it would be  impossible to balance family needs and educational challenges.  Right. Well, you are indeed fortunate then.  Yes, indeed. I am really very thankful. I met instructors here also at  OSU who always encouraged me and they were also interested with  Ethiopia. I think because of the earlier connection of Oklahoma State  University and Ethiopian universities that has, I think, a historical  portion details.  Yes, now five decades of having students on our campus from Ethiopia.  That   s right, yes.  So can you tell me a little bit about what the impact of that has been in  Ethiopia, of having had so many students who have come here and then  have returned? Is that something that has really made a big difference to  the country?  I do believe so. Education is very important in my opinion for any  country   s development. Individuals who are trained overseas are coming  back. You know they do an important job because of their total  education. You can serve better. You can think better. You can plan for  the future in a sustainable way. So when it comes to OSU and Ethiopia, I  think going back to Alemaya University   I was also a student there  7  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  during those times when the home economics program was supported by  Oklahoma State University. I think I was the last student before that  thing stopped. So I think all those things add up together to make you  who you are now, so education is very important. Things can be solved  with other things by money or other assistance, the humanitarian things  and so on, but education is really very important. That   s what you  remain with, so I feel it has a big contribution.  When I bring the situation to our specific point of discussion, I was  trained here. When I went back, I was thinking how is it that we can start  a nutrition program because there is no nutrition program in the country  in the university set-up. There was a program in one of the universities  in Gondar, but it was also phased out for a moment. So I was working  with Dr.  Barbara  Stoecker  Regents Professor, Department of  Nutritional Sciences , who was also a member of my graduate advisory  committee. So we were working, gradually developing the curriculum.  She is also trying to pull her friends in   Dr. Gail Gates was my major  advisor, also came to Ethiopia. So we developed this curriculum, which  was approved by the university. We started the master   s program and we  also have students here. So when they return, I think we   ll have much  more strength to really run the program in the way we like.  When did the master   s program start?  It started last year, in 2007. We have now the first ten graduate students  who have finished their coursework. Now they   re working on their  research and we have accepted another twelve new batch. So the need is  there, really. Whenever we advertise for applicants, there are more  applicants who want to join the nutrition program, we cannot accept all  of them  due to limited capacity . So I think, in my opinion, this is a  good beginning which may still continue and be encouraged.  So is the program set up that students enter as a cohort and do the  coursework all together in a group?  Yes, because this time that is what we are doing because we want to  have them finish because it   s not easy to have many instructors. We  have instructors who come from Canada and Germany, also from here.  Dr. Stoecker was there to give a nutrition metabolism course, and  another one came also from New Zealand   Rosalind Gibson  University  of Otago , who is also our partner.  That must be very challenging not only to work with the students in  delivering the instruction that makes up the coursework but then  working with each of them individually on a research project that  they   ve chosen.  8  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Yes.  So is it designed to be a program that   s completed in a two-year period  or a little longer than that?  Normally graduate programs in the university where I am working,  Hawassa University, it is ideally a two year program, but if for some  reason the student cannot finish, it has to be extended until that student  finishes, yes.  I see. So the students that finish this master   s program, what kind of  opportunities are available to them with this advanced degree?  There is huge opportunity now because there is a nutrition strategy  launched in government and policy, and the need to serve is a driving  factor that nutrition professionals are needed urgently. So the need will  be out there. We actually did a needs assessment survey before we  started the program. We asked potential employers and we are confident  there. The results have shown us that at least for the coming ten years we  can produce professionals and it will not be enough.  Well I guess that   s encouraging and discouraging all at the same time,  isn   t it?  Well, we cannot have everything being rosy. We have to face the  challenge   personally, I   m glad because at least it is started and  definitely it is going to contribute for development.  Well let   s go back a little bit to your time while you were a student here  at OSU. You said that you came here in 1999 and you received your  degree in 2003. Is that correct? So you were here for four years.  Yes.  When you came to Stillwater, I   m assuming that it was the first time that  you had been to Oklahoma. What were your general impressions of  Stillwater and of OSU?  Well, I was really happy. I had heard about OSU because of my earlier  student life and to have had American instructors who were teaching in  the home economics program, and I was also studying here before in  West Virginia. It was not as such quite, unexpected thing. I would say I  just fit in. I had Dr. Gates, she was really very much accepting and  encouraging, and Dr. Stoecker. All of my instructors whenever I go to  class, it was fine. I could share my experience in class   graduate  students being more mature also. I had friends from other countries as  9  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  well. So it was good, welcoming, and the situation in the student  orientation, it was very helpful to see what   s expected. The International  Student Office had also a lot of things to tell us. So I think the  orientation program just helped me to fit in.  Great. That   s always a good thing to hear. So you have mentioned Dr.  Gates and Dr. Stoecker a number of times. Tell me a little bit about your  relationship with them and how you have continued to work with them  since you   ve left OSU.  I think before I left, there was one instance where I got a flyer from the  Agriculture College. I was taking one course there. This flyer was saying  if your professor wants to go   you can write a consent note or  something if the professor would like to go to a developing country  where the student lives. I wrote so that one of my professors could go.  When I shared this with Dr. Gail Gates she discussed it with Dr.  Stoecker and we applied for that. Then Dr. Stoecker was able to come to  Ethiopia just for a short time   the first time I went for my field research  work to Ethiopia. So after that, I think Dr. Stoecker also got interested  because of the need, the internal situation.  So we were always writing projects, proposals, trying different methods  of how we can have projects. They have been very helpful and interested  in the cases I was bringing of internal needs. I was always encouraged,  whatever assignment we were doing, I would always bring a case of an  Ethiopian project whenever we took courses. I remember in community  nutrition we had a case study where you had to develop a program where  American students and myself and another one from Latin America,  Marcella, we had this class project. It is that type of project we   re doing  now here in Ethiopia in partnership with nutrition sciences with Dr.  Stoecker and her colleagues.  So your coursework here ended up being a good testing laboratory.  Yes, I think before I came, I was also working and I was also the  department head, I had been lecturing, I had questions   how should this  problem should be challenged? So whenever we were given an  assignment, I was trying to relate with those type of needs.  I think that would be very exciting to   I guess have a situation in mind  with every assignment that you come up with that I can do something  and I can take this back home.  Yes, it is. That is the reality. When I was taking this research  methodology course with Dr. Kathleen Kelsey  Associate Professor and  Distance Learning Director for the Department of Agricultural  10  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Education, Communications and Leadership  from the agricultural  building, she was giving us an assignment to come up with our possible  list of topics. So I was coming up with these topics and she would say,     Yewelsew, these are big, big topics.    So now for the class exercise, she   advises us to  know the techniques. But always I think to go to that  realistic situation, so her course has really also prepared me. She really  challenged us to develop our proposal right when we took the course. So  that was really, really helpful.  Great. I know that one of the things that you and Dr. Stoecker have  worked on is a series of studies about the importance of zinc in neonatal  and childhood nutrition. Could you talk a little bit about that, about  some of your findings and what kind of changes you   ve been able to  make as a result of the knowledge that you   ve gained through those  projects.  Okay. What we did was a proposal, we wrote in collaboration with the  University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, with  Dr.  Michael  Hambidge and Dr. Stoecker, it got funded by NIH   National Institute of  Health here in the U.S.   so our first thing was to conduct a pilot study;  we want to know what is the zinc status with this population. So we had  a pilot study with pregnant women. The results show that these women  are really zinc-deficient. So the literature indicates that zinc is related  with brain development, future learning capacity. So we tried to work  one proposal on development to have intervention   bigger, large  intervention study with zinc supplementation, which is now   we   re  waiting for final approval by the Ethiopian Drug Administration  Committee. So at least the study has shown us the magnitude of the zinc  deficiency with this  study population .  Good. So you have a chance to really   I mean a relatively simple thing  that could make a huge impact on generations of mothers and children.  Definitely, even to really know the exact situation in a scientific manner  is good. The results are published in scientific journals and it   s good to  influence policy, to plan, programs   international programs, to think  about nutrition as a development agenda. I think it has a bigger impact  and because of this project also we have students who get trained here at  OSU to offer them  the capacity  while they finish their master   s degree  and return back home. We have three more here, one PhD and two MS  which, I think, is a very nice thing. When we have more individuals in  the field we can have more impact.  You really broaden your reach, don   t you?  Yes, I think so.  11  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  I notice from your business card that you are not only an Associate  Professor but that you are also Associate Vice President for Research  and Extension at your institution.  That   s right.  That seems like a great deal of responsibility. How do you balance that  activity?  Well, after I returned from OSU, I was serving in the Department of  Rural Development and Family Sciences where I came from. Before I  came to this Associate Vice President for Research office, I was  assigned to be Dean of the College of Agriculture. So there also I was  working a deanship role and teaching as well as other things. After  awhile I was assigned to be the Associate Vice President for Research. I  think balancing your coursework, research and office administration     yes, it takes time but I think my whole time now is devoted to this. I  have a good support from my family. As I mentioned earlier, my spouse  is very supportive and my children are grown up.  It   s a good time in your life to be so busy.  I think so. While sometimes I think had it been in earlier times when you  have young children to look after, I think it would not be very easy as  now.  I   m assuming, but perhaps wrongly, that when you were the dean of the  College of Agriculture, and now in your role as Associate Vice  President, that you   re the first woman to have held either of those titles  at your university.  That   s true.  You haven   t really talked at all about what it   s like to be a woman  operating at this high level in higher education in Ethiopia. Are there  real differences you think because you   re a woman?  I think things have changed and that they are really changing these days.  When it comes to my situation, I don   t know I may be in a different  situation. Starting from childhood, I was always encouraged and I never  felt at all to not do this because I am a woman. I think it could be  because of the support I got from my family and those surrounding me. I  never felt that. Even now, I   ve never felt that I cannot do this because I  am a woman. It doesn   t mean that other women may not have that  problem, but my situation, I think I just feel it is a little bit different. I  think I was lucky. (Laughs)  12  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  What about men   s reaction to your being in these higher level positions?  Since I stayed in the same institution for more than half of my life, for  the last three decades, including my education periods when I was out of  the country, the university is just like a home and the colleagues are like  brothers and sisters. So maybe I don   t know how hard it would look like  if I was working in another institution. I just see them believing in my  work and having the respect. So after I worked like one year and six  months at the dean   s place, I was asked to go to this position so I just  took it as a positive challenge.  I think that your success would have to be very encouraging for young  women that are looking for opportunities within Ethiopia to stay there  and to make a difference. You have talked about Dr. Gates and Dr.  Stoecker being important mentors to you here. Have you had the  opportunity to mentor other women?  Oh yes. My students really   well you could have different students with  different capacities, those who are really outstanding and succeeding and  those who are also having challenge with their grades and failing scores.  Both of them are an equal challenge for me, in my opinion. I should  encourage those who are also succeeding. I should also encourage those  who are failing because failing in grades is not failing in life. There are  still other opportunities. So I think my work as an instructor in the  university and also as office holder has given me an opportunity to share  in what I believe. Try your best who you are   try to help   and there is  nothing I can do in my capacity, but whatever I can I try to really  support my counterparts, female students.  How often do you have a chance to return to the OSU campus?  I have come two or three times. After I graduated and I went back home,  I came for a conference and I had a chance to stop over here. When we  go to a conference   last year also I was going to Canada and on the way  back, I stopped here.  Since you were so close, right? (Laughs)  I know. I was going to Atlanta so I met with Dr. Stoecker. Coming back  to OSU is just like coming back home really.  You   ve started this master   s program in Applied Human Nutrition in  Ethiopia; you   re in southern Ethiopia, is that true? Is this a program  that   s serving as a model for other countries in Africa?  Well, this is a good program. It   s applied human nutrition, so we want it  13  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  to be really applicable first to the local situation. We have written a  project with a German University that if it is funded, our proposal has  passed the first stage so that program is trying to make an East African  program involving Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, and with Ethiopia, to  have a program where students can share experiences where our students  go to other countries, faculty members also come here   exchange. The  nutritional challenge remains to be the same, in my opinion, specific for  food habits and so on. We have proposed that project. We   re just  crossing our fingers; if it gets funded, that will be wonderful to have an  East African program.  So for this round of funding that you   re competing for, when do you  expect to know?  Our collaborator has informed me that the first concept note selection  was successful and I think we are waiting two to three months. Another  thing which we are hoping for is that U.S. and African universities can  collaborate on future projects; that would be wonderful if it gets funded  and to work in collaboration with U.S. universities. I think there will be  a meeting soon in Rwanda, our university president is also going and I  know faculty members from here, including Dr. Stoecker, they are going  to discuss future projects.  Yes, she mentioned to me earlier this week that she was going to  Rwanda but she didn   t say for what.  This is for this purpose and that will be really great to exchange. You  can do lots of things by having collaborative projects like this.  So what do you see as the biggest challenges ahead for you and the work  that you   re doing at your university and within Ethiopia?  I think the biggest challenge is really to have the human capital. We  need to have individuals trained in different fields when it comes to  nutrition. Of course we need to have nutrition professionals, but much  beyond this. It   s always nice to have really trained individuals doing the  job back home and to have real capacity in terms of different facilities. If  the work environment is attractive and you can do your research activity,  I think you can serve the best. So I think the challenge is really to create  an environment that really attracts professionals to serve and to work on  local problems and to think also ahead to face future challenges.  Do most of the students from Ethiopia that go abroad to study return?  Do you have any sense of that?  That was a challenge, but luckily on this project I   m happy two of our  14  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  graduates have returned back that Dr. Stoecker is advising. They just  went back and we are hoping the other students will also come. They are  working on their research project on local problems. They are coming  for their field research, so I hope it is working quite well.  I   m just curious, for some of the students that you   ve been involved with  that come here and work on a master   s degree   or you mentioned that  there were one or two that were currently working on PhD   s   do they  define their research problems themselves or is there some sort of  discussion about    This would be a really excellent project that would  really meet a local need?   Or is it a combination of both?  Actually, it   s a combination of both, but based on my experience it is a  student who chooses the topic because it   s a learning gateway to the  learning experience that matters first. But if there is already a running  project that has been going on there and if the student can relate with  that project, that is even much worthwhile. You are doing what   s the  most cost-effective and time wise also, so the student is learning the  techniques, but his interest is also considered.  Do you have any advice for students coming from Ethiopia to the U.S. or  elsewhere that are pursuing a graduate degree? And tell me some of the  things that you think have helped you be so successful.  I think for students who want to come for a graduate degree to OSU or  any other U.S. university, the first thing they have to take is the TOEFL  exam, this test of English      The proficiency?  Yes, proficiency, TOEFL  Test of English as a Foreign Language  exam,  and for graduate degrees they need to take a GRE exam also which is  given in the country. Other things, they have to look now in terms of  facilities available, they have to search through different university  websites. Look for possible researchers if the information is available     they can write it themselves, they have to tell their interests, what they  need and if they write, I think there is always a letter back:    I   m sorry, I  cannot, I don   t have the funds    or    You do this or do that.    So they have  to try. One has to try to write before they come. Also, it would be good  to have a pre-planned type of, what is it that I want to learn? What  research is what I want to do? This type of preparedness would be  helpful, I believe.  So do you mind telling me a little bit about your own family? You  mentioned your husband and that you have children. What do they do?  15  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  My husband, professionally he studied automotive engineering, and he  was also working as a farm manager. He was trained in Germany. That  time I took my turn to keep the family. I have three children. My  firstborn is Biniam (Benjamin). Actually, Biniam got his MS also here at  OSU.  Oh, he did?  The same advice I was trying to give to other students based on your  question, I told Biniam to write to his faculty members here with his  discipline. He finished his BSC in electrical engineering in Ethiopia. So  he wrote here and he got accepted. He took his TOEFL and GRE. So as  a matter of fact, we graduated the same day and I was always telling  him,    I   m glad you didn   t beat me somehow     (Laughter)  How wonderful   Yea. Bethlehem, who is in Ethiopia, she is also working. She studied  sociology. My last born, Efrem, he just joined the university this year.  So I have three children, and I have two grandchildren. My firstborn,  Biniam, and my daughter Bethlehem, they  each  got married and now  they have their children, which I   m very pleased to see.  So does he work as an electrical engineer?  He   s now working in Atlanta.  Oh, he is? Okay.  Yes, and my daughter is in Ethiopia, and the last one is in the university  now.  Well, that   s very exciting. It seems like the College of Human  Environmental Sciences has done a very good job of keeping you  involved and staying involved with you. Could you comment on that at  all?  I think this is very important. I always say graduation shouldn   t be the  end. I think graduation or finishing a program at a certain university  should be the beginning to start a different path or project for the future.  One thing you always learn   I always feel myself, I   m still, I get good  support. I can always go back and ask for different support. This chance  is also the result of collaboration so I think it   s always good to continue  to have a real partnership to work for development and to have some  meaningful activity. So it   s very important to invest in the students as  well as for the students to refer back, you know.  16  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Paustenbaugh  Yewelsew  Is there anything that you wish that I had asked you about that I didn   t?  You have asked me the questions and if there is anything which I didn   t  respond, you could ask me   but I   m really happy and glad to be back  and be part of OSU and I really look forward to further partnership and  collaboration.  I think one thing that I wanted to mention is the fact that the College of  Human Environmental Sciences has named you one of their two  distinguished alumni for this year. How does that make you feel to  receive that recognition from the university?  I feel really humbled and privileged. I never expected it. I think this is a  big honor which I   m very much thankful. This award is really very big.  This is an opportunity. I accept it with humbleness to serve better and to  see future aspects as well.  Well good. Is that banquet tonight?  It   s today, yes.  Well, congratulations on that award. It sounds like it   s very well  deserved and my sense is that you are a very modest person   that  there   s lots more that you could have told me about your  accomplishments, but I appreciate the time that you spent with me today.  Thank you very much, and it   s my pleasure indeed.  -------  -------   
