 Gill. Today is December 31, 2008. I   m visiting with  Phil Glasgow in Oklahoma City. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories project which is part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Phil, I know you   re on vacation here in Oklahoma City and  we appreciate you taking the time for us to visit. For the audience, you  and I have known each other several years, so there may be some asides  that aren   t understood in our conversation..  If they   re not a book salesman.  That   s right. Primarily, Phil, I wanted to interview you as part of a  formal Pistol Pete mascot series that we   re doing. But before we get into  that I might just back up and ask you a little bit about your background,  some things that influenced you in your early life, in your childhood?  I was born in Vinita, Oklahoma. My dad was a Baptist preacher   the  King James version. You know, the kind that says,    Awe, Phillipeth, my  soneth.    (Laughter) Anyway we moved to Wagoner, Oklahoma when I  was almost six years old. I went through grade school, junior high and  high school all in Wagoner, Oklahoma. Graduated    Outstanding Senior  Boy    in 1960 in Wagoner, Oklahoma. Of course there weren   t very  many boys there so somebody had to have it. Played football, basketball,  I did pole vaulting, track; very involved. Wagoner, Oklahoma was a  very special place to me.  Didn   t know anything about college. There was no one who would sit  down with students and help with college choices or a career. My folks  were poor, and we didn   t even know it  But I did know that I had to  work and go to college. The night of my high school graduation, I met a  fellow by the name of Allen Seals from Cushing, Oklahoma. He had a  photo service company that did lots of Party Pix here at OSU. Allen had  flown his little private plane to Wagoner and taken pictures of our  5  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  graduation. His sister was one of our teachers, and I was the school  photographer. I had learned to use one of those big old 4x5 speed  graphics.  So Allen asked me if I would like to leave THAT NIGHT   get on his  plane and live in Cushing, to be a photographer  He said he would teach  me, and I could help him at Party Pix at OSU. O thought,    This is  heaven     We talked to Mom and Dad, and I left that night to go to  Cushing for the summer. It was quite interesting.  I was working alongside a school teacher, and one day he asked me,     What are you going to do? What are you going to be?    I said,    I   m not  sure.    He asked me what I was good at, and I said math and art. He  responded,    Sounds like an architectural engineer.    And I said,    Then,  okay     That was how I made my career choice   I knew I didn   t have enough money to attend a big engineering school,  so I worked at Safeway Grocery Store in Wagoner   and commuted to  Northeastern State College for two years. I worked very hard  A friend  of mine was going to OSU, and he took me to a function here. I fell in  love with it instantly    the architecture, the beauty, the campus. I started  investigating and learned about the School of Architecture in Gunderson  Hall.  I enrolled, had saved a little money, and borrowed some more. I couldn   t  afford rent anywhere, so I bought a small used trailer, parked it on the  outside of downtown in a little trailer park. It had a kerosene heater, so  my clothes smells all the time  The bed would keep falling, and I would  prop it up   and it would fall again in the middle of the night   And who is was this?  Me. By myself. No one else. Just me. And I had an old car that was a big  old Oldsmobile. It was huge. It was an old one that my folks had. They  said,    We don   t have much, but take this car.     Please. (Laughter)  You know my father was such a good man. Man, he had tears in his  eyes.    Don   t have much. Here.    Came and helped set up this trailer.  That   s more emotional. I just remember him leaving. Boy, he had tears  in his eyes and he said,    I wish we could do more.    Greatest thing that  ever happened to me because I learned to stand on my own two feet. I  learned that no situation is too bad. So anyway, I lived there and traveled  in. I worked at Safeway grocery store and got involved in the School of  Architecture. During one of my first design courses, I recognized that I  6  loved design. Those engineering students studied all of the time. I didn   t  have all that time. I was working at Safeway grocery store at night.  They have what they call charette. Are you familiar with that? That   s  when they give you a problem. They will not let you go down on the  board  to present  until they   re ready. They want you to have to go  through night after night, just like real practice.  So here we are, my first charette in the snake pit over at Gunderson Hall.  It   s hard to believe but I went on the board Sunday night and I did not go  to bed until the next Saturday morning at noon after I turned in the  problem. And Bob Heatly, I   ll never forget, in fact he ended up being a  professor in the School of Architecture, but he was one of the guys. We  went over to eat breakfast after we turned in our project and I remember  him sitting there looking at those pancakes and I remember his head  going (boom) right into the pancakes. He just went to sleep  (Laughter)  And I thought,    Wow.     But I decided I loved design and I knew that engineering was not where  I was going to be. The creative juices weren   t going to be there as much.  So I decided I was going to be an architect. Went through school. What I  discovered was, the School of Architecture was a five year school; it  didn   t matter if you went to Northeastern State College for two years or  not. And here again, being a kid from Wagoner, Oklahoma just because  I didn   t know any better I think I graduated with over 200 hours. Just  simply because I didn   t know any better. I still had a five year school I  had to go through. I was able to do that five years in only six years. I had  to drop out twice. I had to quit working at Safeway grocery store  because you can   t stay up all night long and still work at Safeway and go  to class and so forth. It was impossible. So my first summer, Spencer  Hayes, who you know, was at the hotel, OSU   s hotel there. There was a  room and he was recruiting all these guys. Bill Swindler was my sales  manager or crew leader. I went out the first summer with R. L. Calhoun.  Now R.L. Calhoun had gone out the summer before and he failed. They  sent me out with him and we went to Kokomo, Indiana and for three and  a half weeks I went out scared to death. I made a lot of money my first  three and a half weeks.  And then one weekend R.L. and I went down to some Sears and saw a  set of golf clubs which I had never had and we bought a little set of golf  clubs (laughs) and we got off schedule. I remember I was saying,    I   ve  got to get back on schedule. I   ve got to make the money. I   ve got to go  to school.    And as I would leave every morning he   d stay in bed. I   d  jump up and he   d be upstairs in Mom Gedley   s house on Washington  Street in Kokomo, Indiana. He   d open that window and he   d holler out,     See you at the golf course     and it was so difficult. After my whole  7  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  summer, I owed them  23. I didn   t make a dime.  Spencer Hayes talked me into signing to come back the next summer.  He   s good. (Laughs) They allowed me to take some guys and I ruined  every one of them. And that summer I did better. I only lost 300 and  some odd dollars. And you gotta understand, here   s a kid from Wagoner,  Oklahoma that needs the money and he   s learning a lot about himself  and about what it takes to succeed. At the end of that summer I   m  writing a check and I have no money. I have to drop out of school and I  have to work that year so I could make enough money to pay him that  300 and some odd dollars, save a little bit of money and figure out how  I   m going to get back into school. And low and behold Spencer Hayes  loans me some money to pay him back at the end of my third year.  He talked me into coming back the third year and this time he sent me  with a guy with the name of Joe Bailey Hiden. Joe Bailey Hiden is a trial  lawyer in Dallas, Texas. One of the brightest, sharpest guys I   ve ever  known. And that year I saved over  3500. And that may not have been  the best, but for me that was success. I had turned some things around.  And Jerry, that   s a great lesson for me, was that Spencer would say,    We  know why you didn   t make it. You know why you didn   t make it, and  those are the things that you   re going to confront for the rest of your life.  You can either whip them now, or you   ll fight them for the rest of your  life,    and I knew he was right. But my dad on the other hand was saying,     Son, you don   t have the money. That company is taking your money.  What they   re doing is they   re making money at your expense.    And I  said,    Dad, I do know that it   s my fault, not the company   s fault.     So the fourth summer I took out a crew and I did very well. In fact, I  think I made like  8500. The third summer I think I ended up making  about  13,500 which Jerry, as you well know in today   s money, that   s  well over  50,000 in a summer. Was the number three salesman in the  company and all those things. Had a top ten organization. Had a top ten  crew. You know, those type of things and to me, the money was not  nearly as important as what I learned. At the same time I   m going to  school getting my degree in architecture. So I   d get two educations. One  in the summer and one from Oklahoma State.  What was the year were you Pistol Pete?  That was    65.  That was your second year?  No, it was my third.  8  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Do you remember the first time you knew about Pistol Pete? And when  did you first think you wanted to be Pistol Pete?  Well one of the great activities for any student that doesn   t have a lot of  money is still on Saturday, that game, getting ready, having a date,  going. Athletics at Oklahoma State, that is one of the biggest activities  you can use. And when you see that, when you see that football field, if  you   re from Wagoner, Oklahoma, if you see the color and the music and  the cheerleaders and Pistol Pete and the football team and you see all  these things going on, it   s just my nature. I   m interested. Count me in.  Whatever the question is my answer is yes  Let   s do it  And I   m seeing  that and thinking,    How can I be a part of that? I   m not going to be in  the band. I   m too fast and good to be on the football team.    (Laughter)  (Which is not true.) But I thought, that   s something. They were going to  have tryouts and qualifications and a committee and everything you had  to do. So I asked,    What do you do? How do you become a Pistol Pete?     I contacted them. I filled out an application and did all of the things they  asked me to do with the process and so forth and low and behold, to my  surprise, they picked me. And boy what a thrill. Probably one of the  greatest thrills of my education was being Pistol Pete.  Did you know any of the former Petes?  Did not.  Have any connection?  Did not.  Where did it first come into your mind that you   d like to be a Pete?  Well Kappa Sig. I had already gone to school at Northeastern State  College in Tahlequah. After I had been here about a year, maybe two,  there were some guys   I wasn   t your typical person to rush in a  fraternity. And here I was, already I was four years older than the  average freshman who comes in to be rushed. But a bunch of the guys at  Kappa Sig wanted me to come and I was doing entertaining, I was  playing the guitar and Dave Hitchcock, Jerry Holcomb, he played the  upright bass and we were doing the Smothers Brothers. (Laughter)  People were asking us to come to perform in their church and the BSU  and somebody would hear us and they would want us to come over there  to do a little bit. We weren   t smart enough to charge  And we weren   t  good enough to be paid. But we had a lot of fun and we were asked to do  a lot of different things.  So the Kappa Sigs, because we entertained, they started gravitating and  9  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Jerry Hawkins was already a member of the fraternity and they started  rushing us and I became a pledge. My problem was that I lived off  campus, this was the third year because I had already moved out of the  trailer into an apartment there. Going to the School of Architecture,  being up there night after night, the amount of hours you were there for  each lab was quite extensive.  As a pledge they were asking us to do a lot of things. The burlap and all  these different retreats and I said,    You know what, I can   t do this. I love  what ya   ll do and so forth but I   m not going to pledge. I   m not the guy  for Kappa Sig.    So I did not become a member of that fraternity.  Nothing against it, it   s a great fraternity. It just wasn   t for me. I was too  far along and too serious about what I was trying to do. Had enough  problems of my own  So at that time though was when I first started  looking at Pistol Pete. It was right after that. I wanted to be involved and  a part of the university. But I was really just a small town guy still trying  to figure out my way and being Pistol Pete was the first thing I was  really going to be able to contribute to be a part of this university.  Wasn   t smart enough to be Blue Key, nobody was going to ask me to do  these other things. My temperament was not going to allow me to go  through being a member of a fraternity and time wise. So this was my  opportunity.  What do you remember about the try-out process? What did they ask you  to do as part of the process?  I just remember there were a number of people asking me a lot of  different questions.    What would you do in this case? What would you  do in that case? What do you think of the last Pistol Pete? What did you  see that you liked? What did you see that you think you could do  better?    I   m sure there were a lot of other questions, Jerry, but I   m not  sure what they were. It was a number of years ago.  You didn   t have to act our or pantomime anything?  No, and I didn   t know any better, but I will say this: when I did become  Pistol Pete, I took that very, very seriously. I did some things that no  other Pistol Pete did. That   s my over achiever within me. I did some  things and I will bring up an interesting story here in a little bit.  Let me ask you a couple of things. Sort of the evolution, this is    65 to     66. In that year, how was Pete recognized at that time?  He was popular. He was an icon, but not as much so. There was still the  story of how Pistol Pete came about. A fellow from Ripley, Oklahoma  coming to town with his guns, nobody can take them away from him.  10  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  But now from what I understand, they actually have two Petes and that   s  because they have so many functions; they didn   t have that when I was  Pistol Pete. But I will say this, I don   t know if I had any influence in that  or not, but when people would realize I was Pete or they would say,     That   s Pistol Pete,    I   d say,    Yes.    And then if it was an organization  and so forth, I would volunteer and say,    Listen, if you all have  anything, I   ll show up if you   d like for me too.    And so I did go to some  functions, but instead of people coming to me, there were a number that  I went to where people did ask, but because of that, I thought there ought  to be more. And because of that, what I would do in a way would market  myself to whatever organization that they might be a member of. People  would say,    Are you Pistol Pete?    I would find out if they   re a part of an  organization because I felt like it raised the visibility of an icon at  Oklahoma State University. Pistol Pete, I think, is the greatest mascot in  college sports today.  Do you remember or recall how many events in a year between athletic  events and personal events that you made?  All the football, all the basketball, all the wrestling. However, I didn   t  attend baseball, and I didn   t attend things like tennis   some of those I  didn   t know any better. If I were to do it over, I would find out every  sporting event there was and encourage students. Because some of those  sports aren   t as well attended and I think that anything that creates more  spirit or whatever, at the time, I guess I just wasn   t smart enough to do  that.  In    65, there was evolvement in terms of who you reported to. Who did  you report to? What person or what unit? It wasn   t athletics, was it?  No, the cheerleaders   I just kind of showed up. I didn   t have anybody to  report to. They told me we were going to Boulder, Colorado. My first  event, we went to Little Rock, Arkansas and we played Arkansas the  first game of the year, in Little Rock Memorial Stadium, I think it was.  And all I remember was that when we were in Arkansas we had that  head in the back of a car that had Oklahoma on the license place and that  is a very hostile environment that we went into. I remember that  whoever the mascot was for Arkansas asked me to do something, I was  always a little contrary and I   d shoot blanks at them. I was not going to  be their whipping boy for their show for their hometown. I remember  that. Now your question was, those events, plus I   m going to guess that  at the most we may have had 20 to 30 events outside of that. Now I  know they   ve got hundreds and hundreds which I think is wonderful.  But back then we had 20, 30 at the most.  In addition to the athletic events, can you tell me a little bit about   was  11  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  there any compensation that you got at all? Did they pay your expenses  when you traveled?  Well, yeah, they paid our travel expenses. They didn   t give us a stipend  or anything. We didn   t get paid anything. We just did it.  You were with the spirit squad and the cheerleaders?  Yes and if you want experiences as Pistol Pete I   ll let you know  whenever you   re ready, because we   ve got a number of them.  I bet you do. Well what about your uniform then? Can you tell me a little  bit about the head, the uniform you wore?  It   s not as good as the one they   ve got now. It was papier-m  ch   and it  was really really heavy. A lot heavier than the one they   ve got now. And  the reason I know that is one of the Homecomings they had us come  down and put them on, and that head was heavy and it had been banged  around a lot. It still looked good. But it was big and it was heavy and  I   m telling you at the time I took that pretty serious. So at the end of the  game, I couldn   t go anywhere. I mean I was just out. I was exhausted. I  worked hard at it.  Your uniform, what did they buy for you?  The vest, the chaps, the guns, which I used one time outside of an  athletic event. It was in my apartment when a friend of mine was  sleeping. (Laughter) I shot the gun and I thought he was having a heart  attack.  Was it anything that you thought it would be to be a Pistol Pete, what  your actual experience was?  In retrospect, yes. During the time, no. Afterwards, looking back on it, it  was everything I thought   plus more. It was a real honor. Again, I think  that Pistol Pete is one of the greatest icons in college sports. At the time,  I worked hard enough at it that my mind was always on    What can I do?  How can I contribute? What can I do that nobody else has ever done?     And it led to a number of the experiences.  Do you remember the first event, was it the one in Arkansas? That   s the  first one?  That   s it.  And I   ll pick up on some special memories in a minute. What did you try  12  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  to create as part of Pistol Pete? Did you develop a swagger? What did  you try to bring to Pistol Pete?  Energy and entertainment. More than just being a mascot, but an  entertainment. The Arkansas game, I   ll just mention this one thing, the  wrestling coach who became the athletic director     Myron Roderick.  Myron Roderick. Not too tall. I drove to Arkansas with him in the  backseat. And on the way back, he curled up and went to sleep on that  seat   the back seat with me there   and did not touch me in anyway,  that   s how small he was. I   ll never forget that with Myron Roderick.  (Laughter) Entertainment and a lot of energy. What I did was   as heavy  as our head was, it was difficult to really be athletic, but I worked at it  and I would jump and click my heels and do all kinds of things. And  from there, to kind of give you the idea of the entertainment, when we  were playing the Missouri Tigers, they had two mascots   two tigers. I  would always try to get the crowd going with me. I would try to get kids,  I would give them empty  gun  shells and things like this and I would go  around and try to secretly get around to the other side and try to see if I  could get the crowd going with me as I would move and do different  things. I got up behind those two Missouri Tigers and had the crowd and  they hadn   t seen me yet. I reached out and I was going to pull the tiger   s  tail. I pulled it off. And (laughs) they turned around and I   m standing  there holding this tail  I didn   t know what to do. I throw it and I   m  running with this head with them chasing me. I   m running around the  track as fast as I could. Of course the crowd is going wild. They are  absolutely going crazy, you know.  So years later, at a Homecoming, when I had my family there with me,  they had invited me down on the field and I said,    Well I really can   t go  because my kids want to go and we   re not allowed and they   re not  allowed.    And they said,    You follow me Pete, you bring those kids and  you follow me.    We go down there and this is when   who   s the running  back for Detroit that was so good?  Barry Sanders.  It was the year that Barry Sanders was playing. We go down there and  they put the vest and the chaps   I had cowboy boots and jeans and so     but they put that on me and they put the head on me. And so I   m down  there, I   m going to show my kids what I used to do so that they see what  I used to do. So I   m out there and I   m giving it all I got. For an older guy  I   m giving it all I got. And all of a sudden this guy comes up and says,     Pete, keep doing what you   re doing. We   re going to take some  13  Gill  Glasgow  pictures.    So you look through that screen and I said,    I   m not really  Pete.    And he says,    Doesn   t matter. Keep going     So what happened  was, we got a picture of me in the end zone, my kids were there and so I  have a picture of that.  Picking up on some of your memories, what was perhaps your most  humorous event? You pulled the tail off the tiger, can you share with us  some more special memories?  I do remember this. I laugh about it, but at the time I was scared to  death. We went up to Boulder and I was told they were one of the most  hostile crowds of any team that we played. And in fact, what happened  was, I had gone down and we didn   t have anybody from Oklahoma  there, you know. So I had gone down and I got a bunch of the Colorado  kids down in the end zone and I had them all hollering,    Go State, beat  Colorado     People didn   t like this at all and I became a target. So they   re  booing the cheerleaders and myself and so forth and they came over  there saying,    Now guys, Pete, you need to quit shooting guns. There   s a  lot of people here, that   s a hostile crowd. You   re not safe.    Well all of a  sudden, I   m thinking,    Well whoa, with this head,    I   ve been told    you  do not take the head off.    And I   m going over to the cheerleaders and I  said,    Look, what do you do if there   s a mob action and so forth?    and I  swear what they said was,    We   re to go standby our pom poms.     (Laughter) And I said,    Well wait, this is not helping me. I have no pom  poms, number one.     So here we are at the end of the game, and the crowd is not good. And  they said don   t worry about it and I would say about two minutes, three  minutes before the end of the game, there   s this line of Pinkerton  detectives. They   re all dressed the same. They   ve got something under  their coat that makes a stiff thing like this. They surround the end of that  field and I   m jumping and shooting my guns  (Laughter) But I just  remember,    Go stand by your pom poms.    That   s one memory I  remember.  We played Tulsa and that   s when Howard Twilley, I believe, was  receiver. Jerry Rhome was the quarterback? I remember at the end of the  game I used to go outside the stadium and I would find buses with kids  and I   d be going and the kids would be going. There   s this car of Tulsa  students that were not too happy. And evidently they thought they were  just going to brush me, well I kind of take a little step back and they hit  me and it flips me and my head comes off. And of course, the little kids  everywhere,    Oh  Pistol Pete     (Laughter) I just remember grabbing that  head, putting it back on and jumping up and down and shooting the guns  and so forth. But I   ll never forget that it absolutely flipped me and the  head came off.  14  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  One of the things that happened was the band director, he calls me once  and he says,    I want to visit with you. We   ve been noticing some of the  things that you do. Well we really like what you do. And here   s what we  want to do, we want to invite you to become part of our half-time show.  We   re giving you carte blanche, you can do whatever you want to do.     And I   m thinking,    Wow.    And I said,    Well what are you doing?    He  said,    Well just do what comes naturally.    I said,    Well and others don   t  plan anything?    and he said,    We have all the confidence in the world,  we   ve been watching you.    And I said,    Wow.     I   m thinking here   s the half-time show, where am I supposed to stand,  what I   m going to do? Well they played the 1812 overture. And so what  I do, you know, the guns are going off and I   m acting, fighting and so  forth. At the end moment, I   m crawling down the field like this like I   m  dying and so forth and I have a ball. I mean I just had a ball in the whole  show. Well it went over so big that they called me and they said,    Look,  we decided we   re going to repeat that at OU the next weekend. We want  you to do the same thing you did here. It was a big hit with the crowd.     That   s when we played OU   we beat them.  At Norman, the first time in 19 years?  Yes.  How was that feeling?  I   m going to tell you  One is, I think that any school that has roughnecks  ought to be outlawed from college sports. Those guys, they   re awful.  That   s just horrible, those roughnecks. I don   t know how anybody can  have them. Of course, I   m an Oklahoma State Cowboy, so you can  imagine my feeling toward them. But here   s what happened: at the end  of the game, they started running at me trying to get the guns. They  started running and trying to hit me and they were trying to surround me  and it took me, the best I can estimate, an hour to get off that field. Of  course, we had a lot of excited people out on the field. I   m trying to get  off the field and I   m pretty scared, because again, I honored the    Don   t  take the head off. Pete doesn   t take his head off.    But I just remember, I  was a little worried. I didn   t know what might happen to me there. But,  it was great getting to be a part. I guess I became part of everything that  they hated that time since I was a big part of that show, thanks to the  band director  (Laughter) He almost got me killed   You mentioned earlier how special Pistol Pete is as a mascot. He  represents Frank Eaton.  Absolutely.  15  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  In your mind, how is he unique to college mascots? And how does he  represent OSU and Oklahoma?  Well I think there   s a legend there. I think anything that   s legendary is  overweighed. And I think because of his legend in Stillwater, getting off  that bus, never being able to take off his guns, and being the Oklahoma  State Cowboys, I think, at a time where it was no longer Oklahoma  A M, but it was Oklahoma State University, I think that everything  worked. It was like the perfect storm. I think that everything worked  together to make that an ideal    It wasn   t like a bunch of people got  together and said,    What should we do?       Let   s have a cowboy and let   s  manufacture a head and let   s call him Pistol Pete.       Hey, good idea,  we   ll give you a gift certificate.    It actually came from something. And  it came from something that was meaningful, that was legendary and I  think it will always be that way.  What do you think Pistol Pete represents to OSU alumni fans?  He represents the song that they sing at the end of the game. He  represents the school spirit that you have while you   re going to school  and you never lose. Every student that has ever graduated from here,  when they   for instance, when I meet someone in Knoxville, Tennessee  that went to Oklahoma State University, I don   t want to boast, but I can   t  help but say,    Before you were born, I was Pistol Pete.    (Laughter) And  immediately,    Really?     and then they start turning and telling other  people who Pistol Pete is. Pistol Pete is important to every student that  went to Oklahoma State University. I may not be able to articulate how  important he is to the college, to the Alumni, and to every student that  will ever go there. You know, I think that they cannot remember the  cheerleaders and the names of the cheerleaders back when they went to  school. Many students do not know the names of those cheerleaders, but  they know Pistol Pete and he is the symbol. About everything that  Oklahoma State University puts out has Pistol Pete on it.  So is it special to you that Pete is a real life person as opposed to a  made up buckeye or some animal, a tiger? That he really lived and  represented the old west and Oklahoma and traditions. Is that important  to OSU?  It   s like Wyatt Earp and Doc Holiday. They were real. Roy Rogers is  important, but he wasn   t a real cowboy  Pistol Pete   s a real cowboy. It   s  not a made up mascot. He   s a real cowboy.  Going back, you were talking about some of your special memories and  moments. Are there embarrassing moments that you recall?  16  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Bill Lamb was a wrestler for OU. I remember a wrestling match where  we won. Boy, I wish I could remember all the names. We had some  great wrestlers. I remember Bill Lamb   he was a great wrestler also. We  won that match and I jumped up on where they wrestled and I   m up  there jumping around and so forth and he is such a competitor that he  could not take it. He ran over and kicked me. I did not know what  happened. All I knew was that all of a sudden I felt this sharp pain in my  leg and I just kind of buckled. I found out that it was Bill Lamb and then  all kinds of people were going to take up for me and so forth. Well that  was a little bit embarrassing. I didn   t know what it was, I didn   t know  how to react. I was ashamed that I was in that situation. There was a lot  of turmoil, and that   s not good. A mascot isn   t supposed to produce that.  Again, it was my fault, but it still was not a situation that any mascot for  a university would say,    Look what   s going on. It   s because of me.    A  little bit embarrassing.  I remember that night, I was at Hideaway Pizza. And I remember these  guys walked up that knew that I was Pete, and they said something to the  effect,    We almost went up there and took Lamb on,    and I thought,     You stupid idiots. Thanks a lot  You   re talking big at Hideaway Pizza.  Bill Lamb would cream your crop.    I will say this, another thing that  was a little bit embarrassing. Our coach at the time, basketball coach  Hank Iba, he allowed me to put socks over my shoes. I went to him and I  said,    Coach, I don   t want to interfere with the guys getting ready for the  game and so forth, but I still would like to be able to get the crowd going  a little bit early while you   re warming up. If I put socks over my boots,  could I do layups with the team?    (Laughter) Now I was pretty serious  about basketball. He looked at me and he says,    Okay. Give it a shot.     He allowed me to do it every game after that. What I would do, now you  can imagine how slick it is with socks and trying to do lay-ups. And of  course the crowd loved it especially if I made one, which I couldn   t see.  I would look and try to judge it   s up there but when you   re up there,  you   re doing like this, but you can   t go like this and look. So if I made  one, the crowd would go wild and so forth.  That   s great. You were kind of known at your time for innovating in a lot  of ways, in the characteristics that you portrayed as Pete and you  mentioned some things you did earlier. Again, can you summarize some  of the specific things you tried to create, some of the things that you did  that were different   your swagger, your walk, different things?  Have you ever had Pistol Pete play the guitar? (Laughter) Cowboys can  sing western songs. Mine were a little hilarious, you know it   s not Gene  Autry singing. Sometimes at a little function, I would show up with a  guitar and things like that. The main thing was the amount of energy I  exerted constantly. I didn   t sit. I was always proactive, always moving. I  17  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  felt like it was important that you don   t just stand there. You don   t just  watch the game. Although when Gil Sears is running and you see him  stop and everybody is diving over there and he goes up, you had to  watch that  And there were some great players at the time that I was  Pistol Pete. We had games against some really great football players.  And of course, as you know, that   s a part of your memories are some of  these are the best players in the world   ever. So never stop moving,  always be active, try to do something creative, athletic, that looks like  the guy with that big head ought not to be not doing that. Running,  sneaking, getting people, getting groups doing something, getting some  dynamics going. But that   s just who I am, you know.  A lot of Pete   s that I talked to alluded to the special nature of Pete to  children. Can you speak to that a little bit?  Oh, absolutely. That   s why I always went for the buses. If you had a bus  that had a lot of school students on it, especially young ones, they loved  it. To show interest in them, to go out of the way to show interest in  them, I think every Pete gives away shells. I used to just hoard shells  that I could give away and try to get something going and get their spirit  going. Get them to chanting and always trying to get something stirred  up. (Laughs)  Did you ever get asked to do photographs and autographs?  Yeah. And like anyone, you would never fail to do that. You would  never, ever, deny a request. I don   t think you   d ever have a Pistol Pete,  ever in the history of Oklahoma State University that would ever deny  that. That   s so special.  One of the Petes told me you had to be careful about stepping on the  kids because of your vision.  You can   t see them. They   re so short and it   s hard to tilt forward and see  them. Especially in the old head we had. I found the head that I wore  during Homecoming; I found that head to be a little bit more mobile,  that you could manipulate it a little bit better, but still it   s hard to do.  That   s a big head. Still is. And ours was extremely heavy back then; just  real heavy.  Is there a special sense of responsibility that you had representing  Oklahoma State University as Pistol Pete?  Yeah, absolutely.  Can you describe that?  18  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Well if you take a kid from Wagoner, Oklahoma that had no money,  scrambling to get through school the best way he could, that gets to be  that part of Oklahoma State University, that gets to be the icon of all  sporting events, somehow in the back of my mind, I recognized that long  after I left this school, that that would be a focal point of everything.  Now don   t get me wrong, it   s never going to take away the greatness of  our football team, it   s never going to take away the greatness of our  coaching, it   s never going to take away from the stature of T. Boone  Pickens and all of this. What I   m saying is, that even those, all of that,  there   ll be a Pistol Pete. There   ll be an emblem, there   ll be a symbol,  there   ll be a picture somewhere of that icon as people identify that with  our university. It was very important. So I felt a certain weight of that  responsibility, to be what I could be to make sure that it was the best it  could possibly be.  Did it affect you the times you weren   t on the field that you didn   t have  on the outfit?  Oh yeah. It affected my dating life. I was so tired I couldn   t date  You  bet it affected me. I was a young man, I mean, you know. (Laughs) Off  the field, I was a youth director at First Baptist Church in Stillwater for a  couple of years. I also was the music director at the First Baptist Church  halfway between here and Interstate 35, a little town there. I actually  was their music director for a short period of time and then the First  Baptist Church of Guthrie, Oklahoma I would drive up there on Sunday  morning and lead the music there some. And what I found was, that the  people when they found out that I was Pistol Pete   the pastor would say  something, or somebody would say something and so forth   when they  would find that out and especially the youth at First Baptist Church in  Stillwater, that was a big deal that their youth director was Pistol Pete. I  mean I didn   t have to be that good of a youth director because I was  Pistol Pete  (Laughter) Made it easy for me.  What does it mean to you now, looking back, that you were Pistol Pete?  That coat that they gave away this year that was made available to all of  the prior Pistol Petes; it   s my understanding that they   ve never let  anybody have a copy of the letter jacket unless they   ve won a letter at  Oklahoma State University. But for the first time, they let all of the old  Pistol Pete   s have that letter jacket with a Pistol Pete on it. That was  huge. Huge. You know, as I get older, I lose a lot of memory, but I don   t  lose any memory about Pistol Pete. I can remember it as vivid today as it  was back then. It   s just that great. I   m 66 years old and it   s still very  vivid.  How did you manage all that? Your youth activities at the churches, you  19  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  had a pretty demanding curriculum in architecture and Pistol Pete. How  did you balance all of that?  I don   t know the answer to that, Jerry. I didn   t have any plan on how to  manage it. I just did what I had to do when I had to do it as much as I  could. One is, they paid me to be youth director, they paid me to be  music director. I took that job just as serious as anything else, and I felt  like I did a really good job of it. I had a close knit group of young  people. I was involved at the Baptist Student Center. That was important  to me. My faith is extremely important to me. Being a part of this  university, that was the single greatest way that I could be a part of it so  it had an importance that made the effort worth it.  What happened was, my dating life did suffer some. My wife, we got  married the next year. I actually got married. She had graduated but I  still had some time to go. I guess if we had 200 events that I had to go to  like some of them do that, I don   t know how I would have done it  because it was extremely strenuous. And you   re right, at the School of  Architecture you   re up there around the clock. You   re there day after  day. One good thing was that one of the graduate assistants that was  helping us in our lab when we were there each afternoon for five hours, I  got to know him so well, it is my nature to talk him into going out and  playing golf that afternoon. We would skip class that afternoon and I  would take my graduate assistant and we would play golf. How can you  get in trouble if the guy that is supposed to be helping you is going with  you, right?  Not naming any names.  Yeah, I wasn   t even going to say Jerry Holcomb   s name. He is an  architect in Dallas, Texas now. He is very successful. Very successful,  and still a good friend.  Is there some discipline you learn from Pete? What impact had he made  on your life as a student at that time?  Jerry, I guess I had so much going on, emotionally, what I was learning  about success. In the little town of Wagoner, Oklahoma, no one ever  coached me in the fundamentals of life. I believe that being Pistol Pete  was one of the things that helped me with part of the fundamentals of  life. I think that Spencer Hayes helped me with some of those  fundamentals of life. I think having to make money wherever I could  helped me with those fundamentals of life. I think living in that little  trailer with that kerosene heater helped me in some of the fundamentals  of life. So consequently in my business experience and so forth, it   s been  very very helpful. All of those were lessons, but gosh, the importance of  20  Gill  Glasgow  Pistol Pete     You know what I think it does? When you take a small town boy that  really didn   t know how to engage in this big university with all these  students   who am I? I just want to do something. I want to do  something special. This gave me an opportunity to do that here at this  school. Now, what I took with it was an increase in my confidence, my  confidence that I could do something and be somebody. So looking  back, I have to say I never thought of it, but I think that being Pistol Pete  may have been a great stepping stone to me believing that I could  succeed in anything that I did in life. That if you work at it, and you give  your all, and you go after it   I never dreamed I would be Pistol Pete. I  was shocked when they called me and told me,    You   re the one.    I was  shocked. Who in the world would pick me? (Laughter)  Following your comments about how it affected your life, how has it  affected you since? You mentioned earlier how people would find out  that you were the former Pistol Pete   has it always been a part of your  life that you were Pete?  Yeah. Jerry, I think that because I did so many different things in school,  I created the attitude that I could pretty well do anything. And although I  had a degree in architecture and went to Dallas to be an architect, it did  not take very long to realize that it was going to take too long   I did not  have the patience to draw stair details. I got involved with real estate, I  did very well. I actually started a management company, did all things  and made good money. Then, during a bad time, Mary Kay   s son  Richard Rogers, Mary Kay cosmetics, her son and I played golf  together. He started trying to get me to come go on the corporate staff  with Mary Kay cosmetics. And for some strange reason I had a real,  although I was making a lot of money, I went there at half of what I had  been making and I had worked my way up a little at a time until I  became the Vice President for Sales worldwide for Mary Kay cosmetics.  And I would have to say having the confidence of being able to say     We   ll find a way. We   ll do something I   ve never done before. If I assert  myself and give everything I got.     I left Mary Kay, which they could not believe. They had the golden  handcuffs on me about as tight as they could be. It was the premier job  of the United States at the time. We were the darling of Wall Street.  Harvard had used us as a case study. Just before I left, Sixty Minutes did  a special on us and when I went in to tell them I said,    I   m leaving.     They said,    You   re what?    and they asked me,    What are you leaving to  do? This is the example here.    I said,    I   m buying into a little local  burglar alarm company that   s not even doing a million dollars a year.     They said,    No way. You   re not serious. You   re not telling us this.     21  That   s what I did.  I left them and I left over a million dollars on the table to leave Mary  Kay Cosmetics. Somewhere that confidence was developed. Somewhere  the confidence to be able to go do that came from somewhere and I  would have to say it started at Oklahoma State University. I would say  that the creative spirit of being able to do these things    So I went there,  changed the name, built the company called Network Security  Corporation. We took that little bitty company, built it nationwide.  Several thousand employees took the company public. We sold it to  Swiss Investment Group in    87 for  166 million. From there, at that  time, I basically retired, did some real estate developing, built a golf  course, did some deal making. The savings and loan collapsed. I didn   t  have any liabilities so I wouldn   t hurt at all. They had just talked me into  coming and making deals. They said,    We   ll give you a percentage  profit. You don   t have any liability.     When the savings and loans collapsed and everybody was falling by the  way side, I spent two years building a three and half million dollar estate  on six and half acres while everybody else was crying. And at the end of  that I thought I was going to build homes and use my architectural  degree and I thought,    Man, two years to build one home. And after that  I   ll have to start all over. This breaks every rule I go by.    And the rule  was,    Whatever you do makes you or pays you for the rest of your life.     So I decided I didn   t want to do that. I looked around for a company to  buy or a company to go in and take over and redo and I thought,    Phil  what are you equipped to do? Look over your life and so forth.    And I  thought,    Stand up comedy.    And that   s what I did. I had enough  courage. We had plenty of money.  For five years, I did stand-up comedy, Gill. Five years. I started off and  the first year I had two weeks of work. The second year I had five weeks  of work. The third, fourth, and fifth year I was able to work half the  time, 26 weeks of the year. Twenty-six states, top ten comedy clubs  across the country. I did standup comedy. I was clean, they were dirty,  and I was able to do that. I   ve worked with Tim Allen, Gary Gulman,  Ray Romano, Jay Leno, and so I decided at the end of that,    Now, what  am I doing? I   m never going to have a sitcom.    This has been a great  and wonderful thing, I had a lot of fun.  I was going to build a theater in Branson, Missouri. People at Pigeon  Forge got word of it, Lee Greenwood asked me to come take a look at  the theater he was building, wanted me to build one next to him. Pigeon  Forge, Tennessee made an offer to a piece of land that was very well  located and I decided to build a theater and I built an eight and a half  million dollar project in one of your good friends and football cohorts  22  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  was an investor with me. Roger Staubach, Troy Aikman, they were  investors with me. We built a theater in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee and I  lost millions of dollars and broke one of my rules. But it was really  painful. I can   t say it wasn   t. It was painful, but I   m doing what I love  and that   s financial planning, helping people. That   s the first business I  ever had that failed, but to use all the streets smarts that I developed over  those years and helping people in building wealth and that type of thing  in financial planning, I believe that you can point back to Oklahoma  State University for sure, Pistol Pete for certain, that what I developed  there and some of the things that were developed out of that enabled me  to be able to do some of the things that I would do later.  Just out of curiosity backing up a little bit. What were some of the clubs  you made? Name some of the hot spots that you were at?  Sure, I   ll tell you one of the number one clubs in America is at Hermosa  Beach. It   s the Comedy and Magic Club at Hermosa Beach. That   s  where Jay Leno every Sunday night he takes these cards of jokes that  he   s going to try that week and he tries them out there. Mike Lacey who  is the owner of that comedy club. Jerry Seinfeld when he got ready to do  the last show after his sitcom, he honed it right there at the Comedy and  Magic Club in Hermosa Beach, California. By the way, I didn   t perform  at my theater until the last day. I had great comedians and I never looked  at myself as being a great comedian. I just had the guts to go do it   (Laughs)  There   s a comedy club in North Carolina where the University of North  Carolina is. That   s one of the top clubs. I performed at several clubs in  California   the one where almost every great comedian in the world  performed at.  There is  only one in New York that I didn   t perform in.  Nine of the top ten comedy clubs, recognized as top ten comedy clubs  across the country.  Phil is there a special bond that former Pistol Petes have? Like this past  year you all came back for a reunion, 40 or more former Petes. Do you  ever communicate with the other Petes?  You know, if I met one it would be immediate. But because I was  always out there trying to build and so forth, the one thing if I had a  great regret Jerry, would be that I have not been able to come back for  every single Homecoming and get to know some of the other Petes that I  haven   t known since then. But I will tell you that when I have met them,  when I did come back, that every single one of them, there is an affinity  among Petes that I would say, I think there   s just a strong affinity with  me, probably not with the athletes, but when I meet an Oklahoma State  athlete. I think there   s a bond with Pistol Pete with whoever you meet  23  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  that ever went to school at Oklahoma State University. I think that   s a  fair estimate.  What about your legacy, Phil? How do you want to be remembered?  How do you hope people remember you?  Wow, golly Jerry  (Laughs) I would hope that they would remember me  as being a person who was willing to do the things that unsuccessful  people would not or cannot do. And in doing it, I was honest, I had a  servitude about it, that I had my priorities in order, and that I was a  committed and dedicated Christian who loved the Lord. Now, would  somebody who knew me say that? I don   t know that I will leave that  kind of legacy.  Phil what do you think were your contributions to Pistol Pete? It has  evolved over the years with the role of Pistol Pete, the recognition of  Pistol Pete, the number of events, and we have talked about some of  those things. What do you think you added to that?  Since I don   t know and would only speculate, I would say that whoever  was Pistol Pete later who watched me and would say,    You know I   d  like to be Pistol Pete,    that they would aspire to being as energetic and  creative as I was because of the importance of that being such a focal  point for our student body, for our alumni, for a donor, for anyone who  loves Oklahoma State University. I would hope it would set a standard  that they would have to work to do. I would hope that that would be the  legacy I would leave to all of the other Pistol Petes. Certainly, I have no  idea whether I did or not, but to answer your question, I would certainly  hope so.  What would you tell an OSU student or young person that is aspiring to  be Pistol Pete or thinking about being Pistol Pete?  Well, I would say,    Check your ego at the door because you   re a servant  of the University.    Number two is,    Buckle up. You   re going to expend  a lot of energy and you   re going to do it for a purpose. So check your  heart. Make sure you   re doing it for the right reasons.    I do think that if  you were just Pistol Pete for the glory, nobody knows who is under that  head. So what you do, and I think that   s the wonderful thing about Pistol  Pete is that nobody really knows. There were not a lot of articles written  about me back then. I think they do now and maybe the students may  know who it is, it may be such an honorary thing that they know who it  is. But mine wasn   t because you   re anonymous, I think you do it for the  right reasons. You   re not recognized and saying,    Hey look at me.     You   re saying,    Hey look at Pistol Pete.    I think that   s very important. I  would tell them,    You   re going into this and you   re doing it for the right  24  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  reasons because they don   t know who you are. You are Pistol Pete.  That   s who you are.     That brings a couple questions to mind. One is in that era, was anyone  supposed to know that you   re Pistol Pete? I mean, nowadays most  people know who the student Petes are. Was it then that they encouraged  you not to let people know you were Pete?  I   ve got to tell you, there weren   t a lot of rules. I didn   t have a lot of  leadership; I didn   t have anybody telling me what to do or anything. I  mean, I would put on my Pistol Pete uniform in my little apartment,  walk across the street, across University Avenue. I would walk to the  stadium and there I was. They   d let me in. (Laughs) I didn   t have to pay.  They would let me in, so all I   d do was show up. And when there was an  athletic event, nobody said,    Hey Pete, you realize there   s an athletic  event.    I   d show up. And then I   d ask the cheerleaders,    Next week,  what do we do?    and they   d tell me.  You brought up another point   being anonymous behind the head, I  heard some other Petes talking about how it gave them a license to live  out some things that were greater than themselves. Knowing that you  represented Pete, people not really knowing that was Phil Glasgow  there, how did that affect you?  With me, I have to honestly say that I don   t think that made any  difference to me. Maybe it should have. But I can   t remember that it  caused me to be something I wasn   t, because I was always acting out  anyway  (Laughs) It   s just my nature. That   s why I did comedy, Jerry  If  anything, it inhibited me.  You were Pete for one year; did you choose not to be Pete the second  year? Did you have other priorities and just needed to move on?  Well there were probably two reasons. One is I didn   t know I could be.  (Laughs) You   ve got to understand, I wasn   t the brightest kid at  Oklahoma State University. I just lived every moment as I could, feeling  my way through life. It never dawned on me that I could do a second  year, but I think because of the time that architecture consumed and  because of the other things. And the following year I got married and I  didn   t feel like that as a married student with all the obligations and  everything that I had that I could do it justice was probably more why I  didn   t at least ask somebody,    Can I do this again?    Because I took it as  it was, so important. I respected the position so much that I would not do  that again if I could not put the same effort forth. And I still feel that  way today about the position of Pistol Pete. I feel like a celebrity is what  it amounts to   25  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  You are. Back to the question earlier, what would you tell a young man  aspiring to be Pete? Would you encourage him to be Pete?  Oh absolutely. Absolutely. There are many many things that you   re  going to forget in your life, but you will never ever forget that you were  Pistol Pete and that in your college years you were a focal point at a  great university. We live in Knoxville, Tennessee now and it   s hard not  to follow the Tennessee Volunteers because they   re right there in your  city. Boy I tell you what, you never forget Oklahoma State University.  So it   s a big deal, Jerry. It   s a big deal. It always will be. I want Pistol  Pete to show up at my funeral and shoot his guns  (Laughs)  There was a neat story I was going to tell you off camera about the first  Pistol Pete. When he died, he had Pete come to the funeral.  Really? That   s how important it is.  It was very moving. So looking back, you would do it all over again?  Absolutely. In a heartbeat. Quicker, earlier, two years instead of one   This has been a great interview and I appreciate it. Is there any  additional information, thoughts, comments, stories that we haven   t  shared yet that would be interesting?  Not that I can think of. I will say that just recently   I   m trying to  remember the circumstance because it was recently   someone said  something about my being Pistol Pete to somebody else and this person  said,    No way     I   ll never forget that I thought, this is amazing. In  Tennessee, a person who happened to have gone to Oklahoma State  University a long time ago and somebody pointed out that that guy that   s  66 years old was Pistol Pete and that was a huge deal to that individual. I  count it as a real blessing. It   s one of the great highlights and blessings  of my life.  It   s pretty structured now being Pistol Pete. In the athletic department  there are certain rules and regulations. Who did you deal or interview  with? Who were the decision makers on you being Pistol Pete?  Gosh, I   m trying to remember. I think there were some faculty and some  students. I think it was the student body president, people like that. You  know at the time I just knew so little.  Was it through the student services area, a part of that?  Jerry, I don   t know but I do have a comment about it being so structured  26  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  Gill  Glasgow  and so forth now. I probably couldn   t be Pistol Pete now. (Laughter) I   m  pretty   they probably would have kicked me off. I probably would have  told them,    I   m not going to do that.    I wanted to get out there and do  things.  Did they have any general guidelines at all?  No.  Like you can   t take the head off?  Keep the head on.  Nothing about firing any guns?  Oh, don   t shoot them too close because you could hurt somebody. Don   t  ever take the head off in public and don   t shoot too close. I will say this,  that tiger, I shot him (laughter) and at OU, the guy that wanted me to do  so and so and so forth, but when it came down to it, I wouldn   t do it. I  shot him. I just wasn   t going to play second fiddle to anybody else   s  mascot. I had the guns, he didn   t. So I did use them for that reason.  You were part of the spirit squad, the cheerleaders and such. You would  travel with them and whatever transportation they were in?  Yes, except for local.  You just walked across campus?  That   s it. And they didn   t tell me where I was supposed to meet  anybody. They   re the cheerleaders, I   m supposed to go over there. The  first game that we had, we met up with the cheerleaders there in  Arkansas; they didn   t know me and I didn   t know them. There wasn   t a  lot of structure. I really appreciate it because I got to manufacture  whatever I wanted. I   m kind of independent anyway. I   m an  entrepreneur.  Have you observed or watched Pistol Pete before at athletic events?  Yes. Seeing that person   the only thing I kept thinking was,    What a  great mascot we have.    But you   ve got to understand, I   d never been to a  university like this. You could have had a hundred universities   we  don   t, but you could have had a hundred universities that had greater  mascots, cheerleaders, fans, and I wouldn   t have known it because I   d  never been to one. To me, this was huge. I was just in awe of all this.  You know, you have a date and you go to the ballgame and all of this is  27  Gill  Glasgow  going on   this was big stuff. I was a Wagoner Bulldog. We didn   t have  a bulldog. We didn   t have a mascot. So this was big deal. Watching him  was certainly   but yeah, I just recognized who he was.  Anything else we didn   t capture? One last shot here.  No.  -------  -------   
