 Gill. Today is December 14, 2009. I   m visiting with  Dwain Sehon, and this interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project for  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. The interview is being  conducted in Stillwater, Oklahoma in the home of Walter Adams. I  appreciate you, Dwain, taking the time to visit with us today. I  understand from talking to some of your family members that you   re one  of the historians in the family. Is that right?  Well, that   s right. I really did get interested in it. I was in my  grandmother   s house  looking at  this old book here, an old photo  album, and then it had tintype photos in it. I was a young kid and really  didn   t even know they made such a thing as tintype, and I just got  interested in it (Laughs) and started collecting as much as I could.  Maybe you can point out   it   s probably a source of pride for you and  your family, the Adams family, that your ancestors helped actually found  the Stillwater community and you had two family members of the Adams  family of the first graduating class at OSU and actually made the Run of  1889. So, there   s a lot of history in the Adams family. Is that a special  source of pride for you?  It really is. We talk about it as a family. We don   t go around the street  saying we were the first ones to be at OSU, but we talk to each other,  and the events the university has had for the family, it   s always been  something that just makes you feel super.  Let   s see, your great- great-grandfather, William H. H. Adams, and his  wife Rebecca would have made the run into Oklahoma in 1889 and  settled in the quarter section, claimed the quarter section here, which  would be the southwest part of Stillwater now?  Right, and the research that I   ve done into his past (he is a very  5  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  interesting fellow to research), he came from Tennessee and fought in  the Civil War and was at several  battles such as  Missionary Ridge. We  have records from even the national archives on his records and places  he   d been.  Missionary Ridge. Was that at Gettysburg?  There were several places.  Missionary Ridge was close to Chattanooga  in Tennessee.  One of them, he would have been at Shiloh and  Chickamauga. If the records are accurate, he would have been at those  places, and he   s a lucky man to even be here, we   re all lucky to be here,  because of the danger he was probably in during the war.  He served in  the 2nd Confederate Infantry Regiment from Tennessee. During his time  of service his regiment served at Shiloh, Murfreesboro, Chickamauga,  Missionary Ridge and several other battles. In late 1864, Adams and  many others in his unit were captured near Atlanta.   Do you know what rank he attained?  He was lieutenant. We actually have the records of when he was signed  into the Army and then to the point that he was promoted, and then later  on he was captured as a prisoner of war, and I think he was at Johnson   s  Island up near Chicago, up in that area. They would put them in different  places and send them off somewhere, and then made his way back to  Kansas, I guess, and then came in.  You mentioned some interesting things about your great- great-grandfather,  William. What are some other things? He was a surveyor,  for example? Are there any other things you can tell us about him?  The old newspapers and all of the records   he was one of the people  that laid out the Stillwater town site. Walter has an old map, and I   ve got  it in several of my records that show the original Adams claim and then  the square Stillwater area. So, he was quite an interesting fellow. We   ve  actually even got a few old things that we believe are his, an old spy  glass and compass and things that we believe are his property. So, he left  a lot of things behind.  Some survey equipment?  Not that I   m aware of. I don   t know where that would have been. We  never saw any of it. Everything was small and would have fit in a drawer  in transit, and those other things are kind of large items, so they haven   t  survived.  Now, he farmed in the Augusta, Kansas area before he made the Run.  6  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Are there things he did in addition to farming? We talked about  surveying. Was he in business or anything?  Well, I haven   t really researched the records while they were in Kansas.  I was always looking more back in the Tennessee and North Carolina  areas where the family was originally from. I always thought that  Kansas was sort of a way station, they were waiting for the Land Run to  start, but I   m not sure. I don   t know. Several of our other relatives on my  grandmother   s side of the family (I believe Walter also talked about it)  also came in on the Land Run and one of the families, name was Kautz,  he had established some businesses up in the Kansas area. I don   t know  for sure exactly how long they stayed there and what their occupations  were.  You don   t know how long they lived in Kansas?  No, I haven   t really ever investigated that. Walter may know, but I just  haven   t spent time on that area.  Maybe we can back up and ask you a little bit about your personal  experiences. Can you tell us a little bit about where you grew up, your  family and some of your early experiences?  My dad actually came here and attended the university after World War  II. He was getting ready to invade Japan. He was in the Army sitting on  a boat getting ready to go in, and they dropped the atomic bomb. So, I   m  lucky for that, because I   m probably here as a result of that because he  didn   t get killed. (Laughs) He stayed in Japan and was in the military  government there for several years and then came back to Stillwater and  met my mother, and she   s my connection to the Adams family.  Your family tree from William to   what was the family line there?  My mother was named Joanne Adams, which is Walter   s sister. Then  Joanne Adams to Arthur Adams, my granddad, to Walter Alanzo Adams  to William H. H.  William H. H. and Walter and then Arthur     Then Arthur and then my mother, Joanne.  Did you grow up in Stillwater?  No, I grew up in Chickasha, which is not far from here, and it was a  good experience. I got to work on airplanes when I was a kid, and we  were talking a little bit about my first flight experience, a little bit like  7  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Walter   s or the guy that was running the airport. I went out to take a  ride, and I went to the right side of the airplane and he said,    No, you   re  on the wrong side.    And he said,    Get over there.    And I said,    I can   t  fly. I   m not a pilot.    And he says,    Well, that   s where you   re going.     (Laughter) He was an instructor, and so the very first time I ever rode in  an airplane, I was sitting in the pilot   s seat.  And you were how old then, Dwain?  I was probably about fourteen years old.  In Chickasha?  Yes. (Laughter)  What did your mom and dad do for a living?  They were both accountants. My dad has his own firm in Chickasha  since about 1950.  And your father   s name?  Is Ernest Earl Sehon. He attended here at the university in accounting  back in the    40s.  So, how many kids were there in your family?  Just my brother, Dwight  and me . He also came here for a short time,  and then he went to Northeastern. He was a football player, and he had a  better chance to start up there. So, he was wanting to be on the field  during the games.  What year did you enroll at Oklahoma State?  I enrolled in 1972.  And your major was?  I was in electronics and then later on in electrical engineering.  You graduated in what year?  I graduated in 1977, and I stayed on also in graduate school for some  time. I didn   t go ahead and get my master   s degree here.  You took several hours in the master   s program in electrical  8  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  engineering?  Yes. While I was here I worked for the university electrical engineering  department on the Windmill Project. I went later on to work for a  company here that one of the professors started. It is called Frontier  Engineering. It   s a little bit bigger company  now . There were only  three of us back when it originally started. (Laughs)  That was with  Ed  Shreve. Yes, I   ve got an old business card with Frontier Engineering on  it back when it was only a three-man outfit. (Laughs)  Well, backing up just a little bit, I want to ask you, Dwain, why did you  choose to come to Oklahoma State University? Was it part of that  Adams family experience?  Yes, it really was, and the people here were friendly. I   ve been to other  campuses, but in my entire period of going through school, the students  were just remarkable. You always find somebody, and as you   re going  through you meet new people, but the people were just wonderful. The  other students were.  I had to ask you that question because there   s another university just  down the road from Chickasha.  It   s very close.  You drive through to get to Stillwater. (Laughter)  Yes, and it was always good when you got past that point. (Laughter)  Did the history of the Adams family influence your decision, also, to  come to Oklahoma State?  Yes, and, really, when you   re young, you just kind of go with what feels  right, and it felt right. I mean, the family was here, and I spent a lot of  time here when I was a kid.  Can you tell us a little bit about your OSU experience, some of the  things you did, some of your activities at Oklahoma State?  Well, the first two years, I stayed in Kerr Hall, which was a really great   experience . I enjoyed that very much. We had some very good  intramural teams. If we weren   t first in football, we were pretty close.  We had teams that do everything good, and I really liked the way they  put people together with similar majors and similar backgrounds.  Whoever was assigning the students at that point was a genius because  they put the right people together. So, we all just had a great time.  9  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  You were talking about flying. Were you in the Flying Aggies?  No, I really didn   t. I got my license when I was real young before I ever  came. So, for me, I was already a pilot when I was here, so there wasn   t  any benefit to me doing that. I didn   t ever run across anybody that was a  Flying Aggie that I knew personally, so I didn   t connect with them.  Did you fly out of the airport some here?  I   ve flown just from Chickasha to here mostly. I didn   t go out and fly for  enjoyment. I was really too busy with school.  Probably pretty expensive, too.  Yes.  Can you talk a little bit about being a part of the Adams family? Did it  influence your perception of Oklahoma State and your OSU experience?  Well, the college has been part of our experience ever since I can  remember, because even when I was a young kid we would come to my  grandmother   s house which, at that point, was on the homestead (it   s at  Twelfth and Adams) and all of us kids would be up on the top second  floor of the house, and they would take us up around to see the lights at  the university on Christmas Eve, and it was usually pretty late at night.  When we got back, Santa Claus had been to the house. He came a little  early; he came before midnight. So, I have a lot of fond memories. We  played on the farm here when we were kids and rode horses and did all  the stuff a kid would do to enjoy himself. Threw mud and would swing  on grape vines across Stillwater Creek and all sorts of things. (Laughter)  That   s great. Can you share a little bit about after you left Oklahoma  State? You got your bachelor   s in electrical engineering at Oklahoma  State and then took some hours afterwards. Can you share a little bit  about your experience after you left Oklahoma State?  Well, it was more beneficial for me to take business classes. I was  working on a master   s degree in business. I didn   t complete it, but I went  to work in Fort Worth there at TCU, and I took classes there and also  again in Seattle. Every time I got ready to get close to my business   degree , I would have so much time, some project came up that I never  could finish it.  So, your first job out of college was     After I left Frontier Engineering (that was probably my first job when I  10  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  was in college), I went to General Dynamics. They build fighter planes,  and I was in the engineering department and worked on F-111s and F-  16s and was one of the original guys on the F-22.  Really?  Yes. The General Dynamics team had little badges that had your number  on it, and I think I was number thirty-one or -two or something like that.  When did you go to work for General Dynamics?  In    79.  And where were you located?  In Fort Worth, but that was an interesting experience. The F-22, when it  started, I was working on F-16 work and with the way it started, I was  working on F-111 then I transitioned over to the F-16, they were doing a  big upgrade. They were more or less modernizing the computers on the  airplane. They took old, really slow computers, and this was the  generation when the microprocessor started. Me and several other guys  were young. Gosh, we were incredibly young when we were doing it,  and the F-16C and D model, me and five other guys were the lead  project guys on updating all of the computers for the C and D model,  and really took it from being old technology to new technology where it  will do a lot.  New avionics throughout the thing?  Yes, yes. It was pretty much a complete rebuild of the avionic system.  Can you tell us a little bit about your experience with the F-22 project?  That had to be pretty exciting.  Well, that was. The project, it was kind of an interesting thing. I think  I   ve told Walter about it, but we couldn   t talk about it when it was first  going, and my parents, I   d be going off on a trip or doing something and   they   d  say,    What are you working on?    and I   d say,    Well, just stuff.     We weren   t allowed. I worked on the airplane for several years before  we were actually allowed to say that it existed. (Laughs) It was fun. But  I actually got to see the airplane come together from just  rough  sketches ; we designed it in a computer, but every day we would print  out the design of the airplane on big long sheets of paper and have a  meeting where all of the  Lead Engineers discussed the design . I was in  what they call the program office. I was a little bit more overseeing the  efforts of others. We would look at all the drawings every day and see if  11  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  there was any problems. So, every day I would get to see the airplane  laid out on pieces of  paper , literally saw it coming from nothing and  pieces of paper to being built in the factory. I   ve even got little pieces of  the original metal shavings (Laughs) from when it was being built. It  was really a once in a lifetime experience.  How long did you work with General Dynamics? Was that most of your  career there?  Oh, let   s see. I spent, oh gosh, I don   t know, I think about twelve or  thirteen years there. That was the span of the time, and then I went off  and I decided to go into the commercial side instead of the military side.  So, I went to Seattle and found a company there.  Surely not Boeing.  No. Actually, I used to work with Boeing quite a bit, and that   s kind  of   when I was working on the F-22, I used to spend time in Los  Angeles and in Seattle. My responsibilities   I had to travel to all the  locations, and spent time, and I liked Seattle from that experience. So, I  went up there.  Worked with commercial aircraft design?  Yes, it was business jets. Mostly I designed what you call flight  management systems with some of the first GPS capability in them. It  would let you land your airplane with GPS.  What company were you working with?  I was working with a company called Universal Avionics up there, and  we did one of the very first GPS landing systems, and it became  standard equipment on Lear jets and King Airs and several other jets.  Very interesting. Well, getting back to some of the family history that  we   ve talked about, something that is a question I had that you might  help me with is when you get past William H. H. Adams and get to the  boys in another level down, I understand two of the brothers, James  Homer and Arthur, went to Oklahoma State University. Then Oscar and  Walter stayed on the farm, but they were still connected in some way to  Oklahoma State University. Can you talk a little bit about the family  farm and how the brothers worked with OSU (then, of course, Oklahoma  A M)?  From both my grandmother, Muriel, and the newspapers and other  things, the farm has been pretty much connected with the university  12  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  since the university was started. It seemed to be a social place at the  first, back when the old accounts in the paper said that they had a lot of  parties and things where the university people would come down and  enjoy having a picnic down by the banks of the Stillwater Creek on the  farm. Then Walter Adams, which is William H. H. Adams    son and our  Walter   s granddad, was the brother of the first graduate, but he was  actually quite connected with the university as far as he had planted the  trees, pecan trees, and did many grafting experiments with the pecan  trees and also walnut trees. He was quite a horticulturist. I always felt  that it was just a shame that he didn   t get to attend the university. He  would have been a wonderful researcher. The university, later on, over  the years, sent people down to get grafts, and he was always very  supportive of the university in working with them in the agriculture and  horticulture departments. My grandmother related all sorts of tales about  him.  Scientific farming when it was pretty systematic.  Very much.  Now, did I understand that he crossed walnut and pecan?  There was one tree on the farm, and it was very interesting. In all the  experiments, you always learn something from every one. His  experiment where he crossed a pecan tree and a hickory tree, and it  made a very hard little nut. It would have made a good pool ball.  (Laughter) It wasn   t very good to eat, but that was one of the things you  learn something from. But his other experiences went really well.  Now, I understand they had a large pecan growth, several hundred trees  or something.  Yes, I should refer to my uncle. I guess about thirty acres of trees is  approximate? There   s a map here at the house that shows the location of  each tree and what kind of tree it was, if it was grafted or not. So, he was  a very meticulous person. My mother used to   when they had dinner at  his house, they said that he was very, very proper and meticulous. Some  of his brothers that attended the university, also, you could tell that they  were smart people. That   s what she said.  Good gene pool there?  Well, I hope so. (Laughter)  I think in earlier conversation, you were saying that a lot of the  agronomy professors actually came down and took some samples of  13  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  some of the pecan trees that he grafted because they were selective  breeding that were good.  Right. Yes, even the entomology department used to come down. When  we were kids we always used to see these strange things in the trees, and  they were traps to get different types of insects. There was cooperation  with the university all through time, it appears.  I remember we were talking a little earlier about William H. H. Adams  and some of his background, and, so, he actually laid out the first plot of  the city of Stillwater. Is that right?  Right.  Was it his son that was county commissioner?  Yes, it was Walter Alanzo Adams, and he also was the man that planted  the pecan orchard and did all of the grafts, so he was a very active guy in  the community, and I don   t know how those guys used to do all that  stuff. (Laughs)  And you brought up the point he was very much engaged and involved in  the Stillwater community.  Yes, and there are several articles that we   ve got from   you always  have obituaries, but we have other articles, too, where he was involved  in     He was active in the Methodist church?  That   s right. And some of the old family was named for   I think there  was a Wesley Adams that was from the Wesleyan... (Laughs)  John Wesley, there you go. You have researched the family a little bit.  To the families, generally, and from your perspective, how important is  that association of the Adams family with Oklahoma State University? Is  it important? Is it something you feel special about? A sense of pride of  that long, what, four generations now of Adams having gone to  Oklahoma State University?  Oh, I think everyone in the family is really proud, and we   ve had quite a  few graduates. It is something, you know, and the family just  tremendously appreciates the display in the Alumni Hall and the Adams  Cafeteria. It means a lot to the family, and reinforces that bond, I think.  Do you have a family also? Any kids yourself?  14  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  I   ve got one child that is my wife Cheryl   s child before we were  married, but he   s also an engineer and he   s been very successful. He   s  right now attending Harvard.  Wow. Where did he do his undergraduate work?  He did his undergraduate work at Vanderbilt. He got a mechanical  engineering degree from there. He was interested in going east, so it  seemed to be a good place for him to go.  So, you can   t take credit for the genes.  No, I can   t. He wasn   t a direct descendent of the Adams clan, so I think  he strayed off the path there. (Laughs) Didn   t know about it.  I think we   ve got a bunch of Longhorns, also, in the family down in  Texas, I understand, but that   s okay. You   ve researched the family, so  I   m going to ask you some general questions that maybe you can refer  to. What are some special things that stood out in your mind about the  Adams family as you researched the history of the family?  Well, I guess just going backwards to Walter and his cooperation with  the university and the things that he did, to me, was pretty impressive.  And then William H. H. Adams, which is his father, to come all the way  from Tennessee and to have fought in the Civil War and to have  surveyed the town of Stillwater, he had just an incredible set of things  that he accomplished in his lifespan. And going back even further, I  guess he and his father, Wilson Adams, was in the Tennessee area and  then the oldest one, Elijah, we found that he was born in 1766. I was  surprised that there are records going back that far, before the United  States was a country. We actually even found that there   s a cemetery in  Tennessee, and it   s the Elijah Adams Cemetery, and he   s buried there.  So, there is a tremendous amount of history, and we keep finding more  and more all the time, and we think the history goes back even further. It  looks like it   s connected all the way back to a fellow named Henry  Adams who was in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in the 1600s, and it  goes even further back. We   re still working on all of the connections,  but the interesting thing about Henry Adams at the Massachusetts Bay  Colony, he was also the ancestor of John Adams and John Quincy  Adams and I think also the ancestor of Samuel Adams, which I think  Samuel Adams and John Adams signed the Declaration of  Independence, and Samuel was the guy that organized the Boston Tea  Party. So, we may be connected to all of those people, but we   re still  trying to figure that out. It looks possible right at the moment that it goes  back that far.  A short time after the interview was completed, Walter  15  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Adams obtained records indicating the relationship of our family to  President Adams, etc. through Henry Adams, who was the governor of  the Massachusetts Bay Colony. He has those records in Stillwater.   That   s pretty exciting genealogy, isn   t it?  Yes, it really was. I was really excited to see that, so we   re going to keep  on working on it. It looks promising because all of the families in  Tennessee were all within a very small area, where the Elijah Adams  Cemetery is. We were talking earlier about even going back there and  looking up some of the records in Tennessee and back in North Carolina.  It would just be a fascinating thing to do.  And the Civil War records of William, he was pretty active in several  battles.  Yes, in his records, there   s where he started, and then there   s one record  where he was at Missionary Ridge and several different places during  the war. Interesting life. Their lives are more interesting than ours today,  considering how far they have gone and what they went through.  Probably pretty tough. They survived the Civil War, survived the  Frontier.  We   ve got an old double barrel shotgun, and I would date it to the late  1800s or, you know, in the area of the Land Run. I always want to think  that he had that shotgun with him when he came here and staked the  claim, to keep the bad guys  away . It   s one that   s so old you would  never fire it, but it   s an old twisted barrel, and the things I   ve read on it  said you could only shoot black powder in it.  It   ll explode.  Yes. So, we wouldn   t dare shoot it, anyway. (Laughs)  Moving forward a little bit, is there anything you   ve picked up on some  of the family members, going from Arthur and James Homer, going  forward? I know that Arthur and James were in business together in  Ardmore for a while and were fairly successful. I know Arthur was in the  energy business and exploration.  One of them was a stockbroker. There   s a card where he had a  stockbroker business, unfortunately, in the    20s. (Laughter)  Bad timing. Bad timing.  16  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  But all the brothers seem to have spread out and have done well. Since  their direct sons and grandsons are still alive, I haven   t really done a lot  of extra research. We   ve got a lot of pictures of them. We have a very  good picture library here in the house of the entire family, and it   s  always good to write names down on pictures. We   ve got some of the  oldest pictures that are in the album that I showed you when we first  started the tape. There   s a few of them in there, or almost half of them,  that there are no names, and we   re trying to figure out who could that  person have been. One thing I want to say to people is it   s very  important to write names on the back of your pictures when you take  them. Somebody later on will want to know who they were. (Laughs)  Absolutely. To follow up on that thought, when you have your reunions,  do you get representatives from each of the four brothers that made the  Run with William H. H. Adams?  The first time we had a reunion in New Mexico, I think I did a map of  where everyone was from, and it was amazing how many states.  California   I lived in Washington at that time. I think Jerry, he lived in  Washington D.C. We have people all over the country.  How about the four brothers? Of course, two of them went to Oklahoma  State, and then they were in Oklahoma for a while, then went to Texas.  Then Walter Alanzo stayed here.  Right, stayed right here on the farm.  And then which brother went out to Mexico?  Oscar.  Was that part of the New Mexico connection?  Yes.  So, when you have your reunions, occasionally you get pretty good  representation from all branches?  The first one, we had people from all over the country, literally, and it  was amazing that everybody was so interested and came.  About how many people attended that first one?  I   d say a good fifty, and there was someone from every family. We had  just an incredible representation.  17  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  We talked about earlier, there   s been four generations now of Adams  family members and about forty-some-odd, forty-three or so, students  that have enrolled in Oklahoma State. And you have one currently  enrolled at OSU right now?  Yes. My brother went for a while, and my wife attended, and all of my  cousins have. So, it   s a pretty good representation.  Who might we have worked with, I   m trying to recall, when we did the  display in the Traditions Hall in the Alumni Center on the Adams  family? We highlighted in bold face all the students that had either  attended or graduated from Oklahoma State.  Right, and there   s more since that was done. I was married after that  original display was done, so my wife would be added to one of them,  and some of my cousins and even their children now have gone. They  just were little fellows at that point in time and weren   t college age yet,  so it keeps on going. It   s an ongoing thing.  Were you that fourth generation?  I would be the fourth generation, as far as attending school.  Well, even though it   s like three generations back, you   d think of the first  family, you think of James Homer and, of course, Arthur are pretty  special in that first class. You draw back to the second and third  generations, then. Is it still pretty special to think about being part of  that OSU Adams family circle?  Oh yes. Oh yes, it really is. Every once in awhile I have   we were  talking about that place in Norman before, and every once in a while,     Why are you for the Cowboys?    and I say,    Well, you know, I sort of  have to be. If your great-great-grandfather laid out the town of  Stillwater, you had better be a Cowboy.    (Laughs)  Stillwater, OSU   that   s exactly right. Amen, amen. Dwain, one more  time, does anyone ask you to talk about some of the family members  going way back to the Adams in Massachusetts? Is there anything that  you want to mention about the Adams family, specific individuals,  events, things like that?  It seems like it   s just the accomplishments of the ones that were aware     there   s a few we don   t know much about. There   s Wilson Adams, who  was Elijah Adams    son, and we   re still finding more about Elijah  himself. Where he was from, (North Carolina, originally) but there just  isn   t a lot of information other than they were farmers and in good  18  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  standing in the community. And I believe we   ll run across more  information on the very old family members, and we kind of have talked  about William H. H. and coming in from the war. I have been totally  impressed with what he did. And then his son, Walter Alanzo   I mean,  working with the university like he did, and that   s really not very well  known. He was a man that, from everything I   ve heard, really supported  the university his whole life and, I believe, could have done great things.  Great researcher, sounds like.  If he would have been able to fulfill that. He   s the oldest guy, so I think  he had to work on the farm and help support the family and keep the  farm running.  And it sounded like, while he didn   t attend Oklahoma State University,  he was very closely connected with and engaged with the university  throughout his life.  I believe so. I believe so. So, there   s a very definite connection between  the farm and the university.  What do you think is the Adams family OSU legacy? What do you think  of? What legacy has the Adams family left?  Well, I think that maybe it would be persistence (Laughs) and trying to  go out and do your best. I think that a lot of our family members have  learned a lot. I personally learned a tremendous amount when I was at  the university, and I think that can be repeated. The more family  members you talk to, the more you   ll get that same story. Learned a lot  and was able to go out in the world and stick with it and get things done.  It sounds like, in some ways, even though you lived quite a ways off,  you   ve stayed connected to Oklahoma State University most of your life  in terms of being involved and in the Alumni Association, coming back  for family reunions. Is that an accurate statement for you?  Probably more of the reunions. I   ve just been gone so much. I was gone  out of the state for about thirty years, and when I came back I   d always  try to get up to the campus and look and go to football games if I could.  I believe I was here a couple of times when we beat OU, and that was a  good thing. (Laughs)  That   s always a good thing  What have we not covered that you   d like to  bring up? Surely there   s a subject that maybe we   ve missed from your  historical perspective.  19  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Well, I don   t know what I can add other than I hope that we   ll be able to  get a lot of the material in the hands of the right history department or  people that will preserve it. We have a tremendous amount, and we   re  getting more. We kind of hit and miss, do a little research and then get  busy doing other things and then come back to it. We really have hit the  high points, but there   s always a lot of things that are maybe not in that  direct line but are other fun things that are there, and you can always  spend tons of time covering that, but sometimes it   s easier to look at the  old newspaper clippings and photos and things.  It   s interesting. I would say it   s very distinctive and very unusual that  we   ve tracked a family from the first graduating class that with  Oklahoma State University, a major land-grant university in the United  States, being able to track the two graduates and the family through four  generations is a very fascinating study and is one I hear you saying you  really need to capture, get into the archives at Oklahoma State  University.  Yes, me personally, I really think it   s a great thing just to know where  the people came from, that were the first ones at the university and what  the student population looked like in the first class and their  backgrounds. It   s just a fascinating topic to get into, because we were  really a pioneering school, and people that attended were rough and  ready to go and wanted to learn and go out and take on the world, and  that spirit continues.  I know you   re pretty modest, from our conversation, but you really were  in some pretty high-profile, very important work, engineering with the  F-22 and F-16. How do you feel that your education at Oklahoma State  University stood   did it stand you in good stead? Did it prepare you for  your career?  It very much did. When you go off in a profession like I was in, you  always learn when you get on the job, but one of the things as I got into  management, I would try to help our recruiters bring new people in, and  I did frequently talk to recruiters in the course of bringing in young  engineers and hiring them for the company. The recruiter, an older  gentleman, had been there for a longer time than I had. We were talking  about my background and he said,    Where did you get your degree?     and I said,    Oklahoma State.    He says,    Oh, that   s good. We like  engineers from Oklahoma State because that   s a tough program to get  through. If you get through that, you   re good.    (Laughter) That was the  ultimate compliment from a personnel guy, to say if you got through the  program at Oklahoma State, we knew you were going to be able to  contribute.  20  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Great story. Well, Dwain, finally, what favorite memories  do you have   from Oklahoma State University as a graduate?  Well, it always kind of comes back to people, and it was just a good  time. I mean, not from just a sense of friendly people. People that  would   you   re all aiming towards the same goal: getting a good  education. Just that there   s never a period of time that   s the same as  when you   re going through college, the whole rest of your life, that   s  that sort of a spirit. You never realize it when you   re going through it at  the time, but I think as people go through their college experiences, you  meet people and make friendships for the rest of your life. You   ll know  people, and off later in business you   ll meet those same people again.  For the first ten years after I graduated, I would meet people off in  O   Hare Airport that I had gone to school with or off in different places I  was traveling and see him,    Hey, how you doing? Who do you work  for?    and all that. We still kept in touch, as much as we could. It   s easier  for kids now with e-mail and things, so it was pretty hard to stay in  touch when we were going. Once you got out and lost their phone  number, you   re pretty much out of touch, but it was always a pleasure  for me to meet another person I   d gone to school with while I was at the  university and go through old times. Always a lot of fun.  Speaking of some of your favorite memories, were there favorite  hangouts you had off campus and on campus? You were going to school  in the    70s?  (Laughs) Oh yes, there was a lot of exciting things. There were a few  historical things going on back at those times. I think that was back  when the streaker night got started, and, fortunately, I was just an  observer, not a participant. (Laughs)  Certainly can say that on camera, right?  (Laughs) Yes, I can say that on camera, but there were a lot of places.  Washington Street was really full of good restaurants. There was a place  called   oh, what was it? There was the Coachman and several places.  One place had these incredible nachos, and I   ve never had nachos that  good since.  Did they have refreshments with those nachos?  Well, they seemed to have something. It was in pitchers, but I don   t  know. (Laughter) In adequate quantities.  What are you doing now, since you   ve retired from General Dynamics?  21  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  Sehon  Gill  I mostly work with the stock market. I mostly sit there and do that, and I  do other things. When I   m asked, I go and contribute with the school  system there in Chickasha. I   ve been on several planning committees  with their building, and I participate in things with the city and planning  activities where they want some participation of people in the  community to come in.  Do you live in Chickasha?  Yes, I do. So, I try to help out as much as I can if I can contribute.  Well, I appreciate it very much and, again, if there   s anything else we  haven   t covered just be sure to mention it, okay?  Okay, yes. I   m sure that we can give you some more information.  I appreciate it. Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
