 Gill. Today is June 27th, 2009. I   m visiting with Allen  Reding, former Associate Director of the Student Union here at  Oklahoma State University. We   re in the Student Union on the OSU  campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Allen,  we appreciate you taking the time to be with us today.  My pleasure.  I understand it   s a special day today.  It is. The Student Union director now is trying to get a history of the  Student Union together, which we didn   t do too well at. We got a lot of  scrapbooks, but to get an oral history together and some ideas of the  beginning of the Union on the OSU campus. I think that   s really a great  project. I   m proud to be a part of it.  Allen, you were, for 36 years or so, affiliated with the Student Union, but  I   d like to go back and start at the beginning. Can you tell me a little bit  about where you grew up and your early life?  I was born in El Reno, Oklahoma. I went to the Catholic school there,  Sacred Heart, all 12 years of my time and I graduated as one of 12  people (laughs) in 1950. Then I went to El Reno Junior College, now  called Redlands College, for two years there   got an A.A. degree. I  waited around a year and went to the Army for awhile. Got out of the  Army, worked for about a year and got really bored with what I was  doing and said,    I really need to go back to school.    I came to OSU and  started out in architecture, which I really loved, but I couldn   t do the  math. (Laughter) Math was my downfall. I   d like to someday try it  again, but it   s a little late now. My roommate was doing all the stuff I  thought was really cool. He was in Hotel and Restaurant Administration.  5  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  So I switched schools and got a degree in Hotel and Restaurant  Administration. During that time, I got my first job at the Union through  other friends, in another way. I got a job at the Student Union hotel as a  bellhop. That was very interesting. So I was a bellhop for awhile and  then I was a desk clerk for awhile and didn   t make enough money there.  I was doing too well as a bellhop. I went back to bellhopping and got a  chance to move over to the food area and into the coffee shop where I  was a cook and a salad room maker. I did the cooking and all that kind  of stuff and then wound up manager of the coffee shop.  Then one day we were sitting there and a guy came up from Wichita and  he was with Innes Tea Room, which was interesting. He wanted to know  if I   d like to interview to work for him. Turned out they were in Wichita,  they were paying  300 a month, which was a  100 a month more than I  was making here and we were barely making it. We had a brand new  baby. So we went to Wichita for a couple of years. It was a Macy   s store  and when you work for Macy   s, you get an education. So I really learned  how to run a place when I was in Wichita, but we were spending every  other weekend back here in Stillwater visiting friends. We were visiting  Norman Moore and he says,    Why don   t you come back to Stillwater?  Come back and work at the Union.    It took us about 30 seconds to make  that decision. So we moved back to Stillwater and the rest is kind of  history from there.  What year did you come back to work at the Student Union?  Came back in 1964.  And you were at OSU during which years?  I graduated in 1960. Worked in the coffee shop until    62 and then I was  gone for two years   February of    62 and then came back February    64.  They kind of made a place for me, they called it administrative assistant.  (Laughs) I worked in the food area there doing purchasing, can cutting,  just learning meat purchasing and all that. Then I eventually ended up  being food manager in the Student Union for a couple of years. I made a  career decision to get out of food and it kind of forced on me   my  temperament was not for the daily grind meeting deadlines after  deadlines every day. I was not good at that. So they felt sorry for me and  let me move into the big part of the Union. (Laughs) I came over for  programs, for the Student Union Activities Board. I said,    Oh my god, I  don   t know anything about this.    Turned out to be my favorite part of  any job that I ever worked here because I had to work with students and  they   d have big ideas and I got to facilitate   we got to figure out how to  do those things. We did some big, fun programs. We had carnivals and I  don   t know if you remember the Ferris wheels and the tilt-a-whirls on  6  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  the garden terrace and the Fairest of the Fair and all kinds of things.  The funniest one, we had Sadie Hawkins Week. If you remember,  nobody is old enough to remember Sadie Hawkins, but that was out of a  Little Abner cartoon and Sadie Hawkins was chasing men. So during  Sadie Hawkins, the women would all ask the guys for dates and there  was a grease pig contest (laughter) and catch a greased pig, didn   t have  lipstick (laughs), but kids went out and they borrowed a pig from the  swine barn down here and they had a big crowd around Theta pond.  They had the greased pig and they started the contest and they   d run  around and catch it and it was quite a deal. Somehow I had to be in here  and I looked up and here was the chairmen of the committee, he just  looked,    Guess what?    and I said,    Oh no, the pig died.       Yes.    I said     Oh, god. What   d you do?    (Laughter) He said we put it in the back of  the car and took it away. I said,    Good.    (Laughter) And that was the  end of that. That was kind of a funny part of that week. Experiences like  that are fun and we learned a lot on what not to   then we come to find  out that it was a Poland China pig and a characteristic of a Poland China  pig is to have a heart attack when it   s scared and they die. So it was.  (Laughter) They gave us a pig they knew   we didn   t know that would  happen. But it was kind of fun. Stories like that, there   s a bunch of them.  How many years were you in charge of student programming and  student activities?  I   d have to go back in my personnel stuff, but off and on probably about  six or seven years. Because about the middle of that Ray Sharp left and I  got his conference job added to that. So I did conferences and student  work, both, for a number of years and then I was in full conferences.  So you worked from a student worker slinging hash and then you worked  in the Student Union hotel, a bellhop over there for a few years and then  you     I   ve had incredible luck, I guess, of working in a place   I worked so  many different jobs and stayed in the same place. This never happens  anymore. But I had to shift from job to job through the years, except  accounting. They didn   t want to let me touch any money. (Laughter)  But you got a chance to reinvent yourself, sort of, in each job?  Each job and then I   d cover a lot of vacations. I worked in building  operations and housekeeping and engineering and that type thing for a  number of years.  Did you move into the number two position in the Student Union? Was  7  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  that the title, Associate Director?  I had a number of titles and I   d have to go through my personnel records  to know what and I don   t remember some of those. I really don   t know  what years, but I   m one of these people that was a better number two  man than a number one man. There are the pitchers and the catchers and  I was the catcher and I was always happy with that.  So how many years were you in that number two position? Can you  recall?  Just about all. (Laughs) I think a number of them. I was always   well  the titles changed. Last they called it manager and they called it different  titles. I   ll have to go back and really look. I don   t really know. It   s in the  personnel records.  Do you remember what the major operational units were of the Student  Union, different ways that different department heads and how it was  organized? Can you tell me a little about the management?  It   s a little different. It was just a total evolution over a period of time  and I think a lot of that depended on the skills of the people, how they  could handle it and so forth. We didn   t have this thing about doing  searches until the last number of years and in some ways that   s a good  thing and some ways it stifled a lot of the developmental possibilities  among staff, in terms from moving from job to job and learning and  getting more depth in your job.  There are a lot of the revenue streams in the Student Union. Can you  share some of those revenue streams and how that affected the  operations of the Student Union?  We were always poor. (Laughs) I can remember years after a whole year  of operation we had made maybe  4,000, which is ridiculous, and we  would divide that up and somebody would get a picture or curtains or  something. The thing there was that we had a lot of offices in the  building that we were not collecting rent from. We were paying for the  air conditioning and the cleaning and everything. We were not collecting  rent and it has been a constant struggle and finally, I think, bringing Tom  Keys in from the academic area who was able to convince the academic  area that we needed rent to actually survive and turning that into and  actually collecting money for all of the rent that we did. Collecting for  the service that we were providing and that really turned around and we  were having profits. We were borrowing from residence halls for a  number of years. It turned around to the point where we could actually  loan them some money on occasion. It was quite a turn around and it  8  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  was quite good. Also, we used to have lots and lots of employees. I think  we had 250, 275 employees back in the good old days. Now I think they  operate with less than half of that and you can   t tell the difference. We  just have a different style of work. When it comes to numbers, I   m not  really a great one. Reading number stuff is not my  forte .  Allen, out of the different responsibilities you had over the years, what  did you enjoy the most? You talked about student programming, but  were there some additional things you enjoyed in your position?  Overall, I enjoyed being in the place that was kind of the center of the  campus. I enjoyed meeting all the students and the faculty and working  with conferences. Working with all the different departments on campus,  you get to know a lot of people and being able to be    the living room    or     the meeting place    on the campus, I always thought that was our job.  That was what we were best at and I tried to do the best to make the  Student Union be that and for a number of years   I think we still are  looked at as maybe the center of the campus. At least I hope so.  What do you enjoy the most about your job, Allen?  I like meeting all the people and so forth. Also, being in the position, we  don   t know how incredibly fortunate we were to have the staff, that we  were big enough to have our own engineers where we could weld, we  had carpenters here. We had an upholstery shop here. We had a great  food department. So anything you could think of, we had our own  personnel who could carry it all. If you were creative in one area, you  could go down and make your sketch and so forth and we   d make it. It  was pretty cool and that was enjoyable because you were seldom stifled  by any kind of limits, so I think the whole staff kind of took advantage  of that and we grew a lot, too. We trained a lot of students. When you   re  working with students and so forth and they are involved in that, you   re  training them how to do things and create things   it   s pretty fun.  Speaking of working with students, can you think of some success stories  and students that you worked with? Do you remember students that  you   d have to wipe their nose for them and they turned out to be pretty  successful later?  There   s a number of those. I think a more recent one is we were at  Homecoming and we were walking down the street at Walk Around.     Mr. Reding     I looked up and here comes Jim Carreker and he was  with the Halligans. I thought,    That   s interesting.    So he pulls me and  my wife over and introduced me to the Halligans because they were just  on campus recently and he credited me with teaching him how to work  around here. He gave me a lot more credit I think than I deserved, but I  9  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  think that his name is on the housing area over here because of his  donation and he was telling me,    Well, I just sold my Wyndham  Hotels.    He developed the Wyndham Hotels. Jim   s story would be, he  was so nervous. By the way, he was an outstanding student. He was  scared he wouldn   t get a job. He wanted to go work for, I think it was  Sanger Harris, really bad, but he didn   t want to work in the department  store area. He was not real happy with his resume so Jim and I worked  out a bifold resume and had his picture. It was orange and black on the  front. It had his picture in it and we had everything lined up so you could  open it up and see his picture. We printed 50 of those at the print shop  and it wasn   t cheap. I think he used one and he got the job on his first  interview. (Laughter) But I always think that was a good story because  he was always totally prepared.  Kevin Conway, the night manager here, he has a transportation company  with barges on the Mississippi. There are a number of people. Ellison  Beasley went to work for Ditch Witch, he was night manager, married  the information desk clerk and they   re retired and living back in  Stillwater. Doug Forsman, who was with Fire Protection, married  another one of the desk clerks. We got a number of weddings that come  from the information desk and staff being around. The Burchfields met  here and I think there   s quite a few more, but that was always kind of  fun. And they formed their companies and a lot of them have done  extremely well.  Well Allen, you worked under Norman Moore, Winston Shindell, Tom  Keys.  Right. Gerry Ruttman, Abe Hesser. I worked for all of them, all but Chet  Tibbetts.  Did you work with Mitch  Kilcrease ?  Mitch came after I was retired.  Can you tell me a little about each director that you worked with and  can you tell me about their strengths and stories?  Beginning with Abe   Abe was legendary. He had a reputation that was  a little bit sharper than Abe really was. Abe was really a superior human  being, but he had his way that things should be running right. And  everything in the Student Union ran right, or we knew about it. There  was a lot of fear of Abe. I don   t know that I ever saw him actually fire  anybody on the spot, but people didn   t stay around long sometimes if  they weren   t doing what they should be doing. Abe expected a lot of  everybody and I think he got a lot of everybody, but when he walked  10  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  down the hall, there was quietness. (Laughter) After Abe was Norman.  I   m sure you   ve got a couple of good Abe Hesser stories. Can you share  a couple with me?  Well, I don   t know if you remember Jack Baker or not. His dad was in  athletics, but his son, Jack Jr., was in the Student Union and back in  those days, Jack Jr. was in the hotel. He was a desk clerk, I think, at 14  years old. He was very competent and was able to do it. But later on  when Jack had moved over to food and we were in there, I was food  manager, we decided (there was hamburgers in the coffee shop there)  the hamburgers were a little dull. We were tired of eating the same old  hamburgers. So we worked up a hamburger   we just changed the  hamburger recipe (laughter) and we gave them more meat and we   d put  them in the bun and put a little more stuff on it and so forth. About a  week later, Abe called us up to his office and he told us how to make  hamburgers.    You have five ounces of meat, you have one slice of  tomato, you have one bun, you have a little piece of lettuce and    It was  the first time I ever heard this, he said,    Now watch my lips    and he told  us how to make those things. First time I   d ever heard that expression.  I   ve heard it since then and he ended up    bam     on the table and we  made hamburgers the old fashioned way ever since. That was a  memorable day. That was probably my most memorable experience of  that type of Abe.  We always got along really well together. I was kind of known for  having ideas different than anybody else and so forth and occasionally  and usually if it was a good one then he   d support me on that. We did a  lot of out-of-the-blue projects that I thought would work and we would  improve things, so I   ve got a number of little spots around the Union  that show that. Abe would support you. Also, in terms of the Student  Union, Abe was one of the founders, not only one of the founders, but  one of the powers of ACUI  Association of College Unions  International  and on the bronze plaque right here in front of the office,  he donated that. But the year they developed that role statement     Role  of the College Union    , Abe was president of ACUI. Later on he  donated the plaque out here so we could always remember what we were  about. So he brought in, of course, conferences here, he   d bring in the  top people from around the country from student unions who we got to  have with our staff. So we were indoctrinated with national figures of  what a student union should be from early on, so that was quite  impressive.  So Norman Moore.  Norman Moore. I probably shouldn   t say this on camera, he   s still  11  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  living  (Laughter) It was interesting. Norman and I, we got along real  well. He was a good manager, but Norman had a management style that  just drove you nuts. He would give you this problem and then he would  sit around and wait until you came up with his answer. (Laughs)  Sometimes it took us a long time to figure out what he wanted and so  that   s kind of Norman, but Norman did a lot of good. Norman was a  very good person to work with. Our kids all kind of grew up together  and we were family in and out of the Union bubble   a number of the  staff were. We all lived on the north side of town and our kids all were  about the same age so we did quite a bit. He had four girls, which I  thought would have been incredible.  Are there some favorite Norman Moore stories?  No, I really don   t. Norman was a frustrated artist, I think, and he enjoyed  doing design work and this type of thing. So we got along fine.  If you talk about his legacy, what did he bring to the Student Union?  Well, he was pretty stable, as Abe was. Abe would always come down  on the side of the students. He was very good about that and I think  Norman did a very good job. Some of those years, in the    70s, we had a  lot of campus unrest. It   s hard to think about how it was back then, but it  was pretty hairy for awhile and I think Norman   we went through some  of those pretty well because of calm leadership.  And Winston Shindell?  Winston Shindell, oh lord. Well we had  Gerald  Ruttman in there in  between those and he was one we   d probably rather forget. If he hears  this, he   ll know that I mean it  (Laughter) Ruttman was an interesting  character. We didn   t realize at the time, but this guy was probably, I  would say in today   s world he would be called a multiple personality.  We didn   t know it at the time, but his leadership style was pretty this  way and that way. He had a good staff meeting and he let us do a lot of  things. He encouraged creativity, which was good. He had a lot of good  points to him because he was one of the reasons I got to move around a  little bit and flex in which I learned a lot. But he was hard to get along  with. And mysterious in a lot of ways.  So you were glad to see Winston come on board then?  So Winston came on and that was good. He was in Student Activities  and so he was familiar with all of us through Student Activities so the  student aspect of the Student Union was very nicely moved in and so it  enhanced student activities and the Student Union when he came in.  12  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Winston was pretty creative and worked hard and we did quite a few  changes, when he was here, in development.  Over the years we   ve been talking about the different leadership and the  different directors and you were here 36 years?  Well, if you count the part-time, 36.  A lot of changes. Let me ask you a philosophical question. Allen, from  your perspective, what is or what should be the mission of the Student  Union?  I think the mission of the Student Union should be what   s listed as the  role of the Student Union down the front door. We   re the living room of  the campus, we foster leadership development. We feel this is a place  that is a neutral area where anybody can come and debate. The unions  were founded by debating societies and it was a place where you could  come and talk and work out your problems. So this was a place where  you can meet and work out your problems. We   re the living room of the  campus where you can come and meet and relax, or work or do  whatever you want to. I think it   s a good meeting place, over the door on  the east side,    I   ll meet you at the Union.    I think that   s a good motto.  OSU says,    Howdy.    We say,    I   ll meet you at the Union.     So the Student Union is the heart of the campus.  The heart of the campus   that came up a little later on, but I think that  we   d like to be seen as the heart of the campus. Roscoe Rouse and I got  into it   he didn   t like that. He was the director of the library. (Laughter)  He says,    How can you call yourself the heart of the campus?    Knowing  that he felt the library was. I said,    Roscoe, we can be the heart. We  pump the blood. But you   re the brains.    Well, that took care of him.  (Laughter)  Great response. Over the years a lot of issues have emerged and  changed over your time. What has changed in terms of merging issues,  what is different about the Student Union over 30-some-odd years when  you started? Can you share some of those thoughts with us?  I think at one time we were kind of the center of the campus and then it  grew out a ways and I think now, looking at the atrium and so forth, that  now we   re being recognized by students. I don   t know what caused it to  kind of slow down, but it did. I think it   s swinging back to that. I don   t  know who   Mitch has, they   re doing a great job of putting the story out  now that we never did very much of and I think they   re doing a great  job. I think one of my problems I always had was I never felt like   we  13  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  were here for faculty, staff and guests and I never felt like many of the  faculty knew or felt the Student Union was useful in terms of educating  the students. We always felt like we were useful, but we never got that  kind of recognition from any of the faculty. You never heard it because  there was always somebody complaining about the bookstore stealing  from the students and it was always that kind of negative stuff. But I  think maybe we still have those issues as recently as last year, it   s more  of an annual event, but I think people see us more warmly now than they  did ten, fifteen years ago. And so I think we   re maybe on the right track.  Looking back on your tenure, what have been some of the major  accomplishments, major events that you recall in the life of the Student  Union?  Major events?  Major milestones, major accomplishments?  We had so many events. We had so many things happen. It   s very  difficult to come up with a major event that we were involved in because  a lot of mine were daily stuff that that night it was over with.  For example, different renovations. When Haile Selassie was on the  campus     He was here before I was. And Truman was here before I was. But we  used to have these big conferences, 4-H conferences and they   ve kind of  moved to the other side of the campus, but Rainbow Special Olympics  has been a big one we   ve enjoyed. Of course, my big favorite is  Madrigal Dinner which I was director of for 25 years. That   s been kind  of a gift to the community for and it   s still going, which I   ve been  absolutely amazed. Joe has done a good job of keeping that going. Very  few programs go that many years. (Laughs)  That was under your direct supervision, the Madrigal Program?  Well, I didn   t run fast enough. Bruce Twenhoffel brought that to OSU.  Hoover Fisher and Bruce got together and got the concept going and  they asked and I said,    Well, I   ll do the sets for it.    And so I did the first  half of the sets, it looked like it was going to be pretty good. We did the  rest of the sets the next year and I cannot believe they have lasted almost  30 years. (Laughter) We just put them together and that has been fun. I  was always able to get involved. Then, the second year Bruce decided to  leave and they decided to have the theater department do it. Vivia Locke  directed it and I guess it just tore the theater department apart. They  wanted to get out of it the next year.    Allen     So I didn   t know anything  14  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  about it. Bruce had left. I found a book he had. It had some instructions  on how to do Madrigal Dinners. I looked at that and read it, and said,    I  can write a better script than this.    So I started writing the scripts and the  rest is history. So I was learning music from Hoover and later on Jerry  McCoy. So I learned about music. I learned about scripts. I learned  about direction. I got Sandra Williams to help me choreograph and we  put together a good team and it   s still going.  You worked with the Alumni Association Hall of Fame Induction?  Oh yeah, I worked with all the inductions. We had graduation  ceremonies here. We   ve had many, many banquets with notable people  here and I think that some of the occasions   did we talk about the ball  room? One of the cool early Student Union stories and I think that it  needs to be remembered. In terms of Hesser   s military thought, the  ballroom waitresses, when we had a ballroom function, would march in,  in step, carrying their trays and they had their black uniforms, little lace  caps. They   d walk in and go to their tray stands and wait and it was a  procession that was just really sharp. Then they would serve, and when  they left, they would always march out the same way. They   d always  have a big, huge ovation for that. That was always just the high point in  the banquet time. And there   s just   that was cool. Kind of one of the  traditions that I don   t think you could ever restore.  At one time the catering and events hosted in the ballroom were much  more formal probably     Much more formal, yeah. We   ve had many events in there. If you  remember the old luaus when we had Pat Davis up and she   d dance the  Tahitian dance and we   d make volcanoes. We   d take all the pillows off  the end cushion and we   d sit on the floors and have great food, much  food.  What are some of your favorite memories, your special moments that  you recall in the time that you worked for the Student Union?  You know, that   s really hard. There were so many of them.  Sometimes you felt good  Sometimes you feel good, yeah. And there were little things. These little  personnel things. I don   t know about events that I get tied up. I hadn   t  thought about it that way. I read your question and I hadn   t really  thought about it that way, as a huge event. I just had many little personal  encounters along the way and did different things.  15  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Can you share some of those things that give you pleasure, that you  enjoyed? That you look back and think,    This was part of the job that  was fun. I enjoyed it.     Yeah, well I was in the ballroom the other night at a party, making a list  of all the things that I can remember from the ballroom, just that one  room and then you turn around and we were talking a little bit ago about  the council room and I can remember all of the crazy things about the  council room. So every room here has some memories. (Laughter) As  far as my renovation   in some of my efforts in terms of my frustrated  architecture career is one of my favorite jobs that we did were the  Alumni-Centennial Lounge and the handicap access to the theater. That  took a lot of work to get that down and get it done and it was almost all  done in-house. I   m really proud of that area. That was about 15 years  ago or so and it still looks pretty good. So those areas, the ballroom  renovation, the Oklahoma Room and I think they   ve been through a  couple (laughs) since then, but we were able to do a lot of that in house.  I guess one of the major ones is the summer we did the hotel and  bookstore renovation. We did for  2.8 million the hotel and the  bookstore renovation using in-house people. And what we gave to the  hotel was, we gutted it out, all the old HVAC systems, and put in a     Cadillac    air conditioning system. We didn   t have enough money for  wall paper, so we painted the walls again. I don   t think they ever  realized when the Athertons did their donation that they inherited a place  that just needed to be decorated. I am amazed and pleased with what  they have done with it, but those are some of the things   the bookstore,  they   re just now going to renovate. That   s been a long time to go on one  renovation and I think it needs it.  Allen, you were talking a little bit earlier about some of your special  memories of some students that you worked with. Can you share some  stories from individuals that jump out at you that you worked with? You  saw them grow and develop. You mentioned Kevin Conway.  Oh yeah, when I worked with SUAB we   d get a poster down there and I  was thinking Brady Hunt was one of our SUAB presidents, played the  banjo. Well Brady has gone on to law school and is a lawyer in  Oklahoma City and he runs the banjo get-together  Oklahoma  International Bluegrass Festival  in Guthrie every year.  Oh really? Okay.  Ivol Gregory was one of my SUAB people and Ivol is back and he is  now, through a series of jobs around town, with the Greek System back  in the Student Union. Luke Altendorf was one of our night managers. He  16  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  is the director of a Union at Texas A M, I believe and Winston Beasley  I think we talked about. That   s why it   s fun to come back to  Homecoming because somebody will go,    Mr. Reding     (Laughter).  Then you hope you can remember their name, but I do.  You touched on this earlier, but maybe again, why is the Student Union  so important to the University?  When recognized as such, it is the living room, the front door in many  cases and the part that many people come to first. It is a warm spot. It   s  available here that   s hard to do in a classroom and it   s hard to do in the  other parts of the University. Libraries are doing that now; you put a  snack bar in the library and many of the colleges now have a mini  lounge. But I think as far as the total campus, our role, I think, is to  supplement the educational process while students are here through  programs and offering them something new to see. I   m very pleased.  We   ve never been a very big art supporter. When I was there we had a  lot of art shows. I   d bring them in and they   re pretty easy to get. It   s  never been part of the big program and I think in the new union, there is  an art gallery. I think students walking through and seeing something a  little different, it kind of helps them see things, maybe not just there, but  other places. It kind of opens your mind to be a little more flexible and  open. I think we should provide those opportunities for students to  create, develop and be more when you leave than you were when you  got here.  The follow up question to that is the alumni are really loyal to the  Student Union. They   re really passionate to the Student Union. Why do  you think that is?  I think if they got involved in the Student Union, they had lots of staff  support. I think our staff is really good at working with students. And  this is where they could dig in and I think students develop at different  times and a lot of them in high school, they   re part of the student  organizations, but a lot of them haven   t been when they come to  campus. This is their opportunity to develop those skills. They come in  and with a little staff assistance, they can run a club. We help them  organize a club and do all this kind of stuff, put on some programs.  Well, this is invaluable when you get out and need to make a  presentation to your boss. You have done that before sometime. It   s  those type of things when you   re involved here, I think, become  important in what they call the    other education,    while you   re at OSU.  Education outside the classroom experience.  Right.  17  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  What are some of the things that the Student Union, in your mind, over  the years has done in terms of activities for students outside the  classroom other than coming for a cup of coffee?  Well, this is one that I   m kind of proud of. We did a co-op one of my  first   we did the Will Rogers Film Festival, the first Will Rogers Film  Festival that ever happened. I said,    We don   t know anything about Will  Rogers. We should have a Will Rogers Film Festival.    So we got with  our group and contacted Will Rogers Museum and found out what all we  need to know about doing a film festival, to do one. We put together  Will Rogers Week and we printed up all kinds of little stickers and that  was a big deal back then. Had the movie set up and we had silent  movies, we got Margaret Nichols, who was a piano faculty here that had  retired, and so we had silent movies and she played the piano for the  silent movies. It was wonderful. At one time, there was a chase scene  and she started doing the chase scene before it came up on the screen. I  asked her about that and she says,    I remember.    (Laughter) So it was a  great time.  But anyway, at that time Will Rogers Jr. found out we were doing this  and asked if he could come. So Peter Rollins and I had worked this  program up. Will Rogers Jr. came to that. He   d come for the showing  and talked with the people there and told them about the making of that  movie. His job in that movie was he had  white shoe polish  to put on  the rope so it could show up in the film. That was his job in that movie.  (Laughter) So Will Rogers came through and if you   ve never seen  Ropin    Fool, you   ve gotta   this is absolutely amazing. That was his job.  So this is really interesting to the students. I think you really learn about  movie making. You learn about the celebrities. You learn about Will  Rogers himself. Will Rogers was a very broad person.  So then we called the middle school and said we had some time we  didn   t know what to do with. Called Mr. Mills and said,    Hey, we   ve got  Will Rogers Jr. here. Can you get an assembly together?    So we went  down to the middle school and showed it to half of the kids. The whole  thing full of   and he talked to them down there. I think this type of  thing, bringing people in, showing them   I think this rubbing in the  students in a small way will open up for a few people and I think even if  they don   t go, they know it   s happening and I think that   s good, too.  We talked about the directors and obviously they were more prominent  and we know the names, but who are some of those quiet heroes that you  worked with? Department heads, different people that worked here for  several years.  In the old time? Oh yeah. These are the people that educated me. Abe  18  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Hesser was one, as an educator. Robbie Robinson was the Chief  Engineer here who had been with the building that was being built and  knew every nut and bolt and knew every air conditioning unit in the  building, in the old building. Robbie was a great instructor. Emil Jafek  was a great   he was an engineer, but knew, he had been in the Army as  one of these people that made the demonstration models for training and  Emil could do anything mechanically   just anything. Paul Kinnamon  who was a professional painter. He knew everything, taught me all about  that, wallpaper, and Paul was a great teacher. Chris Tinker in food. She  had a degree, but she had worked for  Stouffers  for several years, came  back here in food production   very creative in food and so forth. Baker  Bokorney, a long time friend. Baker was good at putting together the  overall scene.  What position did Baker have here?  Baker was a food manager at one time.  And then he moved on to become director of the Hotel and Restaurant  school?  Right. He went from here to Hotel and Restaurant school director after  Mr. McAllister. In the Student Union, I   d say Alice Richardson taught  me more about accounting than I ever wanted to know, but it was  extremely helpful. Bill Hunter was the rock of the foundation of the  bookstore. He was an old veteran, and he had an excellent ship. I had a  lot of respect. Winsel Bilyeu, how could I forget him? Winslow hired  me. I came in under Abe but Winslow was a true teacher and a great  friend and Winslow knew everybody and was involved in a lot of things.  He taught us to get out and around. I could go on and on and I think a lot  of staff members, we all learn from each other. So it was good, but those  are some of the old ones.  I   m thinking in different eras, in terms of society and the University that  impacted the Student Union, the late    60s, early    70s, kind of the radical  movement. Can you remember any instances we had in terms of   I know  we had some boycotts, some racial instances in the early    70s, are there  some events like that that stand out?  Oh, I forgot about this. One of my jobs in the student area   and you  have to remember, this is a different time. But they decided to have, it  was black history week or month. So I got a bunch of,    Allen, you  coordinate this and you just keep them in here in the building.    So I got  together with Nimrod Chapelle, who is in University Food Service, and  we got a bunch of the black students. Margaret Smith was an English  professor and who was the student leader? The guy who pronounced his  19  name different than you would read it. I have to think of that sometime,  but a bunch of different black students together and put together the first  Black History Week. We had Gwendolyn Brooks, who was a poet from  Chicago, and we had an artist who did oil painting from New York. And  we had  writer/poet Langston Hughes . Anyway, we had black historians  and black artists and black everybody and we had a guy, Ron Karenga,  was a Black Panther from Los Angeles who was going to come talk. I  may have a few surviving copies of the program I   ll donate.  Well at this time, if you remember Mr.  Eval  Gay was the chief of  security and Mr.  Paul  Cipriano was the former FBI person in charge of  that and so we   d gone into this program quite a bit. Paul Sipriano came  by and said,    Allen, do you know what you   re getting into?    And I said,     I don   t know.    He said,    Well, Ron Keringa has a price on his head and  we   re deeply concerned about him coming to OSU. If they get him, he   ll  be shot.    And so I said,    Oh my God, what am I going to do?    So I got  the group together and we talked about it and he says,    Well, if you get  the support and we can be supported, then we   ll go ahead and do this.  We   ll do it in the field house and we   ll have security and so forth.    This  is before you had security as we know it now.  So he was going to come in to Tulsa at like ten o   clock at night and so,  the students decided they were going to go pick him up. And so Paul  lines up highway patrolmen to escort them over there and to escort them  back to Stillwater. As far as we knew, they figured his history was that  he would back out at the last minute, but we had no clue that he hadn   t  backed out. We were all kind of secretly hoping it would not happen and  so, they went over there and he didn   t get off the plane. (Laughs) So a  huge sigh of relief. Those are nights when the phone would ring at two  o   clock in the morning and nobody would be there. This was a crazy  time and strange things happen, but my phone went out. My phone was  having trouble here and finally I just said,    Paul, if you   re going to tap  my phone then please get the thing fixed so it   ll work.    (Laughter)  Anyway, the phone got fixed  So we had stuff going on here. It was an  interesting time. Those were interesting times, they really were, but it  was a learning experience and this is the way we taught a bunch of  students on how things worked that didn   t know anything.  The other funny story of that is we were going to do soul food day. So  Joe Blair , Res Hall Food Manager over all OSU food, comes and does  his soul food research and he comes in and says,    Well this is our soul  food menu,    that he would suggest. And so we had collards and I forget  what he had tried, but he had all kinds of stuff. Anything that could turn  pale, it did. (Laughs) I said,    Well, we   d like to have it modified.    We  ended up with a modified soul food week, but it was kind of funny.  (Laughter) So that   s one funny part about it. As far as education goes, I  20  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  thought it was one of our high points. It really was. I need to maybe put  that together and if we could find Margaret Williams and those crews, I  think  Nimrod Chappelle  lives in Guthrie or Edmond, but get some of  those leaders back together and discuss that because it would be really  kind of fun.  When you talk about the fun side, I can see the sparkle in your eyes and  the passion, but there   s also a lot of hard times in there and I   ve got to  assume your job was a lot of times 60 to 70 hours a week and probably,  on occasion, 80 hours a week. I guess my question is how did you last so  long? Thirty-some-odd years. It had to be pretty physically demanding,  24/7.  Well, I   m on oxygen now. (Laughs) How   d I last so long? We kept in  shape. I weighed a lot less at that point. You know, we got together and  partied a lot at that time. Which we don   t party now, not like we did  then. We had really good parties and it kept the staff   we knew each  other pretty well. So how did we make it   when the water is knee deep  in the basement, you just work at it until it   s gone.  There   s got to be something, a source of motivation, a source of pride,  something, that keeps you going when it wasn   t about the paycheck.  You know, that   s a funny thing   I had ever thought about that until I  read your questions. But I think the overall thing that really kind of  keeps everybody going is your sense of purpose on the campus. We  knew we had a reason for being and we did it. I think just having that  sense of purpose was good. That was really why. You knew you were  wanted, you knew you were needed and we knew we were doing  something worthwhile.  Looking back on your career, how do you hope people remember Allen  Reding? How do you hope they   ll remember you?  Funny thing you mention that. When I retired in 1995, I think it was, we  had probably one of the nicest retirement parties that I ever remember.  In fact, your picture is in the book. You were there. People wrote letters  and Billy collected them and put them in a folder and I took them home  and I don   t remember ever reading them until the other day I was getting  stuff out and I was reading those letters and it just almost brings tears to  your eyes. I mean, I had a stack of letters that thick from different people  on the campus, all around the campus, from all eras. Even Dr.  Robert   Kamm wrote me a handwritten full page letter remembering stuff. And  in many different ways, I think a lot of times I had the fortunate position  of being here, being the first when people came to me, apparently if  they   d see me they could get stuff done. I always thought that was my  21  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  job. (Laughs) If people needed something, we   d take care of it.  Apparently, I was recognized for that and I think that is a pretty good  thing to be recognized for. Even if it wasn   t my department, I   d go get it  done.  We had an information desk. Our policy was, if people called to ask  questions and we couldn   t answer it. We   d take their number and find  the answer and call them back. Eventually, the switchboard would just  send those questions to us. (Laughs) We were looking up phone  numbers, but we got that. We had the reputation of being the place  where you could get an answer or get things done.  Take off your modesty cap for just a minute. I   m going to add onto your  comments. What did you bring to the mix, and I realize it was a team  effort, but what did you bring to the Union to help continue the legacy  and build it?  Take off my modesty cap? My attitude was,    You can do anything you  want to.    And my attitude also was,    I don   t ask permission unless I  think I have to. If I don   t want    no    for answer then go ahead and do it.     That was my management style and actually, I tried to be pretty sane  about most things. But I think as far as teaching staff and teaching  students and so forth, you decide what you want to do, come up with a  plan, figure out who all you need to involve in it and do it. Nike stole my  motto    just do it.    (Laughter) But we did, it was an attitude that if we  decided if we wanted to do a theme banquet, we researched it and did it.  We just did it. It doesn   t take much. You just figured out how to do it  and did it. So it was easy.  I may be able to read into and answer this question, but I   m going to  include this question. You had 30-some-odd years to do it, but what  would you do differently? What would you do the same?  What would I do differently?  In your career here at the Student Union?  My career. Well, the easy answer is I probably would get my master   s  and go on up. I always felt totally comfortable being the number two  man. I liked that position because you didn   t have all the guff, but you  were able to be creative and you were able to actually work with a  project. It was more my style. I might have got a few more class hours,  but I kind of learned with all my background. I had 235 hours on my  bachelor   s, so I have a fairly well rounded background.  How many?  22  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  Reding  Gill  220 or 230. It   s a bunch. (Laughter)  Undergraduate hours?  Yes.  Wow.  Well now, probably 50 are Fs in math. (Laughter) But my background is  pretty varied. Plus when I came in, I brought some with me when I  started that, so. What would I do different? I   m not sure. I married well.  I had a good bunch of kids and I enjoyed my students. I enjoyed the staff  along the way. So, I would just hope that I could come into a similar  situation if I could do it over. That doesn   t show a lot of creativity, but if  I could really do it all over, I would find somebody to teach me how to  do math, I would take engineering and I would be an architect. And  being a frustrated architect, I have a lot of paw prints around this  building that show what you can do if you study catalogs and meet the  salesmen.  Allen, I appreciate it very much. Thank you. It   s been super.  -------  -------   
