 Finchum  Today is October 7, 2009, and I   m here in Owasso, Oklahoma, to visit  with Frances Finch, a 1952 graduate of Oklahoma A M College and  the daughter of Edmon Low, the former Dean of the OSU Library from  1940-1967. He served the longest period  to date . This interview is  being conducted as part of the O-STATE Stories Oral History Project  for the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU Library,  so thank you for having me today. It   s a pleasure to meet you.  Thank you.  Let   s start off by having you tell us a little bit about your youth, where  you were born, and then we   ll move forward.  Okay. My father was Assistant Librarian at East Central State College  from sometime before 1930 until 1937. I was born in Ada in 1931 and  lived there for the first six years of my life.  And you went to first grade there?  I didn   t go to first grade there because in 1937 my father decided that he  needed further advanced education, and so we moved to Ann Arbor,  Michigan, where he wanted to study for the Master   s in Library Science.  At that time, you did not have a PhD in Library Science. You did one  year beyond the bachelor   s, another BA in Library Science, and then if  you wanted more, you did a second year for a master   s. And so he had  done the bachelor   s at the University of Illinois in 1929-30 when he and  my mother were first married, and then he decided that he needed to do  the second year. So, we all moved to Ann Arbor, and so I did first grade  in Ann Arbor, Michigan. That   s also where I finished my final education  was at the University of Michigan.  Full circle, then.  5  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Full circle, right.  And then from Ann Arbor you went     To Bowling Green University, Bowling Green, Ohio. He got the job as  Head Librarian in Bowling Green, Ohio, and so I went to second and  third grade in Bowling Green. And then he got the job at OSU, and so  we moved to Stillwater. I finished high school there and went to OSU  and then to the University of Michigan for my library degree.  Do you remember much about moving to Stillwater?  Not a great deal. I was about nine, I guess. We rented a house on Lewis  Street, which is the first one east of Main. It was fairly close to the  downtown at that point. I went to Jefferson Elementary School, which  was a block away. (Laughs) In those days you didn   t eat lunch at the  school. You came home, so I came home for lunch every day. I  remember something about those years. Of course, then later in high  school I would bike to the school. I started violin   well, I   d started  piano lessons actually back in Bowling Green and learned to play a bit  and continued them when we got to Oklahoma. Then when I was about  twelve I also started the violin so I could play in the high school  orchestra and then later on also in the college orchestra which I did  while I was still in high school. I took violin lessons from the fellow  who conducted the orchestra.  When did you graduate from high school?  Nineteen forty-nine.  So, sixty years?  Sixty years ago, yes.  Do you have any brothers and sisters?  I have two brothers. They   re both younger. One of them is gone now,  the one that lived here  in Owasso . He died at age fifty-nine, but my  other brother is still living, and he lives in Dayton, Ohio.  Scattered around a little bit.  Scattered around, yes.  And you   re actually in Canton, New York.  6  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Right. That   s way up near the Canadian border. My closest large city is,  in fact, Ottawa, not Syracuse. Syracuse is 120 miles and Ottawa is just  80.  Cool weather up there right now, too, I   d say.  Probably. It   s hard to tell. It often will be similar to here at this time of  year.  And you attended OSU, or OAMC, at that time.  Right.  Do you remember much about campus?  Yes, some of the chemistry labs. I was a chemistry major, and the  chemistry labs were in Quonset huts. The year that we had the hail  storm, the hour-long hail storm, of course the windows in a Quonset hut  were slanted rather than vertical because of the shape of the Quonset hut,  and it broke a lot of windows, (Laughs) a lot of windows. And, of  course, that was before the library was built.  Before the current one, yes.  Before the current library was built, and several of the pieces of the  library were also in Quonset huts.  Really?  Yes.  Do you remember which ones?  The reserve desk, those that they had on reserve, it was a reading room  and stacks for the reserves.  And where would they have been?  Well, the old library     Was closer to Hester Street?  Probably, yes, and there was an annex behind it. And I think they also  had reserve books there and a reading room. And they had a desk, which  would be attended. But when I was a junior in high school I took typing.  At the end of that year, my dad had designed a card to keep track of  7  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  what periodicals went to the bindery, so he hired me by paying me  fifteen cents an hour out of his own pocket (Laughs) to type these  bindery cards with the names of the periodicals. That was how I got my  start in library work was doing that, and by the end of the summer I was  convinced that   s what I wanted to do. (Laughs)  Did you actually do that in the library or did you do it at home?  I did it in the library in the old annex, yes, where they had the bindery  operation, where they assembled periodicals and tied them up. If they  were complete they went to the bindery. This was right at the end of the  war, right at the end of World War II. And a little bit later he set up an  arrangement where they took a college station wagon each week or  every two weeks, I guess, and they would load these tied-up periodicals  into the back of the station wagon and drive it over to Muskogee to the  bindery. And two weeks later they   d come with another one, and they   d  bring back the newly-bound periodicals. He said when they first started  the bindery operation it was still recovering from the lack of help during  the war, but they got accustomed to doing that much, and so that was  how it worked. (Laughs) It was very useful if somebody wanted a  periodical. You could look on the bindery record and say,    Yes, it went  Wednesday, and it   ll be back in two weeks.     I think we still do some of that today.  Is it still the Modern Book Binding Company in Muskogee that does it?  I   m not sure who does it.  I   d like to know because it was a family operation, I remember, and the  son was away during the war, but then he came back and joined the firm.  And during the war they had the War Information Center somewhere in  the library. Can you tell us anything about that?  No, I can   t. I don   t remember anything about it.  I think your father had a major role in getting that to OSU at that time.  I see. No, I don   t remember anything about that.  So, you got interested in being a librarian as a junior in high school?  Right.  But then you majored in chemistry?  8  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Right, yes. I remember struggling as a senior, trying to decide what I   d  want to major in. I was taking a chemistry course in high school and  liked it. My dad thought that would be a very good major because he  said,    Librarians should have a subject specialty. The sciences have  many fewer trained librarians and so that would be a good thing to do.     So I did. Now what I have is a Bachelor of Arts in Chemistry rather than  the Bachelor of Science. You had to take more chemistry for that. I was  only so-so in the necessary math background for it, and I wanted to take  a really broad variety of courses, too, and so I needed more. Plus, I was  doing it in three years, the bachelor   s degree.  Did you have a choice to go somewhere else, or was it just expected that  you   d go to OAMC?  It was just expected, yes, because I lived at home all but part of one  semester  when  I lived in the sorority house.  Do you remember taking any classes in Old Central?  No, I didn   t. I didn   t. Where did I take them? I don   t remember what  buildings.  I think English was taught in Old Central a lot back in that time period,  so I thought maybe you would have had an English class there.  I don   t think so, no. I don   t remember going to Old Central for any  classes. What were some of the other classroom buildings at the time?  There were some where the architecture building is now. That was the  old Armory Building, and then for classrooms I   m not sure.  I just don   t remember. I started in the summer of    49 right after I  graduated from high school, taking psychology or something like that  for the summer, but I can   t remember where we met. I   m almost sure it  wasn   t Old Central.  And so you were there when they did the groundbreaking for the current  library in 1950-51?  Seems to me that I wasn   t. That I knew about it, of course, but that I was  already away from home. Of course, they went through quite a long  period of trying to close Washington Street so they could build it across  that, and I guess that   s the late    40s. It   s when I was in high school.  Did your dad talk about that much at home, that controversy?  9  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Some, yes. He would report on it, how things were going and so forth.  He had been asked to teach summer school at the University of  Michigan back when he was at Bowling Green, I think. Right from the  time he graduated, he got that second degree at Michigan, and he would  come back and teach summers because many students in library science  would be enrolled in the summer school. He was especially fond of  cataloging, and he understood the Library of Congress classification  system very well. Back in his days at Ada, he had converted their library  from the Dewey classification system to the Library of Congress  classification system, (Laughs) so he knew it well enough to teach it.  When I was in school I sat in on that class once so that I could do it, too.  Was it interesting to have your father as a teacher?  Yes. He really was very good. You know, any teacher who really  understands their subject well, I think, is often very good, and he  certainly understood it. (Laughs) I enjoyed that.  And he did that, I read somewhere, for twenty-five years?  Yes, he did it through the war years by going up on the train and leaving  the car with my mother. He got a room close enough to the university  campus that he could just walk back and forth. He did that through about  1946 I think, something like that, and then when this problem about  closing the street came up for the new library, he decided he   d better be  around the whole year. So, he didn   t accept the summer school offer for  at least three years. It   d be    47,    48,    49, I think, something like that.  And then about 1950, when that conflict was over, they asked him to  come back. So, he went and taught summer school, and by that time I  was in college, and so I went along and took summer school at Michigan  and transferred it back to OSU. I did physics. (Laughs)  A nice shared experience.  Yes. I stayed in the dorms, and he kept the room that he had had. I don   t  know how many years he did that, but my mother, because my two  brothers were younger, she stayed home in Stillwater until about, well,  let   s see. I graduated in 1952. My daughter was born in 1954. Beginning  about 1953, she went with him, and they rented a house in Ann Arbor  for the summer from someone who was at the university but who did  summer investigations up in northern Michigan. They were able to rent  that house for four or five summers, and my mother took care of my  daughter while I went to school to get my library degree. So, I did all my  library degree work in summers like many people did, maybe still do, I  don   t know.  10  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  I   d intended after graduating from college to go for the year at Michigan.  I didn   t because I did one summer, and trained librarians were in fairly  short supply at that time. The librarian at Louisiana State University  wrote to my dad and said,    I need somebody to head my chemistry  branch library,    and so my dad suggested me. (Laughs) This was where  the chemistry major came in handy, so that fall I was hired, and I moved  to Baton Rouge. But in my graduate work at Michigan, I had met my  first husband, and we were married in 1953 at Christmastime. I was only  in Baton Rouge a year and a half, then I moved to Canton, New York,  where he was a teacher at Saint Lawrence University, which is a small  liberal arts college in northern New York, and that   s where I still am.  (Laughs)  That was your first husband?  First husband that I moved up there with, yes. He died in 1973, and I  married again in 1980, another Saint Lawrence professor, and then he  died in 2003.  So, you held the librarian job there for     At first, just part-time, and then later when I needed a full-time job and  my son was born, was tiny still, Saint Lawrence didn   t have a full-time  job available. So, I hired on at the State University  New York  College  at Potsdam, which was ten miles away. I was there seventeen years, but  I   ve now been retired   I retired in 1989. I   ve been retired twenty years   And so you had one son. Do you have other children?  A daughter.  Is either one of them interested in library work?  My daughter is the head librarian of Cincinnati State College, which is a  two-year school with a lot of vocational training, and my son is a  computer programmer. Likes to act. He   s done some acting jobs.  Did any of Edmon Low   s grandchildren attend OSU or have they  through the years?  Yes. None of my children. My daughter went to the University of  Vermont and my son to Colby College in Maine. But this family of my  brother, he had five children, and let   s see. The oldest boy went, I think,  for about a year, and then he stopped to form his own business. And the  three girls, Mona, Donna, and Barbara, two of them are OSU graduates.  11  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  The third one went to OU. (Laughter) And because of that, one of the  things I   ll show you later is the picture of the Edmon Low Library, and  right in front of it is a little house, which is split. (Laughter) It had both  OU flags and OSU flags. But the youngest one, Barbara, is very much  an OSU fan, but so is her sister, Mona. Now, Mona is Mona Smith of  S. E. and M. Monogramming in Stillwater, and she also has a degree  from OSU, I   m sure.  Do any of them have children that  have  also  gone to  OSU?  No.  It   s just nice to trace the legacy. I   m always curious.  Yes, right. Let me see. The oldest one, Kenneth, has a five-year-old, and  then his oldest son just went to community college here. And then Mona  doesn   t have children, and Barbara doesn   t have children. No, the three  girls don   t have children, any, just the boys. I was trying to think. The  children of the second boy, the girl just graduated from high school, and  then the son is in the fast food business.  Well, they may come yet.  Yes, yes, they may come yet. My granddaughter is in her senior year at  the University of Dayton as a chemical engineering major.  Runs in the family, too.  Yes.  Well, as a young child, younger than high school, did you go to work  with your dad some? Do you recall?  We would go up to the building like on Sundays or something  occasionally. The old building had one of these old-style elevators, and  we got to do the stacks. We thought that was great fun to ride the  elevator, but as far as actually going to work with him   other than I do  remember typing letters for him a time or two because I got to be a fairly  expert typist. Of course, it was before you had word processing, so you  had to be able to type fairly accurately.  And quickly.  And quickly, yes, yes, although that wasn   t as critical as being accurate.  I read somewhere in those days women weren   t allowed to wear pants?  12  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  There was a dress code.  I think that would be discouraged, yes. I was trying to think when I was  in college what we did. Yes, I think we had a dress code. We were  expected to wear dresses. I get that a little bit mixed up with after I was  married and living in northern New York. My sorority had a chapter on  the Saint Lawrence campus, and I was a sponsor or something. I don   t  know what they called it, but I had to go to meetings with them  sometimes. They had a big discussion about when you could wear pants  because in that climate you needed to be able to. And so they did often  to class when it was cold, but now, of course, it   s not an  issue .  Sometimes anything goes, it seems.  Yes. Yes, well you certainly brought home, too, about the gal in the  Middle East who was arrested for wearing pants. I don   t think we would  have ever been that far out, but you never know.  Well, let   s back up just a little bit and talk about your father   s early life,  and then we   ll move a little bit into his career at OSU.  His father was a farmer. He made the run into the Cherokee Strip in  1894 or something like that. I don   t think he and my grandmother were  married until after that. I   ve seen a picture of that family in about 1896. I  think it was probably taken at their wedding. You can   t tell that. It   s just  a family group picture, but it did seem they were all there. My  grandmother was born in 1859, and she lived long enough that I  realized, I was old enough to realize, that she had been born before the  Civil War and what the Civil War was. I remember asking her about it  once and she was in her 80s. She said she didn   t, of course, remember  anything about when it started, but her father had had a small holding in  Tennessee and had a couple of slaves to work the farm. She remembered  something about when it ended because the slaves were freed. I don   t  know why this would   ve happened, but he apparently lost his farm  because he didn   t have slaves to work it anymore and he moved to  southern Missouri. So, that   s basically where she grew up, in southern  Missouri, and met my grandfather there, I think, too, but by the time my  dad was born, they were farming in southern Oklahoma. So, he grew up  on the farm in southern Oklahoma and had an older brother, about five  years older.  His wife, the older brother   s wife (he had a second marriage and another  family in his later years) has just died, my aunt. And so on this weekend  we   ll go to Oklahoma City for her funeral. I   m here because we were  going to celebrate her ninety-ninth birthday, but she didn   t quite make it.  She died last weekend. So, there   s big difference in their ages. I   m not  13  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  sure when my father decided or why he decided he wanted to go to  college, but both he and his older brother did. And East Central was the  closest, I think, so he was a graduate of East Central and had to work his  way through and got a job in the library, and that   s how he got started in  library work.  From the farm to the library.  Farm to the library, that   s right.  And he was born in?  In 1902.  Before statehood.  Before statehood. Both my parents were born before statehood.  And neither of his parents had education?  No, I   m sure not. Maybe high school but probably not. They may   ve not  even had that. I don   t know in their case, but I think it   s unlikely because  they were farmers, and that   s kind of what you did. (Laughs)  So, he earned his first bachelor   s at Ada.  Yes, right.  And then he went to     University of Illinois.  And then to Michigan.  And then to Michigan, that   s right.  And then to Bowling Green and then to Stillwater.  Right.  And he finished out the majority of his career at Stillwater.  Right, at Stillwater, yes. At that time there was mandatory retirement at  sixty-five, but Michigan had a retirement of seventy. So, when he retired  at Oklahoma State, the head of the library school at Michigan said,     Why don   t you come up here and teach full-time?    So, they moved to  14  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Ann Arbor in 1967, I think, after he retired, and he did teach there for  another five years. My mother found the Michigan weather not too  conducive, difficult. For one thing she was very fond of gardening and  roses. You could grow beautiful roses in Michigan, but she would spray  them with insecticide or something, and I suspect she breathed enough  of that to be harmful because she tended to get bronchitis and respiratory  diseases. So then in 19-, this would be    72, I guess, he got a chance to go  head the library at Florida, New College. New College, named after the  one in England. (Laughs)  At age seventy he trundles down to     Florida, right.  To work a few more years.  Work a few more years, and he was there until his health gave out, but I  think seven or eight years he was head of the library there.  Well, if it was a new college, was he the first librarian?  No, he was the second one. It had been established about two or three  years before he went there and became part of the Florida State system.  It was a private college before that, but supported by a good many  wealthy Floridians.  So, he never did really retire?  No. In the end, yes, finally I would say he did. His health became bad  enough and my mother was developing Alzheimer   s, so I think the last  couple of years, yes. They stayed there in Florida, but he turned over the  head librarian job to someone else. So, basically he did finally retire.  (Laughs) I remember that I used to go to library meetings with them  sometimes and somebody at one of them asking him,    Have you looked  into libraries which have a retirement age of 100?    Of course, he just  laughed.  He was very active, too, in library associations.  Yes, he was.  And encouraged his librarians to     To be active, too, yes.  That   s part of his legacy still. Now they   re very much in support of us  15  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  attending conferences and things.  I   m glad to hear that   s still the case.  And I understand he was responsible for the open stacks?  Yes. Well, he did a lot of visiting of other libraries in preparation for this  one because the people in the Department of Architecture were going to  do the plans. But I think even during the war, gasoline permits were a  little easier to get in Oklahoma than they were in the northeast because I  can remember my Wisconsin-based husband telling me about it. So, I  think he even did some visiting before the end of the war. But through  the    40s, the late    40s, he did a lot of visiting of other libraries, and he  had become interested in the open stack principle.  Princeton, I think, had built a new library, and I remember his coming  back from that and saying,    Well, they say they have open stacks and  they do, but all the wiring for the lights and everything run up the ends  of the stacks, so you can   t move them very easily. They   re just open to  the public.    So, that was Princeton, and he was a little surprised to find  that it wasn   t more flexible than that. But he was determined that his  library should have flexible floor plans. And I remember him saying  that, of course, most presidents want some monumentality in their  buildings, so that was why the entrance was three-stories high. Of  course, that   s not the entrance now, as I understand, or if so, I don   t  really remember what   s the case now where they had the check-out  places.  Right now it   s being renovated, and when that   s done, you   re going to  be able to come in from either door, south or north, and right in the  center it   s going to be reference, circulation, right there.  I see. I think the way it was originally was that you came in from the  south and went up the staircase, and there were the two rooms on either  side. Yes. One of my nieces was married in one of those rooms.  How did that come about, having the wedding there?  My sister-in-law is a Christian Scientist and they may have churches  around, but they don   t perform marriage ceremonies in them. You have  to have that somewhere else, another church or whatever. We already  had my dad   s picture in the Browsing Room.  A beautiful portrait, yes.  Yes, and so she just thought that   d be a nice place to get married. She  16  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  and her husband are the ones who run the monogramming shop. I was  just talking with her mother this morning. As far as she knows there   s  never been anybody else married there. Is that right?  As far as I know there hasn   t. I know there have been proposals in the  library, but I don   t know of any vows.  She knew that up to about the last five years anyway nobody else had  been married there.  Well, what did your father think of the new library once it was all  finished?  I think he liked it very much, but because he went on to Michigan when  he retired, he wasn   t there a terribly long time after it was built because  of the problem with closing the street and that kind of thing.  And then they dedicated it in his name in 1977, I think?  Was it? I don   t remember exactly. I remember I was able to come out for  that.  Do you remember him saying anything about that?  Oh, I think he was very pleased. I   m sure he was, yes. To be named after  him was really very nice, but I don   t remember him saying anything  specifically about it. He had to write a speech for the dedication, so you  probably have a copy of that somewhere. My folks bought a house on  University Circle in 1951, I think. I think I lived there the last year I was  in college, and until they moved to Ann Arbor, that   s where they lived.  Of course it backed up to Murray Hall or one of the dorms, but there was  an alleyway along between the dorm and the property so that you could  drive a car in there to get to the garage at the back. We moved there  when my brothers were still in high school, so they both graduated from  Stillwater.  Close enough for your father to walk to work.  Yes, which he often did.  I think the entrance to the library is very impressive. You get that sense,  okay, you   re here to learn and study.  Yes. That   s the monumentality that I was talking about. Of course, Dr.  Bennett was the one who wanted the new library. He had promised that  when he hired my dad, (Laughs) and, of course, between the Second  17  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  World War and probably closing the street afterward, he didn   t live to  see it, Dr. Bennett.  They had a pretty good working relationship, Dr. Bennett and your  father?  Oh, yes. Yes, he was very fond of Dr. Bennett, and he did well with the  other presidents afterward, too. He got along with most people. (Laughs)  That   s what I   ve read, that his people skills were quite well.  Yes, he did. One of the techniques he used   for one thing, he said,    You  always want to befriend the secretaries of the higher-ups,    and he would  use a very southern expression of using their first names preceded by     Miss.       Miss Josephine,       Miss Helen,    he   d call them that, and I think  most women liked that.  Can you think of something that you can share with us about him that a  lot of people might not know?  I don   t guess I think of anything special.  Well, in the evenings when he came home from work would he bring  work with him, or would he put it aside and have family time?  Both. In the days when you wanted to catalog books using Library of  Congress proof slips, (I think during the war you could get them) they  didn   t have the personnel to sort them. So, I remember the dining room  table being covered with proof slips (Laughs) because we would help to  sort the proof slips. I hadn   t thought about that until just now, so  probably most people wouldn   t know that.  What would you do for fun as a family?  We did picnics, and I think sometimes went to some of the sports games,  football games or something of that sort. My dad liked to travel, and so  we would get in the car and head off somewhere. In 1947, when you  could get gas easily again, we got a trailer and got camping gear and we  started out. We took a six-week trip through the west. My mother must  have read quite a bit about the various western national parks because  just having seen the Ken Burns thing I realized that practically every one  of the ones he mentions, I   ve been to. We did it on that 1947 trip. The  Grand Canyon, we camped on the north rim, but, of course, we saw the  south rim. And Bryce Canyon and Zion  National Park . And that was  the year that the annual meeting of the American Library Association  was in San Francisco, so we went to San Francisco for that because he  18  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  was already going to meetings. And after that, we then headed north into  Oregon and Washington, and he went to, I think, the university in each  place, and we   d have to stop and see the library. (Laughter)  Of course.  Of course. And he would talk to the librarian. And then over into Idaho.  I remember we had some especially good salmon. And down through  Colorado. The summer before that,    46 I guess, again you could already  get gasoline, and this is in a 1936 Chevrolet. We went to Colorado for a  week. I don   t know whether that was in connection with a library  meeting or not, but we were gone a couple of weeks. But he   d always  wanted to do a big western tour and Montana. So I   ve done all those  things, again, pretty much   not all the national parks. Mostly it was that     47 trip that we did those.  Do you have a favorite camping story from that trip, any memorable  moments?  I remember my brother very much wished we had a radio, which we  didn   t. (Laughs) He wanted to be able to listen to the radio, and cars  didn   t have them yet in those days. At least    36 Chevys didn   t. (Laughs)  How   d you pass the time then?  Reading some and walking trails and this kind of thing, sightseeing in  the national parks.  While you were in the car from point to point, did you play games or  read or tell stories?  Some. My brother, Marc, was always an avid reader, more so than  Donald, and so he would read. I have always just enjoyed looking at  scenery. I still do, and I drive myself. I drove myself down from Canton.  Many people find that kind of unusual. (Laughs)  That   s a long trip by yourself.  It is, it is. But I   m a fairly relaxed driver. I   m old enough now and infirm  enough that I do get tired, but I can still do it and enjoy it. I enjoy  driving, and that I know I inherit from my dad, because he loved it, too.  Once they moved to Florida, they usually came back here at least once a  year to Oklahoma. My mother   s older sister lived quite a long time still,  and she would want to come back and see her, so they would do that.  They could   ve flown, but my dad always preferred to drive. And I do,  too, so I think I inherit that from him.  19  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  We haven   t talked much about your mother. Can you tell us how your  parents met?  Only that it was at East Central, at college. I think Eileen, my sister-in-law,  has some letters that she wrote home during the period she was in  school there because she would   as they often did in those days, the  public schools would meet in the summer and be out in the fall, have  vacation in the fall so that the students could help with harvesting, and  so she would go to school in the summer at East Central and then teach  for the spring semester, the winter and spring terms, at a little school  near the farm where she grew up. I don   t know when she graduated from  East Central, but she did graduate. She was the only member of her  family to have a college degree, and, actually, later on in Stillwater she  enrolled in the Education Department and got her master   s degree. And  during the Second World War, when teachers were really short-supply,  she actually taught in the local high school, and I think I had eighth-grade  arithmetic or something from her. (Laughs) But, of course, once  the war was over, she didn   t need to anymore. I think it was at that time  she decided to go for the advanced degree, but she never taught again  after she got it.  She just helped do library work at home?  (Laughter) Occasionally, yes. Other than sorting the proof slips on the  dining room table, I don   t remember that we did much library work at  home. We tended to keep that in the library.  Did you discuss politics around the dinner table?  Not much. Of course, he became active in national politics for libraries  and did quite a lot of work with the Congress. He was instrumental in  getting the bill through that gave federal money to libraries, for a while.  (Laughs) Of course, that   s long since been gone. I can remember though  that I   m sure my mother voted for Eisenhower and my father was always  a democrat, and that she said,    He just seems so sincere.    (Laughter) My  first husband taught government at Saint Lawrence, so I learned at least  from him that somehow sincerity wasn   t really a very good qualification  for politicians, for government, making laws and so on. Oklahoma was  very much a southern democratic state in those days. I think he didn   t  have much use for republican views, and so I think he would not be too  pleased to see Oklahoma as republican as it is today.  And he also lived through the Depression.  Yes. That   s another thing. When he was in the library at Ada, I think it  was 1932, from one month to the next, their salaries were cut by a  20  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  fourth. It was a fourth or a third. It   s some huge fraction that if you   re  making  500 a month, which is probably the most he was making, and  then you take a fourth of that, you   re now at  375 or something. It   s a  huge cut, and he said it was pretty hard. But you know, he kept his job,  which not everybody did.  He must have managed to save a little bit in order to get to go on to  more schooling.  Yes, they did, I think. And I   m sure my mother   she   d grown up on a  farm, and it was near Wetumka, so it wasn   t terribly far from Ada. My  grandmother kept chickens and had a big vegetable garden, so she would  help out with   I can remember we always had to wrap eggs before we  came home. (Laughs) She would use pages from the Sears-Roebuck or  Montgomery Ward catalogs to wrap the eggs to take back home.  To keep them from breaking or to help keep them cool?  Keep them from breaking. That way you could stack them one on top of  the other without the egg cartons. My niece, Mona, in Stillwater, she and  her husband have a small farm south of town. They have chickens  usually and goats. They have several goats. I had breakfast with them  just the other day after my reunion in Stillwater. I went to their shop, and  people give them cartons, egg cartons, back. I   ll bet they   ve got 500 egg  cartons stacked in their shop. (Laughs) Their hens are getting older and  they   re not laying much. Eileen said she hasn   t been able to get any eggs  from Mona recently. And then my other niece, her sister Barbara lives in  Edmond, and she has been working with the student loan program,  which they   ve started a bill to do away with that, so she thinks her unit  will be disbanded in a year or so. She won   t have a job much longer, but  she is a CPA.  Well, that   s kind of math, too. Your father   s first degree was in math,  wasn   t it?  That   s right, that   s right. I asked my brother, Marc, the other math  student   of course, Donald, his older brother, started at OSU and went  for a year and a half before he decided that an office job was not for him,  although I think in the end that   s what he did. He was hired by Western  Industries, something like that, an outfit that makes oil machinery. And  his math, because he was taking an engineering curriculum, came in  really useful for this, and the company trained him as their engineer,  which he could do very well. So, he was with that company until he  died. But my other brother who taught math then at Wright State, I  remember asking him once how far into math did my dad   s training go,  and he said he had talked to him about it, and he thought it probably was  21  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  not beyond calculus. You know, you need to have analytic geometry and  that kind of thing. I had to have quite a bit of math for the chemistry  major, and I did do elementary calculus, but compared to my daughter  who is also a math major and went on quite a bit beyond that, I didn   t do  much more than my dad, I don   t think.  Did he have to help you with some of it, or could he?  Yes. When I started as a freshman I was put into, I want to say,  advanced math. It was one if you had had a certain amount in high  school you could   and I think it was based on a math test that you took  as an entry freshman. They put me in that, and it was beyond what I   d  had in high school, and he had to help me quite a bit that first semester  because the math level assumed some knowledge that I didn   t have. He  had it and many years later was able to help me with it. After that I was  a beginner as everyone else in the class was, so it worked out all right.  Was he a patient teacher?  Yes. Yes, very much so. Yes, the whole math thing runs through the  family.  And a work ethic seems to, too.  Yes, pretty well.  Well, if someone asked you to describe your father in a few words, what  would you say?  Oh, that one   s hard. (Laughs) That   s hard. A southern gentleman. I think  I would say that because I do remember his using what I think of  essentially as a southern custom, addressing many of the women as     Miss    so-and-so.  I have heard him referred to as a visionary.  Yes, I guess he was. So many of the things he promoted I realize now  were not common at the time and now are, and so in that sense he was.  His outlook for the college was probably visionary, too.  That may have been part of why he got along so well with Dr. Bennett,  too.  Yes. Yes, he was really upset when Dr. Bennett was killed because he  was very fond of him.  22  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  While we   re here, let me ask about the stakes of the new building.  Okay.  When they were getting ready to do the groundbreaking of the building,  the engineers had staked the spot where it was to go, and after some  ceremony or some thinking, Dr. Bennett evidently decided that it needed  to be pulled forward toward the south a few more feet, or yards. I   m not  sure how far. So, we were just curious as to if your dad was involved in  the decision to move the stakes and if he helped move the stakes.  I don   t know anything about that at all. I can see that he might have been  because he wanted to be sure there was plenty of room for expansion  which would have been at the back, of course. And so they might have  decided that they had better move it forward a bit to be sure there was  plenty of room to add on, which they   ve done, of course, at the back, but  I don   t think he would actually move the stakes. I think that   s most  unlikely, actually. He thought a great deal of the architecture faculty  who designed the building. They were good friends.  What did he think about having his portrait hung in the Reading Room?  He never saw it.  Okay, it was after.  It was after his death, and that was the idea of my brother and his wife to  have that done.  So, that would   ve had to been after they named the building, then.  I think so, yes. I can   t remember when they did the portrait. Well, he  died in 1981. Isn   t that right?  That   s what I have: 1981.  But I can   t remember when they did the portrait. It may have been  before he died.  I came in    96, and it was there then, so I don   t know how much prior to  that it was there.  Glenn Nelson, who was a noted photographer here in Tulsa, took his  picture, and then he knew someone who would paint it as a portrait  based on the picture. So, that   s how it was done. And the three of us,  meaning myself and my two brothers, paid for it so that they would have  23  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  it. I don   t know what we had to do. It had to be approved by some board  or other, I think.  It   s a very nice one. It   s a nice touch to the library.  Yes, it is, and I think Mona was married in    86 there.  And it was hanging then?  It was hanging then, and said she wanted her grandfather to be present at  her wedding. (Laughs)  So, he had to have known about it at some point, then.  He must have had to. Yes, I guess he did because he had to have the  picture taken.  He just didn   t make a big deal out of it.  He didn   t make a big deal out of it, no. He wasn   t one to make a big  deal. He had been to some congressional committee meeting where Ted  Kennedy was a member of the committee, and I can remember his  saying that he was one of the handsomest men that he had seen. Ted  would   ve been pretty young at that point. I was in Massachusetts this  summer when he died, and, of course, he was much beloved by the state  of Massachusetts. In fact, the day that they did the move of the body  from Hyannis to the JFK Library, I was leaving. I had a place in Quincy,  which it was the first town south of Boston. I didn   t get started until way  late in the day, so they were already through with going through the city.  The thing that really moved me the most about it was that somebody had  changed all the electric signs, how you   ll have some that say so many  minutes and so forth. They   d all been changed to,    Thank you, Ted.  From the people of Massachusetts.    I thought that was really very  interesting. In fact, right after he died, the TV and radio for three days  that   s all you heard, people talking about him. And, in fact, somebody  even quoted Obama as saying when he was asked why he was pushing  healthcare so hard, him saying,    I promised Teddy I would.    But I  remember my dad saying that about   and it was not the kind of remark  he made ever, (Laughs) that Ted was a handsome fellow.  So, he traveled to D.C. several times?  Oh, many times, yes. He was practically a commuter from Sarasota to  Washington, I think, (Laughs) because it was after they were in Florida  that he still did a lot of congressional lobbying.  24  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  He would   ve been in his 70s at that point.  Yes, he was. I don   t know where he stayed when he got to Washington,  but yes, he did travel a lot to appear before committees and all this kind  of thing.  And he traveled to a lot of conferences.  Oh yes, he always went to ALA  American Library Association .  Did you travel with him some?  I did some, yes, especially if my mother were along. They would go stay  in the hotel, and I would get a room in the same hotel and spend some  time with my mother. Now, she wasn   t that knowledgeable about  libraries except what she heard, (Laughs) which would be quite a bit, of  course, but she and I would sometimes do things together, that sort of  thing. I can remember, too, the year that he took over as president of the  ACRL  Association of College and Research Libraries , which is a  division of the American Library Association. It was in Montreal, which  of course was up in my neck of the woods, and it was in June, which of  course the longest days of the year. After the meeting in which he  actually assumed the presidency, it was maybe almost ten o   clock at  night, and he got up and said,    Thank you,    all the usual things you   d  say, and he said,    It   s almost dark.    (Laughter) He was not accustomed  to having such long days as we were up that far north. So, of course, it  was really fully dark by then, but it was amusing that he made a  reference to it in that way. And, so, he said,    I   m not going to keep the  meeting any longer.     And you were in attendance when he said this.  Yes, I was. I was there.  That must have been nice to be in the audience.  Yes, it was.  And did they refer to you as Edmon Low   s daughter?  Sometimes, yes. I did get it sometimes. I remember when I first went to  Louisiana, I made the trip up for the Chicago mid-winter meeting. You  could do it on the train (actually I bet you still can) from New Orleans to  Chicago. I could go to the meeting, so then, of course, I was introduced  as Edmon Low   s daughter. (Laughter)  25  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  It   s nice to share a profession with a parent.  Yes, it is. I enjoy having my daughter   and her husband is a librarian  also. Granddaughter, Elizabeth, has worked in the library as a student  and is working on her degree in chemical engineering. She   s finding it  kind of hard. She   s taking twelve hours a semester. She   s dyslexic as far  as reading is concerned, as my daughter was too, mild dyslexia, so the  math and science is always easier for her, and she does handle that pretty  well. But we always wonder if maybe she might not end up as a  librarian, too. (Laughter)  Never can tell.  Never can tell.  The one thing you might be able to tell us about, too, is he was  instrumental in getting the librarians faculty status at OSU.  Oh, really?  Do you remember that discussion at all?  No, I think that was after I wasn   t at home.  He was the one that pushed it through, so we have him to thank for that.  Very good. I think it   s often accepted now at most universities. Many of  the librarians actually have PhDs, advanced degrees, in one thing or  another.  And at some point he also he had something to do with programs in  school media librarianship taught at OSU for a while.  Yes. I took some of the courses when I was in college.  And he played some part to get that started?  Yes. Actually, it was just fairly basic library school courses. I think I  took cataloging. I didn   t do anything especially with media because  media was pretty primitive in those days. (Laughs)  There were microfiche and microfilm.  Right, yes.  Where was his office in the current library? The dean   s  office  now is  26  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  on the second floor. Was his there?  I think so. I remember that neither the secretaries nor his office had any  outside windows. Is that still the case?  No, the dean has windows. Her secretary does not, but she does.  I think his maybe had windows, but it   s as you go up the central stairway  and a hallway at the top. I think that   s where his office was, in there. I  remember the lighting system was a big concern. He made a trip to a big  General Electric showroom in Cleveland, I think, again, in the    40s  while it was still being planned. And the egg crate ceiling with the lights  and having fluorescent lights. I do remember one of the things he  mentioned after that visit which he thought gave a really nice light to the  tables, that somebody said they thought if you did that for the whole  building the cost of the bulbs would be very high because they do run  out and you   d have to replace them. There   d be a lot of them. I   ve  forgotten how many miles there is. In fact, with the big air conditioning  system for the whole building it turned out that they didn   t have to  replace them nearly as often because the air conditioning was efficient  enough to keep them cool. And so it didn   t cost what they   d predicted it  might. He was determined he was going to have that lighting because he  said,    In a library you need light on your tables.    (Laughs)  And it was one of the first buildings with air conditioning on campus I  think.  Yes, I think so. I do remember us talking about that. They were able to  buy a huge surplus air conditioning system which would air condition  both that building and one of the others, one of the dorms or one of the  other nearby buildings. In fact, the system was actually installed in that  building instead of in the library, but they were glad to get it because it  was very efficient. For that time it was a very efficient system. And I  can   t remember who, somebody gave the bells, the electronic chimes.  My second husband was an organist, and he wasn   t much in favor of  electronic things for music.  The carillon?  Yes. It   s still electronic, isn   t it?  It is. At noon they play the OSU song on it, and at Christmas they   ll play  a few Christmas tunes, which is nice. You   re walking across campus and  you hear    Frosty the Snowman    or something, and if it   s snowing, it  just sets the mood.  27  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Oh yes, that   s nice.  It gives you that sense of place, you know. Just like walking into the  front of the library, it creates a great sense of place.  Uh-huh, uh-huh.  Along with the smell. People say it smells like a library.  Oh really? (Laughter)  We   ve had several of the alumni come in and tell us their stories, and  they say,    It smells like the library.    (Laughter) It probably didn   t so  much in the early    50s when it was first built. It   s something that   s been  acquired along the way.  Yes, I think so. I think so. I   ve been back for a few of the Friends of the  Library lectures. The last one was when Ken Burns gave it, and his  documentary on the early trip across the country in 1903 had just come  out. My husband was a fancier of old cars. We would eat in the library,  the dinner was served in the library, I think in the Browsing Room,  maybe. And then what was the room on the other side called?  The Reading Room and the Browsing Room.  Right. And then the Reading Room would be where you sat for the  lecture. And several of my family, I know Eileen and Barbara from  Edmond and I think maybe Mona, plus a cousin of mine, she and her  husband came from Oklahoma City. So, there were maybe five or six  family members plus my husband who was still living then. We were  gathered at the foot of the stairs because we were there early. And he   Ken Burns  came down the stairs and came over to us and said,    I  understand you   re part of Edmon Low   s family.    And he talked to us for  twenty minutes. It was really exciting. Tom, my husband, got to ask him  about the old cars in the documentary. And who else? Oh, Oliver Sacks.  Have you heard of him? And Doris Kearns Goodwin came down for  that. So, I   ve been back to the campus a few times.  You may need to come back this next spring when we celebrate our three  millionth volume.  Oh really? You   re approaching that?  Approaching that. I think your father was around for the first.  I think he was.  28  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  And it was the Gutenberg Bible, a replica.  A replica, yes, it would be a replica. (Laughs) Even those are pretty  expensive, big productions.  I   m not sure what they   re planning for the spring, but it   s being  discussed, so you may get to come back for that.  Who is the lecturer this fall?  It   s deGrasse, Neil deGrasse Tyson, coming sometime in November.  Yes, it   s usually in November.  Last year it was T. Boone Pickens.  Oh, yes.  And they had to hold it over in the Alumni Center instead of the library  because they had so many people wanting to come.  Oh, I see.  I think this year they   re planning to have it in the Alumni Center, too.  It   s easier to do the food.  Yes, because they   re equipped, too. Yes, I remember it was a big job to  serve food in the library.  It   s nice to get people into the library, but it   s easier to park and for  people to get into the other place. It being the center of campus is nice,  but then shortcomings are when you want people to get in that are not as  mobile as others.  Yes, by having kind of a back entrance now so that you can drive up  much closer to the doors. We were here for something awhile back and  the fellow who succeeded him as librarian, Roscoe Rouse, they were still  around, and they got us to meet with Dean   what   s her name?  Johnson?  Johnson, yes, Sheila Johnson. And so we had our pictures taken in front  of the portrait. (Laughs) That was about the last time I was over there, I  think, until     Hopefully by the spring they will have finished the renovation for the  29  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  new area on the first floor, so if you come back you   ll get a tour.  Yes, and see it then. My sister-in-law wanted me to ask about the  various plaques and things that he got and where they are in the library.  I don   t know, but they may be in the Special Collections area. That was  next on my list, actually, to mention his awards. He got quite a few.  He got quite a few, yes.  Was he particularly proud of any one? He was the Distinguished Alumni  for East Central and University of Michigan.  Yes. I don   t remember that anything especially stood out. He was very  pleased when he got them, of course. I don   t remember anything special,  it was more meaningful than any other, unless the University of  Michigan. He was very fond of Michigan as an institution.  To have gone back for twenty-something years to teach for them and  then to spend five years more.  Right, yes. It is significant.  How would you like for him to be remembered?  I guess generally just for his contributions to the library world. I think  that   s what he would have liked.  They reach beyond Oklahoma.  They certainly did. They certainly did.  And the quote I   ll end with, and we   ll see what you say about this, it   s  just a short one.    He was an optimist who had traits of the pioneer in  him.     Oh. (Laughs)  I   m not sure who said that, but I thought that   s pretty good.  Yes, it is.  And that we as OSU librarians should be thankful that he homesteaded  at the OSU Library and then got tenure and open stacks and open policy  and all of those things.  30  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  All the things for the librarians, yes.  And I think I read somewhere where he had something to do with getting  rural counties library service, where counties could come together and  get service if they couldn   t afford to have their own library.  Yes, he would have supported anything like that. Oklahoma had some  very active librarians. I was just thinking the other day, the gal who for  many years ran the Tulsa County and City Library system, Allie Beth  Martin, she was very active in ALA, and he thought a lot of her and her  ability to influence legislatures for libraries. In fact, I can remember one  of the things that he used to say when he was testifying before a  committee. If there was anything either that he didn   t quite understand  or that he wanted to bring out in whatever they were considering, he  would start out with,    Now, I   m just a farm boy from Oklahoma.     (Laughter) And then hearing somebody else, other librarians would say  to them,    Don   t be fooled by that,    (Laughter) that he was just as sharp  as a cane when it came to pushing appropriate legislation.  It seems like he landed well to be in a land-grant university, then, with  his farming background.  Right, yes. There was a stage in the war when he was thinking about  actually training to be a pilot because the college had its own plane and  he often went somewhere in it. I remember going in it once, too. He also  told a story about the pilot taking Dr. Bennett to some place in Texas,  and they were supposed to fly back the next day or something like that,  but it got stormy and the conditions that caused icing were prominent.  And so the pilot refused to fly because he said,    It   s too dangerous.    Dr.  Bennett wanted awfully bad to get back. I think his name was Hoyt  Walkup. He said,    It   s just not worth it. It   s too risky.    So, they stayed  over another day, but the fellow who was president of Braniff was also  there and he persuaded his pilot to go, and the plane crashed and killed  them both. So, Dr. Bennett listened to Hoyt after that.  The college was so much smaller then.  Yes, oh yes.  It had about 6,000 or 7,000 I think in the early    40s, but then the war  took away a large number and it dropped to a couple thousand, and then  it came back and blossomed again.  Right.  So, your dad was there when it was up and down, up and down, with  31  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  enrollment.  As I can remember, they had a Navy program.  They had the Waves for the women.  Yes, but then they had some training program for some of the men, and  many of them had their families in Stillwater, and I remember  babysitting for some of them. I was the right age. I can   t remember what  that program was, but it had something to do with the Navy, which you  wouldn   t expect to have a Navy in the middle of Oklahoma, (Laughs)  but it was some sort of training. It may have been the one for training in  Japanese language.  And then had Vet Village for a while.  Yes, yes. A lot of places had that, too. Even Saint Lawrence had Vet  Village, a small school, but all the colleges went through that same spurt  right after the war.  Do you have a favorite fond memory of your time as a student at OAMC  or a favorite professor?  I think maybe the fellow who taught organic chemistry might be called a  favorite. I don   t remember his name at the moment, but his wife taught  chemistry at the high school, and I had chemistry under her, too. But I  liked several of them. A gal who taught poetry class and English, she  was very good. Again, I don   t remember her name.  Do you have a favorite spot?  On campus? Probably the Student Union, (Laughs) although that was  new in my day.  About the same time as the library.  About the same time as the library, yes. It was very nice.  Did you go to dances?  Some, yes. Yes, I did. I wasn   t especially fond of dancing. It was just  because that was what you did. The orchestra usually played in the  college auditorium. I continued playing in the orchestra after I was in  college, but I think maybe the last semester I finally gave it up because I  was taking an extra heavy load in order to graduate in just the three  years and decided that taking physical chemistry and so forth I   d better  32  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  concentrate on that, and so I didn   t play toward the end.  What was the motivation for finishing in three?  Just because I could. (Laughter) Then, as I said, I wanted to go on to  three years of training at University of Michigan, so that was part of the  motivation.  Was Theta Pond the way it is now? Very nice?  Yes, and you got thrown in Theta Pond for something.  If you got pinned, if you got engaged, or something, no matter the  weather, we   re told.  (Laughter) Yes.  I don   t think they do that much anymore.  I doubt if they do because that would be pretty uncomfortable. I enjoyed  my sorority, I remember.  And it was     Kappa Delta. There was a Kappa Delta Mothers Club, too, in Stillwater,  and my mother took part in it. One memory I have, as I was telling  somebody the other day, one of their neighbors on University Circle,  second or third house around the circle, was Roy Hoke of Hoke Lumber,  and my mother and the lady who lived next door, whose name I can   t  remember though I would recognize it if I heard it, and Mrs. Hoke had  been to some luncheon. And I heard this, so I must have been along.  And so we all came back to University Circle, and she said, well, she  needed to go and start her dishwasher. This is the early days of  dishwashers for everybody. And she said,    It   s sort of nice just to be  able to push a button and have your dishes washed.    (Laughter) But she  didn   t like to do it when she was away from home, didn   t like it running  unless she was there. I could appreciate that.  I had it happen in Canton that some critters   I think they finally decided  that it may have been mice. I don   t think raccoons because they were too  big, but anyway some critter got in and ate the hose that circulated from  the center of the dishwasher to the base, ate it up, about a foot of it.  Well, of course, the first time you turned the water on, it all went in the  basement. Fortunately we had a basement. It didn   t go on the kitchen  floor. And so we asked the repairman,    Why would they do that?    and  he said,    Because of the salt, the minerals from the water that would be  33  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  deposited on the hose.    And it backed up to a shed, which later came  down and isn   t there anymore. But there was a big enough hole in the  wall that it could allow small critters to get in, and I think after that we  learned to cover the hole. Among other things, it would let the cold air in  because this shed was not heated. That could freeze your pipes and the  dishwasher. We didn   t want that. My house in Canton was built  originally in 1870, so it   s an old Victorian monstrosity, which I   ve now  had painted in its original colors which were   it had a B-board about  this high, a strip just above the foundation across the front and along two  sides part-way back. And they painted that about the color of your  jacket.  Brown?  Well, more the wine color. And those had heavy boards that have had  the edges taken off, but they   re fairly heavy. And then, of course, posts  on the side. And then a porch, a front porch plus window fittings that  were heavily carved (not really, you know it   s done by machine) that   s  all dark grey. And then above the wine-colored B-board and for the rest  of the house, it   s about the color of the wallpaper, tan.  Sounds pretty.  It is fairly nice, yes. And the porch and all the turn pillars and all those  kind of things, so we had those.  Did your father ever visit you in this house?  Yes. Yes, he did. We lived in several other houses before we got to that  one, but he did, yes.  How long were your parents married before the first one passed on?  They celebrated their fiftieth in 1979 in Florida. We made a big deal and  got everybody together for that in    79. Well, I guess if he died in     81      and, of course, we had photographers and everything to take pictures.  He wasn   t a very tall man, either, was he?  No, and neither was my mother. No, he was only about five feet two or  three. In the early days of the century, you didn   t have terribly good  nutrition, and I think that was a part of it, too. But he knew much better  later on. He was very fond of a regular breakfast of bacon and eggs and  toast. My mother fixed it every day. Then my brother Donald was  almost six feet, and so is Marc. The other thing that Marc asked me once  because his name is spelled M-A-R-C, which is the French spelling for  34  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Mark, if I ever heard my mother say why they chose that spelling, but I  don   t know. I never heard her say, or if I did, I didn   t remember. But that  was unusual.  They weren   t in Louisiana at any point where it could   ve had the French  influence?  No, I don   t know why.  Maybe she was reading a novel or something.  Could be, yes. (Laughs) No, I don   t know why. I   m trying to think about  any other unusual things.  Do you know how they moved their furniture to Stillwater when they  moved?  Yes, that I remember. They moved it in a freight car, a railroad freight  car, they got at Bowling Green. They had added furniture to their house  at Bowling Green, and they were moving most of it to Stillwater, and we  lived kind of in front of a railroad at that point, and so I think it was  probably fairly easy to do. It had a siding, and they put the freight car on  the siding and then loaded the furniture. Of course, you got furniture  movers to load it. And then I do remember at the Stillwater end it was  quite awhile before it got there. (Laughter) We lived in the house with  just pallets on the floor and that kind of thing for two or three weeks  before the freight car got there. And her sewing machine which was in a  stand by itself (I still have it as an end table) had a leg damaged. That  was the only damage we had in moving it by freight car, so that was  kind of interesting. You wouldn   t do that now, but we could do it then.  So she sewed?  Yes, she enjoyed sewing.  Did she make quilts, or did she mostly make clothing?  Mostly clothing, and I learned to sew, too. I made clothing for high  school and college quite a bit. But the sewing machine case was a nice  little wooden case with a top that came up, and so it makes a nice night  stand. (Laughs)  Well, you would   ve been a teenager then. In the late    40s were there  theaters or opera houses or anything like that in Stillwater? Do you  remember?  35  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Movie theaters, yes. The Leachman on the corner of, I think it was on  the corner of Fifth and Main. That was built right after the war. The  Aggie Theater, which was on Main Street downtown, I remember when  that burned. Big fire getting to the air conditioning system and then they  rebuilt it after that. And then there was the Campus Theatre up by the  fire station, much smaller. They did reruns mostly, but if you missed the  movie the first time it came, you could see it some later time.  You lived at home except for the period that you lived in the sorority  house?  In the sorority house, yes I did.  Did the sorority house have a house mother?  Yes.  Do you remember much about her?  Yes, she was a real sweetie. Her name was Mother Alice. I think I had  my wedding reception at the sorority house, and I think she   s in some of  the pictures. She was there. My mother crocheted a table cloth for the  wedding reception, which I think is here somewhere in the cedar chest  maybe, and each of the granddaughters has used it at a wedding  reception, so it   s kind of a family treasure.  Oh, that   s nice.  It was a series of little squares about like this. They crocheted each  square and then hooked them together, so it was a long process. But she  was quite good at needlework generally and liked crocheting. I never  learned to crochet. I could embroider, but I didn   t learn to crochet. She  would do crocheting and she did embroidery, too. When they went to the  University of Illinois right after they were married, she was quite shy  and didn   t get out to meet people very much, so she did a lot of  embroidery work and needlework that year because all she had to do  was cook meals and keep house in this small apartment they were in. I  remember, in fact she was shy enough I think there was supposed to be a  reception for the new students and they were going to go. My dad  wanted to, of course, and at the last minute she said she just couldn   t do  it. Meeting that many strange people was just not something she could  do, and so he apologized for her and said she wasn   t feeling well or  something. But she outgrew quite a bit of that later on when they were  back in Ada, because they went back to Ada after that for several years,  well certainly once she moved to Bowling Green. I was old enough by  then to realize she took part in women   s groups, and she almost always  36  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  was a member of a church circle at a local Methodist church where they  lived. That was true even in Florida, and she was quite a bit older then.  She also liked to play bridge, so she was part of a bridge group most of  the time, too, and my dad would play. Sometimes they   d do couples  bridge, but that was more her thing because that was a social gathering  of the bridge club. And she would occasionally entertain people for  dinner at home, and that was usually pretty elaborate. She would do the  little three-corner rolls where you put little balls into the cups and make  her own bread that way. She had quite a few nice dishes and things and a  set of sterling silver, so she liked to have nice things.  And she was a pretty good cook?  She was a very good cook, yes. One of her specialties in her later years  was chicken and dumplings where you   d boil a tough old chicken and  get a lot of good chicken stock out of it and then heat that to boiling and  do up flour and water and probably some kind of yeast with it, soda,  maybe something like that, and make a dough in little balls. Then you   d  drop that in the boiling water, and it would cook in the boiling stock.  And when they were done, you   d have those with the boiled chicken.  That was very good. And yes, I have a good many recipes that she was  fond of on my computer.  Any one in particular that might have been your father   s favorite?  Oh, let   s see. Well, he liked the chicken and dumplings, too, of course.  (Laughs) I don   t know. I don   t recall any particular   pot roast, maybe.  He certainly liked that.  Any desserts?  Oh yes, yes. Pies, anything. She didn   t make a lot of pies that I recall.  He was very fond of ice cream, too, so that was often dessert. But, like I  said, breakfast had to be bacon, eggs, and toast. (Laughter)  Not homemade biscuits?  No, though she could do that because she had grown up with that. My  grandmother had one of these large cabinets that had a flour holder in it  that you could then sift the flour out of it. They made biscuits twice a  day for bread, breakfast and dinner, which was noon. So, they   d have  fresh biscuits for those two meals. Then for the evening meal, which was  supper, sometimes light bread. In other words, that was a loaf of Wonder  Bread. (Laughter) Sometimes leftover biscuits. But that was one thing  that was different from what I learned when I went east, that dinner was  37  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  noon and supper was evening. She continued and we did that a lot  because we could come home from school for the noon meal. But I think  very gradually the main meal came to be evening for dinner, and you   d  just have lunch.  Those were the days that groceries could be delivered to your front  door?  Yes, although we never did, I don   t think. My mother would go to the  grocery store, and when we first moved to Stillwater, there was a little  grocery store across the street from us on Fifth Street or whatever that  was. I can remember being given a dime to go to the little store for a loaf  of bread. That   s what it cost, a dime. (Laughs) Probably costs  3.50 now  or something, (Laughs) but that went out of business. I think it lasted all  through the war, that little store, then it went out of business. Once  gasoline was easily available you went to bigger stores.  Speaking of the war, do you remember hearing about the day they  bombed Pearl Harbor?  You know, I have no memory of that. My folks were on a trip to New  Mexico, I think, probably some library convention, and my aunt was  staying with us, I know that. But I don   t remember hearing it over the  radio or anything at all. Shortly after that, my brother was old enough to  deliver newspapers, and he had a paper route certainly by 1943. I do  remember D-Day because we were awakened at four o   clock in the  morning. They were calling for the paper boys to come and deliver a  special, and so they had to get up. He had to get up and go deliver  papers. (Laughs) I was thinking of that. One of our high school reunion  visits was to the Stillwater Museum, Sheerar Museum, and I was telling  somebody there about that, that I remembered that. I looked around to  see if a copy of that paper was posted, but it wasn   t. They posted the end  of the war but not D-Day. I have since seen the cemeteries in France  with many rows of crosses or whatever they are.  I remember also that for many years we subscribed to the Ada Evening  News. It came in the mail, and I think my dad read it as much as he  could. He wanted to kind of keep up with Ada. After he retired, this is  after he retired at   since he retired three times, I don   t remember  exactly which one it was. (Laughter) I think it was before he went to  Michigan permanently. They took a trip west, done by Capper   s Farmer  Weekly. They organized tours. He had always assumed when he retired  they   d do some traveling because he liked to do that, and in the end he  just kept on working. (Laughs) But they did do that one trip, and my  mother kept quite a journal about it, which Eileen has. They went, I  think, all the way   it was up in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan,  38  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  and they may have gone all the way to Vancouver, but I   m not sure,  British Columbia. And they went to Hawaii once, too. That   s the one  state I haven   t been to. (Laughter) I   ve been trying to get there, but it  turns out to be pretty expensive, so I haven   t done it.  You can   t quite drive.  It is not someplace you can drive. My second husband and I liked to  drive everywhere we could, and I still do just because I like it.  Well, besides Canada, did your dad make it out of the country? Did he  go anywhere outside the US?  They went to England one spring. I think that was an art tour. And I   d  already been to England a couple times by then, so I flew over and met  them there. And I remember taking my mother   she wanted to go to  Westminster Abbey. We went to a service in Westminster Abbey. And  where else did she want to go? In New York City I remember going to  St. Patrick   s Cathedral with her. She had heard of that and wanted to go  there. Yes, in Europe mostly I   ve seen churches because my second  husband was an organist and he was very interested in the old  instruments, and so we   ve done tours quite a bit and that kind of thing.  I was just wondering if he had gone to Ethiopia when the university was  so involved with that.  No, he didn   t, but he knew about it, and I can remember his talking  about it and being annoyed that the coffee companies interfered or tried  to interfere politically with their promoting coffee production in Ethiopia  where the agriculture people had said it would be ideal for growing  coffee. And I think now you can get Ethiopian coffee, but there was  some opposition to promoting it at that time. He was annoyed with them  because of that. (Laughs) And, of course, I was trying to think, it was the  Point Four program that Dr. Bennett was working with when he was  killed. It   s amazing how much you don   t remember.  Oh, you remember quite a bit. Do you remember holidays? Did you do  anything special for holidays like Christmas?  We always had a Christmas tree, of course. We always wished we had a  white Christmas, of course.  Didn   t happen too much, did it?  No, it didn   t happen too much, and when it did, it was usually slick  roads and not necessarily very   actually, up in northern New York  39  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  where you would expect a white Christmas we didn   t always have them.  We don   t always have them. We can have a spell of warm enough  weather to melt everything, and then you have a green Christmas.  (Laughs)  Now, we   ve talked a little bit about how you think your father would like  to be remembered. How would you like to be remembered?  Me, personally?  You, personally.  That   s a good question. Not too mean. (Laughs) I most almost always  was   well, that   s not true quite, but I did a lot of back-office work  because cataloging was a favorite of mine. I still do it. I still do it as a  volunteer with a little library in Boston. I do their original cataloging,  whatever they have. This is a collection devoted to the pipe organ and  some church-related things. It   s been acquired mostly by donations.  They have a librarian, a paid librarian, for one day a week, but she is not  trained as a cataloger. She   s a very good writer and has written books  herself about the organ, but she doesn   t catalog originally in OCLC, and  I can do that. So, I do that on a volunteer basis, and that   s nice because  then if I   m not there or don   t want to be there for something, I can just  say,    I can   t do it.    (Laughs) So, I   ve cataloged quite a few things for  them, and still keep up with them. They have a fairly active committee  for that library. So, I   ve gotten fairly familiar with the end classification.  And, in fact, one of my requests for a Christmas present to my daughter  one year was my own copy of the end classification (Laughter) because  the one they had was out of date. And, so, I have that.  My dad studied German in college, and he kept it up after they went  back to Ada. He took more classes in it, and he got fairly fluent in  reading it, at least. I remember his telling me that. And he liked tennis.  He used to play tennis with some of his buddies around East Central.  When I started German, which I did as a chemistry major, (you pretty  much had to have it) he could read quite a bit of what I was looking at.  There   s a lot of parallels in the two of you.  Quite a bit, yes, quite a bit. Yes. I   ve traveled abroad a lot more than he  did. I   ll be going to Australia Easter for the second time, so I enjoy that.  And I   ve been to New Zealand. These are mostly organ tours, but my  husband and I went to England for three months in    96. We spent  February, March, and April, four months, May. We got an apartment in  Bath and lived there. So, we had a car and we traveled all over England  to hear various organs, except we missed a few of the cathedrals,  40  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Lincoln and one other major one.  Some of the older theaters had organs.  Yes, yes they did.  The one in Knoxville, Tennessee, still has its. They had it refurbished,  and they still use it from time to time.  Yes, it   s kind of popular where the cities had a large theater if you get  somebody who can play the organ for the silent movie, to show some of  those again. Some of our organ conventions have shown those. It   s great  fun having somebody who can do it properly.  And to come up out of the floor while they   re playing.  Yes, that   s fun, too. Yes, there   s a Pipes and Pizza place in Phoenix,  Arizona, that has one of those, and their large pipes are painted in  primary colors and show around the outside of the building. They   re  enclosed in glass or in plastic, but you can see them as you walk around  the building. So, yes, it   s fun to see those.  I can remember my mother saying they had stockings at Christmas, and  maybe you got an orange. That was a privilege. That was a luxury in the  days when she was small.  Sure, for Oklahoma, a long way from a citrus tree.  Right, yes. And, of course, they had to be shipped in. And the farm was  about five miles from a town, and so in the days when she was small  they didn   t yet have an automobile, so you had to go by horse. So a trip  to town was major. (Laughs) And I can remember her saying also that     she was born in November 1902. My dad was born in January, so they  were almost a year apart. About when she would   ve been about sixteen  or something like that, my grandfather decided he   d buy a Model T, so I  gather he went into town and arranged with the dealer for it. But then he  sent my mother in to be shown how to drive it because he didn   t want to  admit that he didn   t know how. (Laughter) And so she drove a Model T  and then showed him how to drive it. That   s not easy, actually, to drive a  Model T.  I can   t imagine.  She learned. And then the year that we went to Ann Arbor, my dad  bought the 1936 Chevrolet as a new car. I can remember his telling me  that he chose that one over the Plymouth, which he considered also,  41  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  because it had a solid steel top. And the Plymouth, which my husband  bought, had a fabric top, a coated fabric top, which of course wasn   t too  good out in the snow and the rain. (Laughs) It leaked, all kinds of things.  But when my first husband and I were married and I came to northern  New York to live, we didn   t have a car for the first several months of  our marriage. Then my folks got a new one, and they gave us the old  1936 Chevrolet. We drove it around Canton. We drove it all the way up  to Canton from down here and drove it around town for two or three  years before we got a newer one, and at one stage the supports for the  bumper, which were just pieces of metal, straight metal, rusted through  in one side. We didn   t have enough money to replace the bumper  because that was expensive then, too, and certainly is expensive now. It  was on the side where the license plate was, so we just picked it up and  propped it on the license plate. (Laughter) Probably got some pictures of  that somewhere.  I used to bicycle to high school with my violin in the basket, propped up  in the basket, in front of me because I   d bring it home for practicing. I  took piano lessons all through high school, too, as well as violin lessons,  so I was a lot into the music end of things.  Which parent did you get that from?  Probably my mother who encouraged me. As I say, they had me start  piano lessons when we were in Bowling Green, and then I continued,  and my brothers, also. She really thought everybody should have piano  lessons. My grandfather had bought a piano for her, and they gave it  then to her when we were old enough to start lessons. I think they had it  shipped to Bowling Green. It was a big heavy old thing. My son has it  now. It had a walnut case, and it was my grandfather   s wish that if  nobody in the family wanted it anymore as a piano that we at least keep  the walnut because it was good wood. (Laughter) So, he has it sitting in  the house in Cambridge, Mass achusetts , right now. I don   t know what  he   ll do with it if we sell the house.  Will it come to yours?  It probably will. It was in mine for a while. I have my husband   s piano  that his mother bought, but I don   t play much anymore so it tends to  collect junk on the piano bench. I got interested in trying to play the  organ, too. I kept saying that when I retired I   d have time, and somehow  when you retire, you don   t know how you ever had time to work  because partly it was having an instrument to practice on. I did try some,  and I   ve found that I had enough piano as a youngster that doing the  manuals was fairly easy. I sometimes forget that they were separated,  you know. But, boy, training your feet was something else, and I hadn   t  42  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  done that, and I haven   t taken enough lessons to be able to do it still.  Now, in my house in Canton I have a reed organ with pedals so that if I  would ever bother to do it, I have pedals to learn on. And actually I still  hope to do that. I think that I should learn to play it enough that if I go  on organ tours I can also play some of the organs that we visit, but that   s  for the future. Maybe. (Laughs)  Hey, that and Hawaii, that sounds like two good goals.  Yes, yes I   ve got to get to Hawaii at some point. There   s a particularly  well known organ in Sydney, Australia, one of the few in the world that  has a stop with a sixty-four-foot pipe. That   s pretty tall.  That   s pretty tall.  And, of course, then the pipes are graduated so it   s got a sixty-three-foot  and sixty-two-foot and so on. It   s in Sydney   s Town Hall. They often  had concerts on it, but it   s been out of commission for at least two years  now because they   re doing repairs on the Town Hall, which is still really  a municipal administrative building there. But the next meeting of the  Organ Historical Trust of Australia at Easter is to be in Sydney, and so I  think they hope that it   ll be enough done by then that they can have a  performance there. If not, the group is small enough that we can  probably arrange to see it. I   m told by other organ people who   ve been  to it that the great big pipes make their sound by a vibrating, essentially,  a piece of metal across the opening to the pipe. They tune it not by  listening to it, but by counting the vibrations. It   s so low that you can  feel it but you can   t hear it. (Laughter) My husband always wanted to be  able to see that and, of course, we never got there. He didn   t.  I went a year ago this October to their convention in Melbourne, but  Melbourne doesn   t have one that big. That was really nice. We then  went to Adelaide and took the train up to Alice Springs so we could go  see the Ayers Rock and through the Outback. I have definitely seen the  Outback, (Laughter) and I was very disappointed. The only wild  kangaroo, I saw one, and they think the train tended to scare them away.  We did see wild horses and some wild camels, but I didn   t see any wild  kangaroos. Now some places we stopped in bus tours and so forth had  them around, so I certainly saw them but not in the wild. And the whole  countryside is about the color of that chair, like orange.  Orange. (Laughter) Almost OSU orange. Almost.  Yes, just about. Yes, I   ll have to show you the picture of the library  there. They   ve got a spotlight for it, and I was very fond of the pictures  of the library and so on, proud of their association with it and so forth.  43  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Well, are we about talked out?  I think so. (Laughs)  If you want to go longer we   ll go longer. If not, we   ll close it off.  I do remember when we first moved there in 1940, Angie Debo had just  published her book And Still the Waters Run, and I can remember his  explaining to my mother why that was a problem, that book. He hired  her as OSU   s map librarian so she would have a source of income. She  had a place there in Stillwater, too, and lived there while she worked  there. And she was active in the Methodist church. I remember that, as  my folks were, as well. My sister-in-law has saved an article there about  Angie Debo.  You met her?  Oh yes, I knew her well as a family friend, and it was a long time before  I understood what the significance of that book was. And, of course,  who knows. It   s a lot better now, but you still see a lot of problems with  Indian lands.  She was ahead of her time.  Way ahead. She lived a long time though. She was just a family friend  as far as I was concerned, and I knew she worked in the library, but he  basically had to give her a job so she could have an income. I eventually,  I hope, will be sorting through some of the papers that we brought from  Florida. He had pretty well sorted through them himself, and so there   s  not a lot, but I certainly will keep the archives in mind, (Laughs)  anything unusual I   d like to go there. Seems to me I found a certificate  for graduation from the school or something, high school maybe, for  some reason I had, and I thought,    Well, now, that really ought to be in  the archives.    So, if I come across it again, I   ll make sure it is.  Put it in a file.  Put it in a file, yes.  Even your mother   s journal from their travels might be interesting to at  least scan. If you didn   t want us to have the original, we can scan it.  I   ll mention it to Eileen, and, like I say, there are some letters that she  wrote from her days at East Central.  44  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Finchum  Finch  Even those would be interesting. Again, if not the original, at least  borrow them long enough for us to scan them and give you back the  originals.  Right. Eileen has more of that stuff than I do, probably because she   s  closer here, so I   ll mention that. She   s very busy. She   s quite active.  Well, she works now as an assistant for Michael Nolan who is a state  advisor downtown, so that   s where she is right now. But she   s very  active in square dancing and gets into all kinds of officer positions in  their clubs and all kinds of things, so she   s been very busy with that, too.  Carrying on the family tradition, even though it   s the daughter-in-law.  Yes. Yes, right. And she got this for her daughter   s Christmas present,  Barbara, the youngest one who lives in Edmond but who is a very strong  OSU supporter. So, she got that.  Well, I   d say for a little old farmer from southeast Oklahoma, his  family   s done quite well.  Yes. (Laughs)  And he did, too.  He did too, right. Yes, I do remember that business about some friend  saying to the legislators,    Don   t be fooled by that farm boy business.     (Laughs) Yes, he would occasionally talk about some of his experiences  with the legislators in the actual lobbying part of it. He set off, and he  found that the legislators were more receptive to what he was lobbying  for because it was no personal gain for himself, that so often they had to  cope with people for whom there was personal gain in legislation. But he  was always lobbying for libraries, so he didn   t have anything personal to  gain from it. So they would often listen to him when they might not have  otherwise. Not that that got any money for libraries, necessarily, but I  can remember that there was a bill which he worked very hard on that  gave every college library in the country  5,000 to spend on books and  magazines. It was actually funded for a few years but, of course, when  the budget cuts began to come it was not considered necessary. And, of  course, as the technology changed, you began to get the internet, this  kind of thing.  Poor newspapers today. I remember reading   I have a good local  newspaper up in northern New York. It   s regional, which is why it   s  been able to keep growing. It   s from Watertown, New York, and it  covers the whole North Country. I remember reading a squib in that that  the Ann Arbor News, which, of course, I was familiar with because  45  Finchum  Finch  we   ve been in Ann Arbor, had cut their print edition to three days a  week and the rest of it would be online, just recently. And then Eileen,  who is Christian Scientist, had taken the Christian Science Monitor for  years, and she said,    They   ve changed to a magazine now.    So, she  remembered getting it the first time and thinking,    Oh, this is pretty  nice.    She said,    You don   t have to go to another page to finish the  article.    (Laughter) And she had picked up that other major newspapers  were watching how that worked out because they   re all in trouble one  way or another for the print edition.  So, the Watertown Times had almost always had a separate section for  North Country, and I guess North Country decided to include that news  with the first section of the paper, which was national news, on Mondays  and Fridays. They   ve cut it that much, and mostly they   ve been able to  keep everything else. It   s always been a pretty good newspaper in the  sense of covering a lot of news, foreign news and human interest news  and all that kind of thing, so I can have it delivered to my home, which  is nice.  That is nice. If there   s nothing more, I would like to thank you for having  me today.  Okay, you   re welcome.  -------  -------   
