 Poland, and he   s interviewing Bill Hoag. Will you introduce  yourselves please?  I   m Cole Poland. I   m a third-year English major here at OSU, hopefully  I   m a junior. I   m from Jones, Oklahoma. I graduated high school there  in 2004.  I   m Bill Hoag, Cole Poland   s grandfather, and I grew up in Guthrie and  live presently in Jones, Oklahoma. I   ve been there for about forty-five  years, and I started at OSU in 1956.  You started college in    56 and graduated in    58 right after the name  change from Oklahoma A M College to Oklahoma State University.  How did that work?  Well, they decided that they were going to change the name from  Oklahoma A M College to Oklahoma State University to give them a  little more prestige, and that name change happened in the summer of  1957. They had some graduates in the December    57 from Oklahoma  State University, but my brother, George, and I were the first two to  walk across the stage and shake hands with Dr. Willham so I consider he  and I being the first two graduates from Oklahoma State University.  The way we come out to be the first two to walk across the stage was he  went over to the rehearsals. I was busy that afternoon, and he saw where  everybody was sitting. They were taking our department, or I should say  the college, they had various colleges within the university, and our  portion was the first to walk across the stage, and we were the very first  ones to be lined up and he saw how the seating was and said,    Let   s sit  down there, Bill.    So that   s what we did.  There is a bunch of change going on right now and there   s a bunch of  5  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  different feelings about it. What were the feelings going on about the  name change then?  Well, we were so busy studying and everything, we didn   t really get into  the name changing. We left that up to the more professional groups, the  engineers and the ones in master   s sections or PhD sections. That would  really lend more credence to their degrees.  Yeah.  So really we were just receiving degrees. I was from electronics  technology so they used to just issue certificates. Now they issue an  Associate of Science degree in electronics technology. Just a matter of  semantics, I guess.  So you were busy studying, and was there anything else going  on   anything like that?  Well, we had lots of time for studying and some time for partying. One  of my best partying partners happened to be the center for the football  team.  So it   s your fault?  So it was my fault that we probably had a not so good season without  going back to any books to look to see what the exact record was, and at  that time Cliff Speegle was the  head football  coach for OSU. But the  thing I do remember outstanding, we got a walkout because OSU beat     Wilt the Stilt    Chamberlain.  You were here for that game?  I was here for that game.  Did you get to go?  I didn   t get to go. My ticket was the wrong number, (Laughter) as usual,  but we did participate in the walkout on the following Monday that     that was quite a feat because I think Kansas at that time won every game  except when they come down here. Hank Iba, good Hank, he knew how  to play basketball. They did not do run and shoot. They did lots of run  the post patterns and such as that.  Where did you guys do things? Did they let you have parties in the  dorms or did you have to go off campus?  6  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Well, there was some partying going on in the dorms. I had a nickname  of    Jack    and     How did you get that?  How did I get the nickname?  It   s been twenty years, and I still don   t know how you got that.  Well my first wife, Cole   s grandmother, knew me as Jack for about three  months before she found out what my real name was, (Laughs) and how  that come about is some of my roommates, we lived in West Bennett  Hall, 266 right above the cafeteria. And at that time it was used as the  athletic dorm because they were building one for them. Well, we   d get  to playing cards all the time. There was about four or five of us that sat  around in the evening and played cards, and for some reason every time  I   d play the Jack of Hearts, I   d catch the Queen of Diamonds, and this  guy from Manchester, Oklahoma says,    Man, there you go jacking  around again.    He said,    I   m just gonna call you Jack,    and that   s where  the name Jack came from, from old college days.  So, he   s a card shark.  Another thing about some of the parties, and I don   t know if it   s changed  that much since then   we hung out on the fourth floor of the Student  Union. They had always somebody up there to dance with, and they had  a little snack bar. I spent some time in the library but not being on the  heavy duty engineering side, I was able to keep up my grades on  homework and     The fourth floor is still a pretty good part of the union now. That was  just kind of interesting to find out, it was just pretty much the same for  me, because I   m young and na  ve still so   I think we started everything,  but in the dorms where did you play cards, things like that? Where   d you  live?  Well, let   s see. I lived West or W266 West Bennett which was right  above the cafeteria, and we   d wake up every morning smelling  breakfast, all the good fumes coming up. I shouldn   t say fumes   all the  smells coming up, and since that was the athlete   s side we got a little  better breakfast and lunches than they did     A healthy, heartier one?  It was a healthy, hearty one. And then at night they had a snack bar in  the basement which we could go down to. One of the things I recall was  7  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  having a garage sale in town, and I picked up a huge clock that was  probably almost two foot square, and I put a couple of screw eyes on it  and in the room I hung it on the steam pipes. What was neat about this  clock, it had a latch on it. You could open it up and, my gosh, you could  keep a bottle of wine in there. (Laughs) I probably shouldn   t tell that, but  that     We never got as creative as clocks.     but     We just use our surroundings.  As far as I know, that clock is still hanging in there. (Laughter) I   m sure  somebody   s taken it down by now, but     Other than hiding various bottles, what other things did you do on  campus, like traditions and the sort of things that we might still do  today?  Well, one of the traditions for freshmen was the tossing in Theta Pond,  and I went the whole year without getting tossed in, except for the last  day and they said,    Okay, Bill, it   s your turn. Here we go.    So they did  let me leave my billfold in my room. I didn   t want to get my billfold  wet, and they carried me all the way from West Bennett clear to Theta  Pond, not in the car   walked. There was about eight or ten guys that  carried me. Of course I wasn   t as big then as what I am now. I was only  about six foot, and now I   m six five.  Did you run into any crazy geese? Any renegade geese over there?  Not per se, but at that time, I do remember one year we had   it was in  the spring of    57   was terrible rainstorms that flooded out and back of  Bennett Hall and flooded Theta Pond and went over there and everybody  was out playing in the water, which was nice and warm, even the old  Cimarron River flooded out south of town. And one of the guys at the  room, he had a brand new    56 Chevrolet and it had started hailing a bit  so he moved it under the tree to keep the hail off of it. Mistake. It was in  the low part, and he went out and looked and here   s water up to the  windows in his car. He should have left it out.  Did you all fish in there, because there   s some kids fishing in there now  and I still don   t understand why they do it   Theta Pond     We didn   t. We didn   t fool with fish anymore.  8  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  I didn   t figure too much. I guess that   s just us. What was Homecoming  like back then? Was it as big then as it is now?  I thought it was big then. They had big parades, but my brother and I,  George, (I might mention I had two older brothers  Cappy was the  oldest, then George )   but Cappy he wasn   t as active. We didn   t see  much of him. He was somewhere else most of the time. But because  brother George and I roomed together and Cappy was down the hall     but George and I we had our own unicycles, and we rode our unicycles  through both parades   one in the fall of    56 and    57      57 I had the flu.  Man I was drooping. He said,    You   re gonna go,    so what I did, I got  behind one of the fire trucks and I   d hang onto them and they   d pull me  so   then it worked out. We made the full route and somewhere in some  home movies we do have about a three-minute clip of my brother and I  riding unicycles in the parade.  They didn   t televise them like they do now?  We didn   t have TV back then. (Laughter) Well, we had but it wasn   t  remote controlled. You mentioned that   that brought up one   in some  of our studies, we started studying this new fandangled thing that was in  vacuum tubes. They come out   it was about the size of a thimble. I  don   t know if everybody knows what a thimble is nowadays    but about  the size of your thumb was a transistor, and that was the newest thing on  the block at that time back in    56. Well since then, you can put almost a  whole computer inside that thimble and in fact down in the basement of  one of the buildings here in the latter    57 they started installing a  computer. It was all   had vacuum tubes in it and resistors and  everything, and it took up the whole basement, and they had to have 200  tons of air conditioning just to keep the computer cool so they could use  it. But the computing power   well my PDA I have here with me has got  ten times more computing power than that computer did at the time, so  times have changed for the better.  I am kind of interested in Homecoming just because it   s so huge here. I  mean, it   s a three-day event, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Did they have  like a Walk Around? Did they dress up all the buildings like they do  still?  They did some, mostly the fraternity side, and I, being an independent,  didn   t even have a float, but all the fraternities had their floats and all  that. The parade, I think, would last for about an hour or so, and I   m sure  they had lots of tailgate parties     Yeah.  9  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag     but being stuck over at Bennett Hall, at that time we were in the  boonies. (Laughter) There were not many houses or anything north of  us, and   in fact, about the furthest thing north of us was a brand new  Sonic that had just started at that time.  It   s still there. They   ve got a big sign that says    First Sonic.     There wasn   t much north of that so   there wasn   t much   any building  north of that. And following later years I   m sure things have changed a  lot, hope for the better. Now the library I noticed on the south side hasn   t  changed much, but the north side of the library has had a lot of changes.  The classrooms I was in was old Quonset huts on the north side of the  building. They are long gone and built nice, fancy buildings over there.  What all do you remember about the library? You said the south side  has changed.  Well one of the things   up on the top floor they had exhibits come  through, traveling exhibit of all of Leonardo daVinci   s inventions, and  they had models, replicas of his helicopter and the various things that he  had invented, and that was one of the main things that they were trying  to stress to us as technicians. If Leonardo had technicians to build what  he thought up, things would have been a whole lot different today, but  he just didn   t have the skilled workers to put it in, so even though you   ve  got your engineers and you   ve got all of your thinkers and your  inventors, you still need the technicians to do the actual building   the  machinists and the welders and such as that. There   s a spot for  everybody.  I know how Hoag's do. Did you and Uncle George try to rig anything up  from that museum or anything?  Well     See something you liked and maybe get a     We built our own go-carts, our own   I even built my own Cushman   motor  scooter. I made it from the ground up. We   d take the wheels off  of a wheelbarrow and growing up in a machine shop and foundry, which  my Dad owned, and so I had an opportunity to learn to weld on the job.  Had a fella I used to work with said,    On the job is no place for on-the-job  training.    (Laughter) That was his quote. But we could build   make  our own pulleys. We   d get just hunks of metal and put it in a lathe and  turn it down and make our own pulleys and fit it onto the wheelbarrow  and   took an old transmission out of my old car and rigged it up and  mounted it on the back of it so   and made up a special type clutch, put a  10  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  little old Wisconsin one-cylinder lawn mower engine on it. We   ve got a  lot of home movies of that going around the yard. Started out with a  three-wheeler first, then we went into a four-wheeler, and we made our  own unicycles, by the way. (Laughter) We didn   t buy them. We went  down to the junkyard and got connecting rods out of an old car and cut  one end off, the small end off, and melted all the lead out and put a shaft  in the rear axle of a bicycle wheel, welded those in and with them  sticking out, we   d put the end caps of the connecting rods over it, poured  our own lead bearings in there, and welded the brake pedals on   or the  pedals from bicycles. We would just cut them off and weld them back  onto the shaft. George and I used the front fork out of a bicycle. We tore  up a couple of old bicycles and welded the connecting rods to the ends  where the wheels used to fit in. Yeah, I   in fact, I still have mine at  home.  It   s up in the attic, huh?  It   s in my storage shed. I saw them digging through it for Christmas.  (Laughter)  And you were doing this in Stillwater?  I did this while I was still in high school.  Oh yeah. What was it like in Guthrie?  I lived in Guthrie and was born and raised there. I have two older  brothers, Cappy and George, and four younger sisters. Sadly, both my  older brothers   they   re gone now. We were raised on a forty-acre farm.  I got to milk a cow, feed the chickens, water the pigs and all that, and  my brothers, George and Cap, all had these milk going back to the  house. (Laughter) It was all right except in the wintertime. We had a lot  more snow and ice back then, and you had to carry a bucket of hot water  down and thaw out the water faucets.  Well that was global warming.  Yeah. Well, maybe so. (Laughter) But anyhow, those good old days are  right now. (Laughter)  Yes. What brought you up here to Stillwater?  Well first off, my Dad being in the gas and natural gas compression  business and being in the machine shop, he come over and put up a  fellowship for a young gentleman over here to study the effects of gas.  He was trying to come up with some way to convert it to liquid without  11  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  going into high pressure, and they tried everything they could but it  didn   t work out   built up little models for it and everything. In fact, I  think this one is still down there at the machine shop where they   d run  gas through and then run high voltage through it and try to change the  atoms in it, but it was one of those things that just didn   t quite work out,  but he tried.  Blow something up?  Nope, never did blow something up. (Laughs)  You roomed with Uncle George?  I roomed with your Uncle George, right. One of the things that I  mentioned earlier about the swap meet. He   d say,    I need some help,    so  I got out there and he had bought an old fashioned deep freeze that  wasn   t very large. We brought it up and set it in the room, and we kept  our Eskimo pies in there. (Laughs)  Your new wife doesn   t let you do too much of that anymore, does she?  I   ve got it in my garage. (Laughs) I keep it in my garage. (Laughs)  When you   re in your dorm outside?  Yeah, I   ve got my dorm outside.  So, now when somebody   s talking to you and brings up OSU, what do  you think of? Do you think of maybe   I don   t want to throw me in there,  but do you think of me first or maybe your time here?  Well, it does bring back a lot of nostalgia and fun times we had in the  dorm there. Dorm life was   I   d recommend it to everybody. I know you  didn   t take that.  Yeah, I got out of it.     and I   ve always had a real soft spot in my heart for Hank Iba. I loved  his style of basketball.  I   m pretty sure you   re not the only one.     and even the wrestling because if I recall OSU holds more   or has  won more national titles than any other college in the State of  Oklahoma.  12  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  In the State of Oklahoma, that   s true. They   ve got more gold  medals   more Olympic gold medals than   something like 7, 15  countries, something like that   a bunch of them.  Even their golf team was great, and the thing up here   I didn   t realize it.  I probably would have done it later on if I   d stayed four years, but they  would teach flying.  Oh yeah.  I don   t know if they still teach that up here. They do?  Yes, it   s big up here at the aviation courses and what not.  Since I had a two-year course, Pop asked me one day when he found  out,    Well, you   re gonna graduate in two years?    I said,    Well, yeah.     He said,    What happened?    I said,    Well, I went over and saw some of  those engineers and they couldn   t pour water out of the end of a boot,     and I said,    I didn   t want to be like them. I wanted to try to use a little  common sense,    and Philco Corporation had a big project going out in  El Paso, Texas, and they hired me as a Philco Tech Rep. I worked for  them for a couple of years and before I come back and   in fact, I  worked at the Oklahoma State University Research Foundation for  almost a year, and I was in the mechanic   s side   the machinist side  there   and worked over there on Sixth Street. The building is gone now  but     Where was it on Sixth Street?  Sixth and Monroe. I think that   s where it was, and that was after I was  married and your Mom was with us. What I was gonna say     Did you make the commute   from the city?  No, what happened was   come eighty-niners week in 1958, my brother  was dating a girl in Willard Hall and there were a lot of girls in the dorm  and I said,    George, you and your girlfriend know some ladies up  there?    And he says,    Yeah.    I said,    Have her set me up with a blind  date every night.    So I had seven blind dates set up. Well on Sunday  night, we met and went to the drugstore there on the corner of Knoblock,  and I was so impressed with this young lady I called up the next day and  I said,    Cancel the other six.    And they say, you know,    The rest is  history.    We dated awhile and after. That was Peggy Habben from  Jones, Oklahoma. That   s how we wound up in Jones. She come up to get  her home economics degree, but in the fall of    58 she got her MRS  degree. We got married and moved to El Paso and was out there for a  13  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  year and then the job moved to Lawton for another year, and after that  they had the old attrition and all the downsizing so I found a job up here  in Stillwater and we moved to Stillwater and worked for the Research  Foundation for about a year.  What sort of dates did you all go on?  At that time, my grandfather had an old car, an old Plymouth,    48 model  Plymouth, and he gave it to my brothers and I, and my brother George  got to drive. I don   t care where we went, he got to drive. His girlfriend  would tell Peggy,    Peggy, you and Bill get in the front seat so George  and I can get in the back seat.    It never happened. (Laughter) It never  happened. But let me jump ahead. While we were in Lawton was when  your mother was born. Then she was barely a year old when we moved  up here. She wasn   t quite a year old. So the research projects would  take the devices that we built down to Eglin Air Force Base and they   d  do rocket sheets in which they   d shoot up in the air. One of them was,  you know   they come up with strange ideas. They   d send up a rocket  full of gasoline, ignite it and blow it up in the air and then they   d send  another rocket through the middle of it to measure x-ray radiation.  Another one they   d send up to measure   the moon and the sun had to be  a certain angle in the sky. They would measure the x-ray radiation from  the sun bouncing off the moon back to the rocket, and through this  project they worked with Dr. Van Allen who discovered the Van Allen  Belt which circles the earth, that   s like a static field around the earth, and  that was a lot of fun   and wasn   t paying much. I was getting a total of   350 a month.  That   s about what I   m getting right now. (Laughter)  And I said,    Well, we   re gonna have to do something else,    with your  mother getting older. So I found a job down at FAA down at Will  Rogers Field in Oklahoma City at the airport, and I worked down there  for five years. But then they had another downsize   seemed like I   d  always get caught in these downsizes. I spent about a year working for  General Electric in the computer section, which they were just starting to  build that big mainframe computers and downsize computers.  Everything getting smaller and smaller, and I said,    Man, I sure hate to  waste all my sick leave and time that I   d built up working at FAA,    and  I found a job out at Tinker Air Force Base, and me and another guy was  up for the job out there and they hired me because I had a degree from  college, even though it was an Associate of Science, and the other fella  didn   t have a degree so it is very important to have that behind your  name regardless of what the degree says. Your Uncle Mike and your  mom didn   t go to college, but since then they   ve both went back and  especially your mom, she went to banker   s college, so it   s important that  14  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  you get in there. I know it gets tough and boring a lot of time, but just  keep hanging in there.  Is that the advice you   d give anybody right now?  At this day and age with the technologies changing, you cannot have  enough education, and you really need to get in there and get a good,  firm foundation. I felt I got a good foundation through OSU up here  because it got me through life. I was the first one to leave home. Well,  my dad was from the old school. I wasn   t supposed to get married until  after my oldest brother who was supposed to get married first and be  married in a line, and it just didn   t work that way. When I left, I  basically left home in 1958 and I hadn   t been back since   so pretty well  made my own way.  What   s the best story you can give us   the best story?  The best story   I guess it   ll take a lot of thinking back on that. Meeting  your Grandma     That   s what I was going to mention. (Laughter)  Meeting your Grandma up here  Stillwater, OK  because if I hadn   t met  her and dated her and got married, you wouldn   t be sitting here asking  me questions. (Laughs)  That   s true.  But sadly here, about four years ago we lost her to cancer, but I was very  fortunate to be one of her high school classmates   was actually born the  same day   but my present wife   s name is Gayle and she   s one hour  older than Peg, and she   s a lot similar to your Grandma. But I knew her  at least forty-five years so it wasn   t like coming up with a stranger,  meeting some floozy at a bar. (Laughter)  What exactly was the nightlife like back then? I mean, now everybody   s  at the Strip, going to the bars, going to Joe   s. Was there much?  Well we had beer joints back then.  Well, was there one place that everybody went or was there just various  places     The most popular one was called the Bengalair Club. I don   t know if  anybody remembers that   out south of town. If you go by the old KSPI  radio tower, it   s out where the two streets come together   Route 177  15  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  and Main Street come together. There   s   if you look out, there   s a  church in that same building. (Laughs) That   s where the center for the  football team and I spent a little time.  You all had to go all the way outside of town?  Yeah. There wasn   t anything much around close     It wasn   t too close. Anything just right across the street from the  campus?  No.     like there is now?  No. The popular thing was go to the drugstore down on Knoblock. That  was the main spot     Now, the drugstore that I know is the one at Jones where it   s tiny and  they sell you pills. What   how does it     This one had the soda fountain, had booths in there. It probably had six  or eight booths in there and you could get a sandwich and most  anything. It was a neat place to hang out.  I guess that would probably be what Joe   s is now.  And we had two movie theaters, one downtown and the drive-in out  north of town. I don   t know if it   s still here or not   old drive in theater?  No, the closest one   s in Guthrie.  Well, one of the things we did discover out there with George   brother  George and I would double date. We   d go out to Boomer Lake and you  could see submarines racing out there.  In Boomer?  In Boomer Lake. They would have submarine races out there that you  could watch. (Laughter)  I find that kind of hard to believe. It   s pretty shallow.  Well, that   s what we   d tell the girls. (Laughs)  Yeah, of course. Yes.  16  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Say,    Can   t you see that submarine?    and she   d lean over. Oh my  goodness. (Laughs) But that was a fun thing.  So   I think I   ve gone through the list. Anything else you want to say?  Yeah, this has been a family university for me. Like I say, my two older  brothers, Cap and George   George and I both graduated. Cappy was 5th  year and then before he finished up, he was drafted into the Army, and  four younger sisters   Anne, Janie, Mary and May, your great aunts, all  four of them went to school here. Anne, she got an MRS degree after her  first two years and married a fella and he was a mechanical engineer and  did all the surveying for the dam at Eufaula Dam. He worked for the  Corps of Engineers and, after that, he wound up down in Panama. He  was originally from Panama   dual citizenship, Panamanian, and he  spent the rest of his last thirty or forty years being chief maintenance for  the Panama Canal Company down there. And then sister Janie, she  graduated and married a fella from here, a graduate, and they lived in  Tulsa and they   re both lawyers. She   s more into bookkeeping. She   s  taught bookkeeping for Tulsa Junior College. Sister Mary, she graduated  and married a fella from Kansas and she just raised two boys. And sister  May, she graduated and married a fella and they live in Tucson, and I  think she had a business degree. She worked for thirty, thirty-five years  as the head bookkeeper for Truly Nolen Exterminating Company out  there. They   ve got offices in Arizona and Florida.  So bookkeepers and tinkerers? That   s my line.  Tinkerers   the Hoag side of the family come from a long line of  tinkerers. In fact, my third great-grandfather was in partners with George  Westinghouse and the reason he got in there because his father had a  fleet of sailing ships from England to the United States, and he probably  brought a lot of people over to Ellis Island on some of his ships. I can   t  document that but he was here before Ellis Island was set up, and they  settled in Schenectady, Albany, New York area   so basically I guess  I   m a Yankee by heart, but on my grandmother   s side, her sister married  Stonewall Jackson, so we had both sides in the Civil War represented  and so we   ve got long, deep roots. And sister May, as one of her  projects, researched some of our genealogy and could be traced back to  King Canute of England and was way back, so we come out of England.  So you say we   re related to the King?  In one way.  So eventually when the Queen dies     17  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Poland  We won   t get it. (Laughter)  Oh, come on.  But on the other hand, Gayle, the one I   m married to now, they traced  her history back to King Henry VIII, and when we went over to England  last year, she came to find out King Henry VIII wasn   t a very nice King.  (Laughter) So I said,    Yeah, you   re lucky to be here.    But back to OSU,  I enjoyed it up here. Everybody needs to go at least two years of college.  Like I say, now the technology   from when I started when you had a  transistor the size of a thimble. Now you   ve got computers the size of  thimbles. You really need to have a technical background plus   and  we   re getting so many lawyers out here now   it   s gonna have to come  up with other   thanks to computers, AOL, the internet and everything     there   s just so much information available, it   s your fault if you don   t  learn. You can   t say that your environment is   even from the little town  of Jones where you graduated high school, we   ve had one become a  Rhodes Scholar. We   ve had fellowships at Georgetown University.  We   ve had a pro football player that played for the Detroit Lions for four  years before he got bummed up. He was excellent   he   d have done  better in baseball, but he went the football route   and one from Guthrie  that had three or four come up here and graduate with     Hooks. Did  James Hooks  come up here and play?  He went to Central State. He     OSU wasn   t too good at recruiting back then.  They should have recruited him. His very first time he touched the  football, he scored a touchdown at Central State. The very first time he  touched the football for the Detroit Lions, he took it and made a  touchdown, so that   s something. I   m sure there will be other stories  that   ll come back to mind because at that time Willard Hall and Tanner  was some of the main dorms, then they had West Bennett, Cordell, Stout  Hall. I hope they never tear Bennett Hall down. There   s too much     I don   t think they will. It   s too close to the stadium.  Cordell   s     They   re kind of building around it.     coming down.  Hopefully they   ll get a parking garage up.  18  Hoag  Poland  Hoag  Neurohr  Hoag  Neurohr  Hoag  Poland  But I hope in fifty years when you come back that your grandson   s  asking you questions and you   ll be able to come back and try to  remember the old stories, and if you have anything   save some  memorabilia because at the time we didn   t have that much, other than  the clock and    (Laughter) which was neat. You know, just little things  like that. It   s the small things that you really remember.  All right.  That   s it. I appreciate the time     Thank you, both of you, for coming and participating in the O-STATE  Stories Oral History Project. We really appreciate you sharing your  memories with us, and this young man   Cole, you did an excellent job  asking questions. It was wonderful to see you all      Makes it a little more personal.  Yes, it did. It was wonderful to see the family interchange and the family  stories coming through, too, along with the OSU stories, and we really  appreciate you coming today.  Thank you for having us.  Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
