 Wilson  Ramsay  Today is November 16, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU Library. I   m  joined today by Chris Ramsay, head of the Art Department at OSU and  professor of art. I   m interviewing him for the Creativity Initiative series  of O-STATE Stories. Thank you for joining me today.  It   s my pleasure.  We   re going to be talking mostly about creativity on the OSU campus,  but to start out, would you mind telling us a little bit about yourself,  where you were born and where you grew up?  Sure. I was initially born in Iowa City, Iowa. When I was about four  years old, my parents moved to Ann Arbor, Michigan, where my father  got a job at the University of Michigan. He is a professor of art, as well,  and taught life drawing and painting, and also had a background in art  education. Basically, my memories are mostly of Ann Arbor, Michigan,  growing up. Went to high school there and continued on to the  University of Michigan from there. I think you were wondering how that  ties into my art background?  Well, when you got interested in art.  Well, I basically grew up in a culturally rich environment, and also  having a father as an artist made it a lot easier, I think, than most people  having to deal with society and parental pressures not to do that. I did  not want to be an artist, by any means. I didn   t even recognize that I had  any skill in that way. I went to a summer camp one summer with my  newspaper route money. It was a month-long camp out in Colorado, and  they had amazing facilities. Near the end of that time, they had a craft  cabin where they did lapidary stone work and then a leather and jewelry  making cabin.  5  Wilson  Ramsay  I went in, and I said,    I want to make      well, I took a lapidary class and  learned how cut turquoise and such. Then I went over to the jewelry  cabin, and I said,    I want to make a belt buckle that looks just like those  two mountains right there and have a moonlit sky and chipped turquoise  and ebony mountains.    This guy was like,    Well, if you can draw it, I   ll  help you.    So I sat down, and he showed me, and I just started making it  and wove the leather belt. After that, I made some gifts for my family  and such. When I went back home, everyone was just shocked that I  actually was excited about doing something and it happened to be in art.  So I took high school art classes, specifically jewelry making, and got a  scholarship to go to the University of Michigan in jewelry and metals. I  studied there for four years and had an artist residency after  undergraduate school that I was headed to, but I got a contact from a  faculty member at Texas Tech University. He had just come from  Bloomington, Indiana, where he was head there of the metals program.  He had heard about me just through the vine, I guess, and contacted me  and said,    How would you like to come to Texas Tech in Lubbock,  Texas?    I had no idea   I had never heard of Texas Tech, never heard of  Lubbock. He was offering a free tuition, basically, graduate teaching  assistantship and assistantship just to take care of the studio and such.  I helped him start a program there. I thought,    Well, I   ll go for a year,  and if it   s not good I   ll leave.    It turned out to be fabulous, just what I  needed to really get my own start. One thing that was incredible, too, is  that Lubbock was just so different from Ann Arbor and geologically  different. I mean, it   s a place where you can really see the curvature of  the earth. There was excellent faculty there, too. I think what   s happened  is so many people have graduated with MFAs  master of fine art  from  starting in the    60s to the present that you can find really good people all  over the country. The school may not have the name for art, but you can  find some excellent faculty in places like Oklahoma State, too, so it   s  pretty interesting from that regard.  How old were you when you went to that camp?  I was fifteen. (Laughter) It was 1976. It   s easy to remember that date.  Anyway, I finished graduate school and was in metals and jewelry,  primarily, but my work is much more sculptural than it is wearable. My  first job out of grad school was right here at OSU in 1986. I was twenty-four  years old. (Laughs) I was replacing somebody for a year on  sabbatical. Then I was back out on the job market and didn   t find a job,  so I moved to Austin, Texas, and became a preparator for a children   s  museum, Laguna Gloria Art Museum. Assisted in preparatory  installation of artwork for the museum and also started jewelry classes at  6  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  their museum school.  I basically carved out a living there and kept sending out my teaching  applications, and then got another one-year job at the University of  Illinois. Actually, prior to that, I also taught a summer at the University  of Michigan, too, but it wasn   t a tenure track. It was all just adjunct  positions. I was at University of Illinois for a year, worked on jewelry  and drawing. It was a good experience. Then I taught at Purdue for a  year, and then the first tenure track job that came up was back here, of  all places. Who knew? (Laughter) I applied, and so I was back here in  1989-90, and I   ve been here since. I have taken leaves to teach at San  Diego State University and some other places. I   ve had a couple  sabbaticals that have been very rewarding, to travel to Europe and learn  to do stone carving in Italy and research in Ireland. I also went back to  Ann Arbor and worked for a semester, as well. So, yes, that   s a quick  story, there. (Laughs)  What did you think of Stillwater the first time you came? Then when you  moved back, how did you feel about coming back to Stillwater?  Well, at least I knew what I was getting into. (Laughter) Stillwater then  and Stillwater now, it continues to develop and grow. I think, for me, the  saddest thing about the growth of Stillwater in many ways is that it  grows to look like other places in America. I think the corner of Hall of  Fame and Perkins  Road , you   ve got Red Lobster, Perkins  Restaurant ,  and then some kind of weird Cheesy, Cheez-It thing.  Cheezies  Pizza , yes. (Laughs)  That should be there about six months and gone, I imagine, (Laughter)  but they built this whole new building. You just look there, and there   s a  huge American flag out in front of Perkins. You look down, there   s  Chili   s and Starbucks and Popeye   s Chicken. The growth that way is  societal consumerism. The kind of growth that Stillwater really needs  is   Stillwater, really, the strength of Stillwater is in its university. What  needs to happen more is the cultural activities and dynamic research  that   s happening in the sciences and agriculture and the arts. All of that  needs to spill out beyond this artificial border that   s here. The kinds of  things that the Creativity Initiative, I think, is trying to do, at least in my  mind, is to allow that to breathe more out into the community. At least,  that   s the kind of involvement I   ve been trying to make happen.  Recently, I think there is some growth in the right direction. I see signs  of things, but there   s also some reasons, I think, that it   s also slowed  down, too. Maybe through some of your other questions, that will come  out. I think one thing is the economy is a pill, you know, and makes it  7  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  kind of tough. Also, I think there is vision, and some of the vision is not  there to try to bring   well, I think in the city government, really, to try  to make it more of a college university atmosphere. It   s a funny town  that way. It doesn   t really have that quality. It   s not just me saying that. I  hear it from people, faculty who come in from other towns, from  students who come in from other towns, visitors who come into town. I  think the city and the university should really listen to that and try to  address that.  There are a couple things that are going on, such as the purchase of the  postal plaza and taking the university outside this artificial boundary  here into the downtown area and creating a public facility that is a  research site as well as a museum for research and public intersection  there. If that was elaborated on, I think that   s a good start, but there   s so  many other things that the university is doing that is exciting. I mean,  movie events, speaker series, arts and humanities speaker series, music,  the things that scientists are doing, I think the public would love to learn  about and attend lectures, but I think there   s a little bit of intimidation  about coming onto campus. Plus, just parking, I mean, you get a ticket  immediately if you step on here. They talk about parking downtown just  for shopping being an issue. Well, imagine getting here and all of a  sudden getting a five dollar ticket, like that. (Snaps) It   s trivial, but it  means something. All of these things are little signs that it   s hard to get  over here and keep people off. I think, again, it needs to go the other  way, the university out into the community.  Well, when Burns Hargis became president, a little after that in 2008,  the Creativity Initiative was initially formed. In 2009, they had some  events such as the Creativity Bazaar and then the Creativity Challenge,  which you took first place in for the faculty category with your idea,  which is similar to what we   ve been talking about.  Do you want me to explain what that idea was and what   s happened  since then?  Yes, please.  Okay. Well, I   ve lived in Stillwater, as I said, for quite some time, so I  approached the Creativity Initiative, not project but the challenge, if you  will, as both a citizen and as a faculty member. I looked at it as, again, a  way to try to do something that would bring the university into the town.  The concept was to create a downtown site with an open glass fa  ade so  that outsiders passing by, driving by, would see what was going on  inside, intentionally. Within the space, multiple things could happen. I  envisioned, obviously, visual art shows (that   s an easy one) that would  be rotating with student work, faculty work, work that   s from outside  8  our community, work from inside our community, a place where  community artists and university community artists and the greater state  of Oklahoma and beyond could show.  This is true when I talk also about musical performances that could  happen. It could be very coffee-club kind of things, or it could be very  formal, too, little chamber recitals. It could be a variety of things, theater  performances. It could be street art. It could be troupes that come  through on the way from Dallas or Oklahoma City to St. Louis or  something maybe could bring them through, or community groups,  again, all these possibilities.  There is a movie series within the English Department that   s foreign  films and also avant-garde films. People don   t know about this, and  people would love it. Our high school students would love that, and  junior high, even, all different people, and it could be right down there,  held. When we have arts and humanities lecture series, which are on all  kinds of topics from political to social to high arts, low arts, (I mean, it   s  all kinds of stuff) it could be down there. Or if it   s not down there, they  could be advertised in the window on some kind of video screen or  something, letting people know they   re invited to come over here for  these kinds of events. At the library, you guys do all kinds of things in  the Helmerich Reading Room that are fantastic, but who knows about it  off campus? There   s that whole idea of going.  Part of my thought was that there are probably things that  microbiologists are doing, like the HBRC, that are incredible. Looking  microscopically into our world and being able to share that in a public  forum would be good for our whole place here. We had a little  something like this in Project Gallery, which was two of our art students  who basically lived up above and then opened the downtown site to have  shows of primarily their friends and such. It was the beginning of  something like that. It basically showed everybody that something like  this could exist because it was basically a fishbowl. They were never  open, (Laughter) but the idea, just that little bit, showed people this is a  neat idea, you know. It didn   t have the kind of programming or energy  that I   m talking about and really bringing in the university and other  kinds of things.  In addition to that, I was also visualizing a place, ideally, in that  building, but since then I   ve learned of some other places in town that  would work equally as well in conjunction with that. Having artist  studios   and when I say artist studios, I   m not speaking of only visual  artists. I mean musicians   oh, I should have mentioned, too, the spoken  word, like poetry, storytelling. That kind of art form is also very good. It  could be theater, music, English, visual arts, and others. Anyway, the  9  studios, maybe there would be   I have no idea what the number would  be. Let   s say eight studios where there   d be a juried selection of artists  that could be   I don   t know what the parameters of that would be. It  could be local. It could be Oklahoma. It could be regional. It could be  national. Anyway, these people would come and be provided studio  space for maybe two years, I don   t know, some kind of rotational cycle,  and they   d have to use that space, of course, for whatever their art forms  were. The idea is there   d be some, hopefully, collaboration and  discussion there. At least twice a year, they would have an open studio,  an event, where they would share what they   re doing and their thought  process and their productivity and just what   s going on.  The other thing I was thinking about is there might be some living  quarters either there for a guest artist or guest speaker, whatever, for the  university. They could stay there and do work on campus as well as  some work there so that there   s some breathing in and out kind of stuff,  constantly. There are some other things. I   m kind of drawing a blank at  the moment, but just this vitality spot, to show what   s going on  culturally. Oh, I know. It was First Friday events. Yes, I mean, duh.  Duh  Everybody does it, every downtown, any art center. The businesses  downtown could   and I   m not talking about starting September 1 and  ending April 30. I   m talking about year-round. It   s just something  Stillwater really needs. It   s for Stillwater community, which includes the  university. They really should not be separated. They are the same. The  strength of Stillwater is the university.  If you have this First Friday event, the wine bar, the coffee places, the  clothing shops, the bike store now, the outdoor shops, all of them could  be on board with that and be open and kind of get engaged. We   re  getting more restaurants. That could be also stimulus to really help that,  and it becomes an event. The city and schools and people in the  community could even do something out there, too, street musicians. I  don   t know, but it could be really fun. We don   t have anything like that.  There   s nothing like that as a springboard for developing business,  which brings me to a whole other point.  The State Arts Council did this economic impact report. (Laughs)  Outside organization came in and did research in Oklahoma and other  states, as well, but basically found that wherever arts districts or arts is  part of the community, the economy rises as well. You have to invest in  that in order to make it happen. Let   s look at Oklahoma City and the ten  years, what they   ve done with that, the Bricktown District, the new  performing arts center remodeled, the new art museum. There is a new  Native American Cultural Museum south of the river that   s happening.  Tulsa is just so jealous. They are just   Oklahoma City, it   s shifted. It  used to be Tulsa. Now it   s Oklahoma City that is, like, the cultural place.  10  Wilson  Ramsay  They   ve got (I can never remember the name of it) the Western Heritage  Museum. It   s been re-titled. That, and, of course, the Memorial. There   s  a great story where disaster happens, and it   s a rebuilding. It   s a phoenix.  It   s incredible. Something bad has become something incredible. Tulsa  is just scurrying to try to catch up.  This is where OSU is also missing the boat. Right across the street from  the Brady District, OSU has some incredible Frank Lloyd Wright-influenced  buildings, a whole campus over there, and the Brady District  is starting to come alive because they   re mimicking what Oklahoma City  has done. It   s creating a thriving cultural district, and OSU is not  capitalizing on the fact that they have the Philbrook, the Gilcrease, and  an arts community already. They could be taking this Art Department  and all of the arts and infusing it over there and get in on the beginning  of something that   s going to be really great. Right now, now is the time  to do it. It   s going to be a missed opportunity if they overlook that. We  have tried to run art history classes over there, which filled fine. We  were going to do graphic design, but they wouldn   t provide us labs. I   m  sure we, as a department, if provided the opportunity would seriously  consider moving over there. It doesn   t help Stillwater, but there is no  reason it couldn   t be. (Laughter) Anyway, arts can really help the  economy.  So what   s happened to this wonderful idea, right? Well, I shared it with  President Hargis, and I shared it with Joe Weaver, and I   ve shared it  with the mayor. Actually, right at that time, there was a change of  mayor. I forget the original guy I was talking to, but then Nathan Bates  became mayor, and then I shared it with him. I think it was 2009, as  well, we had the Oklahoma State Arts Council meeting here in  Stillwater, so that really helped to make at least the mayoral office  aware. I hoped that it was actually my plan that maybe helped spur a  little bit of the discussion. Who knows? In my mind, I guess I can let  that fantasy play out. (Laughs) Probably had nothing to do with it, but  anyway. Nathan Bates apparently contacted the city manager     Dan Galloway?     Dan Galloway. Dan Galloway contacted John McClenny, who was  head of Parks and Rec and had him work with Multi Arts Center to  compile a list of entities in the community, in other words, stakeholders,  if you will, to work on creating this concept of an arts district. Basically,  we met with people from the Community Center and Multi Arts Center.  The children   s museum was supposed to go in. Basically, what also  began to happen at that time was the university purchased this postal  plaza building. There   s another story that   s happening simultaneously  over there that I   d like to talk about because it   s really important, so you  11  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  may have to bring me back to that. It too, I think, is related to the  creativity enhancement here in Stillwater and on campus. It has to do  with one of our most incredible alumni from 1966, Bill Goldston.  I   ve got myself in a little loop-de-loop here of stories. Basically, we met,  and we toured several different sites to get a sense of the assets that we  had in terms of facilities. We discovered something that we already  knew, but it reinforced it, is that there   s a wonderful arts district already  in position. It   s actually right across the street from where you live.  (Laughter) It goes from Main Street   actually, let   s go backwards. It  starts down on Twelfth Street, Twelfth and Duck. What   s the street  that   s parallel to Duck to the east?  Duncan or Husband?  Not sure, but it   s just east of Duck Street. The library, the new library is  fantastic. What an incredible gift that is that the city has. I love that  library.  And it has the outdoor space, also.  Exactly, on the east side it   s got a little public courtyard where the band  plays and such, but it   s well underused. Why? Because there   s no  programming out there. But it exists and that, of course, incorporates the  old high school, I think it was, or elementary. That   s all part of the civic  portion of the library, fantastic. North of that is Multi Arts Center, which  is also a huge gift, which now is like,    Hmm, will it survive?    Anyway,  it   s a huge gift. Just across the street, I   m not sure if that is still under  consideration or not, but the children   s museum had signs up there that  they were going to build a site. At present, they   re north of the high  school and have remodeled what appears to be a temporary facility until  they get funding to make that happen.  Then there are some tired buildings that are houses that I think there   s  remnants there of parts that could be really interesting. For the most part,  if you had a bigger vision, you might keep some of it, but most of it  could become something greater because once you get to Ninth Street  and across is the old junior high school, which is the community center  with a huge theater, a huge, fantastic gymnasium that is a dance hall to  die for, and remodeled classrooms on the first level for dances. Dance  classes take place there. I   ve taken Tai Chi, and I know other community  groups rent it and use it. They have a kitchen, which is really cool.  The whole upstairs has seventeen classrooms that we visited that are  untouched, and they are large. I don   t know. I couldn   t give you an exact  size, but they   re twice the size of my office here. They are large.  12  Seventeen unused. Those studios I was talking about that could be  downtown in that open building, you could still have that glass-front  building, but you could have studios up there, amazing studios that could     see, the thing about that is if it was done right   Multi Arts Center is  failing.  What could happen is if there was a national program to bring in  practicing artists and, again, musicians, writers, whatever, but I   m going  to speak to the fine arts because that   s what I know. Let   s say you had,  (and relating it to Multi Arts Center) if you brought in a glass blowing  artist because they have glass blowing at Multi Arts Center, if you  brought in a ceramicist who is a potter or production kind of person or  even a sculptor or potter, a jeweler, and maybe a photographer or drawer  or, you know, okay, those people are here for two to three years and  stagger them. And let   s say where you live or right across from the  library on Duck Street, there   s a whole set of bungalows that are, you  know   what if those were purchased and turned into housing for artists?  You could create a community there. You make it easy for them to live  there. You provide or give them low-rent studio space, and they are the  teachers at Multi Arts Center, and they rotate out. What would that do to  the art community here? It would instill constant, vibrant, rich, new  ideas, techniques. You get to choose who is coming in for two or three  years or whatever. It could be amazing, and those people, I guarantee  you, are probably either recent MFA grads, or they   ve been doing the art  fair circuit or have been doing gallery work, and they   re looking,  probably, for a place to live and make their work that   s affordable.  Stillwater is that. It just doesn   t have an arts community.  The problem with Multi Arts Center is they keep having the same people  over and over and over again. We provide them students who teach, but  they   re undergrads, and they pay so little. It   s like seven dollars an hour  to teach a class. It   s horrible. You can   t get really seasoned people to  come in and do that. Anyway, what would that do? If you saw that in  music and writing, and those people could also be   the State Arts  Council has artists in residencies. These people could apply for the state  program and easily get into it. The public schools, which does not teach  visual arts, music once a week, I think, in elementary school, creative  writing, you could instill the public schools with quality artists, as well.  It can be put together. It happens other places, but what it takes is  community buy-in, government buy-in, city government buy-in, and  applying for grants that have this big vision to change communities and  make things happen, and some excitement behind it.  I have excitement for it, obviously. As department head, you think,    Oh,  boy, he   s probably got some power.    No power. Nothing. It   s not like I  13  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  want power. I just want to try to help make these things happen. It  doesn   t happen at my level. It has to happen with the city and the  university deciding they   re going to work together to make a really cool  and exciting and stimulating cultural environment for the people who  live and work and attend this university.  Have you felt that any people in these positions have shown interest at  all?  Well, Burns, going back to Burns, since he   s gotten here, wow  Big  changes in attitude. He and Ann, both, I think, are just incredible  supporters of trying to make these kind of changes occur. I don   t see it in  the city. The city, I don   t know what they   re about. I cannot figure them  out. The only sign that something good is happening is that they   ve put  goats out to mow the lawns. (Laughter) Have you seen them?  No, I haven   t.  God, it   s fantastic  It   s like the first out-of-the-box idea I   ve seen.  That   s, of course, going back to really grassroots. Basically, they   re  hiring   well, not hiring   they   re employing goats in places where it   s  difficult to get mowers in. On Ninth Street and down near Willis  Street   where the city drainage is, out to Stillwater Creek, it comes from, really,  the university where the dam is, and it goes through those  neighborhoods. It crosses Ninth Street, I think, at Willis. Just to the  South, there   s a little park. It drops down in the ravine where the aquifer  or waterway is, and they   ve put fence up, and they have goats grazing  there to keep the grass down. Then they move them to other places.  Brilliant idea. Love it  People come out to see the goats. They love it  I  think it   s brilliant, and it   s not that hard. I think it makes people look at  our city a little differently, too, doing something that   s playful and  creative and problem-solving.  Anyway, back to Burns. This whole concept of a performing arts center,  it   s going to happen. It   s going to happen, and that   s because of Burns.  It   s very cool.  I think I should probably shift over (since I don   t need to take all your  tape up) to Bill Goldston. About the time that the Creativity Initiative,  2009, January   I don   t know how it happened exactly, but Bill Goldston  has been giving us artwork at Oklahoma State University in the Art  Department since the early    80s. He was a graduate here of    66. He came  from a very small town down around Pauls Valley. He went to school  here. He met J. Jay McVicker, and J. Jay taught him printmaking. He  graduated and went up to the University of Wisconsin, I think, or  Minnesota. I forget which one. I think it was Minnesota, actually. He  14  was drafted, went to Vietnam, became a printmaker there. (Laughs)  Anyway, he came back, and his professor there said,    Hey, there is an  incredible opportunity out in Long Island with Tatyana Grosman, and  she   s looking for an intern to help.    So he went out there and went back  and forth between Minnesota and Long Island, finishing his graduate  degree and working with all of these artists. As Tatyana aged, he became  the proprietor and operator of that business. It became Universal Limited  Art Editions. He has worked with the top artists of contemporary  printmaking and drawing and painting, and sculpture for that matter.  Robert Rauschenberg became one of his best friends. He   s worked with  Robert Motherwell, Helen Frankenthaler, Jim Dine, Jasper Johns,  Elizabeth Murray, Terry Winters. It just goes on and on and on. He  began gifting us works by Larry Rivers and these other artists who I just  named. That was going into our Gardiner Art Gallery permanent art  collection, and it was the foundation of that.  Well, Bill, (I think it probably happened after Robert Rauschenberg  died) he was in charge of his estate. Bill has been positioning  Rauschenberg works down at the Fred Jones Museum and OU. He set up  a show at the Philbrook, all around the world, in Italy, the Rauschenberg  Retrospective. He   s always had OSU in his mind. As a matter of fact,  since 1984, every year, every single year, he   s provided three internships  going back to this idea. He   s from Oklahoma. Tatyana provided him an  opportunity to see New York, to learn what   s going on, to see the bigger  world and the arts that   s out there. With that kind of philosophy, he   s  paid for three students, one in the fall, one in the spring, and one in the  summer, to get out to New York, intern in his shop, go into the city. He  pays for their Long Island Rail pass, pays for the museum fees. All he  wants out of them is to be awakened. That   s all he   s asking, is to go in  there and wake up, see what you can do, what the world can be. Then  come back, finish a semester, and make the most of yourself with this.  That   s all he   s asking. Incredible. Incredible gift. Blows me away every  time I think about it.  Anyway, he came to OSU and began speaking to Burns Hargis. This  was in January 2009, I think. We had a meeting after they met. Ann was  there. Our dean was there. Select members of the faculty were there. He  basically said,    You   ve got this collection that   s in storage. Having a big  OSU art museum is a fantastic idea, but it   s going to take a little while.  Let   s get started. Let   s get a building downtown. Let   s look at that old  Katz  Department Store  building. Let   s look at the VFW Hall building.  Let   s go down and look and see if we can find a place to get this  collection out of the library annex, out of closets, out of offices and  such, and show people. I gave it to you for students to learn from.     That   s what he did.  15  So that started, and we met at Project Gallery. We went to Katz and  toured it and thought that would be good, and the city was like,    Well,  we have ideas for it,    you know, blah, blah, blah. Anyway, went through  all of that. The result was within   from January to August, we went  from no building to having a postal plaza building that the university  purchased, and Joe Weaver has a lot to do with that. He networked to  find out that it belonged to the Baptist church on that block. They sold it  for one million dollars to OSU. I guess the Regents approved the  purchase, and we got it. It is glorious. Just about in the last two weeks,  they   ve gone in and gutted it. Latasha, it is phenomenal   The problem is, as the university has done to this department many  times, in order to do it right, it might be seven million dollars. In order to  do it pretty good, probably five million. But how much do they want to  put on it? Two. Two million. Well, you know, the reason we   re sitting in  this building right now is because the Bartletts gave money to renovate  the Bartlett Center (it was a 1910 building) and make it a full-fledged art  department building. They did it, and they gave the money to do it. We  then had a design for phase two, which is out there, which is where  sculpture and ceramics and printmaking and jewelry and 3D foundations  and a whole gallery and museum are supposed to be, phase two. That  was in 1984 or    85, maybe. It   s now 2011, and we   re waiting.  What did we get? We got the visual arts annex. Why did we get it? We  got it because we were in a Quonset hut on Hall of Fame and Monroe, I  think. It was disastrous. I spent the first fifteen years of my career  teaching in a pit. The physical plant wouldn   t even come over to patch  the ceilings anymore. It was horrible. It was horrible  We complained all  the time about safety issues, so when they came to us saying,    We   d like  you to have a new site,    they   d say safety issues were the reason. It  wasn   t that. It was because they wanted to put the Multi-Modal  Transportation Building right there, and they wanted that spot. They put  us way out on the northwest side of campus. Our stated need, after doing  an assessment, was about two and a half million dollars to do it right so  that students would not be fighting for space, that we might be able to  have space to have graduate students, which we don   t have space right  now. That sculptor could actually make sculpture (gestures large) vs.  sculpture (gestures small). All of these things. Ventilation and  printmaking, kind of obvious, they work with acids and solvents. It   s a  major necessity. They cut way back. They didn   t even finish walls all  the way up in that space.  So what did we get? It was a million dollars. I forget the gentleman   s  name who came, from the president   s office, basically, top accountant  said a million, period. Period. So what are you going to do? Okay. Scoot  16  Wilson  Ramsay  ahead to 2011. I   ve been writing safety reports with problems where  ventilation is coming out one side from printmaking solvents and getting  sucked into ceramics where the gas furnaces are, and headaches and  different things that people are reporting. How much is the ventilation?  Two hundred fifty thousand dollars now, quarter of a million dollars.  There are many, many, many other issues, and it could have been  addressed up front.  This is what I see happening with the postal plaza is,    You get this  much, and you can get it done, right?    Well, you can do something. To  achieve these larger goals of integrating the university and the  community, you   re talking about cutting out a little gift shop, maybe,  which is going to draw people in, a small coffee shop or something to  socialize in that area. It   s not like the university has to run that. I say also  it should be like Aspen or Daily Grind, a local business in there doing it.  A lecture hall, and I   m not talking massive. I   m just talking space to put  chairs and a projector screen so that it could be used to show films, this  film series, or for other organizations or groups in the city to come and  make use of that building. You cut these things out, what are you going  to have? You   re going to have a temple to art, and who the hell wants to  go there? I mean, I like art, but I don   t like going to these dead spaces,  which you go there once and that   s it.  You   ve seen it.  You   ve seen it, and it   s like,    Well, so what?    That is a denial of  creativity. Having artwork on a wall with no kind of programming or  interaction is not solving a problem. I think it creates a problem,  actually, of lack of creativity and a lack of sharing the knowledge. It   s  got to be more than that. It   s got to be. There are ideas out there that are  incredible of engaging. Going back to that First Friday thing, that  museum could be something that has these events. It could be a local  dance. You could bring in high school students.  Oh, and that was another thing that I was thinking about with that  downtown site, is you have high school interns assisting artists in  projects or keeping the place open, I mean, even the idea of working  with the School of Entrepreneurship with art students or whatever kind  of students to produce a product that could be sold in these places.  There   s possibilities out there, but it takes more than me just talking. It   s  like we met with this Stillwater Arts Taskforce, (as I mentioned initially,  I hope this all makes sense when it   s played back) (Laughter) met with  John McClenny and the various constituents to try to develop that arts  district that I talked about, which is a nice L going up Duck Street from  the library to the junior high school. Now you   ve got the postal plaza.  The city owns all of that property between the NewsPress and the postal  17  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  plaza, so Ninth and Eighth Street     Which is, essentially, a lot.  Which is essentially a lot, where they had the ice skating rink. I  understand they   re not doing the ice skating rink this year. I   ve done it  the last two years. It was fantastic. People enjoy having a place to go.  Why cut it? Why not make it better? If that was turned into a park where  the farmers market was off the east side of the junior high school   I  can   t remember the coordinator   s name, the director of that building, but  there have been two of them. They both think it would be brilliant to go  off the east side with a stage, outdoor stage. Then they could use the  indoor facilities and stuff, so you   d have a stage outside and inside. And  if that   s a park right there, then you   ve got a great place to have outdoor  concerts.  The farmers market, if the postal plaza museum is there, you could have  a sculpture garden leading to it. The problem I keep running into is all of  a sudden I hear about a water park that is supposed to go in there. How  come those people aren   t talking to this group? It   s a mess  No one is  herding these ideas together, in terms of city planning. I   ve even tried to  talk to the Convention and Visitors Bureau, Chamber of Commerce, and  I just get bounced around. It   s just weird. Weird, weird, weird, weird,  weird.  Of course, I think if the university went in and said at the presidential  level,    Let   s talk about this. How can we make this whole community  better?    Could you imagine even having that water park there, and if  they put a water park in, shouldn   t it relate to the sculpture that   s there  and to the farmers market, potential booths, and this theater? Then the  next step is downtown. It   s a half a block away. You have a corridor  tying right into businesses and the arts, so you   ve got an arts district.  What did we come up with? It   s a suggestion that was given to Dan  Galloway. This was forwarded. Heck if I know.  No word?  No word. No nothing. April 27, 2011. It   s now November 16, 2011.     Maybe those art people will just go away.    If that   s the kind of attitude,  that   s ridiculous. I don   t think I   ve said anything that   there may be  ideas that are questionable, but there are degrees of them that I think  could be really successful here. I guess if Stillwater just wants to be  another Perkins and Hall of Fame landscape with a Red Lobster, Perkins  Restaurant, the big American flag and Chili   s and Starbucks, well,  you   re on that path. But if you want to be something special and unique,  you have to work at it and put dollars and attention towards it, and I  18  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  don   t see it. What I do see that   s a promise when I go downtown is  Aspen Coffee Company, Stillwater Summit, District Bicycle, Flourishes.  Louie   s has horrible food, but thank God we have Louie   s.  And they   re packed.  They are packed.  People congregate there.  Exactly. And also, there   s this new place, Brooklyn   s, too, which is  another positive thing. There   s a desire, so you go down there and drink  and you eat. The shops close mostly at five, so what do you do for  cultural enrichment? You   ve got to have some arts.  Keep drinking and eating, I guess. (Laughs)  Drinking and eating, watching TV, watch sport games. I love sports, too,  you know. It   s not a problem, but it needs to be bigger than that. We are  a university. Why not take our strengths, which are vast, and incorporate  them into our community, our whole community?  I know that you are a graduate of Leadership Arts Oklahoma. Did you  enjoy the experience of Leadership Arts and learn a lot that has helped,  and also, did you discover exciting things going on in other communities  throughout the state?  Well, Leadership Arts is a brilliant idea. Everything that I   ve been  talking about is reinforced by what Leadership Arts is trying to do in  cities across Oklahoma, which also reinforces the idea that it   s a really  good idea that we should be doing this. (Laughs) I think the Leadership  Arts group, it   s important to realize that its constituency is people from  theater and music and visual arts, but also mayors, city government  people, convention visitor bureau people, Main Street America  (for Oklahoma people), which is smart because, again, it   s that whole  thing of a community. The problem I keep feeling is like these art   that  committee we were on was a bunch of artists trying to invite others to  come, but they didn   t come. You can   t have one entity trying to   I  suppose you can if you have a ton of money and you   re willing to pay  for all those changes. (Laughter)  To make a really good buy-in, I guess we could look at the stadium out  there as an example, where one person has a lot of money and can really  make a difference. (Laughs) In terms of a whole community, you want  everyone to have a buy-in and feel that it   s their community. When I  was talking before about the university and the city working together,  19  what   s so important about that is the changes that could occur would  look like Stillwater. It would be progressive Stillwater, not just trying to  duplicate (what   s that city that they keep talking about?) Paducah,  Kentucky, or something. We can   t be Paducah, Kentucky. I don   t want  to be Paducah, Kentucky. I want to be Stillwater, Oklahoma, that   s  unique and special about Stillwater, Oklahoma, and bring in some of the  positive things that others in the city think would define it as something  unique. People want to go to a unique place. That   s why I enjoy  traveling because I want something new and enrich my life in some way.  We don   t really want duplication, I don   t think.  Leadership Arts demonstrated that it takes all these different kinds of  thinking because people have different skill sets and bring something  new to the table. Of course, they   re from all over Oklahoma which  doesn   t help, necessarily, Stillwater, but that   s what Stillwater needs to  do is bring that together. However, the cool thing about having all these  people all over the place is I met friends who do   like the city planner  for Tulsa. He   s a fabulous guy. I never would   ve met him any other way.  Who knew that we enjoyed similar kinds of things, and we   re on the  same team, so to speak. I met people over in Enid, and Enid, I think, is  really doing its best.  The group I was in, the Leadership Arts group, they had the most  number of people from the city. I think there was maybe one artist,  actually. They had six people from Enid in governmental, like I said,  Main Street and Convention and Visitors Bureau and some  governmental folks, too. Wow  They   re making a commitment. I get  emails from them about events that they   re doing, and they   re making an  effort, a real strong effort. I haven   t been up there. It just hasn   t been on  my agenda to get over there yet, but I   m very interested to see what  they   ve done.  Ada, the city of Ada, has been working with ECU  East Central  University  and built an arts district and has a whole sculptural park that  they   ve made. They are held up as like the poster child of success of  moving forward. Stillwater already has all the infrastructure in place,  those things we were talking about from the library to the Multi Arts  Center to a potential children   s museum, to the junior high school, a big  park, a museum in the city. We already have all of that. They don   t have  that, and yet they   re held up as having success. We could be miles ahead  of them. That shows where they   ve come from, and they   ve come a long  way. Their university is right at the end of the street from their  downtown, basically.  Same with Tahlequah: wonderful. I really like Tahlequah, but it   s tiny in  terms of what changes they   ve made. It   s all very concentrated, and it   s  20  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  all positive stuff. They have a strong Native American component there.  This is the cool thing that I learned. The way the Tahlequah changes  took place, (and I forget what they called it) the mayor of the city, the  president of the university, and the chief of the Cherokee tribe all meet  once a week and have breakfast together. Now, if there is a better way to  get things done, I can   t think of it. They know each other. They share  food together. Topics can come up. I just know, being in this building,  email is one thing, but I can go just up to the restroom, and I can run into  two or three people and take care of business like this, (Snaps) this  informal way, just seeing people and meeting like that. That   s what  Stillwater needs to do. Just get the right people in the right place on a  regular basis, even in an informal way, and stuff will happen.  Norman also has an impressive arts district.  Yes, and I hate to compare us to Norman, but, yes, got to get on   and,  of course, Burns knows all about that. His daughter owns a crunchy  granola joint down there, and we don   t even have   well, we have one  crunchy granola joint, but    (Laughter)  Well, getting back to creativity on the OSU campus and with students,  there have been a lot of conversations about more of an interdisciplinary  education on our campus.  Which is a brilliant idea. I   m all in favor of it, but the practical problem  is we   re all BFA or all undergraduate studies. The degree programs are  such that they have so many hours to take and certain things, and then  there   s open hours. The faculty teach three/three loads  three classes in  spring, three classes in fall . They   re full. There   s no wiggle room. They  don   t get a release for research like they do in other areas. Art history  does, but studio and graphic design does not. I know my faculty would  love to do that. I mean, who wouldn   t love teaching a drawing class with  zoology? We have drawing professors that take their Drawing I or II  class over to the zoology area and draw from the collection, but if it was  combined, a true interdisciplinary class, you   d understand a lot about  mammals and reptiles and bone structure, habitats, whatever, as well as  drawing them. It would be an incredible course, something simple like  that, even with museum studies and working with chemistry. Actually, if  you   re going to be a conservatory, you have to get both of these degrees.  There is no way, unless somebody does a major and a minor, to do it.  The only way it can happen is in the summertime.  We have something called the Doel Reed Center for the Arts, which is a  College of Arts and Sciences program. They   re just getting off the  ground, but I think that   s an idea that   s happening out there, where  science and art and other kinds of activities can take place. Again, that   s  21  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  off campus, and it   s summertime. It   s not really as part of a curriculum  or degree plan. You   d really have to break the whole system down and  build it up again to make it happen for undergraduates in a successful  way, based on our degree programs. We   ve looked and tried different  things. We   ve co-taught classes, you know, co-team, co-taught. You can  make it work, but it   s really hard with the current system to make that as  potent as it could be.  There has also been a lot of talk of creativity in general across the  campus and helping students be more creative and helping faculty teach  more creatively, which I see this as an exciting thing going on. Do you  have any ideas about other ways we should be increasing this on  campus?  Increasing creativity?  Yes, (Laughs) in students in general, in ways we haven   t been in the  past.  Well, of course, in the art classes, that   s one of the things we really do.  We work on foundational, technical kind of skills and skill development.  Along with that, we   re teaching content, and when I say teach content,  hopefully teaching students how to think for themselves, to solve  problems. It   s kind of what we do. It just gets better and better and better  as students continue on in the program. The whole program   s foundation  is just creativity development. (Laughter) You asked me about a  creativity minor before. I think that   s very exciting, especially from the  educational aspect, for those who need to understand better what makes  creativity work, how to achieve that. I think faculty, certainly, could  hugely benefit from attending the workshops, which I went to, and I  think they could be even better workshops, actually, to even dwell on  that more, like, what are the new discoveries we   ve found out about the  way people learn, the brain develops, and such. I think things like that  are really helpful because then you can understand when somebody is  not connecting with what you   re saying so you can try it another way.  I have twins, and I   ll tell you, as a teacher watching my twins learn and  their struggles, totally different people. One hears it, understands it,  comprehends it, can totally elaborate on that. The other has difficulties  reading, doesn   t really hear things and understand it, but if they have  their hands in it and you   re talking and working with them, it takes other  ways. They   re very tactile learners, and seeing how something works,  and extremely creative. Both are extremely creative but in entirely  different ways.  I think learning about how people learn to be creative is very helpful.  22  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  I   m supportive of a creativity minor and enhancing that. I think it   s  really good for education purposes, but it could also be good for students  to know if they   re having problems in an area, how they could also  improve what they   re learning, what their strengths are because  everybody is different. If those could be, like, crystal clear, that would  be a really interesting thing for a university to say,    Hey, there are visual  learners. There are auditory learners. There are       I don   t even know  them all. I don   t know them all. I just know they exist. I don   t know  how. I guess it   s from years of teaching. You just sort of figure out you  need to help somebody this way and that way. Even I could learn those.  I wouldn   t fight it at all. It only helps.  I   m sure it   s really frustrating for some students when the teacher  doesn   t realize that, and the student may not even realize that about  themselves, and they   re struggling in that situation.  I think so. Absolutely. Absolutely. I   ll tell you, having twins at exactly  the same age, learning entirely differently, that just underscores all of  that. It   s been amazing to learn that.  How old are your twins?  They are eight. Day before yesterday was their birthday, for the record.  (Laughter) Here they are. Gosh, that   s probably four years ago.  Do you feel like they contribute to your own creativity?  Absolutely. Oh, my God. (Laughter) Absolutely. It   s very liberating.  Yes, it kind of completes that cycle of life and starting all over again and  watching it. Some of the struggles that I personally went through, I can  see them dealing with. It   s sad at times because you   re like,    Oh, you   ll  be okay. Don   t worry about it.    (Laughter) Then other times, they can  just come out with the craziest things, too. When you think about  creativity, too, I look in my son   s room, and he   s the one that   s having  the problems to the test.  Oh, my God, in these public schools it is all about the tests now. As a  matter of fact, I was trying to get Monty Harper into the public schools  to actually combine a visual arts ideation process along with his  songwriting. He does a songwriting residency in thirty hours, and then  they write a song, and he performs it with the students. It   s a great thing.  I was trying to get it for my kids    school at Sangre and thought,    Well,  wouldn   t it be cool to bring art students over, or at least art ed students,  and have them work with the students to help develop ideas visually?     Monty was saying,    Yes, the visual parts can inform the song, and the  song can inform the visual parts.    He thought it was a great idea. I forgot  23  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  how I got off on this.  Did that happen, though?  Oh, we   re working on it. Yes, I   m working on a State Arts Council grant  to try to make that happen.  Henry   s room?  Oh, yes, Henry   s room, right. Thank you. I   ve lost the tie, but what I was  going to say is he   s the one having problems in school. Oh, to the test,  there you go, the test. What the principal told me is,    Gosh, we really  support this idea, but finding thirty hours in a semester is really hard.  I   m not sure if we can do it because the students all have tests to do,     and now the teachers are actually graded on how the students do, so that  grade will be posted.    We   ll be done with the testing probably at the end  of April, so in May there   s like three weeks left.    That is the problem.  They   re teaching to the test, and the standards, of course, have gone up,  which is okay except my son is struggling, and yet he   s a brilliant young  person, very creative.  How do I know he   s creative? Back to the room. You look around in his  room, and it   s chaos, but all of a sudden you look, and you realize that  he   s taken this doll, if you will, and he   s tied little bits and pieces like  gum wrappers together to make a chain for an alligator. So this doll is,  like, walking an alligator, and it   s just sort of in there. Then you look  over amongst all this stuff, (in my first impression, it   s debris) and all of  a sudden you see he   s got his Cars cars that are perfectly organized. It   s  not just straight. He   s got them in an arc, and it   s going from tall to  small. There   s order in the chaos, and a test is not going to show that.  It   s not going to show that kind of deliberate effort in something that you  can   t test. It   s irrelevant, and maybe that   s how the arts are, too.  I mean, you can test. Yes, they know yellow and blue makes green, and  what the tertiary colors are, or what light refraction is, and how to do  perspective. You can test all that, but creativity and what that can bring  and mean in a job, in a community, to lifestyle enrichment for a  community, to just being human, I   m not sure you can test that exactly.  You can know when you   re in the presence of it, but it   s not going to  show up on a little bubble, A, B, C, D, or E, is it?  Right.  I don   t think so. They   re reducing the amount of that. I heard at that  presentation we went to last week   what was the name of it?  24  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  On creative teaching.  Creative teaching. I don   t know which individual it was that said it, but  they were talking about how art, visual art in this case, is being taught.  Students might have paintings, (I   m thinking of a specific example  which I   ll tell you about in a second) and they   ve had an art experience,  but was it really creative? Interesting. Well, I was at my kids    school,  and a fourth grade teacher had done an art project on her own with the  students because there is no art class. She wanted them to experience  painting and creativity. You would think she was thinking that. Well, I  loved the pieces, what she did, but the creativity element of it, I would  say was very low.  What it was, each student had a specific size sheet of paper, a red  painted background, and a fish pointing a certain direction. Each one, of  course, was different, creativity in terms of interpretation of what the  guidelines were, but they were all pointing the same way, the same  colors, the same everything about it, which, when you put it all together,  looked cool as can be because you have this repetition and all this stuff  going on. But I question (and I think this is what that person was saying)  to what degree was the creativity there. I don   t know what the initial  assignment was and so forth, but in the end when you look at it, you just  see a teacher doing the best they can to produce a product that   s going to  look good, have success, and give the students an opportunity to work  with paint and color and probably had a theme. Maybe it related to  science or something, a fish. Who knows? But is that really pushing  creativity? Probably not. I still like it. Everyone had a good time. It was  a good thing. I don   t want to belittle it, but when you talk about  creativity, I think it   s minimal.  So in different disciplines across campus, do you think people can  sometimes think they   re giving a project that is creative, and they just  don   t realize it, themselves, that it   s not?  It   s possible. I   m not familiar with what other people are doing to say  that, but if that scenario I just described seems feasible or possible, and  if one were to agree with my interpretation of that, then it might be able  to be applied in different ways. I don   t have an on-campus example to  give because I   m not in those classes.  Is there anything else we haven   t covered that we should talk about?  I know I   ve said a lot of things that are negative, (Laughs) but I   m  actually optimistic, and I think the things I   m saying are healthy.  Stillwater has come a long way. OSU has come a long way. I think we  really are fortunate to have had Burns Hargis and Ann Hargis recently,  25  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  Wilson  Ramsay  big positive changes in that regard for the arts. Just in general across  campus, I think it   s a different atmosphere. I don   t want to really make  any comments about Dr.  Robert  Sternberg because, really, he just got  here. It seems like his heart   s in the right place, but I don   t have  anything to say in regards to that. There   s hope. There   s really hope.  There   s possibility. It   s just making it a reality is hard work. A lot of  people have to be involved.  And communicating openly.  Communicating openly about what is going on and what isn   t going to  go on, (Laughs) you know, what their goals are. I think it would be very  helpful. I am positive. (Laughter)  And still energetic.  And still energetic, yes, exactly. Oh, I forgot about this. This is an  awesome part of Stillwater, too, that also is totally understated.  KOSU Radio.  KOSU Radio, going all across the state. I think they also could take  bigger advantage of what   s going on at OSU in every area. I mean,  without KOSU, wow, the other input from the outside world wouldn   t be  there. You   ve got the computer and internet and stuff, but that is it. That  is the carrier of information that   s really important to hear, especially in  a university environment. That   s a treasure right there. Great resource.  Definitely.  I love it. So, anyway, I appreciate you asking me things.  Yes, thank you very much for talking with me.  Sure.  -------  -------   
