 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, April 8, 2016. I   m interviewing Ken Dahms at the Edmon Low Library for the Spotlighting Oklahoma Interview Series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Ken, I understand you have a master   s degree from American University and your JD from Harvard, but you were an undergraduate at OSU during a time of major social change, and that   s really going to be the focus of our interview today, getting at some of the events that happened on campus during the   60s, and particularly those events that occurred around revisions to the OSU campus speakers policy and some of the personalities involved. For starters, can you tell me when and where you were born?  Dahms Sure, I was born December 20, 1945, in San Antonio, Texas. My father was just out of the Army after the war. He and my mother   he was working for the federal government at the time and ended up in Stillwater shortly thereafter, where I grew up until the fourth grade. Then Dad got promoted within the Department of Agriculture to their headquarters in Beltsville, Maryland. I really went to high school in and around Washington, DC. Then, because the Dahms had a long line of history of graduating from OSU, I elected to go back to OSU and came in September of 1964.  Little Thunder That is really interesting, kind of a peripatetic childhood. Do you remember anything as a young child that kind of pointed towards the career avenues you would later take?  Dahms No, actually, I did not develop an intellectual curiosity until I got to Oklahoma State. My high school was filled with athletics, emphasis on athletics. I ran track, ran cross country, and played basketball for all three years there. Was a very mediocre student, underachiever. When I got to Oklahoma State, I began to realize that I never would make the Olympic team in track and field or any other sport, and decided I better knuckle down and study. (Laughter) That   s what I did. 5  Little Thunder So your parents encouraged this enrolling at OSU for college? Your parents encouraged your choice of OSU?  Dahms Not really, they left it kind of up to me on stuff. I think I chose OSU over some other schools because I had relatives in the state, all throughout the state, aunts and uncles and things like that that I could retreat to on a weekend. I couldn   t make it back to Silver Spring, Maryland, all the time, so that was very nice. They provided me a lot of support through bitching about all sorts of hard courses and why they wanted this and that. It was a good support group throughout my college.  Little Thunder Did you know when you started school what your major was going to be?  Dahms Yes, almost from the start. I had an interest in political science and an aversion to the hard sciences, I might add. (Laughter) Actually, I can recall a day or two before classes started, Dad, who knew several professors from being in Stillwater and stuff, we went over to Dr.  Guy  Donnell   s office, who was then head of the political science department, and had a talk with him regarding what to expect if I did major in political science.  Little Thunder You were involved with the Delta Chi fraternity? Is that right?  Dahms Yeah, not from the start. My freshman year was spent in the dorms. It was a very productive year academically, not very much socially. I really tried to buckle down, tried to figure out what the professors wanted, how to study in college, and things like that. I had some friends from my Stillwater days that had gone to elementary school with me. One in particular, Terry Chapel, at the end of my freshman year came over, said,    Hey, we   d like you to think about pledging Delta Chi next year.    I did, and my sophomore year was primarily trying to get used to fraternity life, a little bit different than dorm life, while still trying to keep my grades up.  Little Thunder A balancing act.  Dahms Yeah. It was only my junior and senior year that I became active in campus activities. Spring semester my junior year, I was elected to the student senate. I was Arts and Science student senator. I had served on the Arts and Science student council prior to that, but that was my big jump into campus politics. Then when Bob Swaffar left at the end of my last semester of my senior year, the student senate selected me as student senate president. I spent the last semester   my term was up the fall semester of    68. I was kind of wondering what I was going to do as far as student activities in the last semester, and Swaffar   s leaving set that up nicely. Spent the last semester as president of the student senate.  6  Little Thunder Can you help us set up a context for the period? You   ve been fairly   you   ve been in DC; you   re not coming into Stillwater really without a knowledge of some of the social and cultural shifts going on. I wonder if you can just personalize it for us with regard to the place you   re coming from and what you encountered here on campus as you entered school.  Dahms That   s a good question. I think if I had really thought about it at the time, which I   m not sure I did deeply, I was coming from more of a, let   s say, a liberal and open environment in suburban Maryland. It   s mostly urban or suburban, mainly very well educated because most of the people are civil servants with the federal government like my father was. It just seemed like coming to Oklahoma, they were certainly a bit more conservative, let   s say, agrarian-oriented.    This is a land-grant institution.    Well, it should be. My father was an entomologist, so I had nothing against people in agriculture. It just seemed to me, without really thinking about it but looking back, that I went from a fairly open,    Hey, we   re all different to the point of strangeness sometimes,    to a more closed, I think, fundamentalist-oriented society. That may have had some impact on the way I viewed things.  Little Thunder So you   re coming in as a political science major, and we have the Vietnam War going on, we have the draft, we have recent civil rights legislation and tension because of that. Were some of these issues coming up in your classes, or, for you, did it kind of hit the ground at the student senate?  Dahms Again, that   s a good question. I think a little of both. I looked upon myself as seeing, generally, both sides of an issue as it came up. Some of the irony, I guess, (and I was going to get to this later on, but now that you brought it up   ) was the fact that I felt like I got a very good education while I was here at Oklahoma State. It held me in good stead through my master   s at American and actually in my law degree at Harvard. I thought I was prepared and ready to meet the academic challenges. It always seemed a little ironic to me that, especially in light of the restrictive board of regents speaker policy, that you had all this openness in the classroom. Here I was, reading John Stuart Mill On Liberty, just an impassioned defense of absolute free speech, and then in the real world, there were people that I shouldn   t hear because of somebody   s belief that they could do me harm or could do society harm, or just wasn   t the appropriate place for a university, no less.  That began   there was severe cognitive dissidence there that led to finally making me really mad. I was disappointed and as mad as I ever was in my lifetime about the restrictive speaker policy. I know there was a lot of other issues involved at that time, but for me, that was the big one. I couldn   t quite come to grips with the opposite belief that there should be some policy that restricts free speech. The answer for speech that you don   t like or find reprehensible is more free speech  You get somebody in that opposes that viewpoint, and they have a debate of some sort. What else do you do? You 7  don   t hide somewhere and say,    Oh, no, you can   t hear Thomas Altizer because he believes in the death of God,    whatever that means.  I don   t think anybody came to grips with exactly what that meant, or Timothy Leary  I mean Leary   s got his own problems, and probably not the greatest person in the world to go to the mat about, but, hey, if you   re talking about absolute free speech, you try to protect everybody   s rights. So anyway, I digress a bit, but that was one of the things that most troubled me regarding that and in the end, I think, led to what would back then a fairly radical thing, about writing Dr.  John Kenneth  Galbraith and urging him not to come. The irony was not lost on  Bill  Streck and I. Here, our main point was that all these speakers were being denied on campus, and then we were asking Dr. Galbraith not to come. (Laughs) In critical times, you have critical solutions, and so we did wrestle with that a little bit.  Little Thunder I bet. Can you talk to us about the restrictive speaker policy, because it wasn   t as restrictive, as I understand? Something triggered these decisions by the board of regents and the president to sort of revise that speaker policy.  Dahms Yes, I think I left before they revised it for, my perspective, the better. They were ratcheting down when I was here. Essentially, I believe, looking back in the archives, I wasn   t quite sure that the Altizer decision back in    67 might have been Dr.  Robert  Kamm   s alone. There was something called the congregation policy or something that was kind of amorphous. Dr. Kamm made a decision that Altizer wasn   t, especially since he was preaching the death of God, whatever that meant   I never got to know exactly what he meant because I never got to hear Dr. Altizer speak. Then, I think as the pressure mounted and stuff, the regents really came to what they thought was Kamm   s defense by passing a more specific policy. When you pass a more specific, restrictive speaker policy, you just get in deeper. That   s what happened. Going back and reviewing what the policy said was,    We don   t want any speakers that have ever violated the law, advocated violating the law, or something else.     In the same breath, James Farmer comes on campus, one of the true civil rights heroes, and he would sure be interested in   I don   t think he knew about the policy at that time, but he   d sure be interested to know that Oklahoma State didn   t want anybody that had advocated violating segregationist laws or Jim Crow laws back in the South. It was bound to just be a subjective policy. You picked and choose who you wanted. Leary couldn   t come because we don   t like drugs, okay. Farmer could come because we liked civil rights heroes. You get into a no-win situation. You get into some very ridiculous kind of thing, and the whole policy was subjective in the eyes and completely irrational with regard to who could come and who couldn   t. 8  Little Thunder I have a list of some speakers, too, that I   m wondering if you remember incidents around them. Adam Clayton Powell?  Dahms Oh, yes, yes  That was one   that   s very good  Congratulations, you guys are on the ball. Between the Altizer and the Leary decision, oftentimes we would,    we    being the student body or the student senate, would run up sometimes just to see what would happen. Said,    Hey, we   re really thinking of inviting Adam Clayton Powell.       Oh, my God, no  No, no, he   s not a James Farmer. He   s a radical, black power advocate or something. Obviously not in the framework of people we want to talk to or want to have talk to us.    We ran   I think several people decided,    Well, Adam Clayton Powell, let   s just see what   .    I don   t think there was any formal invitation of some sort.    Let   s just see what they would say.    It was pretty typical of the response of,    No, we don   t think that   s the kind of speaker that your young ears should hear on the campus.     Little Thunder Now, were you running these by George Gries, or were you running them by the president?  Dahms I have really no idea how it happened. We might have even run it by Dan Kroll or Winston Shindell.  Little Thunder What were their positions?  Dahms Winston Shindell was a young guy. I think was student activities chairman and kind of liaison to the student senate. We made life very difficult. He was a likeable guy, but he had a no-win position. Dr. Kroll was the head of the Great Issues Committee that worked very hard to get John Kenneth Galbraith here on campus. I think he spent maybe nine months out of his lifetime writing back and forth, and was just livid at Streck and I, that we were the cause of all this travail. He carried a lot of water for Dr. Kamm and was a well-meaning guy, but he had made up his mind to live   all these people were defensive about the policy. They were smart people. The people that decided to make their peace with the regents said,    Okay, we have to finesse the Regents policy.    The rest of us,    That   s not good enough.    You don   t have a great university when you have a policy like that. It was a difference of opinion and sometimes a strong difference of opinion. We still worked together and stuff. It wasn   t like Streck or I were other-than-typical students. We wanted to get good grades, wanted to go to grad school, wanted to have some fun in college. It was just that the speakers policy intersected some of our student activity.  Little Thunder Right. I have a few more names, and it might be that, again, there   s names that you ran by.  9  Dahms Sure, I   m loving this, yes   Little Thunder Philip Berrigan and Abbie Hoffman?  Dahms You knew  Now, Abbie Hoffman was very interesting. I wasn   t in on that. I was more of a Adam Clayton Powell person. I don   t know who ran   Berrigan was, I believe if my memory serves me right, was a radical priest who was very much into the   60s with radical approaches, maybe some kind of liberation theology and stuff, if I recall right. He   d be a great one to   . I was always looking for people. Leary was a bad, was probably a more messy person to go to the mat with, but I was not on the forum committee who made that selection. They were obviously looking for a fight with the regents, and essentially named Leary about as questionable a person as you could get at the time.    Drop in, drop out,    or whatever on LSD. Again, free speech is free speech. The student senate said,    Okay, that   s fine. Let   s go with Leary.    Certainly, the reaction was   . I   d never forget. The Tulsa World guy, very clever guy, I think he sat on the board of regents, Jones or something. I   ll never forget that when they turned Leary down, the Tulsa World had a editorial entitled,    We   re Leery of Leary, Too.    As much as I objected to their way of thinking, they were really good with that. I wish I could   ve thought of something like that.    We   re leery of Leary, too.    (Laughter) Anyway, who was the other one?  Little Thunder How about Jerry Rubin or Dick Gregory?  Dahms Hmm, I know essentially that there was the beginnings of a black protest. That was after my time a little bit. Must   ve come in    69,    70, the    70s, or something like that. We had very few blacks on campus at that time. I knew that the ones that I knew from my circles and stuff were certainly unhappy with a lot of African Americans and stuff. I have to confess that I did not have an appropriate perspective of what they had to go through on campus or, indeed, in society. I thought everything had been solved with the civil rights legislation. Obviously, it had not. That was not a part of my time at Oklahoma State, other than just hearing anecdotal information.  Little Thunder Would that also be true of Julian Bond?  Dahms Yeah, Julian Bond was a bit more of a hero, regardless of the fact that he happened to be black. I don   t recall whether or not   I didn   t know there was a controversy. He had enough of a civil rights reputation and stuff that you   d have to be awful unlike Adam Clayton Powell, that you   d have to be awful brave to turn down someone to speak on campus of his stature. There may have been some stuff that I was unaware of, or somebody else was trying to pick a fight.  Little Thunder How about  sex education seminar  Sexpo    68? 10  Dahms I was reading an article   . I   d never heard of that. That was not in my vocabulary or on my radar at that particular time. Streck and I must have been housed over at the Catholic Center, writing Dr. Galbraith at the time. (Laughter) I honestly don   t recall that. If I   d have come into contact with it, I would   ve recalled that name.  Little Thunder What are your perspectives on these different constituencies that had a stake in this more restrictive speaker policy, the Oklahoma legislature?  Dahms Obviously, what I blame them for more than anything else is writing the qualifications for the board of regents. The board of regents was bound to be a very conservative, if not a reactionary, group just because of the statutory requirements. There had to be a certain amount of people involved in agriculture, a very conservative group. Understand, though, it   s a land-grant institution and strong agricultural school, but it did not make for the broadest set of minds.  Little Thunder And have a specific class, as well.  Dahms Yeah, Dr. Kamm got in   if you   re talking about contemporary support for Dr. Kamm, the legislature was 100 percent behind his efforts to exclude some of these more questionable speakers from campus. There was, to my knowledge, there was nothing but support coming out of the legislature. I could see them saying,    What do you need? Do you need some other legislation to cool these radicals on campus?    I tell people, anybody who asks,    Hey, I was an undergraduate. The school   s going to go on long after I graduate. The legislature   s still going to be conservative. Dr. Kamm   s going to have to be careful in his dealings with the board of trustees.    There was a limited number of things that I could do and still graduate and remain a student at OSU.  Little Thunder What about faculty council?  Dahms I did not pay too much attention to that. I know a lot of my contacts were obviously with Dr.  Margaret  Brooks. I knew that there was a distinction made between protest by the student body and protest by the graduate students and the faculty. One was, at least initially, strictly verboten. The faculty and the graduate students were to remain on the sidelines.    Students, hey, we   ll deal with them. Who are they? They   re only here for four years, and then they   re passing through. At the very least, the problem people will be out of here in four years.    I know there was some tension there. I know the sociology department resigned en masse, I think, in    67 or    68 and stuff. Frankly, I was just kind of cutting my teeth on the student senate in    67 and was not closely a part of those things. I mean, I was aware of the Hawthorn 11  report that the AAUP  American Association of University Professors    Hawthorn came on and found a number of problems.  Little Thunder They visited campus     Dahms Yes     Little Thunder    to do a report.  Dahms    between, especially between the   it was mainly a faculty, maybe, graduate student thing. It was not administration students. I did not pay as much attention to that as I probably should have. I know that other students were very much interested.  Little Thunder And the political science faculty wasn   t as engaged as the sociology.  Dahms Not as engaged as the sociology department. I think one person, Klaus Heberle, (I believe he was from the political science department) was fairly active in the group. Actually Professor (well, the name escapes me right now; he taught political philosophy) was active somewhat. It was mostly, as far as I could see, the sociology department more than the political science department.  Little Thunder How about some of the following personalities here? Again, this is your perspective on President Kamm.  Dahms Okay   you   re na  ve when you   re an undergraduate.    People should do the right thing no matter whether they have all these pressures.    You   re not aware of what it takes to run an organization, especially a university and especially with   in fact, it   s like herding cats. People have all sorts of perspectives, and these people, definitely. If you   re generally a faculty member worth your salt, you   ll always speak your mind, and you   re expected to. The more passage of time, the more sympathetic I am to Dr. Kamm   s position. Basically, maybe it   s simplified, but I think he truly had a vision of Oklahoma State as a great university, great research university, and very much wanted to move the university in that direction. By the legislature   s actions on what kind of board of regents he would have, he had to deal with a very conservative if not, in my perspective, perhaps even reactionary type of board who probably made decisions to the best of their ability, but they had a certain ideology and had a certain worldview that was bound to clash with the vision of what constitutes a great university. He probably did as best he could under the circumstances. Again, he was probably   I always thought he had a fairly conservative bent. He probably fit in with the general worldview of the Oklahoma populous and stuff, and probably in his own way did the best he could under particular circumstances. Certainly as time passes, one gets a bit more conservative, 12  and one sees a few more things that just tragically led to all this stuff. Probably couldn   t help but lead to that kind of end result.  Little Thunder How about George Gries? Some of these people you may have had interactions with.  Dahms Yeah, who? George?  Little Thunder Gries, G-R-I-E-S?  Dahms Boy, that name does not ring a bell.  Little Thunder I think he was the Student Union Activities Director.  Dahms Oh, okay, I   m not sure. I know The Drummer had all sorts of problems at one time about they took away their table and petty stuff like that. Why do you do those things other than to aggravate people that might not have exactly the same view as you? By doing that, you always cause more trouble than if you just let them alone. I don   t know the man; I really don   t. The name is not familiar to me.  Little Thunder Okay, did you help with The Drummer at all or just read it?  Dahms Surprisingly, it   s amazing how you forget things after fifty years. I was going through, prior to this, going through The Drummer. I wrote several articles for The Drummer that I had forgotten that I had written.  Little Thunder With regard to the open speaker policy?  Dahms There was one on the speakers policy. There was another   . I attended a rather radical convention in Cleveland, (don   t ask me why) and The Drummer asked me to write an article about my experiences at the convention. I did that. I think a couple more, and some of them were more cultural in nature, which surprised the hell out of me. I didn   t know   I forgot that I wrote those.  Little Thunder How about Abe Hesser or Louis Bullock?  Dahms Ah  Abe Hesser, wasn   t he in charge of the Union, the Student Union or something? I believe there was always a little suspect that he was carrying water for Dr. Kamm and the administration. Every once in a while they would   I think Hesser is more the one that I associate with kicking The Drummer out of the Student Union or something like that, some really weird, petty things that you really shouldn   t be doing. I did not know the man himself, but I knew Ron Stevens had very strong feelings about some of the things that he did in relation to The Drummer. I was more over into 13  the student government area. I crossed paths, drank a few beers with people from The Drummer, more, what I would say, people that were a lot less contented than I was about things at OSU.  Little Thunder How about Louis Bullock or William Hammons?  Dahms I   m not sure. I came across the name of Louis Bullock. It occurs to me that he might have been a grad student at the time, but I am not sure. I really didn   t either run in those circles or have much contact with either of those gentlemen.  Little Thunder How about Frank McFarland or Dewey Bartlett  Sr. ?  Dahms Ah  Well, Frank McFarland was one of my favorite people. I believe he was dean of arts and sciences at the time. I though McFarland was a straight shooter. I actually spent some time on the arts and science student council under his tutelage. I always thought that he was very fair. He was obviously in a real tight position because,    Hey, you   re administration, and you toe the administrative line,    whatever it is. I always thought that he did have a certain amount of sympathy and empathy with what was going down as far as the student body, as far as the speakers policy and stuff. Quite frankly, if you were a thinking individual back then, you couldn   t help but be a little bit defensive. If you went into the concept of a great university, you were going to have to work around a very restrictive, anti-great university speakers policy. McFarland, I thought, did it very well. I never got anything but the straight scoop from McFarland, even when I was persona non grata for most of the administrators. I do believe he wrote me a nice letter as I was just about ready to graduate, that he appreciated working with me, general enough not to hang him if it got out, consorting with the enemy, but still acknowledging that he thought I was a straight shooter, too. That meant a lot to me.  Little Thunder That   s neat. How about Dewey Bartlett or Margaret Brooks?  Dahms I probably should know who Judy Bartlett is, but   .  Little Thunder Dewey   Dewey Bartlett?      Dahms Oh, Dewey Bartlett  The governor?     Yeah, I didn   t have   was he governor when   I really don   t have too much of an opinion because I don   t think our paths ever crossed. I think I saw a quote from him in support of President Kamm, but there was no politician within three hundred miles of Stillwater that wasn   t supporting Dr. Kamm. It wasn   t really surprising. Dr. Brooks, I grew up with her son Mike until the fourth grade in Stillwater. My parents knew her, so I had a little bit of history even before I came. I think it was really a very tragic situation that unfolded. Some of it was her doing. I 14  mean, she was a very courageous lady and certainly not hesitant to speak her mind about what was going on. I think she was very well respected by the student senate when I was on there. Matter of fact, we made her our advisor, our faculty advisor. There was some dustup regarding renewal of her advisorship, and we were supposed to sign something and give them three names, give the administration three names.  Little Thunder Three alternate names?  Dahms Yeah, alternate names to the advisor. We wouldn   t. Refused to put the alternate names because we wanted Dr. Brooks. I think it was Streck, me, and Bob Swaffar. We were two senators, and Bob was the president of the student senate at the time. Marched over, I think it was to Winston Shindell   s office because that was our liaison. He flat-out asked. I was never prouder of Swaffar at that time. He said,    Why won   t you fill out the other two?    He said,    Because we don   t trust you. We don   t trust the administration. We think we   d get one of the alternate names.    I said,    Oh, Bob, that   s wonderful.    We marched out. As it turned out, Dr. Brooks resigned her position shortly thereafter and left the university. I can   t begin to   . Here we were as students. They weren   t going to kick us out. We were going to graduate, anyway, in five or six or seven months or a year or something. Here   s somebody who made her livelihood at the university and had everything on the line.  Little Thunder She was in sociology, right? Was she in sociology?  Dahms You know, I don   t   that   s a good question. I almost thought she was in one of the harder sciences. I may be incorrect in that. I think she was under tremendous pressure, but it was somebody that I had great respect for and lived by her principles. Where we were, I don   t want to say we weren   t serious in what we did, but we didn   t have near what we were going to lose compared to her. She had my utmost respect. I really do think possibly I wasn   t privy to meetings and stuff. Things can happen and all, but I really do think she got the short end of the stick from the administration perhaps because of her radical views and the fact that she made trouble on the faculty council and figured prominently in some of the criticisms of the administration and the board of regents.  Little Thunder Do you remember any of the student protests on the Vietnam War or     Dahms No. In retrospect, since I was drafted about four months after I left OSU and was at Fort Bragg in basic training in October of    68, I should   ve participated and listened a little more to that, but that was not my thing at the time. My thing was the speakers policy. Essentially, it   s amazing how very little I paid attention to in the outside world until I got into the outside world. (Laughs) Then it became very, very important. 15  Little Thunder So you served in Vietnam?  Dahms No, actually I went through   I was drafted, went through basic training. For a summer job, I had a top-secret security clearance, and they put me as a documents clerk in the Pentagon for two years. I thank the lucky stars to this day that I did. Then the people I   m going to meet, my fraternity brothers and stuff, actually had the experience of going over to Nam and seeing combat. Matter of fact, I came from meeting one person at the Student Union that was actually shot down over Hanoi and was a POW for a while. I have a great respect, but I was glad that I ended up in a place where I didn   t have to kill anybody and nobody was shooting at me.  Little Thunder Do you have any remembrance of lawsuits that were filed?  Dahms No, actually, though, in the Kindred Spirits Reunion, (gee, that might have been Louis Bullock that I met) I learned that in    69 or    70 after I had left, (I was in the Army and not paying too much attention to what was happening at OSU) that actually there was a suit filed. It could   ve been in   I left in May of    68, so it could   ve been late    68 or early    69. I was long gone from then. I was aware from the Kindred Spirits Reunion   it might   ve been Louis Bullock talking about actually filing a suit against the administration. I   d say,    Right on     (Laughter) We were trying to do as much as we could to bring the policy down. I never hid that fact. I got along well with all these people on other things, but I never made any bones about the fact that I thought the policy was a travesty. I never woke up during those years saying,    What can I do to make Dr. Kamm   s existence miserable?    I always woke up trying to figure out how to get rid of that atrocious policy. It made me mad; it was not good for the university; it was not good for   . If the administration had thought about it, it was not good for the administration, nor for the board of regents, nor for the school. It was one of the best things I ever did when Streck and I decided to go ahead and write Dr. Galbraith.  Looking back on it, I wish (and maybe somebody carried it out) every perspective speaker should   ve got the same request until the school was so embarrassed that it was on the wrong track that it would retract the policy. I understand for various reasons, probably not any associated with my efforts, that there was a compromise in    69 or    70 that kind of left it to the various schools working within the    tradition of the university    and stuff like that to name their speaker. Reading between the lines, it looked like,    Hey, it   s over with. We recognize   let   s just be responsible in who we invite,    maybe adding some opposition. Just to go back to the forum committee, when I said,    Hey, they were looking for a fight,    they knew by naming Leary that they would touch off a protest or kind of an explosive situation. One of their keys that they offered was to have a panel of people that disagreed with Leary on the use of LSD, on the use of hallucinogenic drugs and stuff, 16  saying,    Hey, this is going to hurt you,    and stuff like that. How great is life? That   s what you should do to people that are either advocating irresponsible things or things that you find reprehensible. Just get some opposition to it and hope that your audience is smart enough to recognize the best case of some sort.  Instead, people always, they still have a tendency   . Today I was talking to David  Peters  regarding, evidently there was, twenty years ago or something, there was a movie of some sort that somebody found offensive from the trustees. It was all over again. It was like d  j   vu, that had a policy of some sort. Let people see it. It comes; it goes. If you are worried about impact upon young college minds of some sort, have an opposition speaker or something. Talk about it. The lazy way is to simply say,    We don   t want to hear this because it   s too controversial. It   s too radical,    or whatever, and that   s a lazy way. The intellectually honest way is to meet it head on, to explain to people why this is a bad policy of some sort. Leary was a easy target  My God, just have a couple of physicians with good reputations saying,    This is crazy  This is absolutely loony,    and that was the end of it, but no. We were forced to die on the beach for Timothy Leary. My God. You accept all of them with an absolute free speech policy.  Little Thunder What kind of impact, then, did your letter to Galbraith have? Did this get some publicity? Do you think it might have been the straw that kind of broke the camel   s back?  Dahms That is a very good question and one that I was wrestling with. I tried to make a few notes and stuff, and the first one I said,    Well, they   re going to ask us what we hope to gain by having to do this.    Certainly, there was an outside chance that we could bring down the whole policy by embarrassing the administration, embarrassing the board of regents. We didn   t think that Galbraith would actually refuse to come. The best we thought we could hope for was that we   d introduce him to the policy. Being the great liberal economist that he was, we were pretty sure he   d find it reprehensible and say something at the time that he was on the campus. As it turned out, he didn   t come. We were hoping the best thing we could hope for was a reversal in the policy. When they saw,    Oh, my God, this might be the start of several speakers saying,    I ain   t coming to any place that has a restrictive policy like that,      .     Little Thunder Tulsa World picked up on it?  Dahms Yeah, and who knows? You can only do what you can in the time that you   re given. After Leary was rejected as a speaker, and after we had the get-together, the gathering, I guess several thousand people   incidentally Streck and I wrote Swaffar   s speech for that get-together.  17  Little Thunder Now, tell us about the get-together because that hasn   t come up.  Dahms It was the, I don   t want to call it a protest. It was more of a   . The student senate, after Leary was rejected, the student senate passed a resolution saying that we should have a student gathering protest, if you will, of some sort, peaceful, to try to look at alternatives of the speakers policy and several other things. Tom Lucas, the president of the student body, talked at that. Bob Swaffar, on behalf of the senate, talked. I think the gathering was two or three thousand. It was in, probably in March. They   ve got a picture of it over at the, actually, over at the alumni center. I saw the picture again in one of the periodicals of some of the people there that day.  Little Thunder That   s a good number because I wonder what the enrollment was at the time.  Dahms I have no idea, but I think two or three thousand people showed up. I do think one of the failures of Dr. Kamm   s administration was underestimating the breadth and depth of the feeling against the policy. I   m not saying that there was a majority of students that didn   t like it, but certainly a majority of the student senate was very unhappy with the policy. I think that there was a support from some of the more active and concerned students that this would hurt the university and stuff. I think they did underestimate the depth of student concern. After that, okay, there were several options.    Hey, go home. Talk to your parents. Maybe your parents can put pressure on the regents to change the policy. Maybe we can talk to the regents regarding the fact that it   s hurting the university,    those kinds of things. After that, everybody just kind of went back to what they were doing, as you might expect. I mean, it   s what happens in real life, too, after an election or something. The policy was still there. It was obviously going to be used as a subjective measure to pick and choose. What   s the difference between James Farmer and Timothy Leary about advocating for civil disobedience to existing laws?  Well, there   s really nothing, other than Leary was advocating for violating the drug laws, and Farmer was advocating for violating segregationist policies and stuff. Obviously, that   s just ripe for subjective interpretation. Streck and I, Streck felt about the same way. We felt like there was very little left to do institutionally. We knew that Dr. Galbraith was coming in the spring. We knew that he was a great liberal economist and probably would be sympathetic to our plight. We said,    Well, why not?    Essentially,    Let   s put together a history of the controversy here, beginning with Altizer and going forward. Present it to Dr. Galbraith. Ask him not to come or, in the alternative, mention his opposition to such a restrictive policy.    We put it together. There was no digital stuff back then, so this was labor intensive, cutting and pasting and all that good stuff. We put together, I thought, a pretty good history and sent it off. Obviously, the results were pretty, we 18  thought, pretty devastating, pretty embarrassing hopefully to the administration and to the board of regents.  It may have played a small part in   and it could be the straw. Who knows for sure. There are people after us that I   m sure did much more than we did, but that was our parting thing. I had written down, (and you might have the next question or never ask it, but I   ll answer it anyway)    Would I have done anything differently, essentially, in what Streck and I did?    The end product, no, that was something that actually in my lifetime one of the things of which I   m most proud. In all the applications to law school where they ask you to write an essay or something, I always put that. I got accepted to everywhere I applied. I had some sympathetic stuff. One of the things that I did, we did it in secret. Looking back, there was absolutely no need for us to do that in secret because people knew how we felt about the policy. They would not be surprised in the least that Streck and I decided to request, sent a request to a prospective speaker that they not come out of protest. Essentially, I think that would   ve actually presented the issue more starkly. It would   ve given the administration a chance to reply. Here we were, advocating free speech, and we   re actually shutting off the administration side, and we shouldn   t have.  If we were proud of our side, then let the administration take its best shot, as well. I mean, there was absolutely no reason not to do that, so I think I would have changed that. I would have clarified more, and this was just my education, growing education and stuff. I belonged to a lot of organizations, and so did Streck. We needed to have divorced ourselves. We said in the letter,    We   re not writing as student senators or student leaders but personal. This is our personal feelings, however we are X, X, X, X.    We could   ve done more to separate this and say,    We   re not writing on behalf of an organization.    I regret that. As far as the actual doing, that was our parting shot. We had no regrets, no second thoughts about doing that to try to bring down the policy. It was one of the things I actually was most proud of that I   ve done in my lifetime. It caused concern to a lot of people, and I was sorry, but those people should   ve been working harder to bring down the policy themselves.  Little Thunder What was the Kindred Spirits group?  Dahms That   s very interesting. I think Ron Stevens was kind of, as the editor of The Drummer, was kind of a leader. It was made up of   it was kind of a coalition of a lot of people unhappy with a lot of things. So actually     Little Thunder So it could   ve been the war. It could   ve been   .  Dahms Oh, yeah, unhappy about the way Dr. Brooks was treated, unhappy with what things were going on in the council, a general suspicion of things that 19  were going on   . They were all student activists, people on the student senate. I kind of counted myself as one of the group. Obviously, the off-campus newspaper, Ron Stevens. There were   what African American group was there was kind of part of it. Ann Schneider and Pete Schneider, who were graduate students in the political science department, she and Ron were instrumental in bringing the Kindred Spirits back together after thirty years or thirty-five years. We had a delightful meeting. Two or three professors showed up. We had a delightful time addressing what was going on back then and stuff.  Little Thunder This happened when, your reunion? When was the reunion of the Kindred Spirits?  Dahms It   s got to be at least eight or nine years ago. It was on campus, and most of us came back. We got to tour the   . Oklahoma State does this thing, very good now. They didn   t care who we were or how much hell we raised, why we were here or something like that.    Hey  Let us take you on a tour of the university and tell you about everything.    It was great. We enjoyed every minute of it. It was a loose group, generally kind of gotten back together. After all these years we had a very diverse group. I was a fraternity guy and did everything right, except for the speakers policy, which really made me mad. Ron was certainly more into a lot of other areas that needed addressed on the campus, as was certain other groups borrowed from Ann and Pete Schneider from the graduate group and stuff. It was just a loose coalition of people that I would imagine Dr. Kamm would label malcontents. (Laughter)  Little Thunder We   re about to wrap it up here. Anna, are there questions that     Anna McDougal I have a couple, actually.  Dahms Uh oh  You   re the dangerous one because she   s been studying this.  McDougal Well, one was you were mentioning some of the other groups that are on campus. One that I was interested in was the Afro-American Society, which formed, I believe, in    67. I just wonder if you had any memories of any demonstrations on campus that they did?  Dahms The what?  McDougal Afro-American Society.  Dahms Oh, no, there was one African American activist and the emphasis on one that people usually turned to as the representative for what was a very sparse group back then of African Americans. I forget his name, but he was usually consulted as the spokesperson. It was obvious that his constituency was unhappy, from the things that I got back, not without cause. Again, although 20  I   m kind of ashamed to admit it, that was not number one on my radar at the time.  McDougal In regards to the speakers policy, in the 1968 Redskin, I came across a quote that they put in there, or more of a question I guess, saying,    We   re really too young to hear and decide for ourselves.    I wonder if that   s part of the anger that you felt with the restrictive policy, was the university kind of labeling you guys as too young to decide for yourselves.  Dahms Oh, most definitely. I know just enough political philosophy to be dangerous, (Laughter) so I say this with a grain of salt. The atmosphere was definitely paternalistic, that,    Hey, we   re going to protect you. You   re young, impressionable, and we   re going to protect you from some of these ideas.    Now, I digress a little bit here, but it   s kind of in reverse, some of the movement. I don   t know if it   s come to OSU, the Safe Space movement. That just drives me up a wall. I mean, why do you go to a university? You go to the university to expand your universe of ideas and stuff. That was part of what made me mad. They were giving me   . In classes, I wasn   t too young for Mill   s On Liberty. I wasn   t too young for his arguments in favor of absolute free speech. You read On Liberty, and it   s just as crystal clear today as it was 150 years ago on the fact of why in a free society you have absolute free speech.  Paternalism has no   . If we were minors or something, yeah, you   re paternalistic because they   re children, but we weren   t children. We were here to learn. It wasn   t going to   . Timothy Leary wasn   t going to poison our mind. Altizer, bless his heart, he just had an idea  He didn   t have the baggage Leary did. Generally, I   ll bet you any amount of money, having read Nietzsche, that he lamented the death of God. It was the same thing, that the Enlightenment killed, essentially, religion with its rationality. I would bet a lot of money that that was Altizer   s theory, too. He was lamenting the fact that God had died in society because the Enlightenment had killed him. I never got the chance to really find out, and I didn   t read his book. Yes, it was paternalism, pure and simple. That was part, I think certainly, I know, part of my frustration that led to more of an anger of some sort, so I appreciate you bringing that up.  McDougal Yeah  My last question, and then I   ll let you off the hook. It   s kind of a broader question, I guess, about just the movement of student unrest in the   60s. How would you compare Stillwater and Oklahoma State   s campus to some of the coastal campuses at the time that got a lot of attention for things happening, the protests and rioting on campus?  Dahms We were very, very conservative compared to anything that was going on on the coasts or whatever. Essentially, when I got to Harvard, those protests were still going on. These were, our protests, were very, very respectful, 21  very, very non-disruptive of university happenings, very peaceful as far as assembling and things. There was never even a hint that   . I read something where ten years later or something like that, somebody came into the library and put books everywhere or something. (Laughter) We wouldn   t have dreamed of that. Our position was always, always a respectful type of protest. About has radical as it could get is what Streck and I did at the time to try to embarrass the administration, but they needed embarrassing. To this day, I don   t begrudge anything. We were definitely very conservative, very respectful, none of the disruption that was happening on the coast. I liked our atmosphere better because you had to deal with these people in a lot of other aspects of campus life. You just agreed to disagree and go on about your business. I think the times were not reflected at Oklahoma State as much it was in your typical Berkeley or Harvard or some of the East Coast schools. That was my thought, that we were a much more mild form of protest, but a protest nonetheless.  Little Thunder So after you graduated and you went on to American University and then Harvard and got your JD, what did you do?  Dahms I practiced law in Dayton, Ohio, for a large law firm for three years.  Little Thunder Was it civil law?  Dahms Corporate, real estate, and that three years convinced me that I was not cut out to be a private lawyer. I had grounding in political science, local government. I went to work from the law firm to being the lawyer for a county-wide public health agency in Dayton, where I remained for thirty years, first as their lawyer and then director of administration budgeting and stuff like that. It was the type of activity that I think I was really cut out for. If I didn   t have to pay the bills, I would   ve done it for free. If you can say that about your work, it   s not work. (Laughter) It was very satisfying because I never   I lost a lot of sleep from recalcitrant employees and policy problem, but never, ever any sleep on whether I was doing the right thing or doing work for the public good. I retired from there in February of 2004. My wife and I, my late wife who died about two years ago, traveled for a couple of years. Looked at one another and said,    I   m tired of traveling.    I said,    I   m thinking I   ll go back to work somehow.    I got a job teaching in the school of public health at Wright State University. I   ve been there ever since in one capacity or another. I teach a couple of graduate courses, help them out from time to time with legal problems and stuff. I   m thoroughly enjoying life. Other than the death of my wife, which she was my best friend, too, things have been very good for me since I left OSU.  Little Thunder I   m sorry about your loss.  Dahms Thank you. 22  Little Thunder Really thankful that you shared your story with us. It   s a wonderful   .  Dahms Oh, I enjoyed it. Like I said, again, I really appreciate you accommodating me on short notice. I know it   s not your standard procedure. It   s not my standard procedure, either. I usually go under the rubric that failure to plan is not my   your failure to plan is not my emergency. I really, really appreciate you all being so responsive and actually wanting to hear the tales from fifty years ago. I really appreciate it.  Little Thunder We appreciate it, too. Thank you so much.  Dahms Thank you.  -------  -------  
