 Paustenbaugh  Today is Saturday, April 18, 2009. We   re in the OSU Athletic  Department and this is Jennifer Paustenbaugh with the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. I am interviewing Mike Mulvihill who was a  member of the 1959 College World Series Championship team. Thank  you so much for your willingness to participate in this interview this  afternoon. I really appreciate it.  Sure.  You   re here this weekend for a 50th anniversary reunion of this  wonderful accomplishment and you   re seeing guys that you probably  haven   t seen in awhile. How   s the weekend been so far?  It   s been absolutely fabulous. I want to first thank whoever put this  together. Jason, I know, did a lot of work on this. He couldn   t have been  more generous, helpful, whatever, any little thing we needed. But the  idea in general just to have us back after fifty years, as if anybody would  remember what happened fifty years ago (laughs) is pretty nice. They  had one  reunion  at twenty-five  years  and I had a death in the family.  My grandfather died two days before, so I didn   t make that one. So,  actually, it has been fifty years since I   ve seen most of these people. A  few of them I   ve seen after  graduation . One funny thing, I looked up  Don Soergel, Dick   s older brother. I looked up his phone number on the  internet and I found it, and I called and didn   t identify myself. I just said,     What in the hell have you been doing the last fifty years?    He says,     Who is this?    (Laughter). So anyway, then of course I identified  myself, but you lose track of people. I was from Texas; I think there  were three of us. And like most people, I went back there, to my home,  so I didn   t see these people very much. But anyway, it   s been great. I  wish I could   ve made the other one but I couldn   t make it.  You said there were three of you. Three of you that were from Texas?  5  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Right, three from Texas. Ben Bancroft, Joel Horlen, and myself were.  They were from San Antonio and I was from Houston.  I wanted to, obviously, talk about that championship year, but before I  do that, tell me a little bit about where you grew up. You just said you  were from Houston, but how you came to be a baseball player.  Well, I grew up in Houston and I think it was in 1948 I was playing for  this little Peewee baseball team. First year I had ever played anything,  and the coach of that team was a real famous baseball coach in Houston  named Father Wilson. He was a Catholic priest. He got a call from some  man saying,    They   re getting ready to start this new program called  Little League baseball in the country.    It was the first year of Little  League.    Do you have any young men that have strong arms?    He  recommended me and some other young guys and we played the first  year they had Little League baseball in the country. There were eight  teams in the city of Houston. In that big place there were only eight  teams. That   s how I got started playing baseball and I played all through  high school.  And you indicated that you went to St. Thomas High School. Is that a  Catholic high school?  It was a Catholic boys    school, yes.  How did you get interested in Oklahoma State?  Well, I had already gotten a scholarship to play at Texas A M and was  about, I guess, a month from leaving to go to A M and I was playing in  an amateur league in Houston in the summer. And one night I played  and I had a good game, and Toby Greene happened to be there. This is  sort of funny. He happened to pick a seat right next to my dad, which  was sort of strange, and he said,    What   s that kid   s name?    And of  course my dad said,    Well, that   s my son.    You know how fathers are.  But anyway, he met with me after the game and then I met with him the  next day. He asked me to come up to where he was staying and he said,     I don   t have any more baseball scholarships left because I   m going to  San Antonio and I   ve committed to two people,    (which were Horlen  and Bancroft)    but I understand you play football and if you send me  some films of the football, I   ll see about getting you on as a football  scholarship, and then the second year if you decide you don   t want to  play football anymore, I   ll switch you over to baseball because I   ll have  all my scholarships available.    So, ended up I did that. I played two  years and got hurt, decided I   d had enough football, so he switched me  over to baseball.  6  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  But anyway, that   s how I got here. Didn   t know one person, never had  been in the state of Oklahoma. But I also wanted to major in geology  and Oklahoma State had a good geology school then, and it   s much  better now than it was then. A M was just getting started in that  particular subject and Oklahoma State had a better baseball program  than A M. So, those two things convinced me, and Coach was awfully  nice to me. Those two things convinced me to come up here, which I   m  glad I did. Met my wife. My roommate was from a little town in Kansas,  and I went home with him one weekend and met my wife of fifty-one  years. (Laughs) So, that wouldn   t have happened had I not come up  here. But anyway, that   s how I got here.  So, if you played baseball at A M, was it a requirement that you were  part of the Corps of Cadets?  No, you didn   t have to be part of the Corps. I probably would have, but  it was optional. But here, I don   t know how it is now, but here, back  then, you had to take ROTC a couple of years, which I did. But a lot of  people don   t get in the Corps. Some do.  So, you enrolled and you declared your major as geology and you stuck  with that?  Yes, I graduated in four years in geology.  And you mentioned that you had never been to Oklahoma. What was  your first impression when you saw the campus?  Well, it was hot. (Laughs) Wasn   t any hotter than Texas, but I came for  fall football practice and I had been working out, getting ready for that,  and we got here and it was, I don   t know, it was about 101  degrees  and  I   m thinking,    Oh my God, what have I gotten myself into in August in  Oklahoma?    I went and met Mr. Iba, and Cliff Speegle was the football  coach at the time, and they were both very nice and said,    Go down and  check out your equipment, because we   re going to be starting first thing  in the morning.    The first person I see, and I cannot remember his name  but there was a big, I think he was 6   9   , 355 or something, and he was in  front of me checking this stuff out and I was 5   10    and 180 and I said,     You know, I   m not sure I did the right thing here.    (Laughs) But, ends  up he really was not very good, but he was big. Then two-a-days started  the next day. But when you don   t know one person, the first week was a  little tough. They just put you with a roommate. I didn   t have the option  of picking somebody that I   d gone to high school with, or someone else  I knew. But it didn   t really take long. The people here are very relaxed.  Blue jeans and, as far as boys, all you needed was a couple pairs of blue  jeans and three or four shirts and you can forget the suit and tie and that  7  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  prep stuff. They didn   t go in for that. I don   t know how it is now.  Pretty much the same. (Laughs)  It was a very relaxed atmosphere, and I probably ended up with too  many friends. But I did get out in four years.  Were there favorite hangouts that you had on campus?  Yes, and I don   t know if I probably ought to say. (Laughs) The Bengal  Lair was an old club south of town, and I used to go out to the lake.  There was Lake Carl Blackwell. Is that the name of it?  Right, just west of town.  Yes, used to go out there. Now, I got married my second half of my  sophomore year. So, that probably was the one reason I graduated in  four years, because I straightened up and got my grades going good. But  less carousing with the guys, you know.  Right. Now you mentioned that you were a member of Sigma  Phi   Epsilon fraternity?  Yes. Wasn   t a very good member, but I was a member.  Did you live in the fraternity?  I lived there one semester. We didn   t pledge when we first got to  Oklahoma State because we were busy with football and just didn   t do  it. So, we decided to do it later. There were three athletes. Ben Bancroft  was one of them, and we pledged and I lived there one semester, but I  got out of there and I told them after they tried to say that the fraternity  was the number one thing in your whole life, which I said,    Well, I have  a problem with that because I wouldn   t be in college at all if it wasn   t for  this scholarship and if I don   t pass, I lose the scholarship. So, you   re  third.    (Laughs)  At least.  They didn   t like much. But I got out of there because I knew there was  no way that I could pass geology living in a fraternity house. There was  just a little too much every day, every night. I didn   t have time to be  working on floats or any of that stuff. (Laughs) So, anyway, it didn   t last  long. I moved out after one semester.  So, I understand that freshmen didn   t play on the     8  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  No, freshmen weren   t eligible for the varsity sports back then. Now, in  football, we did play the Big Eight schools. It was the Big Eight, then,  and they had freshman football teams, and we   d play those teams.  Baseball did not have such a situation, so freshman year all we did was  we   d practice with the varsity, play inter-squad games and stuff like that.  But there was no schedule, per se.  So, let   s talk a little bit about the    58 season. You would   ve been a  sophomore then, right?  Yes.  And so that was the season that started off with high hopes then sort of  ended in disappointment.  Yes, it did. I think we got tattooed as I recall. We ended the season at   Missouri .  It   s been a while ago.  But anyway, as I recall, we played Missouri away and we had to win a  double-header to beat them by one game. It rained in the morning in  Columbia and they called the games, I mean, at like ten o   clock in the  morning. They called and said,    It   s unplayable.    So, we all felt that we  got cheated on that deal. For one thing, you shouldn   t call a game that  early. What if it started at two o   clock or three o   clock?  Could have  played the second  game the next day. But, no. Anyway, I thought we  had a great team. In fact, it may have been better than the team that won,  or as good. But anyway, that ended, and a funny side light of that is I  had some grandparents that lived in St. Louis, and I didn   t know that  they even knew that I was playing in Columbia that weekend. They rode  the train up there.  To see you play.  To see me play. And arrived the morning that  the games were  cancelled .  Oh, gosh.  I got to see them about fifteen minutes, maybe twenty, before we took  off for Stillwater. So, that was another reason that I was upset. But  anyway, that   s life. (Laughs) But that was the    58 season and we had a  really good team. We had Jerry Adair, for one thing, added to the people  that ended up winning it. I always thought of all the ballplayers that I  had seen or grown up with or played with or whatever that he was the  9  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  best. I think a lot of the people would tell you that (laughs) that were on  this team. He was unbelievable.  But he graduated that year?  No, he actually signed a pro contract with the Baltimore Orioles, I think.  He was a great basketball player too. So, he didn   t finish either one. I  think he was a junior that year and signed and didn   t play his senior year  in either sport.  In high school what position did you play in baseball?  I was a pitcher and I played outfield when I didn   t pitch.  Okay, so you came here and you were an outfielder?  And a pitcher. Same.  Same setup.  I didn   t play as much as I would   ve, of course, thought I should   ve and  so forth. But I hurt myself playing football, as far as the pitching, and I  became basically a relief pitcher. Started a few games and, with the  pitchers that we had that were starters, we had two pros and one that  could   ve been. I didn   t pitch a whole hell of a lot, but I played some  outfield and pitched.  So, when the    59 season started, what did the team think? Did they think,     We could win it all this year   ?  I don   t think anybody went quite that far. We were thinking more like,     We will win the Big Eight,    because we felt like we got cheated out of  it the year before and we had almost everybody back. We felt like,  basically, we won the Big Eight the year before and we were for sure  going to win it this year. But I don   t think anybody   you have to have a  lot of breaks and you   ve got to get a hot streak to win that tournament  because you play so many games. I mean, back then you   re playing, I  think, eight games. It was double-elimination so you had to have deep  starting pitching. You couldn   t have just one real good pitcher. That   s  what kills a lot of teams is they get there and they   ve got one superstar  pitcher, but there   s no rest because you play every day, and he can  only   pitch but every third or fourth day, so you   re dead. But we happened to  have three good starters. There were some people that just really got hot,  above what they had played the whole year. For some reason they came  through, and not that they didn   t have good years, but they just went  crazy. James Dobson, I don   t know if you talked to him, but I can   t  10  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  remember what he hit. But during the regular season, he might have hit  .280 or something, and up there he must have hit .500 or .600. The  scouts just were drooling over him.  He peaked at the right time.  Yes, he peaked at the right time. Then there was Bruce Andrew who was  a little second baseman and he did the same. I mean they couldn   t get  him out. So, you   ve got to have a lot of breaks. But to count that you   re  going to win something like that would be a mistake. But I do believe  we really thought we would win the Big Eight and felt like we got  cheated. But anyway.  What can you tell me about the coach, Toby Greene?  He was tough. He was his own man. (Laughs) He hated the press, the  media, the newspaper writers, publicity. He just didn   t have time for  them. His job was to coach those boys, and he didn   t like talking about  them or talking to them. He must have gotten misquoted or something  somewhere back, but he didn   t seem to care much for the media. His  wife was a real character, also, and she went to all the ball games and  hollered like crazy up there in the stands. But he was a good coach and  he was a good recruiter. He knew talent. He was able to get them to  play. You can get a bunch of people together and if they   re selfish it  won   t work.  So, do you think those were his primary strengths, that he was a good  recruiter and could get people to play as a team?  Well, which is a motivator. I mean, if you can get the people to play to  their potential, yes, I   d say that   s the strength of any good coach. You  can get good players but if you can   t motivate them, you have a bunch of  individuals playing instead of a team. And we had a lot of fun. I mean,  these people   we had fun doing what we were doing. Sometimes,  maybe, a little too much fun. That   s what   s been so great about seeing  them. We   ve been talking about a lot of things other than a specific  game, but stuff that happened in the dugout or on the trips up there.  Back then, we used to   unless you were going to Colorado or Nebraska,  somewhere real far, we drove in cars. They   d pay various people on the  team to drive their own car; they   d give them mileage. I did that. So,  we   d be off by ourselves. They   d give you meal money and gas money.  There were a lot of funny things  that  happened on those road trips and  the trips back. I told a couple of them I wouldn   t tell this story, but I   m  going to tell it anyway, but it   s not incriminating or too bad. A bunch of  us, and I   ll leave them nameless, got interested in playing golf up here a  11  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  little bit and we   one night somebody had the brilliant idea of,    Gosh,  here we are at    wherever it was    Kansas State and they   ve got a golf  course on the college grounds. Let   s go see if we can find a pond and  wade, see if we can find a bunch of golf balls and we   ll take them back  and we can use them.    Well, that became sort of a tradition. We waded  for golf balls in several Big Eight schools.  Did you ever get caught?  We got caught one time and it was here.  Oh. (Laughter)  It was  at the public course here . I don   t even know that that is still  here. I think it was the Stillwater Municipal Golf Course or something.  Anyway, I   m sure that Coach Greene never knew we were doing that,  but it was sort of a lark. But it was relatively harmless, nobody drowned,  and we never got caught but here. I remember when we got caught,  somebody hollered,    What   re you all doing over there?    and Adair was  the one that hollered out,    What does it look like we   re doing? We   re  stealing your golf balls     (Laughter) Or    Wading for golf balls     But  stuff like that  happened . Coach Greene always rode with the trainer.  Byron Bird was his name, and we   d let them get out in front of us so if  we wanted to stop somewhere. We had an appointed time to get there,  but we didn   t want to get there before the appointed time. So, we   d stop  somewhere and eat a lot longer than we were supposed to, probably.  So, what can you tell me about the field that you played on?  Well, it   s in the same exact spot that it was. The grass wasn   t near as  good as it is now. The fences were similar; they were about the same  distance away. They had just bleachers, I would call them, a few. Didn   t  have near the attendance that they have now and didn   t have all the  music. I don   t think Coach Greene would   ve allowed music if it were up  to him. But it   s at the exact same spot, and where that parking lot is  right, I guess that   s west of there, there were a bunch of houses there and  a lot of us were married back then. I know that two players lived right by  the ballpark, a couple of houses from there. The rest of us lived in  Bennett Hall before we got married. But the field was the same other  than the grass being better. The field was about the same as it is now.  I   ve heard lots of stories about the workout facilities under Gallagher.  Oh, it was unbelievable.  And you were there for two different sports, right? Did you do some  12  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  football weightlifting and stuff?  They didn   t do much football down there, but when I was there, there  was a little track down there that sort of, it was just a dirt trail going  around. There were posts, big posts, supporting the floor of the  basketball arena, Iba. We would get down there and they   d set up a cage  between some of the posts and they   d measure out sixty feet for the  mound to home plate, put a plate there. Since I was one of the pitchers,  we all had to take a chance, our turn, pitching batting practice in there.  And Coach Greene would sit in a little folding chair behind the catcher  and chart how many balls you threw and how many strikes you threw.  But once you were through pitching or catching or it was your turn to  bat, there wasn   t much to do down there other than play Pepper a little  and play catch. But it was so damn dusty. That old red dirt, things grow  in it but it   s not good to breathe. They   d send the wrestlers down there in  wrestling season where they ran to make their weight. They   d weigh and  they   d be half a pound over or something and those poor guys, they   d  bundle them up, cover them up with everything they could put on and  run and run and run and then go weigh again.    Well, you need another  quarter pound,    and you   d send them back down. Well, they kicked up a  lot of dust.  Now, I was from Houston and had played ball around there for years,  and our first trip every year was down to Houston to play Rice and  Houston, and we   d usually pick up somebody else on the way back, Sam  Houston State or Arkansas or somebody. Well, I knew all these people,  or a lot of them, that we were playing against, for Rice and Houston.  We   d come down there and we   d be as white as that paper, because we  hadn   t been outside yet. We   d been down in the hole. They   re all tanned,  as it   s warm down there. In fact, some people, when I went up here said,     What   re you going up there for? You can   t play ball up there until  March.    I said,    Well, they play a lot of ball up there sometime.    Well,  when they took us today down there. I couldn   t believe it. There   s no  dust, and that beautiful track and all those  machines . They didn   t have  any of that stuff around here. There weren   t any training rooms, weight  rooms. I mean, there were some barbells I guess.  It   s pretty impressive, isn   t it?  Oh, it   s just incredible. And the baseball field is the same. There   s a lot  of minor league baseball fields that aren   t any better than that.  Going back to the championship season, are there any particular  players that really stand out in your mind as being   without them, this  wouldn   t have been possible?  13  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Well, I hate to single anybody out. It was a team thing. I will say that  had not Dobson and Bruce Andrew gotten so hot, it would   ve been  harder to get it done. But the pitching was good almost the whole Series.  So, I don   t think we could   ve won without the pitchers that went. Like I  say, it was a team deal. We just were joined at the hip, so to speak.  (Laughs) That   s why this has been so much fun. It   s like   well, you saw  those guys yesterday.  All the memories came back to me.   Yes, just picked right back up.  Picked right back up with the same people. Just a few limps. (Laughs) I  told somebody, I said,    Gosh, I hope they don   t ask us to trot out on the  field. They   d have to call a bunch of ambulances     (Laughter)  Do you think there was a significant game or a significant real turning  point in the season?  No.  I mean, after you won the Big Eight, did you have this sense that maybe  we could?  Yes, I think we did after we won the Big Eight, because we beat the  good teams. We beat Missouri and we beat Oklahoma. I don   t remember  how many we lost, but we didn   t lose many games the whole year. I  think maybe, including the playoffs, we might have lost five games or  something.  Yes, I think that sounds right.  You know, it was like 31 and 5 or something like that. But you know, it  always was nice to beat Oklahoma, of course. And we grew to hate  Missouri. A lot of that incident of calling those games, which was totally  unfair, that started it, and then one year we go out there to have infield  practice at Missouri. Coach Greene had hit a grounder, and a dog would  chase it, pick it up, run off with it. They had this dog that was   every  time he hit a ground ball  during  infield practice, the dog would go get  it. Of course, maybe that   s not their fault, but for sure   the dog was too  good. (Laughter) It chased every ball. Anyway, I think that was our  biggest rival other than Oklahoma. Now, of course, Texas wasn   t in  there then or A M. It was just eight.  What about the College World Series? I mean, is it this big of a deal in  1959 as it is today?  Yes, I   d say so. There might be more, I   m sure there   s more, television  14  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  coverage now because of the cable, FOX and so forth. I   ve watched it  myself, but it   s always been a big deal. I don   t think I quite exactly  know how they ever picked Omaha or why. That   s a long way from  almost everywhere, but that   s where it is.  What   s the game atmosphere like there? What was it like for the games  you played there in    59?  Well, I didn   t play there in    59, actually. I was injured. But for one thing,  you have a lot of the local people go. I mean, it   s worth going to. Every  school has their contingency of fans and a lot of them will watch more  than your game. They watch who they think is the best competition,  hoping they lose or rooting for them to lose, which is sort of backwards.  But, anyway. It   s wild. (Laughs)  Did the locals like Oklahoma State because they had won the Big Eight?  Well, everybody has won something that gets there, so that   s no issue.   Nebraska didn   t stress baseball, especially then.   I just wondered, with Nebraska being part of the Big Eight, if they  thought,    Oh, we   ll get behind Oklahoma State.     No. There was usually a Big Eight school up there, so if it wasn   t  Nebraska, I don   t think so.  How do you think the    59 club ranks in relation to other great teams  that, maybe, Gary Ward or even Frank Anderson has had?  Well, I   m not familiar with those teams being   though, when I left here,  I went back to Houston, and they don   t cover much in Texas other than  A M and Texas. So, you   re just not going to hear a lot of news now  unless there   s a famous player on Oklahoma State like Incaviglia or one  of those folks, well, yes, they hear about him, but they don   t cover the  Big XII like they cover the Big XII football games, but Texas might  have two pages, Oklahoma State will have an article that   s one column.  Right. So it   s hard to get a feel.  So, it   s hard to get a feel of that. And baseball, that   s not like football in  Texas; football is king. So, they   re not going to cover   much about the  Big XII baseball. I live near San Antonio now, but it   s got to be the  worst newspaper in the United States. Put that on the internet. (Laughter)  No, anyway, they are pro-, pro-, pro-Texas University, and the Big XII  baseball is going on now, and they   ll have these little things that   ll say,  like today   s game, it   ll say,    Stillwater   Oklahoma State won 4 to 3,  15  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  and so-and-so hit a home run, the winning pitcher was Joe Paluca,    or  whatever. That   s it. I mean, that   s all the coverage you   re going to get.  But that   s just the way it is.  So, do you think college baseball has changed a lot in fifty years?  Oh, yes.  What do you think are the biggest changes?  Well, it used to be a major sport for very few colleges that really  emphasized it or had real good programs. In the Big Eight when we  played, Oklahoma State had a good program, Oklahoma had a good  program, Missouri had one, not the rest of the Big Eight. They might  give four scholarships a team, or five, or maybe five halves, but they  didn   t emphasize it. Now, everybody has a first-class ballpark to play in  and everybody gives a full complement of scholarships, so you   re going  to get better players. Also, the professional baseball has done away with  a lot of the minor leagues that they used to have, the lower divisions.  They used to have D ball and C and A, Double A, Triple A. Well, now  they   ve eliminated some of those lower classifications, because the  college programs are going so well and they   re every bit as good as  those lower class pro leagues. So, that has changed it a lot. But I think  the main thing is that   well, it   s like women   s softball. I mean, that   s a  big thing now and it sure didn   t used to be. I mean, they might play it in  intramurals but they didn   t have leagues for the ladies.  Right, it   s definitely a Title IX thing.  Yes, it   s a big deal now. I watched some of that. Actually, the  girls are   awfully good. You know, they   re not just playing slow pitch somewhere.  This field that they have here for the Lady Cowboys, I couldn   t believe  that when I saw that. That was much better than what we had back then.  Yes, they   ve just finished making some significant improvements to it, so  it looks really good.  But there   s no comparison in college baseball, now and what it used to  be. Now, the aluminum bats, that   s sort of a funny thing.  I   m glad you brought that up.  Well, they did it because there   s a shortage of good bat material. When  you have all the colleges, how many teams there are, then you   ve got  little leagues, then you   ve got softball leagues, and you   ve got high  school and junior high and everybody, there   s just not enough bats. So,  16  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  several years ago, they went to these aluminum bats in high school and  little league and softball, basically, to save the wood for the pro leagues,  I guess. Well, the scouts have to, I   m sure, take that and do take that into  consideration, the ball will just fly off those aluminum bats on mis-hits. I  mean, if you hit a baseball on the handle or up on the wooden bat, you  either crack the bat or you don   t hit it very hard, but  aluminum bats  have  a big sweet spot about so long where a wood bat doesn   t. So, some  of the averages are a little inflated. Some of the home run totals, the  smallest guy on the team can hit home runs because they   ll fly off those  bats. Well, I don   t know what the fudge factor is, but I   m sure that the  scouts look at those averages and the number of home runs and reduce  them some amount for that. But that   s alright as long as everybody   s  treated the same, which I   m sure they are. But that   s changed and, I  mean, they can hit a foul ball over here and it sounds like a rocket. You  hear that clank of the   well, they don   t break any bats either. (Laughs)  It   s good for the programs, I guess. You   d have to run over one of those  bats to break it, I guess.  I live about a half a mile from the stadium and when the air   s just right,  you can hear that all day long.  Uh-huh. But it   s   I mean, a young man hit a home run today and that  ball, it went just over the 397 foot sign, which is a long way for a college  player or anybody to hit the ball, and he cleared it easily. And the guy, I  mean, he looked like he wasn   t much bigger than I am. That definitely  has something to do with these averages that they have. But it   s alright.  So, tell me about the challenge of being a student and an athlete. I mean,  you picked a major that isn   t exactly an easy major when you   re doing  something else.  Well, it was hard. (Laughs) Didn   t have a lot of free time, but   well, my  high school was a very good academic high school, which was fortunate  because they taught us how to study. And I took hard courses in high  school. I don   t know how they did it, but they divided people into   groups and suggested  what you took, like in science. In high school I  took physics and chemistry instead of general science and biology, and  math, instead of business math and algebra. Well, I took algebra but I  also took trig and solid and plane geometry, and had some calculus. I  didn   t get a grade in calculus; it was a monitored deal. Anyway, that  helped me when I got here. But the time is the killer. If you had a lot of  labs, if you were an engineering major or architecture or geology. The  average coach doesn   t like that much because, it   s not that they   re  against you bettering yourself, it   s that it cuts into their practice time  because you   ve got labs. Sometimes you just can   t get labs in the  morning. They   re usually in the afternoon, and they didn   t like that  17  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  much. But there were labs in geology. But you get through it. Like I say,  when I got married, it got a lot easier because I was more motivated.  (Laughs) Had to get out of there and get on somebody   s payroll.  So, did you end up working as a geologist?  Not a day. And that just varies. I had a high B average. When I started  Oklahoma State four years earlier, a B.S. in geology, you could just go  out and get a job, no problem. When I got out, you had to have the  degree, decent grades. I had that, but you had to have five years of  experience. I was thinking,    Well, how in the hell am I supposed to have  five years experience? I just got out of school.    Well I could get jobs in  Iran and the desert sand. Well, I had a little baby and a wife. I   m not  doing that. So, I went back to school at the University of Houston when  I got down there and tried to  get a master   s in business as  I had  minored in business up here and I tried to but I just couldn   t. I was so  happy I had graduated; I just wasn   t motivated to go back to school.  Anyway, I ended up being a salesman of engineered products, big ticket  exchangers and heaters and coolers for about thirty years.  So, all those science classes, I mean, that came in     It came in handy. In fact, the first job I got, somebody helped me write a  resume, and I had a lot of good people references, and then I had this  degree, and I had the baseball background, and sports in Houston  background. So, I had a little bit of a name there. It was a sales  engineer   s job for an engineering firm and said,    Non-engineers need  not apply.    Well, I said,    What the hell? I got these resumes, what   s it  going to hurt?    So, I sent them a resume and the guy called me, says,     Best resume I   ve ever read.    (Laughs)  You got the job.  So, I went in there and, God, I was starved. We were starving to death.  Went in there and the guy said,    Well, if you want the job, it   s yours but  I want you to wait. Go home and talk to your wife and tell her about it.  Tell her about what you   ll be doing, and if you still are interested, the  job is yours. Come back.    This was on a Tuesday, I think, and he said,     Come back Monday,    the following Monday. Well, I came home and I  was jumping up and down and I was back in there Thursday and said,     Put me on the payroll starting today, not Monday.    So, anyway, I got  that. That   s how I got into that but it was lucky. I worked there a couple  of years and there came an opening in Tulsa. There was a one-man  office in Tulsa, and the guy had a big expense account and not much  sales. So, the numbers didn   t look good. So, to beat him was just a lead-pipe  sense. You just cut the expenses and sell a little more. So, that  18  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  Paustenbaugh  Mulvihill  worked out and I did spend some time here then, but that was in like    63  to    65. We used to come to some basketball games and a few football  games. But then I got another job offer from Houston and went back, left  Oklahoma. First time back. Well, not the first. I   d been through here  going to my wife   s home in Kansas.  So, have you been surprised at how much the campus has changed?  Oh, it   s incredible. I don   t know how the hell I   d ever get to class. I  mean, you had to walk so much then. I   m sure you still do. There   s  nowhere to park, there   s more students, more buildings, and no more  parking spaces that I saw. Maybe there are, but I didn   t see any. We  walked all over the place. Bennett Hall was not very convenient to any  classroom buildings that I know of.  So, the student athletes were still in Bennett Hall back at that time?  Yes, we all started out in Bennett Hall. They let freshmen   you were  going to stay there no matter what, but they let me move out. They let  me move to the fraternity house that one semester when I was a  sophomore, and then I lived with Benny Bancroft in a little house  somewhere. Not at Bennett Hall, and they gave us what it would cost  them to keep us in Bennett Hall and feed us. That was not for very long  because I got married in February, that second semester. But I mean, it   s  enormous, the school, and real pretty, I might add. They   ve kept the  same look. They   ve got a lot of the steeples like they have on the  Student Union building. I guess that   s what that   s called. But it looks  great. My kids are already educated or I   d send them up here. (Laughter)  No, they wanted to go to   my daughter was the first in the first  Maggie   s of Texas A M, the first graduating class at A M. And my  son went to school in Texas, also.  He graduated from Texas State.   We   ve covered a lot of ground today. Is there anything that you really  wish that I had asked you about that we didn   t talk about?  Gosh, I can   t think about it. I   d just say that I was real unsure of myself  when I came up here the first time to go to school here. It is a little scary  for an eighteen year old kid, but I just loved it. It was a great place.  Well, thank you so much for participating in this interview.  Sure.  -------  -------   
