 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Dr. Sara Mata for the Latino Americans: 500 Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Edmon Low Library on the Stillwater campus of Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Saturday, June 18, 2016, in Dr. Mata   s home in Norman, Oklahoma. The interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, Director of Library Graduate Services. Thank you for agreeing to participate in this Oral History project, Dr. Mata. I want to remind you that this interview may be published as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research program at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, Oklahoma, and that you have granted us permission to publish the transcript in part or in its entirety. Okay, so to start off the interview, will you please again, I   ve already asked but, can you tell me your name again?  Mata Sara Mata.  Baeza Where were you born?  Mata I was born in Phoenix, Arizona, actually.  Baeza How long did you live there?  Mata Probably I was less than a year old, so my mother   s family was originally from Kansas, so she moved back to Kansas.  Baeza Where in Kansas?  Mata Arkansas City, Kansas.  Baeza Do me a favor, and can you tell me something about your parents?  5  Mata My parents were married, and my dad was in the military, which was why we were in Phoenix, Arizona. Although I have a great deal of paternal side of my family that lives in Phoenix. My parents separated and divorced when I was two, so I really didn   t grow up much with my father. It was mostly my mother and her side of the family that were part of my childhood and upbringing.  Baeza Is that why you moved to Ark City?  Mata Yes, it is. My family, my grandparents, my mother was originally from there and had a long history of living in Kansas actually. When they separated, my mother moved back with her family.  Baeza Tell me about your mother.  Mata My mother, she is still living. I have a great deal of responsibility, of filling in and taking care of her still. She is seventy-one, currently. My mother worked at a hospital for a majority of her career doing data entry, which is almost   . (Laughs) Doesn   t really exist anymore. She spent probably a good fifteen, twenty years, working at the hospital before she retired, and has been retired for quite some time now, and is doing well.  Baeza Do you have any siblings?  Mata I do. I have two brothers. I have an older brother, who is five years older, and I have a younger brother, who is seventeen months younger than I am.  Baeza Were they all with you in Ark City?  Mata Yes, but my older brother left when he was about seventeen, and went to California, which, at that time, was where my paternal side, my grandmother, my dad was, and so he went to live with him. I was probably   I was really young, so it was me getting into my teenage years. I remember him, but he really was not around a lot. My youngest brother, obviously don   t know what living was like without him, because we were so close in age, but yes, we grew up together.  Baeza What was it like growing up in Ark City?  Mata It   s a small town. I don   t know that I appreciated it as much. I think now, as an adult, looking back and understanding the history of why my family was there, and how unique that was, I have more of a appreciation for it, and am thankful that I had that experience. At the time, I was young and na  ve, and very much sheltered in a lot of ways that I think small towns are notorious for doing. I go back pretty often. My family, my mother is still there. My younger brother lives there, and all my aunts and uncles are there, as well. 6  Baeza What is your family history in Ark City?  Mata My great-grandfather was recruited by the Santa Fe Railroad, lived in Mexico at the time, and so they were brought to the United States to work with the railroad. Ark City was one of the places where Santa Fe Railroad built a community actually, and so my entire maternal side of both my grandmother and my grandfather   s brothers and sisters, and even their parents, lived within a square mile of each other. I thought that was normal, (Laughs) and it wasn   t until grad school when I was doing a exercise for a multicultural class that I realized that not everybody grows up with their great-aunts and -uncles living across the street, or their grandparents. My grandparents lived directly across the street from me my entire life growing up. I have   . That was amazing for me because they were like   . The whole community was sets of parents that looked after you, and growing up around my cousins, and we ruled that neighborhood. (Laughs) It was so close to the railroad tracks. I have such a connection to trains and the railroad because of that that I actually like   where I live currently, you can hear them at night, and it reminds me of growing up.  Baeza Do you know what year it was that they brought your family up?  Mata My great-grandmother was actually interviewed for the newspaper at one time, and she tells a story about remembering seeing bodies, and that was the Mexican War, at that time. I think when we did the research, it was in 1889 or 1890s that they originally came to the United States. My great-grandmother tells a story of paying five cents to come to the United States, and they were considered citizens at that point in time. Oh, how immigration has changed. I think I   m fifth-generation because that was initially when they came. I know it was at least 115 years ago, so it   s crazy to think about.  Baeza At the time, as far as when you were growing up in Ark City, is there a large Hispanic community there?  Mata No, not at all. If you were brown, you were probably related, (Laughs) some way or fashion, so there was not. I tell this story often when I talk about my upbringing, but I never really felt like that was different. My mother and her siblings would often talk about racism, but it was more because the nuns would not   in the Catholic school, obviously. (Laughs) They were not allowed to speak the language at all, and they had to assimilate very quickly. My grandparents actually did not want their children to speak Spanish because they wanted everybody to be alike. My mother would tell stories about how the nuns were very mean and would treat them different, but I never really felt like I was different when it came to race. I did however feel like I was different because my parents were divorced, and I was in Catholic school, and that was such a taboo thing back in the day. There were not   I 7  always, even going to WalMart or to the grocery, and they see the Hispanic food aisle. I mean, getting tortillas anywhere that wasn   t from your family   s house was not even heard of. My grandparents had to travel to get any of the ingredients that you could see now at the convenient store, so it has changed quite a bit since growing up. (Laughs)  Baeza During your teen years, you never felt any kind of racism or any kind of that you   re being treated differently?  Mata No, not because of race. I think, and again, I am self-disclosed. I was very na  ve, and maybe didn   t recognize those things. Now when I talk to people who I went to school with, and they would talk about situations that had happened, I never knew that race was an issue behind it. Why they wouldn   t hang out with somebody, or why now, someone would not be invited because they   re from a particular race, but I never felt like that was an issue. The only time I could really   . The first time I remember having an encounter, which   because my family had a Mexican restaurant back home, growing up, and I worked there starting when I was thirteen years old.  I remember there was a regular who came in, and was quite intoxicated, or had been drinking. He came in, I was seating him, and I had the menus. He walked in, and I was putting the menus on the table, and he made a comment, and I turned to him. He   s like,    You probably don   t even understand what I   m saying,    and started speaking fake Spanish to try to make himself think that he was speaking my language. I didn   t understand then, but I now know that that was one of the first experience where I did not like how he made me feel. His response and how he treated me, and how he was definitely making a comment because of my race at that time.  Baeza As I introduced you as Dr. Sara Mata, you obviously have gone through a lot of education. Was education a priority when you were growing up?  Mata No, it wasn   t a priority that I felt like was important for me to pursue. My mother obviously   I remember one of the struggles with my older brother was he didn   t like school, and I was probably twelve, thirteen, and he was eighteen, trying to finish high school. I remember my mother always angry with him because he did not want to get up to go to school. He hated school. I remember how much stressed that caused my mother. She wanted him to be in school, and so that I can remember was important, that I needed to finish high school, but never remember having a conversation about college, or aspirations of making something of myself. That never really came up.  Baeza Were you the first in your generation to get a college degree in your family?  Mata Yes. My mother did after she came back. She did go, and do some college courses at the community college. I think she might have even graduated 8  with her associate   s degree, but I didn   t know that that   s what she was doing. It wasn   t that she was a model for me to be able to go and do that, but definitely the first in my family to get bachelor   s degree, let alone a PhD.  Baeza What was your path to college?  Mata My path to college   . When I was in high school, as a senior, I really liked art, and art seems to be something in my family. My uncle is a very good artist. My mother even likes to do art, and she would do a lot more when we were younger. It came natural for me, and I remember high school teacher had submitted one of my art. It was big picture, and it was of a girl in a T-Bird, and she   s looking over her shoulder, and I titled it,    Till my daddy takes my T-Bird away,    based on the song. It was more that I was living vicariously through this young woman, who   s driving this car, and was being so carefree, and it was one of my favorites. She had submitted it into an art show, and from the art show, I won a scholarship to the community college, and I had no idea what that meant. I had no idea what community college was, and I didn   t know what I was even supposed to even do with it. I knew that if somebody gives you something, you thank them, and you take advantage of it. Plus, I didn   t know what I was going to do. (Laughs)  I had some great art instructors at the community college, and really helped me to think I knew what I wanted to do, and because they were so convincing that I went to the community college. I finished, and I majored in computer graphic design, which at the time was  just  beginning on computers, and I remember   . (Laughs) Now, looking back, these huge, big Mac chunks on the table, but it was something really new, doing that on the computer. I worked for about five years doing that, and it was not what I anticipated. (Laughs) It killed my creativity. When you   re doing things for other people, you start doing it with their thoughts of what they think is creative. I lost, I feel like, my own creativity in that process. It   s such a turn around, fast-paced experience that I didn   t really like it as much. My first adult job, when I finished high school, I worked   because I   ve always worked.  I   ve worked to help support my family, like I mentioned, I started when I was thirteen. I worked in a hospital. My mother worked in the hospital, and so I had started a position at the hospital too. I was the referral clinic coordinator, I believe was my title, and what I was doing was being cross-trained for all these different things within the business office. I also worked in the emergency room registration, and in admissions, and even worked in an oncology clinic. All these dynamics of seeing how I was helping and working with people really told me that   s what I wanted to do, in some aspect. When I finished, I moved to Stillwater. When I moved to Stillwater, I met a couple, and they said,    Why don   t you go back for your bachelor   s degree and   .       That doesn   t sound fun, but okay.    It was a lull time in my 9  life, and I knew I needed to do something different. Otherwise, it was going to be getting paid minimum wage, and that wasn   t something I was excited about because knew that that meant you struggle a little bit.  I went back and got my bachelor   s degree in juvenile corrections and treatment because I wanted to help, and I like young people. I like working with adolescents because I wanted to be somebody that I had wanted for me as an adolescent, going through the teenage years, and helping to make better decisions (Laughs) as a teenager. I finished that degree, and then I started,    Well, working with adolescents who were in the juvenile system was a lot.    (Laughs) It was heavy, it was hard. It was literally heartbreaking in the sense that what you were going into was so helpless and hopeless, in a lot of ways. I didn   t like that feeling because it was very evident, and still is now, that there is a pipeline from the detention centers to the prisons. The way we handle working with our juveniles doesn   t work. I thought,    I   ll do counseling  That sounds better  I   m going to help them before they make those bad decisions     I did a community counseling master   s degree, and did counseling for a while, and I knew I was going to probably need to get a   .  Counselors make awful money here. (Laughs) It   s not much different than minimum wage, so I thought,    I   ll probably just get my PhD,    because that   s what you do, is you continue to move up. The reason, my aspirations, for getting a PhD was I wanted to be in those positions to help make policy change, and make decisions that are going to be more long-term. I can sit and talk to you one-on-one, and help you with all your problems, but that doesn   t change systemically. That   s why I went into a PhD program in sociology and wanted to focus on adolescents, particularly the Native American community, which is where I had been working. At the time, there wasn   t the   . I didn   t do a very good job of researching faculty   s interests, although I had got my bachelor   s degree in that program. Then when it came to the PhD, where you really needed somebody who was interested in the things that you were interested in, there really weren   t faculty members doing that. I changed and completed my master   s in sociology.  Instead of finishing the PhD, because it was a lot of theoretical perspective and old white guys who came up with those theories, (and that didn   t seem to fit) I wanted to be more applied sociology, so finished my master   s. I got accepted into the social foundation   s program in the college of education, and the course work and the things that we were researching and studying was right where I wanted to be. Right where I felt like,    That   s what it is. That   s what I want to be doing    I wanted to be critical of the educational system. I knew that education is a vehicle for young people and for families to get out of poverty, but how do we make that more accessible? How do we help students from unrepresented populations be successful at the college-level if they   re being   if they   re coming from situations before that are not 10  adequately preparing them? That is how I finished my PhD in that program. It took long. (Laughs)  Baeza Now if I can take you back, do you remember what year it was that you moved from Ark City to Stillwater?  Mata Yes, it was    99.  Baeza Why did you make that move?  Mata At the time, I was married and my son was born. I remember it was    99 because the month I moved was the month after the huge    99 tornado, and I remember being really scared. I just had my son, and his dad at the time, my ex-husband, had started a business there in Stillwater. There was a fallout with the business partner, and that left a lot of things uncertain, and I didn   t like feeling like that. I had had the associate   s degree already, and so some friends had said,    You should go back.     Baeza What was that process for you applying to OSU and getting in?  Mata The friends that I had met, who had said you should go back, both worked at the   they were a couple, and they were married. Both worked at the university, and so they had colleagues, they had friends. They were able to say,    You need to go talk to this person here, and this person there.    Otherwise, I am not sure how well it would have been   . I know, at that time, coming in as a transfer student, the ideas of that working effectively were not in place. (Laughs) It was really hard. I was moving an hour away from my hometown, away from my family, and that was so hard initially. It   s was just an hour, but it was really hard.  Coming from a town that had maybe thirteen thousand people to a city and a university that had twice that, that also was a little overwhelming initially. I was glad though, coming in with my associates, that I didn   t have to be in those two hundred, three hundred student classrooms. I was more ready to be in some of my core courses, which were much smaller courses, so I am grateful because I don   t know how I would have done. (Laughs) I think my largest class probably was a hundred and fifty, and that was a nutrition class, and I was thankful for the labs to make that a little bit more intimate. It was a process. I   m thankful for that couple, who were able to help hand-hold and get me through the process because it was really intimidating.  Baeza Do you remember their names?  Mata Yes, Jim and Deborah Hull, and Deborah works in the Library. Her husband, at the time I think was working in microbiology, but they were students. Jim was a student, at my son   s dad   s academy   he was doing 11  martial arts at the time, and had an academy there, and so that   s how we met them.  Baeza When you applied, or when you went through the registration process, at any time   what were you thinking, as far as how are you going to pay for it?  Mata That   s a good question. I knew that I probably   I had two children at the time. My daughter was five, and my son was six months old. I knew that I probably would qualify for financial aid, and so that was going to be a benefit to be able to help pay for school. Then again, I knew I was going to work, and was told about work-studies, so I did that the entire time I was going to school. I never   . Because when I talk to students now, that   s one of their big questions like,    Oh, I can   t go to school. I can   t afford that.    I don   t remember ever thinking that was one of the big questions. (Laughs) Now when I look at my student loans, (Laughs) I probably could have been a little more proactive in asking that question. I don   t remember ever that being a deterrent, or feeling like that was something that was keeping me from considering going to school. I remember it being more intimidating because it was a university, and it was much bigger than what I had been used to.  Baeza Where did you do your work-study?  Mata I did my work-study at the Stillwater Police Department. I was telling this story the other day because I worked for records department, there at the police department, and they had just moved into a new building. They were changing from all of their old records to was not even digital at the time, but I hated it. It was because I sat at this   it sounds fancy. I worked for the police department, worked in their records, and you   re thinking    Oh     Most people would be thinking,    Oh, what kind of things did you see?    No, I sat at a machine that   s called microfiching, where I sat and fed this machine full of index cards of people who had been arrested. It was not as fun as I anticipated it to be, (Laughs) but it opened up a lot of doors for me because I did get exposed to law enforcement. Because of my position working in that role, I was able to then actually be asked to do part-time work, and work in the jail. As I mentioned, they moved into a new building, and there was some misunderstandings about how the jail was going to work. They needed somebody to work behind the switchboard, which is open and closes the doors, and was the eye in the system to be able to intake calls and that type of thing. I   m glad I stuck it out. Initially, it was not okay. (Laughs)  Baeza What year did you start the program at OSU, and what year did you earn your degree?  Mata Which degree?  12  Baeza Your bachelor   s.  Mata Okay, so I started in 2000, and I started working   . I was working at the psychological services too, the OSU psychological services. Then when my classes started to conflict too much with my degree plan, then I quit, so I was   again, I   ve always worked while I was going to school. I started in 2000, and then I finished my bachelor   s degree in    03, and then master   s in    05, master   s in    07, and then PhD. I finished in 2014.  Baeza What was the driving force, you mentioned this earlier, or what point in your bachelor   s degree did you say,    I need to go get a master   s?     Mata My initial degree for my bachelor   s was in art, so I started   because that was my associate   s degree. As I mentioned, I was doing computer graphic design. At that time, when I was coming into OSU, their graphic design was still sitting there drawing, and typography, where you actually draw each letter. It was a little bit of a step back for me, but it was more of an emphasis on the fine art piece of graphic design. That is when I changed to a juvenile corrections and treatment in sociology degree. I don   t think I thought about a master   s until   I already graduated, so I think it was during the summer that I actually figured out that I wanted to do a master   s degree. When I was doing counseling, and I started talking to, or working with adolescents, and I started talking to some of the counselors. They said,    Well, you need to get your LPC, which is Licensed Professional Counselor, and you need to get your master   s,    and so I think it was then that I pursued my master   s.  Baeza When you first started going to OSU, did you, at any point, start looking for other Hispanic students?  Mata I did, probably more towards the end of my graduate program, or my undergrad because I remember getting the emails at some point in time. (Laughs) There was a call for tutors, and so at that   and because I was a non-traditional student, I wasn   t on campus, other than there for my classes. I didn   t ever know that there was a multicultural office. I didn   t know that there was a Hispanic Student Coordinator or any of that. When I got the email about requesting for a tutor, and asking people to volunteer, I took advantage of that, so that   s how I got even somewhat involved with the Hispanic Student Association.  Baeza That   s who sent out the request?  Mata Yes, and so I tutored. She was in high school, and I still keep in contact with her. She is now married and has two little boys. That was pretty cool.  Baeza At that time, could you tell me, what do you think the size of the Hispanic Student Association was? 13  Mata Very slim, non-existent. (Laughs) I think even doing some research and going back to see how many Hispanic students were even at the institution when I was there, obviously it was very, very small. Again, it was   . It   s hard for me to gauge if there was a strong community at the institution because I never was a part of that. I never got involved in any organizations or did things outside of my program.  Baeza Do you remember who it was that hired you     Mata For the   .  Baeza    to be a tutor?  Mata I don   t. I might have also had connections because Dahlia was in the sociology. I think she was my advisor, and she was also involved in the Hispanic Student Association at the time. I   m slipping on her last name, but as far as I know, she   s still there. She   s been there for a really long time.  Baeza She was staff?  Mata Yes, she was sociology, one of the sociology advisors.  Baeza What was her name again?  Mata Dahlia.  Baeza When you decided to go back to OSU for your master   s, did you then   now that you knew about the Hispanic Student Association, did you get involved with them at all?  Mata No, and I think I had other Hispanic graduate students that I became friends with, that were in the same boat that I was in the sense that you always felt different because you were a grad student. It wasn   t that the programming was geared towards that particular population. It was very much for the undergrads, so it was hard to be able to,    Oh, now I want to be a part of this organization,    even though you   re like   well, they were much younger than me, but there   s a big difference between graduate students and undergraduate students.  Baeza When you earned your master   s degree, did you go straight into the PhD program, or did you work somewhere for a while?  Mata I   ve gone back to back to back. As I mentioned, I finished my first master   s in    05, which was a sixty-hour master   s program, which is insane when you think about. That   s a PhD hour program, but because you were supposed to 14  be preparing for the LPC, which is accreditation for being a counselor, that   s why it was so hefty on the hours. I worked throughout that master   s doing counseling, but then went and started my PhD. That was when I started working at Oklahoma State in diversity, so I was doing that program while I was working at the university.  Baeza You start   which came first? You started the PhD program at OSU, or you got the job at OSU?  Mata I started the PhD, but that was in sociology, where I ended up just getting a master   s in that program, and that was in    07. Yes, so I finished that. I actually started   yes, I started in    07 at Oklahoma State in Diversity. That was actually the year I was already here into the PhD program, now that I think about it. I finished in    05 and then went straight into that PhD program, but finished my master   s in    07, and I started at the university in    07.  Baeza If I understand correctly, you earned   . You were starting your   intending to get a PhD in that program, but stopped at the master   s level, and then switched to a different program for your PhD?  Mata Yes.  Baeza That was when you started working for OSU?  Mata    I graduated in December of    07 with my master   s, (that was initially supposed to be my PhD program) and then in    08 is when I started my PhD in the social foundations program.  Baeza What was your job when you started working for OSU?  Mata I was the Inclusion Leadership Program Coordinator, and that was in Institutional Diversity. It was one of the first, one or two, second year of the program, but I was responsible for working with second year college students as well as the program was in high school. We had high schools in Tulsa, and had high schools in Oklahoma City, and in Stillwater. It was a mentorship program, but also used as a recruiting tool, because if the students completed the program successfully, they got a thousand dollars towards coming to the university. It was primarily targeting student from under-represented high schools and under-represented populations there.  Baeza Who hired you for that position?  Mata Dr. Cornell Thomas.  Baeza What was that name again? 15  Mata Cornell Thomas, who is one of my favorite people of all times and still consider him a mentor. It   s funny how we actually met. I wasn   t involved in student organizations, but because I was at the graduate college all the time (Laughs) with different things, paper work or whatever   . There was a coordinator at the time, his name was Mike Heppler and he was very instrumental in getting   . He even helped with my thesis slash creative component. He was very intentional about contributing to my experience, and my education there at OSU, and he had invited me to come to a McNair Research Symposium at OSU. I was sitting at a table, and I happened to be sitting next to and initially met Dr. Thomas there, and I wasn   t even thinking about anything. I was telling him about what I do. I was counseling at the time, telling him about why I thought it was important, where I was counseling, which was in all over north central Oklahoma.  I was driving to all of these little towns, and helping kids who   d been in trouble with the law, or families who   d had their kids taken away, doing parenting classes. I was doing all these things, and it was   . I was pretty passionate about it, but it got heavy at times, and so I happened to be sharing all of this information. It wasn   t until a couple weeks later, he contacted me, and he said,    I have this position, and I think you   d be great for it. I   d like for you to apply,    and I did. He was so   he   s such an amazing individual, but what made him so important to me, and so essential to me now, is I think he saw things in me that I didn   t even know. (Laughs) I had no idea I was even going to go down the path that I was going to go down, but he knew. He would always   he was notorious for always saying,    I hired you. You do what you think is right,    and I   m like,    But wait, I need you to tell me      He was never one of those people to be like,    You do this, this, and this,    and I learned so much from having that freedom because he provided the structure, the vision, and the tools. It was because of that, I had found where I feel like I needed to be, and because of that program, and that work that I was doing, the Inclusion Leadership Program has totally changed my life. I   ve met so many amazing students, and still keep in contact with them, even on a very, very often, even weekly sometimes with some of the students that I met. That means a lot to me because it helps to validate what I felt was so important about that work. What Dr. Thomas would say,    You are their family while they   re here,    and we were. That   s pretty cool because we made them our family. (Laughs)  Baeza You were working with under-represented populations. Did you run into a lot of Hispanics doing that?  Mata Yes, I did. One of my favorite things that I did while I was at OSU was a program called STYLE, which stands for Strengthening Today   s Young Leaders through Education. We targeted high school girls, who had never 16  really considered going to the university before in either the very rural areas or very urban areas. We wanted to get a lot of the participants from those areas. One of the things that I learned while I was doing that was understanding the fate of students who were undocumented, because we had a large population of Latinas coming to the program. It wasn   t until after a financial aid presentation did we learn that about seven or eight of the sixteen girls that were there were undocumented, and it was like a kick in the stomach. (Laughs) I remember feeling like,    Oh my god, what did we just do?     We   re planting this unrealistic dreams for these girls to be here on this campus, and we can   t even   . The odds of them being able to afford it are   . This was way before DACA  Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals immigration policy , or anything that related to the potential Dream Act, any of that. They were really without any possibilities, and so because of that, I started getting really involved and working with the Hispanic students and the Hispanic population, not just at the university, but also in the communities, and some of the advocacy groups. I had no idea  about  immigration   like I mentioned, my grandparents, my great-grandparents paid five cents (Laughs) to come to the United States, and so it wasn   t anything that I really had to deal with. I never had to go through any of that process.  Baeza Because you didn   t have that experience, or you didn   t share a lot of experiences that they had when you were growing up and going to college, what were some of the things that   I mean, you already mentioned the undocumented, but what were some of the other things that surprised you about working with the Hispanic students?  Mata I think it really made me more aware of privilege. I know we were not well-off, and we were poor growing up, but I never saw poverty like I did when I was working with a lot of the Hispanic students, and understanding what they were trying to deal with. Because a lot of them were first-generation, some of their struggles, as far as the girls    dads didn   t want them to come to the university. They didn   t trust us at the university. They were expected to get married, and have kids, and that was normal. I never understood that, I didn   t know that that was such a traditional mentality. They were coming from was never anything that I   d really been exposed to before, so there   it wasn   t like you could say,    Well, go tell them it   s going to be okay. Tell them you   re getting an education.    Well, that   s not   . I had to really learn a lot about   . They didn   t want them to come to the university because it   s scary, there   s a lot.  Even an hour difference, coming from the city to OSU, which is in the middle of nowhere really, right, (Laughs) and you can   t blame them. That wasn   t   . I definitely wasn   t as far from that as some people. Some people I 17  was working with,    Well, they need to tell their parents they   re going to college.    That was supposed to be an appropriate response to helping these young people be able to know how to maneuver, wanting to go to the university. There was no   the cultural competency that a lot of people at the institution, when I was working there, needed a lot of help. (Laughs) I learned a lot about working with families, who were coming first-generation, and I actually did a lot of research when I was in my master   s program. I   ll never forget this. I remember interviewing a little girl. She was undocumented, and she told me her story. She was ten at the time, and she told me her story about how she came to the United States, and remembered every detail, and I thought,    God.     The symptoms of PTSD from having to go through this experience, but one of the things that I remember so vividly is she was saying,    I worry every day when I go to school because I could go home and my parents couldn   t be there. They might not be there   ,    because there was nothing stopping. At that time, it was where in Tulsa, they trained all of their officers to be ICE enforcers, right, so they could be immigration as well as pulling you over. It was no big deal for them to pack you up, and put you in a vehicle, and send you off. This little girl understood those dynamics at ten, and worrying every single day that she was going to come home and not have her parents. Those were things that working with first-generation, Hispanic students really taught me because I didn   t have any of those, understanding part to that, experience.  Baeza What you are saying is that the police were being trained to be immigration. Why was that being done?  Mata That was a hot topic at the time. Immigration was a big deal, and that   s when they were doing a lot of the crackdowns on people who are here that unlawful   it   s political. It wasn   t necessarily that there was this huge influx of crime, or anything like that. They were going to schools, who had like programs, and their parents were coming to see their kids, they were doing raids there. They were doing raids at people   s employee   their employment. It was becoming quite a  norm  at that point in time.  Baeza As this was going on, and you were working with Institutional Diversity on the campus of OSU in Stillwater, did you then start getting more involved with the Hispanic Student Association?  Mata Yes. I actually probably got more involved with the Hispanic faculty and staff, so that was where I found more of a role, but I still helped a lot with the students, and became engaged with their activities and their events. One of the things that I was really passionate about when I was   as the president of the Hispanic faculty and staff, which I don   t even remember what year that was, was to develop a scholarship program for the students because I 18  knew   . Because of the work that I was doing, with working with students who were undocumented, they need all the financial support that they can get when they come to the institutions. We, as Hispanic faculty and staff, need to be promoting as much as possible for developing scholarships, and being able to support those students because we know it   s not   you can give the money to get here to the institution, but how are you helping them out to persist, right? That was more of how I felt I got involved with the Hispanic community at OSU was more with the Hispanic faculty and staff.  Baeza You mentioned that when you started school, there weren   t very many Hispanic students, because you had looked that up, but how about Hispanic faculty and staff?  Mata Oh no. (Laughs) I think there was a solid core, maybe ten, twelve. I think when I was Hispanic faculty and staff president, I think we did the research and maybe there were twenty plus. That was via Tulsa, Stillwater, OKC, that was not just in the Stillwater campus, so there were not a lot.  Baeza Do you remember how many were actually faculty, and how many were staff?  Mata I think maybe there were ten or twelve that were faculty, and I think there might have been   . It was less than twenty for sure that were faculty, and the rest were staff. Again, not everybody participated. Just because they checked involved doesn   t necessarily mean they want to get involved in a    power to the people    thing. (Laughs) Yes, it was very few of us. I think we rotated, everybody had their term who was president (Laughs) while I was there.  Baeza You were working for OSU as you were working on your PhD. What was the degree again?  Mata The PhD, it was in social foundations.  Baeza Had you thought about   I mean, in general, if you look at the statistics or you get those releases from the Pew Center. At any point, did you think about the statistics about how many Hispanics get bachelors, how many get a master   s, and how many   . Few students in general, when you look at the entire population of college students, ever go on to get a PhD. Did you ever look at the statistics as far as the Hispanics go?  Mata Yes, I know that less than one percent have a PhD in any field. As I started working at the university, I got involved in NASPA, which is the National Association of Student Personnel Administrators, and that primarily is working in student affairs. People who work in student affairs, who cross the board throughout the institutions, and the piece that I really found a home 19  was with the Latino knowledge community. That is where Latinos, who are working in student affairs and working in higher ed in general, have a membership and contribute. That was something that has been, from the beginning, so important to the work that we do on that level to how are we promoting more Latinos into higher ed and to graduating to continue to graduate degrees. How are we supporting them in student affairs, or in programming, and residential life, and scholarship, multicultural offices? How are we promoting our own to be in more positions of VP of student affairs, deans, provosts, those kind of positions, and faculty, so we have a whole support system, but also   . Our whole purpose is to encourage more.  Baeza What year again did you finish your PhD, or earn your PhD? What year was that again?  Mata Twenty fourteen.  Baeza Were you still working at OSU at the time?  Mata Yes, no. No. (Laughs) I left in 2013, so I worked in Institutional Diversity until 2010. Then in 2010, I started another position in working in nutritional sciences, where I was working with a grant. We were working with one of the Native American tribes here in Oklahoma and doing nutrition-based education, primarily in those serving areas with the tribal community, but also focusing on an educational program for first through third graders, to preventing diabetes, and health and wellness. I did that until, I guess it was 2014 when I left OSU, and I took a position and went to   . I was in Nebraska when I finished my PhD.  Baeza You were ABD  all but dissertation  when you left?  Mata Yes.  Baeza What was your dissertation?  Mata My dissertation was looking at female faculty members, who were diagnosed with breast cancer during their tenure, and how that had an impact, both professionally as well as personally, and maneuvering the system of higher education.  Baeza What is it that you are doing now? Are you still in Nebraska?  Mata I am not in Nebraska. (Laughs) I am currently at the University of Oklahoma in Norman. Go Pokes. (Laughs) I am working with another grant with the National Science Foundation, so it   s an NSF grant. It   s a multimillion-dollar grant looking at being a model for graduate education, and primarily focusing on interdisciplinary research for graduate students. 20  I   m working with meteorology, geography, computer science, anthropology, communication, biology. I think I might be missing one, but putting together this graduate certificate, to helping graduate students to understand that we   re not going to solve the world   s problems with just biology or just geography. We have to figure out how we   re talking to each other. It   s also focused on a program, or a field called aero ecology, which is basically the study of all things in the aerosphere, the ground up to a certain point in the air, that might have climate-environmental factors. How things are being impacted, such as wind turbines and communication towers, and how is that impacting migration patterns for birds or light pollution? All of these different things that have to do with things that fly, or things that are in the air.  Baeza Since you earned your PhD, either just prior to or after, did you ever have an experience where the fact that you were Hispanic came up?  Mata Outside the institution or in the institution?  Baeza Has it been a detriment or a plus in any way?  Mata I had a situation, and I guess it   s because it   s the most recent situation. I don   t know. Because the position that I work in is the National Science Foundation, they are very active in wanting to diversify graduate student programs. That   s my work in diversity, hopefully, is a piece to wanting to contribute in that sense, to make sure that we are also diversifying our programs there at OU. I had a situation where someone had commented and said,    Oh, you   re a minority?    I mean, it was shocking to me because I   ve never had anybody question that before. It almost eluded to the fact that because I am a minority that that   s why I was in my position. That was a little troubling because I felt like I earned where I am at because of the work and the experience that I bring to the table, not because I am checking off a box. I think that   s always going to be a question, regardless of where I   m at or where any Latinos of higher ed are. It   s not uncommon for us to have that question and to think that we are filling the slot because it looks good for wherever.  Baeza Do you think that it would have been any different had you been a Hispanic male?  Mata That probably wouldn   t have been asked. I don   t know, I can   t say. (Laughs)  Baeza Of your experiences, from the time you got to OSU, going through all your degrees, and the different positions you   ve held at different institutions, what   s the most beneficial experience you think you   ve had?  21  Mata I would probably say   . They each have a contributing factor to why I think I am who I am today, but definitely the Inclusion Leadership Program because I found myself in my career. I found what was going to be where I would base the rest of my work that I wanted to do because of the students that I worked with. They changed my life, and they continue to  I actually had one of the students, who was in my STYLE program, who   and I know. There   s no question that the work that we did with STYLE changed these young girls    lives, and she finished her degree in mechanical engineering last year I want to say, or maybe it was   . No, it was last year, and she just got engaged last night, so I just   seeing that, and seeing how these girls were in high school to transform to where they are now, and being successful, and doing what they   . Going through the university, and how that was a great recruiting tool because we were able to get them there, but then seeing that it made some real influence on their lives.  Baeza That was what you gained from your education and your work experience. What would you consider to be the most meaningful or important event in your life?  Mata I would have to say getting my PhD probably, because of   . I don   t know   because I know it sets an example for others in my family. I know it sets an example for my family in the sense that they contributed right. I don   t sit here representing just myself, I represent all of them, who were a part of the process, and helped me in a lot of ways to be able to   getting to classes, and having the experience of calling on them if I needed, childcare or whatever. The PhD also serves an example for the students that I worked with, for my colleagues who are struggling with the program now, (Laughs) who are struggling to get a PhD because it wasn   t easy. The PhD was probably the biggest hurdle that I   ve had to overcome, so now having a piece of paper (Laughs) proves my determination, my resilience seeing   I was talking to a colleague yesterday actually, and she was talking about her husband   s experience, and how there are some programs, who are deliberate in academic hazing in a sense.  It   s also much more challenging for those of us of color to be able to persist, and not having the cultural capital to be able to rely on to get us through the process. It   s much more difficult in a lot of ways. I think about her comments, and she was saying that it was challenging for her husband because of that. The program did make her husband   s life hell, and I know what that looks like. (Laughs) I   ve read two dissertation proposals, even this year of colleagues of mine,    How can I help? What can I do? What questions can I ask or help you answer? How do you want to ask these research questions? Maybe think about this way.    All of those things are essential to that piece of paper because, that being my biggest accomplishment, helps me to want other people to know what that feels like to. 22  Baeza As a Hispanic female with a PhD, which puts you rarified air there, do you find any responsibility or pressure because of that?  Mata I feel a huge responsibility, and I don   t think that responsibility and pressure those are synonymous. I think that responsibility that I do give back in a lot of different ways, and that I do serve in roles that showcase that less than one percent of what I   ve been able to obtain. I serve as the national co-chair for the Latino knowledge community currently. That is something that   s also been a great accomplishment, but it puts me in a position to be able to serve as a leader, and hopefully inspire others to see that there are possibilities. I take that responsibility. I try to be involved in my community. I try to give back to Oklahoma State. I support my Society Hispanic Professional Engineers because they were my babies. I always want to give back to them because I know all the great work that   . They also do a high school program to bring students on campus, and I   ve seen how effective it is. That responsibility comes from how I give on a personal level, I give on a financial level, and how I give to being visible in a lot of ways.  Baeza You mentioned the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers, which is the first time you   ve mentioned that, and you said they   re your babies.  Mata They are my babies. (Laughs)  Baeza Can you tell me more about that program?  Mata I actually, working in diversity, I got involved in helping a lot with the engineering because they seemed to have funding available. (Laughs) Plus, that   s also   currently, my job is in the STEM field. I know that   s where we are very, very few, in regards to Hispanics being visible in getting PhDs or getting their degrees. When I got involved in engineering, and also they were doing these summer programs, and then there became more and more Hispanic students who we were outreaching to, and got involved with the Society Hispanic Professional Engineer program there on campus. I started that probably in    08, so my first summer program was there. I helped, stayed the night. I was giving back and wanting to   I didn   t know anything about engineering so much. That wasn   t the field I was interested in, or had a background in, so it was more about the student support, and helping them feel connected, and that they could ask any questions.  Meeting their parents, that was always something so fun. I still have so many stories with students how I met their parents, and these kind of programs. Those students that were in high school, so many of them came to the university, and I know that that work that we did, in regards to helping them feel like they were connected. Plus, coming on campus and seeing this amazing facilities, and knowing that people cared, that is essential. I still 23  keep in contact with a lot of those students, and because of that piece of helping them to understand. Plus, so important, especially with STEM   s fields, to encourage that in high school,    Yes, you need to take a science class while you   re in high school. Just because you took it as a freshman when you were in ninth grade, you still need to take something.     Continue those skills because when they get to the university, they do awful unfortunately, because they haven   t had it for four years, you can   t   . If I were to go back right now and take a biology course, oh my god. (Laughs) You can only imagine with these young people. Those programs were able to say,    Hey, you got be proactive. Your advisors might not tell you this, or your counselors not going to tell you this, but you take a math, take a science as many times as you can throughout your high school experience to be better prepared for when you get to the university, especially if you want to do STEMs.    All of those different aspects were essential in why I give back, and why so many of the students made a difference to me.  Baeza SHPE  Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers ?  Mata SHPE, SHPE.  Baeza SHPE. I guess the program was going on before you got involved with them?  Mata Yes, I think so. I couldn   t tell you who the advisor was for them. I remember some of the students, and it   s been fascinating to see that being so important because so many of them were high school students to now be at the college, to want to continue to do this high school program because it   s what helped change their life, too. That giving back, that cycle of wanting to be   and go back to your community. That was also important, going back to some of these schools that they went to when they were in Oklahoma City or Tulsa. Just to be able to be there, and be visible to the students, the high school students as college students,    I   m at Oklahoma State.    There   s such a pride that goes with that. Yes, I don   t remember who at the beginning, but it was the students that made such an impression on me.  Baeza It   s a program that basically grows its own replacements?  Mata Yes, it has   I can   t tell you now. I still know several students, but the one student that I was closest to graduated.  Baeza Now that we   ve talked about a lot of stuff in your past and present, what dreams or what visions do you have for yourself in the future?  Mata I want to be a philanthropist. (Laughs) I want to be able to be in a position to continue to give back and be encouraging in different ways. I   d like to live 24  in Mexico at some point. I don   t know. I hope to continue down this path, to do similar work, or do work that I   m doing. I   d like to be in a position more advanced, in the sense that helping to contribute to policies and procedures, that way things are done, continue to be progressive and evolve to consider   . I   ve seen a lot change, I think, in my personal experience, but things still continue to need to evolve, I think, and taking into consideration all the different aspects of our students.  Baeza Is there something that you   d like to say to future or current Hispanic students at OSU?  Mata I met a lot of students, who did their best to try to fit in, and I think that if I were to say something in helping students to understand that their story matters. That where you come from feeds you to where you end up, and that   s a great asset to have. Whether it be that you are undocumented, or your parents are undocumented, or not having the educational background that you had hoped to be able to adequately persist the university. That knowing that your  story    all of that matters, and it   s going to make you stronger. I would never say that because I did it, you can, because I feel like that is language that is very ethno-centric, but I would say that once you get where you want to be, it will all be worth it.  Baeza Is there anything that I didn   t ask you about that you wanted to add to your story?  Mata I don   t know. (Laughs) I would just say I   ve been at rival institutions, and I   ve have had a variety of experiences, but Oklahoma State is always where I   ll call home. There is such an amazing community that I   ve been able to know in the sixteen years that I was either going to school, well, most of the sixteen years I was going to school, or have worked there. It   ll always feel like home to me, that that   s important. I think it   s unfortunate that the university hasn   t figured out ways to get better connected to our alum, who are also Latino. I hope that that is something that we can, via this project or via the work that some of you all are doing, (Laughs) that we can find better ways to make those connections. It was a very isolating experience for me in a lot of ways. I   m glad I had the students to be able to help to build that community, but it would be nice to be able to know others out there.  Baeza Thank you very much.  Mata Thanks.  -------  -------  
