 Gill. Today is April 8, 2009. I   m visiting with Dave  Martin in the OSU Library on the OSU Campus at Oklahoma State  University. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Dave, I appreciate you  taking time to be with us today. I want to ask you some questions about  Oklahoma State University, but if you don   t mind, first of all I   d like to  go back and ask you a little bit about where you grew up and about your  family. Can you share some of that information with us?  Sure. I   m originally from Algona, Iowa up in the north central part of the  state. I grew up there. My father was a school teacher, industrial arts  teacher and a wrestling coach. I wrestled for him in high school. I later  went on to Iowa State University, went there in 1967-1970. Graduated  there with a bachelor   s in speech and telecommunication arts. Wrestled  at Iowa State University. I was one of five kids. I had three other  brothers and one sister. I actually moved down to Stillwater, Oklahoma  in 1971. This has been our home with our family. My wife Toni and I  have three children, two boys and one girl. We   ve lived here since 1971.  You attended Iowa State University. Can you share a little about your  undergraduate experience there and your wrestling career?  Well, there wasn   t any question when I graduated from high school, I  mean my main thought when going to a university was to pick one  where I thought I could be part of a great wrestling team and at the same  time get a good solid education. I had an opportunity to go to several  schools, but when it really came down to it in the end, I think I wanted  to stay closer to home. I felt like Iowa State offered me both of those  opportunities. And I was fortunate enough to be on a couple of national  championship teams and one runner up team when I was at the  University. It was a great institution as far as education, a very good  experience for me. So I look back on it very fondly with memories not  5  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  only of sports but also of academics, so it was a very good experience.  Now you were an NCAA champ, is that right? One or two years?  Actually I won the national championship in 1970 and I was runner up  in 1969. Our team was runner up in 1968 and we won in 1969 and 1970.  A lot of memories go back that pertain to your sport. There   s no  question. Not only the memories just of the sports. You make a lot of  friends and things like this that carry on, so that makes the experience a  lot better. But at the same time, I learned a lot going to school there, I  grew up and matured and thought it was a real positive thing. At the  same time I was close enough to my parents that they had an opportunity  to watch me through college, so that was a positive thing.  Did you meet Toni there?  Toni actually was a cheerleader at Iowa State. I met her my senior year  in college. She was actually one year behind me in school, so I stayed  and worked in Ames for another semester. She graduated in three and a  half years. We got married on May 15, 1971. Moved here in August of     71 and we   ve lived in Stillwater ever since.  Is there a story behind how you got to Oklahoma State University?  Actually when we both graduated and were married, we felt like we   d  like to move some place away from the families, just some place we  could start on our own. I   d made some contacts through wrestling and  my wrestling camps that I held in the summer and I knew Myron  Roderick and I knew he was starting a business down here in town. I just  thought that would be a great town where we could move, still be  involved in wrestling, and still be in a college town. We   d lived in a  college town ever since    67 at that point, and now it   s been from    67 til  the present, 2009. We   ve always lived in a college town. We   re  definitely those kind of folks. Stillwater seemed to be a place where we  could come and still be involved in wrestling and maybe I could find  something to do occupationally.  So when we first came down, Toni started out working with Myron  Roderick in the Wrestling Hall of Fame, helping him. A couple of years  later she got a job at Stillwater High School and taught there for a  number of years. I was in private business for the first twelve years I was  in town and then I   ve worked for the University since 1983 to the  present. So I   m right in the middle now of my twenty-sixth year.  Dave, did you ever help as an assistant coach in any capacity with the  wrestling program?  6  Martin  Gill  Martin  Oh, yeah. I   ve actually been an interim of more things at Oklahoma  State University than anyone in history. But there was a time I was the  part-time wrestling coach. I said I was in private business and I was  doing that and then I would help part-time Coach  Tommy  Chesbro  there. Then my brother Paul came down and he was a three time All-  American at Oklahoma State. I think he won the Big 12 four times, or  Big 8 at that particular time. He was a really good wrestler at Oklahoma  State. So I was helping at that time. But through my tenure there I   ve  actually been the interim wrestling coach at one time. John Smith just  finished up Olympics and all that and we   d just been put on that  probation time that we were on in wrestling. So I was the interim  wrestling coach there for awhile with John and Kenny Monday helping  in the room. And there was the time I spent as the interim tennis coach.  I   ve probably been the interim athletic director about four times. One  time it was for about two-and-a-half years. And then about nine to ten  months out of the year I was actually the interim commissioner of the  Big 12. So I   ve had an opportunity to do a lot of things in the  department.  Can you outline your professional career at Oklahoma State? You  mentioned a lot of different positions, but can you talk about positions  you   ve held, responsibilities you   ve had?  Well, I   ve actually been fortunate. When you work at any one place as  long as I have, for twenty-six years, if you did the same thing every day  it might be monotonous. But I   ve been fortunate, when I came into the  department Myron Roderick was the athletic director. I came in and I  was really doing external operations and overseeing everything on the  external end. I had a good background, as I said, in private business. I  had a lot of background in radio and television, which was my major in  college. I had also done some work with ABC   s Wide World of Sports at  that time. I could help with a lot of areas externally so I did that for a  number of years. And then now these last few years, I think actually  from the time when Terry Don Philips came in, that time to present, I   ve  really been doing internal operations.  Now I think my title is the Chief Officer of Operations. I also oversee  most of the internal operations, day to day things of the business office  and several of the men   s sports. I oversee the sports medicine folks and  the strength and conditioning and things like that. So most of the internal  things, day to day is what I do now. But that   s switched. So I   ve been  fortunate to do probably most every area within the Athletic Department  and had the opportunity to be an interim coach for a while. That   s really  fun. Obviously the thing that sets our business apart from others is that  you have the opportunity on a daily basis to work with student athletics  and that   s a neat thing.  7  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Well Dave, from your unique perspective that you   ve mentioned from  many years of coaching and athletic administration and the years you  spent as interim commissioner of the Big 12, what do you feel have been  the major changes in intercollegiate sports? Positive and maybe not so  positive?  Well that   s an interesting question. I think over the years it   s probably  changed from the standpoint that the two sports, men   s basketball and  football, have gotten so big that we   re really kind of an entertainment  business. A lot of people look at the Athletic Department and they can   t  understand how the salaries of coaches are spiraling seemingly out of  control, and they always think that it   s going to come to a halt. But if  you look at it historically, what really happens in this business we   re in  is that you have a number of sports   at the present time we have  eighteen sports. Sixteen of those sports don   t really give you any kind of  revenue. And so if you are typically talking about a business, you would  close those sixteen sports and just concentrate on the two you have that  make money. But that   s not what college athletics are about. It   s about  giving young people the opportunity to get an education and also to have  an opportunity to participate in sports. You know going in that those two  sports have to support all the sixteen others, and in some cases it   s more  than sixteen. So you seemingly fund those two major sports more and  more even though you know those salaries don   t make sense.  But the flip side of that is that if you lose those particular coaches and  those sports don   t bring the revenue in it certainly cripples the rest of the  department. So I look at it a little more like we   re a mini Hollywood  because supply and demand dictates the kind of salaries those people get  in those sports and the rest of the sports are pretty normal. The going  rate is what those people are getting paid and it goes from there. But  certainly those two sports that have become so popular inspires national  television, national sports coverage, radio, media, print, internet, all that,  it really goes into those two sports and that drives the whole department.  So the prices do spiral and probably will continue to.  I guess women   s athletics has seen a major change?  Yes, when I first started working with athletics that was, just like the  AIA or however they explained what that was, it wasn   t a NCAA sport  at that time. I think it   s been a great addition to collegiate sports to have  the women   s sports, but it   s certainly been a learning thing for a lot of  people because as they brought in women   s sports there was a lot of cost  that went into that. And some people think that   s what crippled men   s  sports. But I mean it   s really a thing that was going to happen and should  happen. People within athletic departments just had to learn to live with  it because the women sports don   t bring in any revenue, but neither do  8  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  most all the men   s sports. So over a period of time people have adjusted  to that. I think now with gender equity and things like this, most major  universities are adhering to the rules the way they should and young  women are getting the same opportunities as young men are and it   s  really been a positive addition to college sports. I think it   s great.  What about the influence of fundraising, have you seen that increase  significantly?  Well there isn   t any question that fundraising in most every athletic  institution is a major, major area because there really are a limited  number of revenue opportunities you have within an athletic department.  You have ticket sales in football, you have ticket sales in basketball,  men   s, you have revenue that comes from conference affiliation and you  have monies that come from your donors and that usually is tied to  donor seating in football and donor seating in men   s basketball. You see  some revenue coming at this time in the 2000s from women   s sports,  particularly women   s basketball, but typically that doesn   t even really  come close to paying what that sport costs you annually. That isn   t  necessarily a negative thing, that   s just a fact.  So you really have to continue to push the envelope when it comes to  donor seating and ticket prices because that   s really your only source of  revenue. If you just look at something common sense-wise, you look at  it and say I have two sports that are financially solid and sixteen that  aren   t, I   m going to have to rob Peter to pay Paul to make it all work.  And so we knowingly do that and you have to continue to push the  envelope to get people to pay higher ticket prices and continue to pay  donor seating. We try to tell people that you need to remember that the  high donor seating costs in football and men   s basketball you can   t  necessarily say,    Well that makes sense what you   re charging me to  come to games,    but it does make sense when you see that in our  particular case in the present we have sixteen other sports that we can  have because you are supporting those two sports.  Dave, you work with athletic facilities, how do you feel about the current  proposed enhancement to athletic facilities at Oklahoma State?  Well we   re in a situation where we do have plans to build that Athletic  Village which is directly north of Hall of Fame right now. A few months  ago we had most all of that money raised, as everybody knows at this  particular time. People will look back years from now and probably  chuckle about this, but we   re in times where we are in a recession right  now, things are tough. But at the same time we purchased a lot of the  land north of Hall of Fame, and hopefully in the future somehow those  monies will come available again either through our investments or  9  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  through donors and we   ll continue to want to build our facilities for non-revenue  sports. Probably the only thing we   re looking at in the near  future for the two main sports, we   re going to do some things probably  in the near future with improving our men   s and women   s locker rooms  in basketball. But then as far as football, probably the only thing once  we open up the end zone in July of this year 2009, we   ll probably do an  indoor facility of some sort on the north side of Hall of Fame and maybe  some practice fields. Then the rest of our focus will be in facilities for  the Olympic sports and all of those sports we really need to do some  things, with the exception of golf.  In your current position do you still have oversight for the Spirit Squad  and Pistol Pete?  Yes, actually this is an interesting thing. The first year I started work at  the Athletic Department back in    83, I think it was the Fall of    83,  Myron Roderick came to me and said,    I   d like you to get involved in  the oversight of the Spirit Group,    which at that particular time was  really under the oversight of the Marching Band. They just really didn   t  have any financing and they really didn   t have anybody overseeing them  on a day to day basis. So we took that on. That   s a position that I  assumed. It really has been a great thing over the years. I   ve enjoyed  doing it because that   s another forty or fifty kids a year that I get to work  with. We have the mascots, which at this particular time we have two  mascots, two Pistol Petes per year. We have the Spirit Rider, which we  have the individual that rides the horse and we have the grounds keepers  that work with the horse and that   s probably six to eight more kids. And  then we have a dance squad, which is anywhere from fourteen to sixteen  women, and a cheerleading squad that   s anywhere around twelve  couples, men and women. That   s been an interesting side. I like to work  with those young people. They bring a lot to the university as far as from  the spirit standpoint. So that   s been a thing that I   ve enjoyed doing and I  have done that for twenty-five years.  Do you know why we made the decision for the Athletic Department to  assume responsibility for the Spirit Squad, particularly Pistol Pete?  I think it was basically they were looking for a home and somebody who  could finance them. We just have oversight. We really have a nice  structure now where we conduct their tryouts. We fully fund the things  that they do. We have oversight for them. We have the policies and  procedures in place for them. So I think it   s worked out pretty well.  So that was 1983 would you say when you took that over?  Yeah it was    83-   84.  10  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  And you   ve worked with them every year since?  Every year since.  What do you think are the benefits to the Athletic Department assuming  control of Pistol Pete?  Well not knowing what it was like prior to that, because ever since I   ve  been at the University Pistol Pete has been under our attention, so I can   t  really tell you what it was like before. The thing that we tried to make  sure we did, we control the tryouts. The big thing is we feel like the  Pistol Petes presently probably make as many or more appearances a  year than anybody on our campus, maybe with the exception of the  president. But it wouldn   t be out of the ordinary for the kids that are  Pistol Pete, each of them, to do 250-300 appearances a year as Pistol  Pete. So you have quite a scheduling issue there to get them going to all  the right places, the right day, fulfilling the needs that people have. In  addition to all the athletic events, we do a lot of fundraising events. We  go to schools. We go to malls. We go to PR events. We go to all kinds of  occasions where Pistol Pete represents Oklahoma State University.  So I think one of the things we   ve been able to do is a great job of  scheduling, making sure they have all the equipment that they need, that  the head continues to be painted and taken care of, keeping them funded  properly because that is the symbol of Oklahoma State University,  everywhere you go. You   d be amazed at all the people who want Pistol  Pete at their wedding receptions. Some people even ask him to come to  funerals, somebody who   s just a great fan of Pistol Pete and the whole  idea of Oklahoma State has just been a part of their families, Pistol Pete  does that. It would astound you at the things that Pistol Pete participates  in. And I think it   s good that we have control of that because we can  make sure they   re at our athletic events but we also have policies for  getting them to go other places, too.  I want to ask you a little bit about the policy, but first of all I   ll ask you  this question. You talked about support for Pete, what kind of financial  support does the Athletic Department provide to Pistol Pete?  The thing we try, every year there   s a certain amount of clothing that  they need. You   d be amazed in a year   s time how many blanks they go  through in their guns, shooting them at the events and parades and  wherever they need them. We have policies where if it   s not an athletic  event and somebody else wants Pistol Pete to come, there   s a policy that  we charge them a certain amount so the kids aren   t out the travel that  they would be. They have certain things, like they get a really nice belt  buckle every year, they get boots. There   s certain things they get to have  11  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  and then keep after they   re done being Pete that we give them to support  them. And there   s quite a bit of maintenance actually that goes with that  head. It   s a fiberglass head that   s actually many years old, probably  close to thirty years old. We actually take it down to a car dealership,  and just like they   d mold the fiberglass of a corvette body, they can  patch that head. It weighs about forty pounds. We have some people in  town, the Solomans, who come and do the makeup on the head.  So you have a lot of transportation issues with the head because you  want to secure it. You want to make sure you keep it painted and up to  date and then you know, he   s got all the chaps and boots and dusters and  shirts and jeans that go with it. And the ammunition, keeping their guns  up to date, keeping their shotgun up to date, keeping them clean. We  have quite a procedure we go through with any event that they go to that  the police actually check their ammunition before the event to make sure  everything they have is blanks and there   s no way a real live round  would ever get in there. They check to make sure their equipment is  clean and make sure if it isn   t, that we get new pistols, we get new  shotguns. So there   s actually a lot more things than you think.  Does the Athletic Department pay for those things? The chaps, the  shirts, the boots? Or do you have retail stores that provide that?  No, we pay for it.  You pay for it.  Sometimes we get some discounts, but we pay for it.  What about the selection process for Petes? Can you share a little bit  about that process?  Actually, I don   t do that process anymore. I oversee it, I mean. What I  have now, which is nice, within the Athletic Department I have two  people who work underneath me and run the different areas. I have a  man named LeRoy McCullough and LeRoy McCullough is the cheer  coach. He oversees everything on a day to day basis that the  cheerleaders do. He also works in our department in the marketing area.  So he handles that group of young women and men. And then Tracey  Wittwer who lives in town, Tracey for a number of years now has been  involved where she is the coordinator of all the spirit group events and  so she does and oversees the scheduling of a lot of things, most of the  things that Pistol Pete does. We coordinate that every week so that she  knows exactly what they   re doing. She also oversees the dance squad  and then she oversees the selection process for the pom squad or dance  squad. LeRoy oversees the selection process for the cheerleaders and  12  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  then Tracy organizes it and uses a lot of the former Petes to do the  selection process for Pistol Pete.  Can you describe the selection process and what prospective Petes are  asked to do as part of the try-out?  Well not having actually been to one in the last few years, typically what  they would do, there   s an interview process. There   s a process where  you actually put the head on and show how you would entertain, do  different pantomimes, do things with the head on. It   s actually an  interesting process because when you pick a young man to be Pistol  Pete, they have to be great with the head on. That   s the way most people  see them. But at the same time, they have to be the type of young person  that can handle most every different venue they   re going to go into,  different fans. It isn   t always positive. You go into other venues and  sometimes the fans are pretty tough on them, a little bit rude, throw  things at them. Just the demeanor they have to have to understand that  they   re the mascot and not to get involved. So you   re looking for a  young man who is a quality person with the head on, talented, can  entertain people as a performer with the head on. But you   re also  looking at a young man who when they take the head off can speak well  for the University, can make the arrangements, follow things up with  people, put on a great image, project a great ambassador image for  Oklahoma State. So you really need someone who can fulfill both those  things and has the time available. Because as you can imagine, to be a  full time student and do 250 appearances a year, that   s a time consuming  thing. So those are the kinds of things they are looking for. I haven   t  really been at those tryouts as of late. I used to do a lot, but now I   ve  kind of delegated that out.  I understand there are some former Pistol Petes that help you out with  the scoring.  Sure, they do.  Are there guidelines and expectations that the Athletic Department has  of these young men, the Pistol Petes? Do you give them some guidelines  on how to conduct themselves in public?  Sure. There   s no question. We don   t expect that the mascots will enter  into any kind of conflict situation with fans, with other mascots, but  there   s always sometimes where something comes up. But I   d say in the  twenty-five years that I   ve dealt with those young men, they represent  OSU well. They   re just diehard OSU fans. They always come back to do  this. Because once you   ve been Pete, you have ownership at Oklahoma  State University. You   re part of the University and part of that heritage.  13  Gill  Martin  Gill  Those guys are quite a bunch. I mean we just had a fifty year reunion of  those guys. When they get together there   s just a love they have for the  University that is amazing. They   re quite a group. They   re not all the  same kind of guys. They   re different kinds of guys, but they have  something in common. They   re just dedicated to Oklahoma State and  that   s what their life is when they are Pete for at least one or two years.  You don   t normally have a Pete   I   ve never had a Pete that   s done more  than two years. There   s just so many people that want to do it, and it   s so  time consuming. Typically the good ones, they do it two years. That   s  about right. I don   t know that I   ve ever had one do it three years. It just  takes so much time. But once they   re Pete, they   re lifers.  In your opinion, how is the Pistol Pete mascot special and different than  most other school mascots?  Well, probably the idea that Pistol Pete is patterned after a real live  person. I think there   s an interesting DVD out now that shows real  footage of Frank Eaton and just the grit that he has, the cowboy image  that he brings. Pistol Pete is patterned after him. You know, he   s not a  caricature like a lot of these other mascots at different universities are.  He   s patterned after a real person. So there   s a story about Pistol Pete  and the things he did growing up and what kind of character he was. It   s  just carried on, and people have tied that into Oklahoma State  University. It   s probably one of the most unique mascots out there. Very  recognizable. There are a couple other universities that are kind of  masquerading around thinking that someone who looks similar to Pistol  Pete is their mascot, but I think people understand that he is the one that  represents Oklahoma State. I don   t know, there   s just something there  that people across the country really take to that cowboy. They take to  that.  We   ve really been fortunate that with all the gun control things and stuff  we haven   t had any resistance to continue to carry the pistols and the  shotgun. Knowing that though, we really put effort into making sure  when we go to a venue that our Pistol Petes speak with the Chief of  Police and the policeman there. Let them see their firearms, let them  make sure they   re clean. Make sure they have only blanks with them. So  we really have very few issues. We actually have a theatrical gun that  they can carry that isn   t a real gun. It looks like one. And they carry  that   you know maybe once or twice a year they   re asked to only use  that in a venue. But most of the times they let them use the pistols and  the shotguns.  Isn   t that one of the rules in the NCAA tournament in basketball? I know  that they don   t allow the Pete to have the real     14  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  They don   t let them shoot them out due to the noise and things like this.  We respect that wherever we go. If somebody says that they don   t want  us to do that, we respect that. There   s a lot of people nowadays that are  hesitant of having that. At least anywhere around Oklahoma State,  seldom in the year do we have much resistance.  Going back to your statement earlier, in what ways does Pete symbolize  Oklahoma State University and catch the spirit of the state of  Oklahoma?  Well, I mean obviously, when you think about this state and people who  are outdoors, cowboys, the image, there   s a lot of horses in this state, a  lot of rural people, and they get into the cowboy image. I mean we are  the cowboys, cowgirls, and they like it. In this state there   s probably as  many horses as there are humans. They   re very outdoors-oriented  people. They like to ride. They like to do outdoors types of things. A lot  of people hunt, so it   s not unusual to have people who have firearms in  their pickups and they hunt. It   s just the mentality that this state has. I  mean if you live in Oklahoma, chances are you like to hunt or fish. You  like outdoor activities, you like to ride, and you   re involved. That   s  probably one of the reasons when we picked a new sport to add at  Oklahoma State we added equestrian because we felt it satisfied a huge  interest in this state. There are lots of women who have grown up riding,  competing, rodeoing, all these things that are around horses. So the  whole thing kind of fits together. I think that   s why the Spirit Rider has  taken on such an image at Oklahoma State, too. People love that horse  and all that goes into that horse because that   s part of Oklahoma, too. I  think it just represents the people, represents the lifestyle that we live out  here.  Does that tie in kind of to the frontier, old west motif of Oklahoma from  the territorial days?  I think it does. I mean not being a native, I   ve lived here since    71, but it  seems to be and those are great people.  Well Dave, there   s something special about Pistol Pete to Oklahoma  State fans, you mentioned that earlier. What does he represent to  Oklahoma State University alumni and fans?  You know Jerry, that would be an interesting question maybe if you  interviewed   I know you are doing this   a lot of the ex-Petes, they  could probably give you a better answer because they   re out in the field  and they hear the comments that people have. I don   t know if I could put  just a few words into that that would characterize it. But I   m sure that  fans could do that or Pistol Petes could do that because they sense that  15  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  and they live that every single day. He   s just seemingly become the  symbol of our university, something that people would never do without.  I don   t know, it   s always been a part of the University ever since I   ve  been here. Maybe if you asked that question to fifty or seventy-five guys  that used to be Petes you   d probably come up with four or five words  that would all be similar. They would say the same thing and it   d  probably give you a pretty good idea.  Rick Wilson was one of the former Petes that I interviewed. Rick said in  his mind Pete was more than just a mascot, he was a symbol of  Oklahoma State University, of what Oklahoma State University is about,  its values. Is that     Yeah. And that   s one Pete. There   s seventy-five others that would  probably have an idea and they would probably come back to a lot of the  similar things.  Through the years, you have got to have some special memories   maybe  some funny, some not so funny memories about Pistol Pete. Could you  share some of those with us?  Well you always have some interesting things with Pistol Pete as far as  other fans and what they try to do with the head. We   ve had times where  Pistol Pete was getting ready to do an event the day of a game and pulled  in some place to get something to eat and someone tried to steal the  head, and we had to get the head back. We had a time where Pistol Pete  had the head in the back of his pickup and thank goodness he had a rope  tied to it. Somehow the head bounced out of his pickup and was  dragging around the end of the pickup so we had to stop and get the head  fixed and things like this.  I had an incident the other night. Thank goodness I don   t know the guy   s  name so I can   t incriminate him, but we were at a wedding and he was  doing   which they do lots of weddings. And some fan from one of our  other schools nearby thought it was going to be cute and they took the  head, stole the head and put it someplace in an elevator shaft. He didn   t  know what to do. Anyway, had to call the police and get the person. And  then of course they wouldn   t admit that they took it and we had it on  video surveillance and they knew he took it. I mean, people think it   s  funny, that they can do those things, but it really isn   t that funny because  people with Oklahoma State ties take that very personally if somebody  touches their mascot, especially if it be a fan from the red side down  south of us. They don   t look at it too lightly. And then you take people  that are at an event and they   re supposedly friends and something like  that comes up and it kind of draws a line.  16  Gill  Martin  You have some problems sometimes between the mascots getting in  wrestling matches. They   re supposed to be doing something cute and it  gets a little carried away. We had a time where we played Houston a few  years ago, some of the fans were just all over Pistol Pete. And that   s  where you have to pick the right men because they know how to handle  the situation. You know that you   re the mascot. You know that you   re  the symbol of the University. You have to be able to divorce yourself  from the craziness that goes on, not to get involved with that. And that   s  hard. They   re young men, and they   re passionate about their school and  if somebody draws that line or fans get involved then our fans get  involved. So you are always on your guard that something doesn   t  happen to the mascot head, the firearms don   t get in the wrong hands.  I had a Pistol Pete that was going out to do an event out here at Lake  McMurtry for some new students coming in. He didn   t think anything of  it. He had his guns in the back seat, and I don   t know for what reason he  got pulled over, who knows what reason, he wasn   t doing anything bad.  But the policeman shines his lights in the backseat and the guy   s got a  shotgun and a .357 pistol in there and the guy   s wondering,    What are  you doing?    The guy goes,    I   m Pistol Pete.    You know, thank  goodness the people in town know that. But if they didn   t, here   s a kid  that   s carrying a shotgun and a pistol that   s real.    What are you doing?     He   s trying to tell them he   s going to an orientation meeting for new  students at Oklahoma State. And they   d say,    Yeah, right.    But you do  deal with that. Or having to get those things   we go now where we  don   t do much as far as airplanes. If it goes to away football games, we  send them on the trailers so we don   t have to go through airports because  it   s really hard to go through there, even if you   re checking them. If they  know you have a gun, it   s a lot of questions. So we don   t do that.  Whenever we can avoid having Pete have any of the guns with him  when we travel, we put them in the buses and take them.  I know Colorado students at times have been fairly feisty. Have you ever  had some instances where you were concerned about the safety of your  mascot?  Not very many. Once in a while, but typically the thing that you have,  you build a rapport with the people when you go to the stadiums. I think  when you see that our people go and they check with their security  people, like I said earlier, and they show them what they   re carrying and  they show them their ammunition, you develop a rapport where people  know who you are, know what you   re doing there. And typically their  security people and then we travel with security people for our football  teams, they coordinate with each other what   s going on, and we really  don   t have  much trouble . Doesn   t mean that some people don   t get out  of control, but if you do you typically have the security of the rivalry  17  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  take care of it.  Several former Petes have mentioned how Dave Martin helped them and  how important he is to the Pistol Pete program. Are there some special  Pistol Petes that you remember that are special to you?  Every Pistol Pete that I   ve ever had over the twenty-five years will tell  you that they   re the greatest Pistol Pete we   ve ever had at this university.  I like that about them. There   s just something about those young men  that they know why they   re there. They have a passion for what they do.  They   re serious about the job they take on. They understand when they  put the head on what they   re doing, that they   re representing our  university. It   s not them anymore, they   re representing our university.  You can   t say that you never have an issue that you have to deal with,  but seldom does that happen. They   re typically understanding.  Probably the nicest thing about dealing with the Pistol Petes over the  years is the association you have with young men. You see them grow as  men and you see them also understand what Oklahoma State is all about.  You understand what the history of this university is all about, what the  tradition is all about. Most of them when they come in know that or they  wouldn   t be trying out. But they really get a different sense of it because  they live it every single day. Because if you think about it, if you make  250 appearances a year, you   re pretty much making one all the time.  Doesn   t mean they don   t do multiple ones on game day, but you are that  particular person. You understand firsthand the importance of how you  represent us. Do you get closer to some kids than others? Well sure you  do. Sometimes you just have more time to spend and sometimes they  share similar interests. It   d be hard to single them out because they   re all  good. I mean, you just don   t get young men that aren   t good that take on  that position.  I   ve been struck by the fact of how successful in life most of these young  men have been. Do you have communication with several of the former  Petes?  Yeah, you try, but to be honest with you, over the years I   ve probably  worked with   you know most every year of the last twenty-five years  you   re working with around forty kids involved in the Spirit Group  alone, not counting any of your student athletes. And so we try to have  reunions every five years with that group of kids. That   s several hundred  kids including the Pistol Petes. And so do you like to keep track of  them? Yeah. I   ve actually gotten to the point now, Jerry, that some of  my association with kids over the years, I   ve been involved a lot with  student athletes at the university, I have been involved with a lot of the  young people that are in the Spirit Group. My wife and I have done  18  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  some Bible study things at our house for the last twenty-five years and I  actually marry kids, too. So some of the kids that I   ve known have  asked,    Well we met at your house, will you do our wedding  ceremony?    So now I   ve actually become a licensed minister and my  wife and I counsel these kids. So do we take it a lot further than just  knowing someone. When kids ask us to, we get involved in their lives  and it   s just a neat thing. It   s kind of like your kids are gone, but there  are still kids coming back every year, so it   s been a really special thing.  You mentioned the fifty year reunion of Pistol Pete last fall. Was that  special for you?  Yeah. Again it is just interesting to see them get up and talk about being  in that group and I mean they almost get emotional about this. There   s  just that tie to the university they have. It   s part of them and it   s a big  deal. I think it was a bigger deal when they got there  to the reunion . I  mean, it   s a lot of work to try to put things together. Sizes, get them  some jackets and all the things we did. But when they get there, you  think it   s all worth it because you see how meaningful it is to them. I  don   t think you would know that prior to ever being involved with it and  seeing it. So yeah, it was a special deal. I do the same thing about every  five years with the cheers and poms and that   s the same type of group.  They have all kinds of activities that they do representing Oklahoma  State University and that same thing. So yeah, we get involved with a lot  of stuff.  Dave, what would you tell a young person thinking about trying out to  be the mascot Pistol Pete?  Well first of all, to be a Pistol Pete you certainly need to be able to  schedule your time. And when you get into it you need to understand  what the time commitment is. It   s a real struggle on some of those kids  and their grades. You better be really efficient academically. You better  be really ready to schedule your time because you   re going to have a lot  of things that you have to do. You don   t have time for a lot of the other  things. You give up a lot of other collegiate things at least for the time  you   re Pete because it   s very time consuming. At the same time you  have to continue to work on being an entertainer. You   re not just a  young man who puts that head on. Once you put that head on you have  to entertain the crowd by how you pantomime things or mimic things.  You have the access to control a lot of fans. At football games the guy  shoots off that shotgun and everybody starts the OSU chant. I mean you  take on a totally different person when you put the head on, so you have  to understand all that. You have to work on that technique. You have to  understand what it is about being an ambassador. So it   s very time  consuming. You have to be very well scheduled. And you just have to  19  Gill  Martin  have a passion for it. If you look at it as it   s a job that you don   t have  any passion for, you could never be Pistol Pete.  You mentioned the Spirit Rider earlier. Does the athletic program work  with the Spirit Rider too? Does that come under you? At one time I think  the College of Agriculture was handling that. When did that come  about?  Yeah, that   s true. They were under the College of Agriculture to start  with. But now actually at this time in 2009, when we got into the  renovation of the stadium I was a little nervous about having student  riders because the thing that you need when you have a horse (I   ve  learned this, I don   t know that much about horses) you have to have  familiar settings, familiar situations where they   ve repetitively been in  that situation so they don   t get spooked. A lot of people don   t know  about horses. They just think that horse is standing there just so silently  and would never spook or never move, which really isn   t true. You have  to really respect those animals. You wouldn   t want them just to react,  especially if you had a young child around there.  So as we got into the renovation phase of the end zone I actually had a  couple, Ty and Jennifer Cunningham, who both while they were in  school at different times were the Spirit Rider. They live over in the  Sand Springs area and it just happened that I could use them to actually  house the horse. That   s where they house Bullet. They ride Bullet every  day to keep him trained. And they bring him over here and put him in  situations, get him out in the football field, have him at band practice  where he can hear the sounds, which it   s interesting, the different logos  on the field can spook the horse. They   re color blind and they don   t  really know if those are valleys or if it   s flat. You have to make sure that  you have people riding it that understand the footing so that you don   t let  that horse slip on you. As we   re doing construction around the stadium  they move the cannon over here, they move the band over here. All  those distractions can spook the horse.  During the construction phrase I felt it would be better if we had the  same riders every year so I actually got Jen and her husband Ty to be the  riders, to care for the horse, and keep it under control over in Sand  Springs, so they house it for me every month and ride it. We   re just now  in the phase, this last year we had a student rider again and we   ll have a  student rider again this next year, so we   re back to what we were before.  We wanted to always do that but I just didn   t want to take a chance with  a young person riding with all those distractions and changes. As we get  the whole end zone thing in and get it all finished up, things become  familiar to the horse. We   ve got a young horse that now has some work  behind it and traditionally is pretty good, so it   s turned into a great horse.  20  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  What year did we start the Bullet tradition? Do you recall?  That   s a good question. I don   t know exactly  when that was . Because  you   re right, it was taken care of on campus and not under the Athletic  Department. Which is a nice thing now, I like it. There   s a lot that goes  into Bullet. The care of the horse, not only that but making sure you  have a rider that is proficient, that you have handlers that are proficient.  When they go out on that field, it   s not as simple as it looks to make sure  that that horse stays out of the way of officials, stays out of the way of  any band members, side lines persons, on and on. The handlers are very  important. We just can   t afford to ever have an incident on that field  with that horse. And there   s always that problem. We actually have an  accident policy, what we would do. There   s a horse stretcher we have  down there. So we have a policy in line if something would happen to  the horse or somebody out there on how we would handle it. It   s one of  those things that everybody loves it but they just think, well that horse is  like a robot, always runs in the right place and does the right thing.  Anyone who is a horse handler knows that isn   t true. We try to go out of  our way to make sure that   s happening. I feel a lot better now that the  stadium is going to be complete this year and we   re going to have the  same set up every year. I think that will make it a lot easier for Bullet.  So you   ve got the trailer that the horse is in, you house it, you   ve got the  saddle and the equipment, the rider equipment, et cetera. Does the  Athletic Department pay for those costs?  Yes. Partly, the Spirit Group totally entails the cheerleaders, the  dance/pom squad, the Pistol Petes, the Spirit Rider, and the horse.  How do you feel the Spirit Rider has been received? Bullet the horse and  the Spirit Rider as a symbol of Oklahoma State University say in  comparison to Pistol Pete?  You know, I think when that first happened, Jerry, there were some  people who felt like that wasn   t right, we shouldn   t have a rider, we have  a mascot Pistol Pete. I don   t have anybody really bring that up much  anymore. I think people understand that Pistol Pete is in fact the mascot.  Period. The end. But they love the Spirit Rider. I mean the Spirit Rider  leads the team down from the Student Union to the stadium on games  when they have the walk. The Spirit Rider, all kinds of kids come down  and get little cards signed and touch and pet the horse. I mean it   s a great  thing on game day, but I don   t think anybody thinks anymore that that   s  an issue. You see, we use the horse on different things as far as maybe  some symbols. But that   s not the logo of Oklahoma State. People at  OSU know that. They understand the difference between Pete and the  rider.  21  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  What functions other than just football games is the Spirit Rider involved  with?  There   s not all that many just because it   s so much different to put a  horse in a trailer, transport it to a parade. There   s a lot of cost and time  involved with that. We minimize that because there   s only so much  those handlers can do. They have jobs and family so we can   t just be  running around the state doing that. There are a lot of people from  parades and lots of people who would take the horse if they could,  there   s no question about that. But we kind of have to limit that. But on  game day it   s a long day for the horse.  About how many appearances a year in addition to football games,  parades, even though you indicated it was limited, how many  appearances would the Spirit Rider give?  That would be a tough one. I don   t know that. I   d probably have to ask  the Cunninghams but I would bet it would be ten or fifteen. It   s not that  many.  In addition to football games, maybe another ten or fifteen?  Yeah.  Currently we have a female Spirit Rider, and we   ve had a couple   women . Is that a good thing?  We don   t differentiate. I mean to be honest we   ve always had   any  Pistol Pete has always been a male. But Pistol Pete is a person and Pistol  Pete was a male. I don   t know, that   s never really become an issue.  We   ve always had males. The Spirit Rider, we   ve had women and we   ve  had men. I think we try to pick the best one that year. If it   s a male we  pick a male if it   s a female we pick a female. So I don   t know, I haven   t  had any issues with that.  What are you looking for in a Spirit Rider? You have the tryouts,  interviews, whatever you do. What   s the process for selecting?  I   m going to tell you, I   ve never been to one of those. It used to be, when  it was on the university side they conducted their own tryouts. The  Cunninghams oversee it now. And trust me, knowing them, they have  quite a policy and quite a list of what they want. But there   s no question  of one thing, they have to be an excellent rider because you   re going to  be involved in some situations with that horse that you just have to be  really good at so that there   s no issue of danger to the horse or danger to  anybody around the horse or danger to whoever   s riding. I   m sure one of  22  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  the paramount things is that they are not just good but they are excellent  riders. And then they probably have a whole list of things. The same  thing as Pistol Petes, common sense would say to you, do you have the  time to do this? Because even though you might only be doing it a few  days a year, when you   re out there on game day, you   re there the  entire   day. You   re out there in the  Spirit  Walk, you   re out there beforehand  so people can see Pete. It takes quite a time commitment. You have to  know that horse and you have to be able to ride that horse so you don   t  just get on it on game day and think everything   s great. Familiarity with  the horse is very important, the care of the horse is very important. Most  of the kids that do that are quite involved with that.  The horse stays in Sand Springs as you indicated earlier, so the Spirit  Rider would go over there frequently?  I don   t know how much they do. I know just up until last year the  Cunninghams were the ones who were taking care of it so they rode the  horse every day. I don   t know how much the Spirit Rider gets over there  now. But the good thing is they keep it exercised all the time. And I   m  sure they bring it over here for practices.  We talked about what Pistol Pete symbolizes for Oklahoma State. What  do you think the Spirit Rider symbolizes for OSU?  That   d be a good question for the Spirit Riders. It   s just a tradition that  people got into when we score. They love to see that horse come out  there and run.    Here comes Bullet     And it   s just a tradition that started  and people have caught on to it. There   s just something about when we  score in football, traditionally you   re going to see Bullet. And the more  we see Bullet, the better we   re doing in the season.  We want to see a lot of Bullet.  If we don   t see Bullet very often then it   s a long year.  Do you remember anything about the inception of Spirit Rider, how it  came about, when we decided to do that?  I wouldn   t be the best person. Somebody probably over in Animal  Science would be better because I don   t even know how it originally  started and got out there. If you   ve been to enough of our games, you  know that one of the first Spirit Riders had a dog, and the dog started  running out there when the horse ran out there. Next thing you know  they were dressing the dog and the horse was running out there and the  dog would run out there. The kid graduated and he took his dog and  people couldn   t figure out what happened. So you know, those things  23  Gill  Martin  Gill  Martin  Gill  evolve. You never know exactly where they   re going to be. But I   m not  sure exactly how that started. But I like the fact that they   re part of the  Spirit Group now because there isn   t any us and them. We   re all the  same. They all understand what their roles are. And so we don   t have  any of that issue like well they think we ought to do this. We just treat  them all the same.  Do you think that the Spirit Rider will be an endearing tradition at  OSU?  Oh, absolutely.  Well Dave is there anything we haven   t talked about in terms of some of  your administrative experiences, in terms of Pistol Pete, the Spirit  Group, anything we   ve left out?  No, I think we   ve covered it pretty well.  All right. I appreciate it, thank you.  -------  -------   
