 Finchum Today is April 5, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Charles  Abramson. We   re with Oklahoma State University, and today we   re in  Oklahoma City to speak with Dean Stringer, particularly in regards to Phi  Beta Kappa  Society , but we   ll learn a little bit more about him in other  areas, too. So thank you for having us today. Let   s start with having you tell  us when     Stringer Well, thank you.  Finchum    and where you were born.  Stringer Welcome to Oklahoma City.  Finchum Thank you.  Stringer I was born in 1936 in June. I was born in western Oklahoma, near the town  of Sayre, which is the county seat of Beckham County. I lived in Beckham  County nearly all my life prior to college.  Finchum And what did your parents do for a living?  Stringer My father was a farmer, and my mother was a homemaker.  Finchum And what high school did you graduate from and when?  Stringer I graduated from Carter High School, which is in Beckham County, in 1954.  Finchum And what were your plans for your future at that point?  Stringer My plans at that point were to become a lawyer, and that   s what I did.  5  Finchum And so take us through your education then.  Stringer Okay. After graduating from Carter High School, I enrolled at what was  then, Oklahoma A M College at Stillwater as a freshman in 1954. I was in  the College of Arts and Sciences. I wound up with a degree in political  science. At the outset, I think it was called a pre-law curriculum. When I  started to college I thought I   d probably go to college three years and then  go to law school, but I went four years instead. At that time, many law  schools admitted law students with three years of college credit. If they  completed the first year of law school satisfactory, they could earn a  baccalaureate degree. The University of Oklahoma was in that category at  the time. When I started to college, I thought that   s probably where I would  go to law school.  Finchum And did you?  Stringer No, I didn   t. I did not. We   re taught to finish the education path. I graduated  in 1958 from what was by then Oklahoma State University. That ceremony  was in August. I graduated in the summer graduation ceremony. When that  fall began I was into quite an interesting chapter of   I was a first-year law  student, a    one L    if you please, at Harvard Law School. In 1961, I received  an LLB  Bachelor of Laws  from Harvard, and that completed my formal  education.  Finchum And from there, where?  Stringer From there I returned to Oklahoma City and went to work as an associate  with an Oklahoma City law firm that is now known as Crowe and Dunlevy,  an outstanding law firm. I was pleased to have that opportunity there. I was  pleased to have a job. (Laughter) There were times in college and  particularly in law school   I remember in law school you reach a point  there where what you   ve done for seventeen or eighteen years is go to  school. I had those nagging thoughts of,    Will I be able to do anything  else?    Fortunately, I was.  I got reassurance on that in a summer clerkship after the second year in law  school, which I did with a law firm in Indianapolis. I discovered that  summer that I could do things other than go to school. Soon we tested that  more fully, and I practiced law with the same firm, the Crowe and Dunlevy  firm, for nearly forty years. Then one day there in 2000, I retired. That was a  little bit of a surprise to me that I just decided to do that because for many  years I had not really thought about retirement. I got started thinking about  it, and it seemed more appealing. I   m sure Carol  Stringer  was surprised by  that decision, too, but she reacted pretty well. (Laughter)  6  Finchum Did you completely retire, or was that about the time you got involved with  the Board of Regents and that direction?  Stringer No, it was long after my Regents service, and yes, I did completely retire.  That was a decision I made at the time. I didn   t think I   d be practicing. I  didn   t think I   d be happy practicing law any way expect all-out. I retired  completely and came home, and I didn   t take another council position or  keep an office or anything. I just retired. One of the things it permitted at the  time was, our first grandchild was nearing two. Now there are three  grandchildren. I was determined not to miss any of that grandparenting, and  I haven   t. Now, that was one aspect of my retirement that Carol liked a lot.  (Laughter)  Finchum Underlined is there a few things she didn   t like?  Stringer No, actually that went over fine. We had no problems associated with it.  Finchum Okay, let   s switch gears a little bit. Our topic today is Phi Beta Kappa. How  did you get involved with that endeavor to get a chapter at OSU?  Stringer Well, I can give a pretty short version of that or a longer version. It won   t be  terribly lengthy, but since knowing about this interview, I have sort of  reflected upon my association with Phi Beta Kappa. I have vague memories  of knowing that it was not available at OSU when I graduated. I was a  member of ODK  Omicron Delta Kappa , which is a scholastic honors  fraternity, which I think is at all of the land-grant institutions or most of  them at least. It was there when I graduated and probably still is. All of that  is a little bit vague. I had occasion to think about it somewhat more because  of a conversation in law school. I was talking to a classmate, and we were  talking about scholastic pasts. He said to me, and he said,    And of course,  you were a member of Phi Beta Kappa.    I said,    No. As a matter of fact I  was not and am not.    I gave him some sort of an explanation because my  understanding at the time was a little vague, but it was clear on one thing:  there was not a Phi Beta Kappa chapter there. That was more than he needed  to know as to why I wasn   t a member. (Laughter)  After I returned to Oklahoma City to work, I became immediately involved  in OSU activities. I think the first thing in 1964   I   d been back since   61. In     64, I was the Oklahoma County Chairman of the Oklahoma County Alumni  Association, and soon I was on the Alumni Association Board. In that  timeframe, Murl Rogers was the executive director of the Alumni  Association, and he could think of a lot of things that he thought I should do.  (Laughs) Most of them were fun and a few, hopefully, contributory. I was  reminded from time to time that we did not have a Phi Beta Kappa chapter.  There   d just be conversations from time to time. It wasn   t a burning issue or  a frequent topic of conversation. Occasionally someone would lament about  7  that. Most of the time I wouldn   t say anything, but internally, I would  lament, too.  All along this period of time in the   70s and   80s, I was very active on OSU  activities. Then they were mostly centered on Alumni Association and then  the Foundation. I was dramatically involved then on earning a living and  providing for a family and practicing good law. In 1986 I was appointed to  the Board of Regents, and the thought crossed my mind that as a Regent I  might be able to do something positive on this Phi Beta Kappa thing. (This  would be where I could start a shorter version of my involvement in Phi  Beta Kappa.) From that time until the chapter was installed, I maintained an  interest in that happening and had some involvement. My involvement was  initiated by a letter I wrote on Regents stationary to the then president of  OSU, Lawrence L. Boger, Larry Boger, pointing out that OSU did not have  a Phi Beta Kappa chapter. I had conversations, probably, with a few people.  It wasn   t too long after that, as I recall, before there was an application in  process.  I don   t know how quickly it was put together and submitted. It and several  other applications were unsuccessful. When I was told about a rejection, I  always responded with just one question: Have we begun work on our next  application? I think there were several. With the Regents, then and after, I  remember many encounters with presidents and chief academic officers, and  they all seemed to feel compelled to give me some report about Phi Beta  Kappa. I thought,    That   s good.    You   ve got to be known some way. I  wasn   t terribly apologetic about being known as a booster of the  OSU   library and Phi Beta Kappa. Those were sort of pet projects. That probably  gets to the stage of   before we started, I was sort of cued to explain that at  the celebration. After the January 2013 ceremony when the chapter was  officially commenced, there was a celebration afterwards. There was a sheet  of paper which Marvin Keener had produced torn up, and I been cued up to  give    What was that all about, and what was that document?     That document, what we tore up was a copy. The document was a simple  sheet of paper that said simply,    Oklahoma State University does not have a  Phi Beta Kappa chapter.    That document originated at my last meeting as a  Regent. In 1994, I was going off the board. That occurred to me as a way to  keep Phi Beta Kappa in the consciousness of the administration. I thought as  long as I was a Regent, I could take care of that personally. When I was  gone, I thought this might be a good idea, and I set it up for signature of the  president and the provost. We had an interim president at that time by the  name of Ray Bowen, who happily signed that and seemed to think it was a  good idea and that it would be highly desirable if the university had a Phi  Beta Kappa chapter. Marvin signed it; he was chief academic officer at the  time, and provost. The stipulation was that the document was to be retained  by the chief academic officer until we had a chapter, and then the document  8  could be destroyed. Marvin took that seriously, and I know there was at least  one application during his tenure. There may have been two. I thought he  took the pursuit of a Phi Beta Kappa chapter seriously. Then he had the  privilege of tearing up that document at that celebration of the coming of the  chapter. That   s the story on that.  On the last application, which was successful, that was spearheaded and  spearheaded well, I might add, by the then and current president of OSU,  Burns Hargis, who keenly felt the need of a chapter and oversaw an  outstanding application effort. One of the things I thought he did,  particularly, he invoked what I refer to as the four Ps: publicly proclaimed  presidential priority. The things that the president puts in that category have  improved odds of success. It was clear to me, and I think it was pretty  generally clear, that President Hargis had that stamp on the Phi Beta Kappa  chapter. That did turn into a lengthier version than I intended, but when you  focus on the summers that came and went while this was happening, I guess  it   s not too lengthy.  Finchum Over twenty years, if I   ve done the math correctly.  Stringer Over twenty years, yes. Babies grew up and were eligible to vote while   .  (Laughs)  Finchum Well, how did you receive the news that it had been approved?  Stringer By telephone call from the airport in Miami, Florida. Bob Graalman had told  me he would call me from the airport, and he did. The president got on the  phone briefly, so I had an opportunity to talk to President Hargis, also. He  was happy about it.  Finchum And your reaction?  Stringer Happiness. I guess a mild glow. No, it   s a signal development for the  university.  Finchum Was that your main motivation for pushing forward with it?  Stringer Well, that   s motivation enough. I guess my main motivation would be that  first-rate universities have Phi Beta Kappa if they qualify curriculum-wise. I  want Oklahoma State University to be a first-rate university, and I always  have. A lot of progress has been made     Finchum In a lot of areas, yes.  9  Stringer    in a lot of areas. This is a subsidiary reason, but without Phi Beta Kappa,  the primary deprivation from its absence is felt by your very best students. I  never liked that idea. Now that   s cured.  Finchum Well, your involvement with the library through those years also helped with  the Phi Beta Kappa application, too, from what I can understand, the  library improvements through the years.  Stringer I think that is true, because in the evaluation process, they take a hard look  at your library. That would simply be an insularly reason for my support of  the library all the years. I was almost rigid on that as a Regent. Some  presidents would probably   you can strike, almost. My analysis was, you  show me a great university without a great library, and I   ll relax a little. I  think I told a newspaper reporter who was interviewing me one time   we   d  been talking about symbolism and what have you, and he was raising a  question about the importance of the library. I said,    I think there is some  symbolism and some connection there. I think one will find that where the  library matters, academic rigor will probably matter.    That was credo  enough for me. (Laughs)  Finchum Well, what   s your involvement with Phi Beta Kappa at this point?  Stringer Well, I try to keep up with what   s going on a little bit. I   ve attended several  functions. The first initiation of the first class, I found that thrilling, so I  attended that. There   s an event scheduled pretty soon, which I   ve got on the  calendar. Other than that, I   ve created an endowment which benefits Phi  Beta Kappa, monetary endowment.  Finchum Have they made you an honorary member?  Stringer Yes. Yes.  Finchum That   s what that was.  Stringer That   s what that plaque is, yeah.  Finchum I was curious. They should have. If they hadn   t, they should have. So if there  had been one at OAMC  Oklahoma A M College  or Oklahoma State  University at your time, you would have been eligible to be a member, you  think?  Stringer Yeah, I   ve had that conversation a time or two, that if we   d have had it   .  I   ve told people on the visiting committee that I thought I could have made  it under my own power. The major qualify that     Finchum A high GPA, math, foreign language     10  Stringer Well, I had a high GPA. I didn   t have very much in the way of foreign  languages. I was concerned about that in law school. I had wanted to take  Latin all the time I was there, and it never worked out on the schedule. I  decided that even though it was a pretty expensive book, I decided the first  week of law school, I   d better buy a copy of Black   s Law Dictionary. It has  the definition of a lot of Latin phrases. I didn   t think it was real vital to my  law school career, but in that library we   ll find it somewhere. (Laughs) It  seemed like a big expenditure at the time. I guess one might say it   s not too  late for you to take Latin. (Laughs) I think I would enjoy it. I   ve been given  to understand it   s just memory work squared. I always liked that, the  memory work.  Finchum Well, since you   ve accomplished that goal, what   s your next one, or is there  one?  Stringer Well, not designated, at least. I have jested, I intend to find something. I  think it probably would be prudent to assess the timeline and seek something  a little more short-term.  Finchum Not twenty years to do?  Stringer Twenty might stretch it now. (Laughter)  Finchum Do you have any questions for him, Charles?  Abramson What are your thoughts on why it took so long to get a Phi Beta Kappa  chapter at OSU? It   s been a long struggle. Some people thought that maybe  because OSU is a land-grant college that might have something to do with  it. Any thoughts on that?  Stringer Not really. Most of my thoughts on that would be speculating. I don   t  particularly, I mean, I don   t know for certain, and I think I   ll just skip the  speculation.  Abramson Do you see one day where your grandchildren may go to OSU and become  Phi Beta Kappa?  Stringer Well, I wouldn   t object to that. One thing that I think is pretty likely is all of  them seem disposed toward OSU right now. One of the prospects that  particularly appeals to me is that a grandchild might be in school there and  with classmates, studying at the Dean and Carol Stringer Study Room in the  library. The grandchild can point to those pictures and say,    That   s my  Grandy and my Grammy.    I like that. I like the way that sounds and the  thought of it. That   s likely to happen.  11  Finchum Well, if you don   t have anything else to add, we   ll close off.  Stringer All right, let   s close off.  Finchum Well, we sure appreciate your effort and your stick-to-it-ness to get this  done. Thank you very much.  Stringer I   m pleased to have done it, and I   m really glad the way it   s worked out.  Finchum We are, too. Thank you.  -------  -------   
