 Sherman and I   m with the Oklahoma State University  Library. As part of the O-STATE Stories project with the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program, we are interviewing Rob Reynolds today, an  OSU alum. Today is October 17, 2008. Thank you for giving your time  today so we can interview you. Let   s start with a little bit about yourself,  like where did you grow up, what was your family like and your years  prior to your OSU experience. What was that like?  I have a story probably very different from most in that I grew up in a  professional military family. So after twelve states and two countries my  dad retired from the United States Air Force and we found ourselves in  Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. I was born in Rome, New York and lived all  over the place. We had a car that went east to west twice but never west  to east because we went around the world. My parents are both native  Californians and they decided that wasn   t the pace of life they wanted  after my dad retired and they chose Oklahoma City. From there it was  pretty easy to go on campus tours and whatever and figure out that this  has got to be the greatest place in the world. So, that   s how we chose  Oklahoma State.  What high school did you go to?  Graduated from Carl Albert High School in the Midwest City area.  What year did you graduate high school?  1980.  1980? So you   re a young alum, as they would say.  That would be the first time I   ve heard that today. But yes, in the line of  Petes, I guess I am kind of in the middle, if you will.  5  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  What did you major in here at OSU?  My undergraduate work was in the College of Business and I was a  marketing major.  Besides being a Pistol Pete, did you do any other campus activities?  I had a couple of different jobs. I worked in what was called    Talk Back  TV    for a couple of years.  What was that?  It was    Talk Back TV.    It was the educational TV and it was so  primitive at the time. It was a couple of buttons in the studio and they  needed a student back in the back of the classroom to push the buttons to  direct the professor and the students to questions at our satellite  campuses. I also worked as a house boy at the Kappa House. I was in the  Sigma Nu Fraternity. So yes, lots of campus activities.  So what was your fraternity involvement like?  Lots of activities from Freshman Follies to Spring Sing, the spring  festivals. Greek Week, you name it. I seemed to volunteer and play in all  of them.  What made you want to join a fraternity?  It was really a group of high school friends that introduced me to the  concept. Neither of my folks were in the Greek system when they were  in college. With introduction to that and looking at several different  houses I ended up as a Sigma Nu. Terrific set of guys at the time. All the  peer pressure seemed to be right. They were respectful guys, they had  tradition. They were great athletes. They did pretty well on the grades.  And campus involvement and campus leadership was the thing that was  always talked about in the house. So we had lots of Student Senate kinds  of guys and lots of Homecoming leadership kinds of guys and Blue Key  kinds of guys. It seemed to be a really good fit and I found myself in an  environment where   you always want to surround yourself with people  better than you are and I certainly did that by picking that house.  You said your parents went to college. Did your siblings also go to  college?  Yeah, interestingly enough my older sister had come to Oklahoma State  and was here for a couple of years before she fell in love and did that  tragic thing of following the boy off campus. So she finished in the  6  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  University of Texas system. My younger sister followed me to  Oklahoma State. And while my folks were a little hesitant about the  Greek system when I went through, they insisted that she be part of the  Greek system because it was such a positive influence on me. So she  ended up four years after I did. She was here    84-   88 and she was a  Theta.  Now did your involvement in the fraternity lead you to becoming a Pistol  Pete? Or how did that come about?  It was a Pistol Pete a couple of years ahead of me by the name of Don  Giles, and Don was a   I guess he was a senior and I was a freshman, so  the head and the costume were in the house. Don Giles was probably the  funniest, most creative person I met in my life and I just wanted to be  like Don. So as I pursued this thing, I wasn   t successful the first time. I  don   t take to not being successful very well so I went over to find out  what I did wrong or what I could do better and that   s when I was  introduced to a guy by the name of Kurt Carter who is now a lifelong  friend. We   ve been in each other   s weddings. But Kurt was really  helpful to say,    Hey Rob, you really need to do this and you ought to  work on that. You ought to think about volunteering to do this.    So I did  lots of stuff to represent the university even before I was Pete through  the Alum Association where you guys do your Honor Banquets or  whatever, I was the student speaker for a couple of years.  Oh, good for you.  So it gave me a great background. I was a much better interview when I  went back in for the interview the next time, for the Pistol Pete job.  What years were you Pistol Pete?  From    82-   83, I was what then they called the alternate Pete. Now it   s  kind of a two-guy thing. But then it was an alternate and the guy. As an  alternate you were just there when the other guy had to study for a test or  something like that. He didn   t have any rules as to how many games he  needed to share with you or any of that kind of stuff. But a great  experience. It just made me hungrier. So    83-   84 I was the guy.  The Pete.  The Pete.  So can you describe your try-out process? What was that like?  First part is, as I understand it, the first part is they screen the  7  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  applications. After they screen, they talk to about a dozen folks. It   s a 20  to 25 minute interview as I remember it both as a Pete and then being on  the interview panel. And then they actually have you put on the head. In  my case, they didn   t ask us to think about scenarios or situations. They  asked me to bring to life emotions. So,    Hey Pete, act angry.       Hey  Pete, act sad.       Hey Pete act       So, I portrayed emotions to kind of  show them I knew what I was doing.  Now was that nerve wracking during that process?  Sure, absolutely. Particularly since I wasn   t successful the first time.  Yes.  But the second and the third time, it was more exhilarating. You were  much more comfortable underneath the 30 pound head that wobbles.  And I knew lots more people on the panel than I did the year before. But  you   re always apprehensive that some superstar is going to come in right  behind you and steal that opportunity from you. But no, it was great fun.  Terrific experience.  Now we   re going to get more into you being    The Pete.    Can you  describe the set up, the costume? Can you describe for us what that   s  like?  Well, try to imagine that first couple of games during the season. I had  no idea you could lose that much weight in that short a period of time.  You   re wearing blue jeans and boots. You put on a leather set of chaps.  You put on a leather vest. And then you go out and you have so much  fun you   re not even thinking about being hot. I can remember coming  home and collapsing at the end of the first couple of football games. Just  being exhausted from the heat and not hydrating enough. But the energy  and the people   s responses to you keeps you going full speed the whole  time.  Can you describe the costume for me?  Yeah, I had a unique situation where the standard head was what I had  gotten used to as the alternative. Someone discovered what we then  referred to as the    new head.    It was a much lighter head. It got sent to  the university. Somebody had it hidden away, not even part of  Oklahoma State. It came in. It was a much lighter fiber glass. It only  weighed about 20 or 25 pounds rather than the 35 pounds. But to me, it  was my own boots, no spurs, my own jeans, chaps that were probably  twice as old as I was, and my own shirt. Now they   re given all this stuff  and all this stuff is new. There   s a tradition of spurs that I don   t know  8  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  anything about and never experienced. I was under Student Services  rather than the Athletic Department. I was the last Pete to report to  Student Services. So when Student Services ran out of money, that was  it. So when the vest got ripped     You had to provide for it?     I invented the idea that Pete ought to show up in suspenders. So I had  orange and black suspenders until I could save up enough money to buy  a new black vest. The gun was an interesting phenomenon for me having  not grown up around guns.  Even with the military?  Yeah, my dad wasn   t a hunter and was an Air Force guy who left the  guns at the office, so to speak. And not being an Oklahoman, I wasn   t  introduced to hunting. So for me, I was pretty apprehensive and really  paid attention when it came time for gun training and gun safety and gun  cleaning and those kinds of things. But to be carrying around a 357  Magnum was quite something. They also had, at the time, we carried a  double barrel shot gun which was just quite amazing to me that you  could walk around in this day and time   I   m surprised that Pete still has  a gun. But I   m pleased he does. I think it   s a part of the allure.  Now what kind of gun training did you have for this?  My training was actually here in Stillwater. I think it was with the police  department or the sheriff   s department. But the two of us had to go in  and somebody took us through the safety of our gun and that kind of  thing. But it wasn   t campus police, it was either Stillwater or the sheriff,  I can   t remember which one.  Now did you have to do the training twice, or did the one year of  training suffice?  All I remember is the first year because I was so intent on being sure I  knew what I was going to do. I don   t remember if I had to go through it  a second time.  What was your first event as Pistol Pete?  My first event was the Big Twelve baseball game, because, you know,  you take over after the     Yes, in spring time.  9  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Towards the end of the year, and I was so anxious to get underneath the  head, had it at home and was getting ready for   went off to camp during  that time. I don   t know if the Pete   s still do that. But we went off to  cheerleading camp and it was tough duty. But then they break you off  and you go to mascot camp. So I had it at home, and the Big Twelve, or  Big Eight Tournament at the time, was hosted in Oklahoma City. So I  went out for the baseball games and made it my own first appearance. I  don   t know if I was sanctioned to be there or not, but I pulled up and  acted like I knew what I was doing. They let me in the gate and I went in  and had a great time.  Now what was that feeling like? Did you get a rush? Or were you  nervous?  Oh no, it   s an absolutely natural high. You hear about runner   s highs or  whatever, and that   s what I expected every time I put on the costume.  Right.  During that period of time, we were a pretty good baseball team. Not  only were we a pretty good baseball team, but we were a pretty good  offensive baseball team. So there were lots of opportunities to hop on  top of dugouts and have the ball sail away. It was even better when half  the crowd was orange and the other half was wearing red because the  other school in the state was a pretty good baseball team at the time, too.  Now speaking of rivals, did you have any problems as Pistol Pete,  dealing with fellow Big Eight schools? Do you have any stories you  could share with us?  You know, no problems if you don   t mind oranges being thrown at you.  Because OU clenched the birth to the Orange Bowl one year when I was  Pete and it happened to be in Norman. So as a part of their celebration,  the oranges came out of the stands and they seemed to all be coming  towards wherever I was. I don   t know where the rest of the field was.  One of the greatest stories of all times in my experience was we were at  the University of Colorado, and I   m just standing around in my white  shirt, jeans and boots and a winter jacket. I see a guy in a suit and top  coat talking to some folks from the Oklahoma State official party. And  behind him is a campus cop and they   re talking and then they point me  out. They come over and the guy in the suit says,    Hey, I want to  introduce you to deputy so and so. He will be your escort today.    I said,     Well, why do I need an escort?    He said,    Well, at the University of  Colorado, they   re allowed to drink in the stadium.    I don   t know if you  can remember that time frame but the University of Colorado wasn   t  very good. And so the crowd was drowning their sorrows somewhere  10  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  around the first quarter. Apparently the week before, Herbie the Husker  was walking around and the students grabbed him and pulled him up  into the stands and then he disappeared. Well, Herbie came out in  nothing but boxers and his costume had gone every direction. So for me,  they put this deputy behind me all day long. No problems, but it was  interesting to know that I was one week away from that.  Now did you have any wardrobe malfunctions or anything funny like  that ever happen to you?  No, I didn   t. I had trouble a couple of times with gaining the respect I  thought Pete deserved. For example, a guy came to me and asked me if I  would make his marriage proposal for him. I said, sure I   d be happy to  do that. We talked for about 30 minutes and then he left. I   d never seen  him before, and I don   t know how he ever expected to see me again.  That kind of trust was unbelievable to me. But I called all the major  media in both Tulsa and Oklahoma City and said,    Hey I   m about to do  this thing. You   re probably gonna want it.    You just couldn   t gin up the  respect among the media for that thing. So I had to create my own. I  enlisted family and friends to bring video cameras out and those kinds of  things so that young couple could have some type of memory of this  thing since we couldn   t get a news clip or whatever.  But no costume malfunctions. I drove a Volkswagen bug at the time so  any time I went anywhere I had to take the front seat out to get the head  in to go make appearances. I had car malfunctions. I had a tradition of  not being seen   you either got seen with the whole costume on, or you  weren   t seen.  I went to a wedding reception in my jeans and shirts and told the person  who invited me that I was there. He said,    Great go get dressed.    I said  okay. So I went out in the lobby and couldn   t find any place to get  dressed. So I stepped into a stairwell and got dressed. When I went to  open the stairway door, it   s a one-way lock. So now I   m stuck. I   m  supposed to appear in the wedding reception in a few minutes and the  only person that knows I   m coming is the bride   s dad, and he   s a little  busy. So I just stood out there until somebody finally heard me tapping  on the door to let me back in. I guess that was maybe the costume  malfunction you were looking for.  Yes. You talked about not being seen getting dressed, or undressed. Is  that a main do or don   t? Are there any other dos or don   ts that as being  a Pistol Pete you had to follow?  I didn   t have a lot of written rules. Or at least, they weren   t handed to me  and I didn   t know them. After conversations with Don Giles and Kurt  11  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Carter, I just thought it was best to just not talk underneath the head, to  do everything in kind of pantomime. And to not be seen taking the head  off and on. I later validated that for my own self. I was at a high school  game appearing at the request of the alum at a big huge high school in  Oklahoma, and there was no place for me to go get a break. So at  halftime I walk off and try to slide underneath the stands. I had no idea  there   s a little girl following me at the time. When the head hit the  ground this screech goes up from this little girl. You know, I guess  thinking she   d just seen somebody getting beheaded or something. I  scared the fire out of her when I was just trying to get someplace and get  hidden away. No, the stress was to be respectful and remember that  you   re representing all of us that wear black and orange. But there  weren   t any rules.  Speaking of events, how many events did you do when you were the main  Pete? How many events per year?  People asked me that the year I was the alternate, so I really did keep a  good number; I did over 400.  Oh, wow.  The year I was Pete.  How were you compensated?  Through the university, they would book your appointments and they  would stress to people,    Hey, this is a college kid, you owe him so many  cents a mile,    and then they would suggest an honorarium of  25. So  that was the way you were compensated for the off-campus kinds of  things. I think I was pretty close to the last Pistol Pete who got a  scholarship, but I actually got a  500 stipend for books. When Pete was  shifted over to the athletic department, they weren   t ready to do that for  the cheerleaders so I think I was the last one to get that. But I don   t  know for sure.  You said you did over 400 events. How did you bring in your schooling  and do Pistol Pete? Was that difficult for you to do? What was that like?  I had a great set of friends and I had a great work environment. So as a  house boy, I worked a lot of other times and covered other peoples     shifts so that they were willing to cover mine when it was time for that  kind of a thing. But actually, my grade point got better. The busier you  get, the more focused you knew you needed to be. So every hour  studying you were getting an hour. Where before,    Oh, I got a couple of  hours so I can run and get this coke or I can visit with this person.    But  12  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  for me, it was shut the door and get this done because that   s the only  time you got.  Now did you have much social life when you were Pistol Pete?  I did the fraternity things where I could. But I was either a little late to  the events or left a little earlier. Because lots of times it would piggy  back on. But no, it   s a tradeoff. It   s a half-time job almost by the time  you build in the events and getting to them and getting back away from  them. But everybody was fine with it and the trade-offs didn   t seem to  matter to me. I just loved it.  Did you have to be physically fit or did you have to work out to be Pistol  Pete? What kind of toll did it take on you?  For me, I don   t know. I   ve always been a person of physical fitness. Not  a nut, but I do something four or five times a week. To this day, I am  still doing something four or five times a week. So for me, it wasn   t a  build up for or whatever.  What type of events did you do? Did you do weddings? You mentioned  you did weddings. Any other events that stick out in your mind?  You get invited by lots of folks, alums around town who want you to be  in their hometown parade. So I did the Bristow parade, I did the Owasso  parade, I did the Madill parade. I did birthday parties. The wedding  reception was really kind of strange to me, but it was a family friend and  I was certainly happy to honor that. Appearances in classrooms,  appearances for the state chamber, appearances for the Alumni  Association. I wanted full advantage of this thing, so I attended lots of  the women   s sporting events. Having not been a resident of Oklahoma  and a transplant to Oklahoma, the enthusiasm for wrestling and the  timing to be a good mascot for wrestling was something I needed to  learn and wasn   t something that I knew. But yeah, you name it, I think  Pete   s done it. I won   t steal another guy   s thunder, but if you interview  Rick Wilson, you need to ask Rick about some great experiences. I think  he   s actually snow skied with the head on.  Yeah, I heard that story. (Laughter)  But Pete   s gone everywhere.  Now do you have a most memorable, non-athletic Pistol Pete story that  you   d be willing to share? Anything that sticks out?  The marriage proposal was pretty interesting. It was at a game. Let me  13  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  think about that one for a moment.  What was your favorite sport to be Pistol Pete at? Or what was, every  time you had to go you just got really really pumped up for it?  No doubt football was kind of   we had a pretty good football team then  and on a roll. You had a whole week to think about what do I want to do,  how do I play the theme in, and what can I do big? And then how can I  get the university to agree to let me do that? But football, without a  doubt. The crowd   s huge, the day starts early. There are different  Alumni Association things to go to. There are different tailgating things  you need to go to. Somebody wanted me to show up for the band, show  them some respect. So football without a doubt is the one you get the  most fired up for because you had the anticipation.  Could you describe a typical game day? What time did you get up? Or  what time did events start rolling?  Yeah, game day   for me game day typically started somewhere around  9:30 or 10:00. It was typically an Alumni Association or a Geographic  Posse Club kind of a tailgate thing. Then I always tried to do something  in the tailgating lot to thank the fans for being there. So you   re starting  early and it   s probably a couple hours after the game before you   re  finally loaded into the car and just   .  Calling it a night.  Yep.  How often did you travel to away games?  Again, I was part of Student Services, so the stories you   re going to hear  from the Petes from after me, they did a lot more of the away game stuff.  I think I got only three or four away day games, and that was over the  course of the two years. As I remember it, I think it was the OSU Posse  that had to raise enough money to buy me a seat on the Posse bus to go.  But the best away game without a question for me was my senior year  when we went to the bowl again.  And what bowl game was that?  It was down in Houston. I think it was called the Houston Bowl at the  time. I don   t think there was even one of those sponsors.  Yeah, corporate sponsors.  14  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  But I very specifically remember that because I came in in what we  called jams at the time. They were oversized shorts.  Yes.  They were kind of the shorts of today   s style where they were really  baggy and really long but with big bright colors. So I came in wearing  jams and the oversized glasses on the head, and the camera hanging  around my neck and then my suitcase. I walked into the stadium and I  walk completely around the field and then back into the tunnel to put on  the traditional stuff.  I thought it was pretty clever and pretty funny but not disrespectful to  the character of Pistol Pete. But the Alum   s who attended the game  apparently didn   t feel that way, because by the time I got home   or got  back after Christmas break     Oh, no.  I had been called in to have a discussion about how I need to show a  little more respect to the tradition of the university and the university  mascot.  Speaking of that tradition, what does portraying a real live character  mean to you?  That   s a real hot button for me. After I graduated and became a part of  the Pistol Pete Interview process before I moved away, I insisted that we  spend the money to buy the Frank Eaton book and ask the new Pistol  Pete to read it. That guy was a hoot, a character, and a great story. You  ought to be able to tell that story if in fact you   re going to portray that.  So that   s a real hot button for me. I think it   s important to know about  the university, I think it   s important to know about the man and I think  it   s important to tell folks.  Is representing Frank Eaton for you different than say the Baylor Bear  or Ralphie the Buffalo? Does that add more honor because you   re  portraying a real life character?  Wearing a furry suit with a tail, I think you can do a lot of funny stuff  that you can   t do as Pistol Pete. But I can   t think of a   not just because I  served in that role, but I can   t think of a better mascot in the country. If  you can name one, tell me. I don   t know if it was so much portraying  Frank Eaton as it was representing the university that that   s what drove  me   the honor of doing right, doing it classy meant.  15  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  How do you think Pistol Pete represents Oklahoma State University and  the state of Oklahoma?  Well I   ll tell you, when I was Pete they ran a survey across Oklahoma  and they said,    Who are the most recognizable Oklahomans?    I came in  number two behind Boren who was the U.S. Senator. It wasn   t me that  did it, it was Pete who did it. But the number two most recognizable  figure in Oklahoma was Pistol Pete according to the survey, so it   s pretty  interesting.  Do you still get introduced as a former Pistol Pete, or what   s the  reaction of people when they hear    Hey Rob, you   re a former Pistol  Pete     What type of reaction do you get?  A real shocked reaction. I   m in a button-down environment with a white  shirt and silk tie type of thing. I work in public affairs so I   m kind of in a  serious, technical business, so it comes as a shock that I was in fact a  college mascot because they think of the folks who are wearing the fur  coat and the furry tail that do silly stuff. Not the mascot that you and I  know.  How did you being Pistol Pete, how has that translated into your post-  OSU career?  I would tell you that my very first job, that was the difference maker.  With all the candidates, when that became known, that was a  distinguishing factor. Not that that   s what got me in the door, but I really  truly believe that when you got down to,    Hey we   ve got this many  slots, and there   s this many people.    So I   d say that that was one job I  got because of it. Second of all, I would tell you that my second job was  working for Oklahoma State University in the Athletic Department.  And that came out of relationships built up at the time. And they called  me and said,    Hey, would you be interested in doing this?    And I   m sure  it   s because of the network that was built here and the way that I  represented the university and the relationships that were built.  And then I   ll tell you, there   s a couple of guys that you will talk to in  this thing that   because I know them, because I know the quality of guy  they are, there   s two of them that I   ve been able to help in business. It   s  an interesting group of guys, it   s a group of guys that have a shared  value that being Oklahoma State. If you   re watching two up or two  down where you can really pay attention and get to know these folks,  you can really find out that there are some quality folks.  Now, did being Pistol Pete help you interact with people?  16  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Well, without question.  Did it improve your people skills?  It improved my presentation skills without question. And again, it all  started from just trying to get to be Pete, to being the student speaker at  the honors banquets. But you meet all kinds and you go into all kinds of  ambiguous situations. Sometimes there   s lots of details around them,  sometimes there   s very little detail and you   re pulling into a parking lot  looking for a guy named Goodpasture and you find out half the town is  named Goodpasture. So without question, it develops your interpersonal  skills.  Now did it also help develop your interpersonal skills with children? Or  how did you react with the kids as being Pistol Pete?  I had no idea until I was actually doing it the amount of parents who  would bring children close to you who weren   t really too hip. Everybody  knows that there are stories of children being afraid of Santa Claus when  it   s picture time. But can you imagine this oversized head and this bright  orange hat and then you have two enthusiastic alumni parents who are  insistent that this one and a half year old hang with this kid. I didn   t  know that I was going to run into that. When I found out that I was  going to run into that, I ran over to the Alumni Association and said,     Who do we know that   s in the candy business?    I got in touch with an  alum and he sent me a crate of bubblegum and told me when I ran out of  that to call him and he   d send another one. So in my bag, besides the  blanks for the gun, I also had a box full of gum for each event and both  pockets were full of gum underneath that vest. So if I ran into the scared  kid, you do this and all of the fear dropped away as they were reaching  for the gum. So thanks to an alum, I was able to overcome that.  As you are having this 50 year reunion of Pistol Petes, is there a bond  between the former Pistol Petes? And if so, what   s that like?  The reunion   s great fun. I   m a different Pete than the others, because  there were three of us at my wedding. I appeared in another guy   s  wedding. As I told you, I   ve been able to help two in business. I   ve been  able to see several of them, even though I   m 1100 miles away, I   ve been  able to see several of them over the course of the years. Whether it   s  back for Christmas or anybody who   s coming through that part of the  country, we make time to see each other. There   s a huge bond. And then  the folks that are too far outside of your era, there   s an immediate  connection and an immediate, I want to get to know you and I want to  get to like you. So you become friends pretty quickly, even with the  folks that you didn   t know.  17  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Have you met the current Pistol Pete?  I have not, I   m anxious to do that. Again, I rolled in this morning, so I  haven   t had an opportunity to do that.  How do you see yourself, your legacy as Rob Reynolds, the Pistol Pete?  How do you want people to remember you when you were Pistol Pete?  Is there anything that stands out?  You know, that used to be important to me but I don   t know that it is  now. I tried to start what I called Pete   s Partners. Pete   s Partners lasted a  couple of years before it faded away, but it was just another group of  guys that used to pull the big drum. But anyway, that thing faded away.  I was kind of disappointed that that faded away, because you hate to see  that happen. But for me, the Pistol Pete thing is a great memory. One of  the best experiences of my life time. My family knows that and I   ve got  great friendships that will go on forever. For other folks who find out  you   re Pistol Pete and aren   t a part of the OSU family, if you will,  hopefully they   re going to know all these guys are class acts because I  handled myself in a class way.  Now, I heard there   s a tradition of Pistol Pete gets left behind at some  place. Did that ever happen to you?  No, I missed that one.  That was after your time?  Yes.  What would you tell a student who wants to be Pistol Pete? You served  on the Pistol Pete selection committee, what would you tell that student  who wants to be Pistol Pete?  I would tell them that it   s a 100  dedication to that, and that academics  should be their second priority. No, I   m just kidding. It   s all time  consuming. And there   s a bunch of us ahead of them that are going to be  watching and want them to do it in a class way and want them to be in  this deal 100 . So if they think it   s just putting on the head and going to  eight football games, they   ve got another thing coming and they need to  rethink that. But I think folks get that figured out before they get there.  Again, it   s been a number of years since I   ve been a part of the selection  process. I   ve been away from Oklahoma for ten or eleven years now.  But when I was interviewing, the guys that were interviewing at the time  knew it. It was something that was pretty clear that this was going to be  it for you as far as extracurricular goes.  18  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Who were the Pistol Petes that you helped select? I am just curious.  Scott Petty, Lance Millis.  You   ve got a nice group right there.  I   m trying to think of who else was in there.  Rick Wilson?  Yeah, exactly. So that   s    85-   89 isn   t it?  Yeah.  Those are the years I was around and could help.  Yes. Did you get an even more special pride when they were named All-  American mascot? Did you get a sense of pride?    Hey we selected this  kid and he became an All-American mascot   ?  Yeah, absolutely. Because I had walked a mile in those same boots  before in camp and to understand that they were able to pull it off, just  how good those guys had to be. Because of the competition and those  things were just incredible. And then to see them go up against that level  of competition, absolutely. You bet.  Now, looking back, would you do it all over again? Being Pistol Pete?  All over again. And I would do it even better than I did it the first time.  Like what would you improve on?  I would just work to be funnier. I would have studied   I   ve been  studying mascots since being a mascot, and I would have put a lot more  study into it to see good ideas, modify them, steal them, use them. I was  on the fly while some of the stuff was clever and funny, there was so  much more you could have done. I would love to have an opportunity to  do it again.  That   s good. Where do you live now?  I   m in Cleveland, Ohio now.  So Brutus  the Buckeye ? What do you think about Brutus?  This is going to be officially archived, so I have to be careful. I   m on  19  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  Reynolds  Sherman  record here. Brutus is a nice guy.  Yes.  He doesn   t hold a candle to Pete.  And you went to the better OSU if you don   t mind me inserting that.  I   ve been reminding people of that the last couple of weeks, the higher  ranked OSU is.  Is there anything else you would like to add before we let you go?  No, I   ll think about this and maybe shoot you guys an email or  something that I   ve come up with. But great questions. You   re on the fly  here.  That   s all right. Thank you very much, sir.  You bet.  I appreciate your time.  My pleasure, thank you.  Thanks for coming back, that   s for sure.  -------  -------   
