 Sherman and I   m with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is October 17th, 2008 and I   m here at the OSU Alumni  Center interviewing Rolan Decker, class of    58. We   re interviewing Mr.  Decker as part of the O-STATE Stories which is part of the Oklahoma  Oral History Research Program. First off, I just want to thank you for  your time today. I know Homecoming can be pretty busy and you   ve got  places to be, people to see, so thank you.  You   re welcome. Glad to do it.  First off, I   m going to ask you your background prior to  OSU . Where  did you grow up and what high school did you attend?  I was born in 1936 in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. My parents were living in  Dewey at the time, which is a small town north of Bartlesville.  There  was  no hospital there. My father was teaching science in Dewey   s high  school. Several years after that we moved to Wilburton, Oklahoma  where my father taught in what is now Eastern State College in  Wilburton. We were there until World War II broke out in the early  1940s. I guess I must have been about five when we moved into  Claremore.  He worked in the defense plant in Pryor as a chemist during World War  II, and then we moved to Ada. Most of my growing up was in Ada, and I  consider that my growing-up hometown. We moved there right before I  entered the fourth grade, and I stayed in the same school until I  graduated from high school. It was Horace Mann School on the East  Central University campus. It was initially established as a place where  the education students could do their student teaching. As there got to be  larger numbers of education students needing places to do their student  teaching they were farmed out to schools in the area and the need for  that lab school was diminished. So its life ended in 1960; the building  5  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  was later torn down and is no longer standing there. So in terms of high  school I   m an orphan, but I treasure those years because when I came to   OSU  as a freshman, although Horace Mann   s curriculum was not  extensive in types of courses, it was very intensive and prepared me well  for my work here.  What was the size of that high school?  My graduating class was 20 students, and all of the classes were  approximately that size.  Okay.  Very, very small. So we had a lot of personal one-on-one attention. My  plain geometry class, for example, if I remember correctly, had six  students.  Did you do any activities when you were in high school?  I did. Only because it was on the East Central campus. The school itself  had no extracurricular activities other than sandlot football, baseball,  softball, basketball. But I was very fortunate to be able to participate in  things there on the campus, the university campus   college then. The  man who came there as band director in about 1948 or 1949, Paul Enix,  started a beginners band with students at the school that I was attending.  After a couple of years, he asked three or four of us if we would like to  be a part of the East Central Band, and when you ask that of students in  junior high, you don   t turn that down. So I played with the East Central  Band the rest of my junior high and high school years and also began  taking private cello lessons from the band director who also began an  orchestra at East Central. After about a year he wanted me to play in the  orchestra, so I did that. So music was my main extracurricular activity  there, although it was not associated directly with the high school that I  was attending.  What instruments did you play?  I began taking piano lessons at a very young age. For the band program I  played clarinet and for the orchestra I played cello.  Do you have any brothers or sisters?  I have one sister who is seven years younger and she is a grade school  teacher in Lawton.  Did she come here to OSU?  6  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  She did for graduate work. She went to Horace Mann also except for  two years when we were living here in Stillwater. She attended the same  school that I did   graduated from Horace Mann and then went on to  East Central for her bachelor   s degree, and then came to OSU for her  graduate work.  Did you always want to come to college or was your plan in life to go to  college?  I never had any idea of doing anything but that.  Because basically you   ve had the atmosphere growing up.  Yeah. When I graduated from high school, my father had been teaching  chemistry at East Central. He was the head of the chemistry department,  with bachelor   s and master   s degrees in chemistry from Oklahoma  A M.  What was his name?  Willis Decker. He realized that if he was gonna stay in college teaching  he needed to get a doctor   s degree. So when I graduated from high  school the whole family moved to Stillwater. We were here for two  years while he completed his course work and the bulk of research work  for his dissertation and then they moved back and I stayed. My sister  then I think was in sixth or seventh grade here. But the rest of her  schooling was there at Horace Mann and then at East Central and then  her graduate work here. While our family was here, my mother, Majorie  Decker, earned her master   s degree while teaching English at Cushing  High School.  So what drew you to Oklahoma A M?  At some point I was pretty sure I was going to major in chemistry. My  father taught chemistry at East Central. He knew that in a one man  chemistry department, which that was at the time, there were courses  that I probably needed as a professional chemist that he could not  provide for me. He knew about the chemistry department here because  he had gotten his bachelor   s and master   s here. He felt that whether he  came here or not, this is where I ought to come and, of course, he and his  older brother had attended here for their bachelor   s degrees back in the  middle 1930s when it was Oklahoma A M. So there was kind of a  family tradition (laughter) and also the quality of the chemistry  department here.  Can you describe your leaving home and coming here? What was that  7  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  experience like?  Well, since the whole family moved here before my freshman year, I  didn   t really leave home in that sense. We lived out in the Old Veteran   s  Village out northwest of the campus in the old army barracks that were  up there at the time, but then when my parents moved back home, by  then I was a junior, I moved into Cordell Hall. And so the flying out of  the nest, so to speak, had already, to some extent, begun because I had  friends and activities here on the campus. So there was not the kind of  break that a lot of students feel when they leave their parents, their  hometown, and all of a sudden find themselves on this huge campus  here.  When our middle son, Joel, came to school here, because he had been in  the band program in high school, we encouraged him to be a part of the  band. He didn   t really want to do that but we kept pushing,    Do it one  semester and see what happens.    Well, that became his circle of friends  right away. And that   s what students, I think, need when they come to a  large university.  Now your major was chemistry then, right?  Yes.  Was it strictly chemistry?  Yes.  Although during that time, before I actually began my course work, I  wasn   t sure whether I would major in chemistry or music and finally  decided I could make music a hobby easier than I could chemistry  (laughter) and that   s where I went.  Probably safer, too.  Well yeah, the job opportunities are probably more lucrative in  chemistry than they   although, I went into teaching ultimately which I  wasn   t going to do either; the salaries there are not great, but the rewards  are wonderful.  So was it in your blood that you were going to be in chemistry? Why the  fascination with chemistry?  Probably. With my dad as a chemistry teacher, I don   t ever remember  not being around a chemistry lab. When I was a little kid, every once in  a while I   d be over there in Dad   s chemistry lab. Then while in high  8  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  school when school was out I   d be over there in the chemistry lab until  he was ready to go home and then we   d go home. So I would do things  there. On top of that the high school did not offer chemistry, it was too  small of a school. But we got permission for me to take first and second  semester general chemistry from him, with the college students, for high  school credit, so I got a taste of what it would be like my senior year in  high school.  Nice. Now you lived with your family the first two years on campus?  What was that like? Was that awkward or was it     Not really. I don   t recall any real problems about that. In those old  barracks or apartments, there was an upstairs and downstairs and I had  my bedroom upstairs and that   s where I did most of my homework that  had to be done. I do recall the summer I was taking calculus, that I was  working on a calculus problem downstairs with the TV going. This was  the early days when the TV was black and white. Anyway, I would not  pay any attention to the TV. I   d be working my problems and then every  once in a while I   d get stuck, so I   d watch TV for awhile and then go  back to work on the problem. There was one problem that I was really  stuck on, I couldn   t get the thing solved and I think I even ended up  throwing my pencil across the room. (Laughter) Finally, I said,    Oh  forget it.    I went upstairs and went to bed. In the middle of the night, it  came to me how to solve that problem. I got up, went downstairs and  worked the problem out and went back to bed.  Nice.  So my brain was still working.  What activities were you involved with here at Oklahoma A M?  Well, of course the first activity I was involved in was band, marching  band and concert and symphonic bands. I did that all four years. I was in  the ROTC band one year   the army ROTC band one year. That was  back when ROTC was required of all male students   two years of it.  That was enough for me, so I didn   t continue with that. I spent a couple  of years in the orchestra playing cello, but then honorary organizations  began to become a part of my extracurricular life. I joined Kappa Kappa  Psi, the band fraternity during my freshman year, was president of Alpha  Chapter my senior year.  I was involved with the Disciple Student Fellowship I guess pretty much  all four years and through that I got involved with what was then the  Student Religious Council. Then several of us felt like we really ought to  broaden that and include faculty and other religious groups, so we  9  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  modified that to the University Religious Council. I don   t even know if  that is still in existence or not. But I was president of that for a year.  Then there was one year when I was co-chairman of Religious Emphasis  Week, which I think died a number of years ago. But one of the things  that we really tried to do was to broaden the religious groups from which  we got speakers. That was one of our main concerns. Then there were  other honorary organizations: Pi Mu Epsilon Math Fraternity, Phi  Lambda Upsilon Chemistry Honorary, I was inducted into Omicon Delta  Kappa and Phi Kappa Phi my senior year, and Phi Eta Sigma when I was  a freshman. Those were not heavy activities. The music programs and  the religious programs were the main ones that took extracurricular time.  And of course, studying chemistry and physics and math, you give a lot  of time to those things. I was selected for Who   s Who in American  Colleges and Universities my senior year.  Oh yeah. Now where did the marching band perform? At what events?  Always halftime of football games here. Usually we made two trips a  year, that was back when we played Tulsa regularly, and if we were  playing Tulsa there we went to Tulsa. I remember going to the  University of Kansas. I think it was twice, but a friend of mine thought it  was only once. We always went to OU whenever we played in Norman.  Then during basketball season, the marching band was divided into two  pep bands and Hiram Henry was wonderful. In that time students got  tickets to go to half of the basketball games because the student   s  athletic tickets were numbered   you would have gotten an odd number  or even number. So he would have people in the pep bands so that they  could see all the games.  Oh wow.  They could go when they had the ticket, and then they   d play in the band  when they didn   t. We sat right down on the basketball floor and one of  my fond memories was when we played the University of Kansas when  Wilt Chamberlain was playing and the score had been close at Kansas.  Coach Iba thought we probably had a good chance of beating them here.  And, of course, that was back in the days when there was no time clock  for possession of the ball. He was a master of helping his teams control  the ball   they were good ball handlers. So for about the last five  minutes of the game, it was tied. For the last five minutes of the game   OSU , then Oklahoma A M, controlled the ball and Kansas didn   t  have a chance of making a shot. Then there was just a few seconds  left   a little guard, Mel Wright, I can still see him because I was sitting  there in the band and he was standing right out there, took a set shot; hit  it,  OSU , Oklahoma A M won.  10  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  And the field house erupted  (Laughter) Those were the days of delayed  broadcasts from KRMG. So a bunch of us went back to the dorm, turned  on the radio and listened to the re-broadcast of the ballgame. The guy  that was doing the play-by-play, I thought he was going to lose his  voice. (Laughter) It was just marvelous. We beat  KU  with Wilt  Chamberlain playing out there. That was one of my fond memories of  marching band situations.  Are there any others that you would like to share?  There was another one that was very early because I was just a freshman  when Oklahoma A M played Texas A M the last time they played  them in the Cotton Bowl. I don   t know what organization it was,  whether it was the athletic department or what, but there was a reserved  Santa Fe train that took fans, band, cheerleaders from Stillwater to  Dallas and then we   d bus out to the Cotton Bowl. I was in the band, I  was one of   most of the freshmen, I think, got to march on the Cotton  Bowl field and I was one of those and I still have the pictures of some of  the formations that we did when we were there. That was a very  memorable trip.  Did you get great pride from playing in the marching band and  representing the university in that way?  I just enjoyed the music. Music had been, and still is, so much a part of  my life, and of course the association with all the other folks that were  playing in the band. It was interesting when I came back a little over a  week ago for Hiram Henry   s funeral. There were five guys there, besides  me, who played in the band when I was there. It was such a kick because  four of them I had not seen in 50 years and one of them I had. Another  one was the one who sat first chair clarinet and I sat second chair for two  years, maybe three. We had a long visit then and he was in  communication with me between that day and now and we arranged to  have lunch today at Hideaway and have another long visit. Fifty years  and you can still get back together and visit about old times, yeah.  Now let   s get back into more of the academic portion of your  OSU   career. Can you describe what type of classes you took, where you took  them?  I think all of my math classes were in the Classroom Building that still  stands. When I started taking chemistry it was in that building across the  street here. The fa  ade covers it up, but you can still get back in the guts  of that building and that   s where I had my   I think I had all of my  chemistry there, come to think of it. I don   t think until I started taking  some graduate courses   that Physical Science Building was built, or  11  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  finished, after my senior year. So I think that I took all of my chemistry  courses in that chemistry building across the way.  What were your favorite classes?  Math.  Why math?  I   ve always loved mathematics. I have a better grade point in math than  in chemistry. In terms of chemistry, what was my favorite chemistry  class? I basically enjoyed most of them, I have a story or two about  some of them that I wouldn   t want to tell. (Laughter) It was basically  enjoyable. But the math, in fact, I probably went into chemistry, in part,  for my love of mathematics, because I didn   t think I wanted to teach. I  felt like that was, at that time, that was about all I could do with math.  Yeah.  So I said,    Okay, where can I use math? I can use it in chemistry. I can  do chemistry so I won   t have to teach.    Then about the second year into  my graduate work, I had some difficulty in a couple of courses and so I  began to ask myself,    Well, now let   s see, what are you really good at?  What do you enjoy doing?    and I   ll be doggone if it wasn   t teaching. So  that   s what I ended up doing.  Both my parents are teachers, I should say. At home, when you   re  growing up and you have teachers for parents, you hear all the  complaints about some students (Laughter) and complaints about the  lack of funding from the legislature and so on, and I didn   t think I  wanted to do that. But that was a real joy, I have enjoyed my students  and I still do; I see several of them on occasion.   The chemistry professors I had at OSU were very good teachers.  Among them were Drs. Tom Moore, Paul Arthur, Sylvan Wood (my  academic advisor), Ernest Hodnet, Robert Freeman, O.C. Dermer and  Henry Johnston. Dr. Johnston was especially influential in directing me  toward my teaching career.   What do you like about teaching?  Seeing the light that goes on when a student has been attempting to  understand something and then all of a sudden they realize they do  understand it and seeing that happen. Also seeing students that you   ve  had become very successful in what they do.  12  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Yeah.  My cardiologist, for example, is a former student.  Of yours?  Yes.  Wow.  He was an excellent, excellent student and he   s taken very good care of  me.  I   d hope so.  And our dentist is a former student. Most of the veterinarians we have  used with pets were former students. I know about students who have  worked for Phillips Petroleum, gone to work as a professor at Texas  A M, another one who is a patent attorney. He got a Ph.D in chemistry  at the University of Illinois and then went back to law school and is a  patent attorney in the eastern United States. Seeing those kids become  successful and feeling like,    Well, maybe I had a little bit of something  to do with that    is really enjoyable.  Where did you teach?  I taught at Southwestern State University in Weatherford for 31 years.  What years were you there?  From    65 until I retired in    96. There were about twelve, thirteen,  fourteen of us that taught together for about 30 years.  Oh, wow.  We really became family and shared things that we learned about  teaching various topics; it was a wonderful family. We   ve lost two of  them but we get back together every once in a while and enjoy visiting.  Now you obviously have a Ph. D. correct?  Yes, I did two years of graduate work here at  OSU  in the biochemistry  department. Decided that the type of research that was available there at  that time was not what I was really interested in. Transferred to Purdue  University in Indiana and finished my degree there. My specialty is in an  area of biochemistry called physical biochemistry. I worked with one of  13  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  the outstanding protein chemists of that day, Dr. Joseph F. Foster, and  enjoyed my time there, too.  What drew you back to Oklahoma? Why did you choose to work at  Southwestern State?  My major professor at Purdue saw an ad in the Chemical Engineering  News, that those who belonged to the American Chemical Society get,  advertising for a biochemist at Southwestern. They have an outstanding  pharmacy school at Southwestern. They have had for years.  Yeah.  Their chemistry department didn   t have anybody that had a specialty in  biochemistry. That was my specialty, so that was what drew me there. I  had to discover that they   the chemistry faculty   wanted to do what I  wanted to do, which was to provide the best possible undergraduate  education for chemistry students. Those two factors, the fact that they  wanted a biochemist, because pharmacy students had to take a course of  biochemistry, they wanted somebody who specialized in that area, and  the fact that the faculty was so collegial and they really were interested  in doing a good job of educating chemists; that   s what kept me there for  31 years.  Did being close to your family also play a part in all of that?  Not really, because I had no idea that I was going to end up back in  Oklahoma. I could have gone to other states and probably have drawn a  higher salary, but I might have gotten into departments where there was  internal competition and jealousy and I didn   t want that. This was such a  good place to work, and it was nice being close to family.  Yes.  Weatherford and Ada aren   t all that close together, but anyway.  Same state.  Same state, that   s right.  Now, let   s get back to your  OSU  experience. Since you came back for  Homecoming, what do you remember about the past Homecomings that  you experienced as a student?  Other than the band   s participation in the parade and half time, I don   t  remember much my first two years, but my junior and senior years I was  14  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  staying in Cordell Hall, which I understand is going to be demolished.  I   m gonna come up here and cry whenever they do that. (Laughter) No,  not really, but Cordell Hall always built a float for the Homecoming  parade and we usually had one or more students who were majoring in  architecture. It was the architecture students that would design our  floats, and then we would spend   you know how that goes.  Oh, yeah.  It   s sort of an all night deal the last two or three nights, hanging and  stuffing chicken wire and so on, getting those floats put together. But  that was great fun. And then of course marching in the Homecoming  parade, that was good too. My parents would usually come up. They  would come up occasionally because I was in the band. They would  come up and watch the band.  Pretty good band.  Just like we did when our son was up here playing in the band.  Nice. After you moved out of the barracks you moved into Cordell Hall.  What was that experience like?  Interesting.  Interesting? Why is that?  I maintain that every student should live in the dormitory at least one  semester. That   s an education in itself.  Yeah, it is.  You learn how to get along with different kinds of people with different  backgrounds and that   s important in life, that you learn that. You learn  to eat the dorm food even though it may not be what you had fixed if  you were cooking. And there was at least one winter season where I  organized a caroling group among the guys at Cordell Hall. We went  around and caroled to girl   s dorms and the sororities and so on.  Did you have a roommate?  Yes.  How did you two get along?  I had three different roommates.  15  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Three.  Three different ones during those two   well no three, I was in the dorm  three years because I was there two years my junior and senior years and  the third year was my first year as a graduate student, so I had three  different roommates. That was interesting. The first one I didn   t have  much in common with at all. The next year there was a young man that I  actually was one of the attendants of his wedding. We became very close  friends. I   ve lost touch with him, unfortunately. And the other one was a  graduate history major who was very interesting. We had a lot of  interests in common, even though he was in history and I was in  chemistry. Then the second year of my graduate work I moved out of the  dorm and found one of the little slums, small slum houses (laughs) that  students live in. This was just off the intersection of Washington and  Sixth Street, off of an alley there. He was a fellow that my mother taught  at Cushing his senior year and he ended up in the band, also playing  clarinet. We became fast friends and so we roomed together that final  year that I was here in Stillwater.  Wow. What was your social life like? What did you and your friends do  for fun as students here?  I was a nerd.  Nothing wrong with that.  Most of my social life revolved around music programs, basically. I  didn   t date a lot. But you know, it was movies, it was dances on what  used to be the patio outside of the student union before all of this other  stuff was built, and junior/senior proms when that came up. And I knew  most of the guys that played in a dance band that was called The Blue  Notes. Every time they played for a dance, I would have a date and we   d  go dancing and we   d listen to The Blue Notes. I   d get a kick out of  watching these guys that I played with in marching and concert bands  playing music for dancing. So that was neat. And movies, of course in  those days, were big.  What movies do you remember seeing?  Oh, I never can remember. I need my wife here because she can  remember things I can   t remember. Or if she can   t remember it, I do.  What   s the big one on the Civil War and Tara?  Gone With the Wind.  Gone With the Wind. Gone With The Wind was one of the big ones.  16  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Where did they play that?  There was a movie house down on Main Street on the east side down in  the main part of town, but the big one was on the northwest corner of  Main and what would that be Fifth Street? I can almost remember the  name of it, but I can   t. But anyway, I remember more movies that I   ve  seen in more recent years. Going back 50 years is hard to remember  movies.  Now, obviously you had to escape dorm food. So where would you guys  go eat?  Very seldom.  Very seldom?  Hideaway when it came into existence in    57, which is why whenever  we come back to Stillwater I   ve got to have a pizza at the Hideaway.  There you go. Now is it the same or is it different?  If you get the pizza that is made the way they made it originally, but that  depends. Of course, it   s in a different location than when it first started.  It was along the east/west street just south of where it is now and it was  just east of there. So you go down on the corner about half a block east  and it was on the south side of that street. The old dilapidated building  that I thought was going to fall down then, but it looks like they  refurbished it and put some other business in there now.  Yeah.  But that was a good gathering place. A good place to take dates and a  good place to meet friends and have pizza. That was the main thing. Of  course, there was no Eskimo Joe   s back then. My wife always  remembers the very first date that I had with her. I took her to a place  called Townhouse Restaurant. It was out on North Main, I can see where  it is, it   s the street that runs in front of, on the south side of, I think, I  think on the south side of Bennett Hall and all the way out to Main  Street. It   s in that area.  Yeah.  She was impressed that I had just gotten my paycheck for that  (Laughter) then I said,    Let   s go eat at the Townhouse.    But we didn   t  eat out a lot because money was not that plentiful. It costs money to eat  out and so     17  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  It still does.  I   d sometimes eat at the Student Union cafeteria or whatever.  Now your wife was an  OSU  student?  Yes.  How did you two meet?  She was in the Presbyterian student group in the Westminster  Foundation. I was in the Disciples group   the Christian church student  group. At the time we were here, nationally, those two student groups  along with the one from the United Church of Christ were in merger  discussions to form the United Campus Christian Fellowship. So we had  a number of joint meetings. That   s where I think, where I first     probably not where I first met her, but that   s where we became  interested in one another. Turns out that her two older sisters knew me  before my wife knew me because they were students at East Central and  were active in the band and orchestra programs when I was in the band  and orchestra programs. They remember me as one of those smart aleck  little high school kids that was playing in the college band and orchestra.  (Laughter) But yeah, it was primarily the religious organization and the  fact that we have similar views in terms of our religion and politics and  so on. That has been a major tie over the years.  What kind of activities did the University Religious Council do at that  time?  We were basically the undergirding organization for Religious Emphasis  Week. But while I was on the University Religious Council, we began a  speaker   s series that, I don   t know if went for more than one year or not.  I should have brought the book that would remind me of the fellow that  we had that I remember vividly. He was Episcopalian and also  somewhat of a journalist and wrote a number of books, some of which  we still have in our library, and I can   t remember his name. I   ll  remember it 30 minutes after we end this interview and I apologize for  that. But we got that going and the talks were held in the Bennett  Chapel.  Another thing that I took on and I don   t think I really succeeded, they  used to keep the Bennett Chapel locked except when there were  activities going. I felt that if they were going to have the Bennett Chapel  on the campus, it should be open and available to students who just  wanted to go in and meditate, or whatever.  18  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Yeah.  But the powers that be didn   t think that was wise. Perhaps they were  right, but that was one crusade of many that I didn   t win over the years.  Is there any special place on campus that you think fondly of that you  remember more so than others as you walk around   that you get special  feelings thinking about?  Oh, the north side of Willard Hall where my wife   not then, we weren   t  married, but where she lived as a student and where I took her after dates  before she had to be in. No, the girls had to be in by ten o   clock, maybe  earlier on week days, I can   t remember. But she was on the O   Collegian  staff and because people on the staff had to proof read the paper and     put it to bed    was the term they used, and she often drew that  responsibility. I would sometimes go help and sometimes that didn   t get  finished until after the deadline, but anyway that was okay. And of  course, Theta Pond.  Okay.  I guess that   s a special place for most students. Other than that the place  where the band and orchestra rehearsed, which is no longer there. We  rehearsed in the upper floor of the old library building which is about     here   . It was torn down before this alumni center was built. We were  told that the west half of that was condemned, and we often wondered if  we played a loud enough note that the whole building (laughter) would  come tumbling down like the walls of Jericho. But yeah, that   s special.  We had a room where the Kappa Kappa Psi chapter met downstairs next  to Hiram Henry   s office and we played a lot of wonderful and very  challenging music in the concert and symphonic bands up there; a lot of  fond memories, a lot of neat people that I remember. Some of whom are  gone now, but that   s a good place in my memory.  Can you share more of your memories of Hiram Henry since he just  recently passed?  Yeah, I told somebody that he was truly a gentleman. He was a very  good band director and really worked well with students. He had  something about him that made you want to do your best. And we did.  He got things out of that band that would sometimes surprise me. In  those days, there was less music written expressly for band, so we  played a lot of orchestral transcriptions and being a clarinet player the  music we got was usually violin music. It was transcribed for clarinet,  but it was originally written for violin. Whereas violinists can sit and  move the bow very fast for those fast passages, clarinet players have to  19  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  tongue and finger and it wasn   t easy, but those were challenges that were  very beneficial for those of us that were in it. He challenged us and did it  in a very kind way.  But my favorite story of Hiram Henry was one time when we were  accompanying the football program to Norman when they played OU  and we were sitting on the sidelines, the band usually sat on the sidelines  in those days. Apparently I was upset with the referees for not calling  some rather rough behavior by the OU players. (Laughter) So I was up  yelling and screaming at the referees. Hiram always carried with him   I  don   t know where this started, I don   t know why   but he always carried  with him a box of Luden   s Cough Drops and he would occasionally  take   one other thing I remember, he always wore suspenders   but  anyway he took one of those Luden   s Cough Drops out of the box and  he just came over to me and handed me a Luden   s Cough Drop.  (Laughter) He didn   t need to say,    Shut up and sit down.    I knew what  that was about, so I went    Okay.    Very fond memories I shall always  treasure.  We were here overnight   my wife and I, three, four, five years ago     can   t remember exactly when it was   we didn   t have anything to do for  the afternoon so we were in the motel room.    I think I   ll call Hiram  Henry and see if he   s home and see if I might go over and visit with  him.    I hadn   t seen him for a number of years. He always remembered  student   s names. I swear that man, I don   t know how he remembered our  names but he did. And sure he was home and so I went over and we  must have talked for an hour and a half. Talked about some of the guys  that were in the band when I was and what he was doing and I   ll always  treasure that really last time I had to visit with him.  How did he motivate his students? Is there a technique that he used?  Was he the forceful guy or was he more of the loving father?  Well as I said, I honestly refer to him as being a gentle man and he  was   I wouldn   t call him forceful at all. His personality, the gentle way  in which he handled things, but he made it clear what kind of behavior  he expected and so on. Then he gave us music that was very challenging  to play and work on.  Like what kind of music?  Well, one piece   two pieces that I remember very vividly. One year for  a concert we played a piece by Wagner called    Siegfried   s Rhine  Journey    which had a very difficult part for clarinets. Probably for other  instruments as well, but I didn   t know about those and the fellow we had  lunch with today, Bill Varnum, and I and another good buddy Dick  20  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Mears really struggled. We struggled learning that music because it was  very hard, but we were very pleased with the way it finally turned out.  Then another one was a transcription for the finale of one of  Tchaikovsky   s Symphonies and that was really tough. I remember those  vividly.  We played    Till Eulenspiegel   s Merry Pranks.    But I remember that one  because Frank Ross who was, for a number of years, in the ticket office  over at the athletic department after he retired from the music thing,  played French horn and I remember him as a fine French horn player.  He was a little upset because the band transcription for the orchestral  music modified the French horn solo a little bit and he wanted to play it  the way the orchestral music was played. I think Hiram let him play it  that way, if I remember correctly. I remember that piece of music. And I  listened to a lot of music that   s played on the public radio stations.  Every once in a while there will come a piece that I have played and I  was telling my friend awhile ago that every time I hear orchestras play     The Trumpeter   s Lullaby    by Leroy Anderson, I think of Bob Pyle,  Marshall Metz, and I   ll think of the other guy shortly. There was a  trumpet trio we had, a wonderful trumpet section that we had. So that   s  like meeting old friends when I hear music that we played in the OSU  band. It   s like meeting an old friend because it brings back memories of  those guys that I played with.  Now for you, what   s the greater drive: mastering an orchestra piece or  mastering a chemical equation? Just curious. Or do you get the same joy  out of each?  I think I   d say it was the same. Yeah, I guess so. That   s a joy that is  different from the joy of just having fun. It   s really as much fun, really  to accomplish things that are really hard.  Yeah.  I remember a speech that John F. Kennedy made one time when he said,     We choose to do these things not because they are easy, but because  they are hard.    You really get satisfaction out of that. Either way,  whether it   s chemistry, math, or music, whatever the field. Statistics in  business I am sure you get the same kind of satisfaction, so.  Now how did attending OSU impact your life?  Oh wow, I met my wife here. (Laughter) Lots of good friends. Lots of  good music. Lots of good memories. Then when I went to Purdue I was  competing with students from places like MIT and I wondered,    Did the  21  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  education that I got at  OSU  prepare me well enough to compete with  students from those more prestigious universities?    I discovered that it  did. I was doing as well in the courses as they were. It was really my  time here, the last year or year and a half when I began to reassess my  real professional goals and that   s when I decided to go into university  teaching as opposed to industrial research. So OSU has been very  important and then the fact that we had a son come and go to school here  and be a success in what he does. That   s been important, also.  So three generations of Deckers through  OSU ?  I guess that   s right. My father and his brother and my mother and me  and my wife and our middle son all have. He   s got two boys so maybe  we can convince one of them to come here to go to school. (Laughter)  But that   s their choice.  Yeah.  It   s just like when our middle son decided he was gonna go somewhere  and go into computer science or into computer engineering. We visited  the University of Texas, we visited Oklahoma State, and I think he  looked at one or two others. Quite frankly, I would have chosen the  University of Texas after we visited down there, because they were  doing some interesting extracurricular things that I wasn   t sure he was  going to have the opportunity to do here, but he felt much more  comfortable with OSU and that was fine.  What advice would you give students today from your experience,  whether it be as a student, as a former student or as a professor?  I think one thing that is very important is to, as you look at where you  might go to college your last couple of years of high school, you need to  look at your abilities and how well you can learn, pretty much on your  own or whether you   re going to need some additional help from faculty  members. If you   re going to need additional help from faculty members,  you probably ought to go to a school where the class sizes are smaller  where you have more access to the faculty member, but you ought to  make sure that you   ve got good faculty members in whatever areas that  you   re going to study. But if you can learn pretty much on your own  with minimal, private help from faculty, then go to the big universities.  But two things, number one if you go to a big university or small, I  think, you   re wise if you find some way of making a group of friends  rather quickly and friends that have similar interests and goals, to yours.  And then, work hard, study hard. And don   t take courses just because  they   re easy, because some of the hard courses you   ll look back on and  say,    Oh, that was really worth while even though it was tough.     22  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Is there anything that you would like to add to this interview that we  haven   t discussed?  Yeah, there is. There   s a story that I have told a number of people and I  won   t mention    When I was in school here in Arts and Sciences we  had to take two semesters of a course called Humanities and that was a  very valuable course in terms of general education, broad education. We  had two large sessions a week, as I recall, where all the students met in a  big lecture hall and we had small seminar classes that met with maybe  25-30 students. The professor I had in one of those courses was an  agnostic philosophy professor. He did more to challenge my religious  thinking than just about anybody to the extent that   I had that class at  eleven o   clock and I must have had indigestion after lunch each day  because I had to struggle and make my religious views my own rather  than what my parents had taught me.  That experience probably changed me as much as about anything that I  experienced at OSU. In those days when I was taking that class, I  thought it was awful, but I look back on it now and realize that even  though he probably should have been spending more time on the  material that we were reading, what he did for me was valuable.  His  name was Millard S. Everett.   He challenged you?  Yeah, I had to start as my mother-in-law said,    Working out my own  salvation.    I had to start thinking,    Okay, what is it about your faith that  you believe that you really think is worth hanging on to, in spite of some  of the things you   re hearing from your professor.    If I hadn   t had him     and then there was a math class that I had, my second calculus course.  The man couldn   t teach math very well at all, I didn   t think. So I had to  teach myself and I found out that I could do that and that was valuable.  Those were two things that happened here at OSU that were extremely  helpful to me for the rest of my life, because when I started teaching I  had to continue to learn I was in a field that continues to just explode,  biochemistry. And I could not, in my fifth year, teach what I knew in my  first year. I had to learn a bunch of stuff that had been discovered in the  interim.  Then there was the wind tunnel between the library and engineering hall.  (Laughter) In the winter, the wind out of the north was twenty miles an  hour; I was walking between the library and the engineering building  going north back to Cordell Hall, back to my room (laughter) and oh,  that was bitter. You   d have to walk about a 45 degree angle because it  was just like a wind tunnel, all the wind coming and hitting those two  23  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  Sherman  Decker  buildings would just funnel down through between the library and the  engineering building and that   s a strong memory still.  But those were good days. There were times when you would think,    I  don   t know what   s going on.    But you look back and    but it was a  good education that I got here   not only in the classroom, but outside of  the classroom as well.  Yes, and that   s sometimes the most important education you can get.  Yeah, certainly equally important. Yeah.  Anything else you would like to add that     Just one. (Laughter) The last time that my son marched on the field the  alumni band came and that was when they took marchers on the field  with the band. I got out my old clarinet, had it refurbished, practiced  some and got out there and marched on the field with him   that was a  treasure.  That   s very neat.  Yeah.  I just want to thank you for your time today.  You   re welcome.  I appreciate you coming in. It will definitely add to our knowledge of  OSU.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
