 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, December 6, 2007 and I   m at the El Reno  Carnegie Library in El Reno, Oklahoma. I am interviewing Peggy  Piersall. This interview is being conducted as part of O-STATE Stories,  an oral history project of the OSU Library. Thank you for joining us  today.  You   re welcome.  Well let   s begin. Tell me a little bit about yourself   where are you from?  I   m from El Reno. I was born here, but lived in Germany for a year and  Colorado Springs and went to school at OSU.  Okay. And tell me the years you attended.  I think from 1950 to    54 and then I was out two years and went back in     56.  Okay.  Graduated in    56.  And what was your major?  Elementary ed.  Now, tell me a little bit about your parents. Did your parents have  college educations?  No, they both graduated from high school, but no.  And what did they do for their profession?  5  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  My dad had a dairy and then he also sheriff for eight years in Canadian  County.  And your mom?  She worked as a sales person in clothing.  Did you grow up on a farm?  Yes.  What types of things did you have on your farm?  Lots of cattle (Laughs) and I always had to keep the cattle out of the  corn. (Laughs) So     How did you do that?  Oh well I just   they didn   t have a fence between the wheat and the corn  so I had to just ride   be sure they stayed where they were supposed to,  you know? On my horse.  What was your favorite activity on the farm?  Riding my horse. (Laughs) In fact, I took my horse to college.  Really?  Yeah.  What was your horse   s name?  Honey.  Where did you store Honey? (Laughter) I   m not sure what the  agriculture term is.  I don   t think it   s store. I had her on a pasture outside of Stillwater.  What   s the term?  Board?  Board? There we go. (Laughs) Did you ride her often?  When I was in high school I did. But after I got to OSU, I didn   t have  6  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  that much time to ride her so I just kept her there for a semester.  Now, tell me about some of the classes you remember taking.  (Laughs) Well I   ll tell you about my history class.  Okay.  Oklahoma History   Governor Gary was going to come to visit the  campus and was going to be on stage. And so my professor said,     Peggy, if you   ll wear your cowgirl hat and boots and stuff and be on the  stage with Governor Gary, you won   t have to take your final.    So that   s  what I did. (Laughs)  That   s nice.  They wanted a representative from all the clubs and so that   s what he  wanted me to do, so I guess I made history.  What club did you represent that day?  Rodeo Club.  Were there a lot of female members of the Rodeo Club?  I would say a third, maybe almost a half were. Probably just a third.  What were some of the activities you were involved with, with the Rodeo  Club?  Well they would attend the college rodeos and I was in the Block and  Bridle rodeo and I was in the goat tying event. I didn   t win, (Laughs) but  it was fun.  Was goat tying your specialty?  No, barrel racing was my specialty but they didn   t have it.  Barrel racing. How did you learn to barrel race and goat tie?  Well actually that was the first time I goat tied. (Laughs) But I barrel  raced when I was in high school and it was fun. My dad would take me  and after every time he   d tell me,    Well next time we   re going to do  this.    One time we were coming home after I didn   t win and he said,    I  think we need to get you some spurs.    So he got me some spurs and my  horse was always ready to go. So when we left I spurred him and I mean  7  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  he literally jumped about 40 miles and almost lost me. I didn   t win. But  my dad said,    I know one thing, next time we   re going to throw those  darn spurs away.    (Laughs) So I wasn   t great but I had fun.  Do you still keep in touch with any members of the Rodeo Club?  Yeah, in fact it   s real funny. Jim Ward was a rodeo clown and I hadn   t  seen him since college days. I do artwork and so I was in an art show in  Texas and the booth next to me was Jim Ward. He   s a painter too   Wow.  So I saw him then and we had a good talk.  Now I   m not very familiar with rodeos, so you have to forgive me. But  even back then they had rodeo clowns?  Oh, honey, they had rodeo clowns years before that. (Laughter) Do you  know what the rodeo clown   s job is?  No.  Okay, when a guy gets bucked off, the rodeo clown comes and runs and  gets in front of the bull to try to distract him so he won   t gore the rider.  Were students rodeo clowns? I mean in the Rodeo Club?  Yes, he was.  Oh wow, that   s impressive.  Yes, he was.  And dangerous.  The sad thing was my son turned out to be a bull rider but when he got  married he finally stopped. (Laughs) I   d go to the rodeo to watch him  and when they called his name, I   d go to the car. (Laughs)  It   s dangerous too. It   s a very dangerous sport.  Yes it   s very dangerous.  Well what were some of the buildings you took classes in, do you  remember?  8  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Old Central was one. The Field House. I don   t remember the names of  the others. Of course, I remember the Student Union.  Would you hang out in the Student Union?  Yes.  What would you do there?  Drink coffee.  Do you remember what floor?  It was on the main floor. They had dances at the Student Union, too.  Do you remember those dances?  Sadie Hawkins Dance.  Do you remember the music?  It was by a student band.  Do you remember where the dances were held?  Up on the top floor, I believe.  Where did you live while you were in school?  Stout Hall.  Stout Hall? Tell me about living in Stout Hall. What was that like?  It was fun. I lived on the fourth floor and we were all a close group. We  called ourselves the    Fourth Floor Posse.    (Laughs) And I was proctor,  so I checked the other floors too. I also worked in the office.  Now as proctor, what were   outside of checking the floors   what were  some of your other jobs? What did you have to do?  I would   in those days, I was an elevator operator. And then I worked in  the office and put the mail away in the boxes. I would also buzz the  girl   s rooms when they had company.  Tell me about operating the elevator.  9  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Well they had this little handle, and you pushed it down or you pushed it  the other way to go up. And they   d tell you what floor they wanted to be  on.  Did you have to get it just right to stop it?  Yes.  Did you have any social activities in the dorm? Did they hold any  dances or     No, not in the dorm. I represented Stout Hall in the Miss Stillwater  contest.  Do you remember your dorm mother?  Mrs. Scott.  What was she like?  Oh, she was the sweetest thing.  Was she an enforcer?  She was like the mother. (Laughs) And Mrs. Phillips. They were both  real good.  Do you remember having a curfew?  Do I. (Laughter) Yes, we had a curfew. We had to be in by 8 o   clock and  then it was study hall and you couldn   t even be out in the halls. You had  to be in your room studying. And you had to check out over the weekend  if you were going to be out of town or what you were going to do. One  time I went to a movie in Perry, I think it was, and I didn   t sign out. We  had a wreck.  This guy hit on the passenger side (Laughs) where I was. We didn   t get  home when we were supposed to. I don   t know, maybe it was just 30  minutes late or forty or something like that. Mrs. Scott and Mrs. Phillips  were both standing there at the door and I thought I   d had it. They said,     Oh hurry and get in here.    They didn   t do anything to me. They were  glad to see me.  Well that   s good.  So that   s curfews but I only did that once.  10  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  What would happen to somebody if they were to break curfew?  I don   t know if they would be turned in or what. But it would be  something like that. They would be turned into the dean or whatever.  How did you do you laundry?  Down in the basement they had a washer and dryer.  Do you have a favorite memory living in the dorm?  You want to hear a funny one?  Sure.  (Laughs) Well after I got engaged to my husband   pinned   he was in  Acacia and he was right across the street. And so he and his friend came  over and they hollered at me. They hollered at the window,    Peggy   Peggy  Come out, come out     I said,    I can   t come out.    I mean, it   s  about 10 o   clock or whatever. I said,    I can   t come out.    And so Dean  said,    Just jump.    And the guy next to him says,    She can   t do that.     And he said,    Don   t worry I have my hands in my pocket.     I take it you did not jump.  No.  That   s good, that   s good. How did you get from home in Canadian  County to Stillwater?  Do you mean why did I decide to go there?  How did you travel?  Transportation? With a friend usually. There were a bunch of people  from El Reno.  And they had cars?  And they had cars so I   d just ride with them.  Did a lot of people have cars back then?  Oh, I   d say parking lots were full so I guess they did. But I didn   t.  What activities were you most involved in on campus?  11  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Oh, Baptist Student Union and church, but it wasn   t on campus. I went  to the First Baptist Church in Stillwater.  At the BSU, what type of activities would you     They would have parties, too. And they had vespers every night.  Tell me about this donkey basketball game. I   m very interested to hear  about the donkey basketball game.  (Laughs) Well that was once in a lifetime. But was it the WAVES   Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service . The WAVES  were on campus at the time and they challenged us to the donkey  basketball game. They were pretty big girls. I had this real nice, big girl  join our team. The donkeys had pads on their hooves; you   re supposed  to ride them and they walk back and forth toward the goal. You have to  shoot when they   re under the goal. So a lot of us fell off and a lot of us  had to pull our donkeys around because they wouldn   t mind. Anyway, to  make a long story short, we won two to nothing and I made the goal.  Where did you get the donkeys?  Well these companies come in and   we didn   t go pick out our donkeys.  They come in. They had the boys play too. The donkeys were just little  donkeys. But they wouldn   t move like you wanted them to.  Now how did you get involved with the Board of Publications? Tell me  about that.  Well it was an office you ran for and they just asked me to run. So that   s  how it was. And we would have board meetings probably once a month.  What was your group responsible for governing?  Well like we would have to approve the budget or they would discuss  different things like the campus newspaper and publications. It was just  like a business meeting.  Do you remember Homecoming back then? What it was like? Could you  tell me about it? Parades or house decorations or     All of the above.  All of the above? Could you describe it for me?  Well there were always pretty floats. They would always work on them  12  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  for days and days and days to finish them. I always went to the football  games. The frat houses were decorated and we had a big parade.  Really? What was that like?  When we won, it was wonderful. (Laughs)  Did a lot of people attend games?  It was always full. But of course, the stadium wasn   t as large as it is  now.  Do you remember any campus traditions?  You realize it   s been over fifty years?  I know, I know.  (Laughs) Oh, well pep rallies. They   d always have pep rallies.  Did you remember any basketball games?  Oh, I never missed a game. (Laughs)  How did you get tickets?  Well, in those days, (Laughs) you got them when you enrolled. You had  to pay for them but you got season tickets when you enrolled. And you  could go to all the games with your season ticket   football and  basketball.  Was seating widely available?  Yes. I mean, it was crowded but I always found a place to sit.  Outside of campus, do you remember any hang outs you liked to go to?  Up at Campus Corner, which is right across from   it used to be across  from the Fire Station out there on the corner.  What would you do there?  Drink coffee. (Laughs)  Lots of coffee.  13  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Just a hang out.  Lots of coffee drinking back then.  Yes.  Did you go on many dates?  Yes.  Tell me about a typical date. What would you do?  Oh, probably go to the movie.  Where was the movie at?  It was downtown.  Do you remember the name of the theater?  No, it seems like it started with an L.  The Leachman?  Leachman, yes.  Did they have one screen or two screens or   ?  One.  Okay. Now on campus, outside of the Student Union, would you gather  any other place?  The BSU   the Baptist Student Union   it was off-campus.  With your friends, what did you do for fun?  Well I guess all those things I   ve mentioned.  Did your parents visit you a lot when you were in school?  Not a lot but they did occasionally.  Did you go home a lot?  Oh, about once every couple of months. When I was first there, first  14  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  enrolled, everyone was going home the first weekend. And I thought,     Oh no, I   m not going.    So I didn   t go till the third but it was really hard  on me. And when I came over the hill and saw El Reno I almost cried.  (Laughs) But after that, you know after I got involved in things at school  and didn   t go home as often.  Why did you decide to attend Oklahoma A M?  That   s just what I always wanted to do. And I also got a little  scholarship. But I was going to do that before anyway.  And why education?  Because I love kids.  Tell me about your husband. How did you meet your husband?  (Laughs) Well I was working in the office and he came to pick up a girl.  He had to buzz for them and they would come down. She was late and  he said,    I know you.    And I said,    No you don   t.    And he said,    Yes, I  do.    Then he started singing to me. So then she came down and they  went out and so then a couple of days later a friend of mine said,    Dean  wants to know if he called and asked you to go out for coffee, would you  go?    I said,    Yes.    And so then it was about a week before he called.  We went together for three months and we got married. And I knew my  mother wouldn   t like that. (Laughs) So we were going to elope. So we  had it all planned. We were going to elope in February and my  roommate was going to   I was going to act like I signed out to go home  with my roommate. And about two or three weeks before the time came,  she said,    Peggy I   m not going to let you elope. I   m going to tell your  mother.    And so I had to tell Mother. We got married in a church  wedding in El Reno. But Mother said,    No, you can   t get married.  You   re too young.    And my dad said,    She   ll always be too young for  you.    So anyway, I got married.  Well that   s nice.  And then we came back and went to school.  What was his major?  Engineering   geology and engineering.  What year did he graduate?  15  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  I guess it was    57; I don   t know if it was    56 or    57. But he graduated  after I did. And then he was manager of the turnpike, of the Oklahoma  Turnpike for eight years and he worked in engineering. He was chief  engineer.  Wonderful.  But he passed away in    94. We had been married 41 years.  Do you remember some teachers in education that were very influential  to you?  I remember her face but I can   t think of her name. She was real  enthusiastic. A little teacher. She was enthusiastic and taught art.  What types of classes did you take for your major that you can  remember?  Well you take the basics the first two years, basics with science and  biology and for that I had to take music class where I had to learn to play  the piano, which I never did really. (Laughter) And history, math,  geography, teacher education classes.  Did you have to do any student teaching?  Yes.  Where did you do that at?  In Stillwater.  In Stillwater, okay. What was that like?  It was fun. I taught second grade.  Did the students respond well to you? What subjects did you teach?  Yes, they did. I taught reading and math, mostly.  Do you remember the name of your school you did your student teaching  in?  No, I should go back and look up all of that.  That   s okay, that   s okay. Is there a place on campus that holds a special  place in your heart?  16  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Well, I suppose Stout Hall and then the Field House.  Why?  I guess because I made so many friends. I enjoyed all the games and  events.  How did you feel about when the school changed its name from A M to  OSU?  I didn   t   like I said, I didn   t feel one way or another but I decided I  would graduate from A M. I understand why they changed because  university sounds more powerful than college.  Do you try to make it back to Stillwater for Homecoming or have you  visited in the last 50 years?  Yes, I   ve been back for Homecoming. In fact, both of my daughters  graduated from OSU so I   d go back then. And my son went three years  but he didn   t graduate. So we   re an OSU family.  You have lots of orange in your blood.  Oh yes. But my grandson was   this year  2007    a Merit Scholar and  the sad thing is, he   s going to OU. (Laughter)  Well I guess we have to forgive him.  But he got a big scholarship so I forgave him for that. Money counts I  guess.  I   ve noticed that alumni and students from OSU and A M have such  great loyalty. What do you think sparks that loyalty?  I just think, even the campus is so much different than other schools.  Because everyone just feels friendly. I think that   s it. And I think OSU  fans are different than the other school, you know? (Laughs) Because  our team can lose and lose and lose, we don   t care. We   re still backing  them. That other team, the other ones, they just walk out if they don   t  win.  Oh yeah.  So I don   t know what makes us so loyal. I guess we   re for the underdog.  Catch me up, after you graduate from A M, what did you end up doing  17  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  between then and now? Tell me about what career you went on to and     I taught school in Yukon  Oklahoma  for 27 years. And then when I  retired in    83 because of health problems, since then I   ve taken up art.  And so I have been doing watercolor and oils and going to shows and  things like that. And then before I graduated, did I tell you that we went  to Germany?  No, you need to tell me a little bit about that.  When my husband was going overseas, I had a little girl, Patty, and then  I was expecting my son. So he flew over there first and then I took Patty  and flew over. Then my son was born in Frankfurt  Germany . I was  there for about a year and when we came back I went back to school.  Then after I graduated, I taught school in Yukon.  Did you teach high school or elementary school?  Well first I taught junior high for three years. Then I went back to  elementary.  How long did you teach elementary?  24 years.  A nice long career in education?  Yes, I enjoyed it.  What advice would you give to students today?  If they have any chance at all, go to OSU. (Laughs) They won   t regret it.  Is there anything that I have not asked you about that you want to share  with us today? Tell us about your time on campus? I totally missed?  Oh, I think you had on there something about Theta Pond?  Yes.  Well, at Easter time this boy gave me a baby duck and I snuck it into the  dorm. And it would follow me. It thought I was its mother, you know? I  kept it for a while. As it got bigger I thought it should go to Theta Pond.  And I felt so sad because when I turned it loose it still wanted to come  with me. (Laughs)  18  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Wilson  Piersall  Wilson  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Did you visit it often?  No, because it would want to come with me. I had to walk by Theta  Pond everyday to go to classes. But as far as   I guess that   s all Theta  means to me.  Were your classes spread out over campus?  Yes.  Do you remember when the new Library was built?  It was there when I was a freshman.  Did you spend any time in the Library?  Yes, a lot.  What do you remember about the Library?  Well it was built before   let me think, when was it built? It must have  been built before I got there. But it was brand new.  What floors do you remember studying on or is there anything you could  describe for me about it?  No, I did a lot of studying there but I don   t remember the floors.  Any questions?  Nykolaiszyn asks of O-STATE Stories Project member  Latasha Wilson who now joins the interview   Was it a challenge to be married and be a student?  I made better grades after I married.  What about when you had children?  But when I had children   in fact, I was called in because I   d go home  every weekend. My oldest one wasn   t quite two and then I had the  young one, and I just missed them so much. My mother kept them, and  then I   d go home every weekend. So my adviser said,    Now you   ve got  to buckle down. You can   t miss that much.    (Laughs) But that was the  hard part.  When you were married and you returned from Germany with your  family, where did you live?  19  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Piersall  Nykolaiszyn  Oh we lived, in fact, do you know where Eskimo Joe   s is?  Yes.  Well that used to be a grocery store and my husband used to work there.  And then our apartment when we were first married was right across  from there. It was in a house and we had three great big rooms and it  was nice. But when we came back, we were in a one bedroom at the  same place behind that where you had to pull out your bed, you know  (Laughs) from the wall. It was one room. (Laughs) And it was  40  dollars a month, so it was a pretty good price.  Well we do appreciate you taking time out to share your memories of  campus. It   s been very interesting learning about the donkey basketball.  I don   t think I   ve ever, ever heard of that. Although, I will say     Oh they have donkey baseball too. Where they have to hit and have to  run to the base.  That   s crazy. And I will say, today is the first day I   ve heard from     you   re my second elevator operator. But I haven   t, to this point,  interviewed anybody who operated an elevator before today coming to  El Reno which I find just immensely interesting.  You don   t hear it too much.  What about telephones? Where were the telephones in the hall?  Yes. My room was right next door and then they   d yell for you when  you had a call.  Who would grab it? Just the closest person?  Just whoever would answer the phone going down the hall.  Wow, nice. Okay. Well if you don   t have anything else you   d like to add,  we   d like to thank you very much for coming out today and sharing your  memories of campus and we thank you very much.  You   re very welcome. Thank you, Juliana.  Thank you.  -------  -------   
