 Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Today is Friday, October 19, 2007 and my name is Karen Neurohr. I   m  with the OSU Library and we   re at the OSU Alumni Center. I   d like for  you to each introduce yourselves for us please today.  I   m Sue Pierson.  And I   m James H. Pierson.  And you all are back for Homecoming this weekend. Tell me a little bit  about yourselves. About where you were raised and what year you  graduated from OAMC.  Well, I attended high school in Harrison, Arkansas and graduated there.  Then I attended Arkansas State Teacher   s College, which is now  University of Central Arkansas in Conway. My parents were both school  teachers and they wanted me, since I was majoring in home economics,  to come to OSU. So at the end of my sophomore year I transferred to  Oklahoma State.  Did you know anyone here when you came?  No one.  Tell them why you came.  Well maybe you need to tell them. Why did I come?  Well you told me that your folks wanted you to get the best home  economics education that you could get.  5  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  James, where were you raised?  Well, I was born in Ottawa, Kansas. Went to school there till fourth  grade, I think. I can   t remember, and moved to Nowata in about 1941     the summer or spring of    41. And then went to school and graduated  from Nowata. I came to Oklahoma A M because my mother belonged  to a home demonstration club and she got me a tuition scholarship for a  year    48 a semester. That included basketball tickets also   included  everything and so I came to Stillwater. The main thing I got was a big  picture of Pistol Pete and put it on the side of my suitcase and hitch-hiked  to travel back and forth. And it worked very well. In those days,  1949, after World War II, there still weren   t all that many cars and we  still had trains and buses because we didn   t have any money.  Where did you get that picture of Pistol Pete from?  I think up here by the fire station there used to be a general merchandise  type   Five and Dime we used to call them. It was one of those where  you put water on it, a great big one, filled a suitcase. In those days you  generally hitchhiked from one town to the other   Cleveland to Hominy  and just kept on coming till you finally hit Nowata. We moved to a farm  in    48, five miles west of Nowata. I had a lot of brothers and sisters. And  two brothers came here. One transferred to Oklahoma University. Bill,  my next brother, had gotten out of the Army in    48 and he came to  A M and went to school, took soils and agronomy. So I had joined the  National Guard to help get money to go through school and then we got  nationalized to get to go to Korea. When I came back from Korea, I had  the G.I. Bill and I started out in agriculture and that wasn   t my forte so  then I switched to chemical engineering, which I graduated with in    57.  Sue, did your parents bring you to school here and then drop you off?  How did you get here when you came?  (Laughs) No, actually they gave me a    55 Chevy and it barely would  run. Every time we came up on a hill, it would chug and almost die.  (Laughs) But I had a car and I drove myself and checked myself in.  And where did you live?  The first summer I lived in   what? It   s gone.  Willard?  No.  Murray?  6  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  Murray. In summer school I lived in Murray. And in the fall semester I  lived in Willard and lived there until I graduated, which was not too long  after that really.  And you said that your parents really wanted you to come here because  of the program that they had and so would you say that it had a national  reputation during that time period?  Definitely. Definitely.  So can you talk about that a little bit?  Well, I majored in vocational home economics. And it was a  requirement that we had to meet in the home of all of our students. So  the first year I taught, I had to visit all of my students in their home. That  would be like   goodness, I had six classes and there were about 30 to  40 in each class. And those home visits had to be made because it was a  vocational home economics program.  How old were the students?  Junior high. I taught junior high the first year. And then we were married  at the end of     The first year teaching in Broken Arrow. That first year you taught in  Broken Arrow.  So that was    55.     55 to    56. We got married in    56.  So when you did the home visits, that was part of your education? The  educational program?  It was a requirement, a state requirement.  And when you went into the homes, what did you look for? Did you just  visit with the parents? What was that like?  Well I visited with the parent and tried to make them feel comfortable  about her daughter being in the class. I didn   t have any boys. The boys  took home economics in high school. It was a good relationship because  if there was a problem you could discuss it. If there wasn   t, you could  praise the child and give a good feeling.  Did you have additional contact with the parents outside of the visits?  7  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Well, when I went to teach in Broken Arrow, there was a program where  the junior high home-making teacher had always given a dinner for the  Braden Winch Company in Broken Arrow and the girls served it. The  cooks in the school cooked and the young girls served. So then it was  my job to teach them how and to (Laughs) make them feel comfortable  doing it. It was something they enjoyed doing and it was good rapport  with the community.  Broken Arrow was 3,700 probably at that time. That was its population.  Oh, about like your town is now.  We used to play them in football, that   s why.  That   s interesting. Well I   d like to hear about some of the classes that  you took here. Do any classes stick out in your memory or any  professors that you had, in particular, for what you were studying?  My favorite was organic chemistry and Ms. Gerber taught it. She was  fantastic. She was really outstanding and it was so interesting because  she taught about the chemicals that are in foods and how they   re affected  by cooking. Well, to me it was interesting because I liked chemistry and  it just dealt with things that I dealt with in cooking.  Was your class just all women?  No, no. There were a few fellas in it. But I took it in summer school and  there were fewer men in it then.  Okay, did you have a particular class?  Yes I did. It was Dr. Johnson in organic chemistry. I think the chemistry  building was about right here  the location of the Alumni Center ,  wasn   t it? The old chemistry building?  I think it was in this area.  Right here, in this area. We had about 100 students as I remember. We  had a big amphitheater type of thing   big in those days. And then of  course, we had an organic chemistry lab once a week for four hours   1  to 5.  I always remember we were making these chemicals and working and  all of a sudden we got this white powder and Dr. Johnson says,    That   s  salicylic acid,    which didn   t mean a thing to us. We said,    What   s that?     He said,    Aspirin.    And that was the first class I had ever taken down  8  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  here where I found out that there was some reality between school and  actually making something. But that continued on in the chemistry  classes and chemical engineering, engineering classes.  So how did you two meet then?  That   s a sad story. (Laughing) I had gone one year in    49 and    50 and  then I went in the Army and I came back, and let   s see, I started back in  the fall of    52 and    53. I realized that I wasn   t made out to be a soil  student. So I decided I   d switch to chemical engineering. I just had one  problem, I hadn   t taken any math. So I had to take dumb-bell math that  summer. When they say dumb-bell that means you don   t get credit for it.  It was non-credited. And so I met Sue in summer school because she  went straight through. She didn   t take summer breaks. And boy, just  kept going with each other and     Met at the Student Union.  Do you remember   was there a dance or was there an event you met at?  Well, there weren   t a lot of students on campus that summer. So after we  finished   my friends and I, after we finished studying at the library,  went over to the Union and up to the top floor. And at that time, you  could dance at the top of the Student Union. That   s how we met. He  asked me to dance and that was it.  Oh.  Mm-hmm. We might like to add that at that year the temperature got to  113  degrees  and the campus had three air conditioned buildings,  Student Union, Library and the new Classroom Building. So we spent all  the time we could either in the Student Union or the Library until they  chased us out.  They chased you out of the Library?  At ten o   clock.  It closed.  At ten o   clock they closed?  I don   t know if they still do that but in those days   did you have to be in  at a certain time in that year?  I think ten o   clock, wasn   t it?  9  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Yes, yes. Very strict on those hours in those days.  Or was it 10:30?  Ten o   clock. That   s what I remember.  What else do you remember about the Library?  Well I remember I loved it because of all the books that were in there  and the variety of reading. I could go in and if I had an hour between a  class or whatever, you   d get through with your studies and then read all  these different books on everything.  Mm-hmm. What do you remember about the Library?  How wonderfully cool it was. (Laughter) It was a good place to study.  Quiet and     And we used it.  Were there librarians on every floor if you needed help that you could  ask for help? Do you remember?  I don   t remember having trouble getting help but I don   t remember if  there were librarians on every floor.  I think surely there was at least one person on every floor.  Must have. If we need books   in those days, a lot of our chemical  engineering projects would be four of us chemical engineers getting  together and doing a project and there would be five groups of four each.  We always did those in the Library because that   s the only place we had  the books too.  So was the Library a very quiet place? Did you have to be very quiet  when you were working with a group on your projects?  Oh my goodness, yes. In those days, you go in   well, you go in the  Nowata Library and you think you   re on Fifth Avenue in New York  City. But in those days it was no talking, no loud noises.  So if you got a little too loud, what would happen?  Oh, they would come tell you to be quiet.  10  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Okay, so you met at a dance in the Student Union. What other activities  were you involved in when you were students here? Sue?  I really wasn   t active in anything else because I pledged a sorority at  Conway and it was National. It didn   t have a chapter here so I didn   t  take part in any of the Greek activities. I was going through so fast I  didn   t have time for much of anything other than study and go to class.  Okay.  Activities that I was involved in basically would have been a Veteran   s  Club. We started a Veteran   s Club on campus.  What was the Veteran   s Club?  Well mostly we were Korean Veterans, but it was for anyone who had  been in the service. The G.I. Bill was really used in that day. We had a  lot of Veterans on the campus. The World War II Veterans were  basically gone and then the Korean Veterans came in. And we were very  active. We kind of had a built-in   whenever, I remember, they needed  money for Bennett Chapel. So we bought a boat and a motor and raffled  it off. We just drove up to Ponca City and put it in front of the VFW. Of  course, all those soldiers up there we sold tickets to. We didn   t have to  work at all.  How much were the raffle tickets?  One dollar each and we raised  1,700.  Oh, and that helped build Bennett Chapel?  Well, partly.  Partly. So how many people would you say were in the club?  Oh, we probably had 250.  And did you have officers of the club?  Oh yes, mm-hmm. And we got a senator elected and all that kind of  stuff.  And what other activities did the Veteran   s Club do?  Well that was really our main activity. We just kind of were loosely  organized. A lot of our Veterans were married also and had children. So  11  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  basically we were more of the single Veterans.  Was Veterans Village still here?  Oh yes, it was going strong.  But you all never lived there?  No.  We weren   t married.  You weren   t married. You married after you graduated?  I came back in    52 and we got married in    56.  And the Veteran   s Club, did you compete in sporting events with other  campus groups or student groups?  Not really, not much, no. We were a lot older than the other kids. We   d  seen a lot of the world that wasn   t all that great. So, you know, we  weren   t on the same thought level, I guess you   d say.  Okay. What do you remember about Homecoming when you were here?  Was Homecoming a big event then?  Well we thought it was. (Laughter)  I remember watching the parade from Willard Hall. Our room looked  out over the street and how small it was compared to what it is today. I  mean, they   d use cardboard boxes and lots of imagination and not much  of anything else to do the floats. It was totally different. No Walk  Around.  I don   t remember the fraternities and sororities decorating. Maybe they  did but I don   t remember it. I belong to the American Institute of  Chemical Engineers. We had a chapter here on campus so we entered a  float. We found out you had to get down to Stillwater early to get your  cardboard because that   s what you made your float out of when you  didn   t have any money. And so we (Laughs) went down to   I always  remember, we had a good turnout. In those days, there were Quonset  huts. Do you know where the Quonset huts were?  I heard     They were just on past and so we got a truck somewhere and we fixed it  12  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  all up with cardboard. We had, I think, played Kansas. We had a  Jayhawk (Laughs) on a conveyer belt and he would run up into our  Oklahoma A M lumber mill. And he would scream out every time he  ran in there. We didn   t win any prizes.  But I will kind of digress a little bit. I came down here in 1949. There  were still a lot of World War II Veterans so housing was very tight. We  lived way out here on 6th Street. Is that the main  Highway  51?  Yes.  In a place called Oretoopa. It was a Navy Barracks in World War II and  it was just tents. And there was no bus service so invariably you   d get  down to campus and you   d forget a piece of paper you needed or  something but you couldn   t get back to get it because it was way out  there. Then the dining room was an old asbestos building. Let   s see, that  would be right across from the, I guess Agricultural Building. It was,  and that   s where we ate. Then they just had Cordell Hall and they had  some little Hall right down here   two buildings. I can   t remember their  names. That   s all I remember for men. The others were built after that.  And people didn   t live long in Oretoopa. You   d scrounge until you  could find a place to live.  Sue, when you came when you were taking summer classes did you have  a roommate in the summertime?  Yes I did and I can   t remember my first roommate. She was from Kiowa  but I can   t remember her name. Then the next semester my friend from  Harrison transferred from TCU  Texas Christian University  and we  roomed together and lived in Willard.  Was she in the same field that you were studying?  No, no. She was interested in pre-law and government and things like  that. But we had gone to high school together.  Do you have any stories about Theta Pond?  No.  When you were here?  Don   t have any. (Laughter)  When we were here there were about five men to two women so it was  almost impossible, especially   and I   m going to brag on engineering  13  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  school because we had so many studies   but it was basically impossible  to get a date. That was for the guys taking accounting and everything. So  we just did   we   d go to the movies and go up, like we said, up to the  top of the Student Union and sit there and drink coffee and shoot the bull  and tell old war stories and things like that. I lived one month in Cordell  Hall. And then we Veterans got together and rented old houses and did  our own cooking and housekeeping.  What do you remember about Old Central? Did you have any classes in  Old Central at all?  Not at all.  I had English there. I think three times.  (Laughter) What does that mean?  Well I didn   t pass the first class. So I took it again when I came back  from the service. I think I took it every time in Old Central. That   s  where I remember it. Well when I came back, of course, the new  Classroom Building was built so you took math and   I didn   t take  physics there. I had physics in some other building. I think it   s gone too.  And agriculture courses were over in the old Ag Building which is still  the Ag Building, I   m sure.  And who was president of the college when you were here? This would  have been after Bennett.  After Bennett.  Bennett had just been killed in Ethiopia  Iran  in a plane crash, hadn   t  he?  Do you remember when that happened? Were you here when that  happened?  I think that was    48  1950 . I know it happened before I got here.  I wasn   t here and   who was president after that? I can see his face but I  can   t think of his name.  Oliver S. Willham   Did he walk around on campus?  No, I don   t think so.  You didn   t see him much?  14  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  No, no.  What kind of music did you listen to? You said you met at a dance, so  who were the popular bands? What kind of music were you dancing to  then?  The Jitterbug.  And the big bands were still operating then. I remember there was a  bunch of guys from our house that went over and I guess we were  shooting pool on Main Street over there. And someone played a record  and it was Don   t Step on my Blue Suede Shoes and we couldn   t figure  out who that nut was and what a crazy song that was. Of course later it  became ol    Elvis Presley. But he wasn   t popular here that I remember,  do you?  Hmm-mm.  No it was still old Tommy Dorsey, Benny Goodman and all those guys.  Yeah.  Were there ever live music events where bands came?  Well, the main thing I remember most of all was   were you here when  Fred Waring     No.  He had a choir type thing. I don   t know who   and it was over in the  Field House in those days, which was considerably smaller. And it was  just packed. I remember how impressed I was and how beautiful the  music was. We didn   t have many of those things, did we?  No, we didn   t. We went to the basketball and the football games.  Basketball was good.  Well tell me a little about the basketball games.  Eddie Sutton played. (Laughs) He was the star. And that was about it.  Was it crowded at the games?  Well not like it is now. But it was well attended, always.  Was it loud in the gym?  15  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Not like it is now. (Laughs)  I think in those days it held about 7,000 or 6,000   somewhere in that  range. And of course now it   s what, 13 or 14  thousand .  Did people wear school colors to the games?  I don   t remember it if they did. You know, the economic level at that  time was so different from what it is now.  You didn   t buy a lot of     Extra things?  Mm-hmm.  So how did you dress as a woman in that time period? What did you  wear to class?  Bobby-socks, skirts and sweaters, blouses, dresses.  Did the women wear pants?  No.  No.  Well did we wear jeans?  You probably did.  Once in a while but usually not.  You could find a parking place anywhere on this campus. We all had  used cars. I never remember anyone from our house ever driving. You  walked to school and we   d walk back at lunch and most of us all had  labs. Most of us were engineering students. There was never a problem  with parking. I remember basketball games a little different because I  always remember the main basketball game was the year that we beat  Kansas when they had Wilt Chamberlain and I was sitting right there  and watched ol    Eddie make the last two points. (Laughter) I always  remember that. I wonder now because as we   ve gotten older, things  aren   t anything like we remember. But anyway, that   s the way I  remember it and that   s a good memory because that was quite a thrill.  Because that year Kansas was the big dogs with ol    Wilt Chamberlain.  16  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  So what happened after that game? I mean that had to be a huge win.  Oh yes, but you didn   t dare get on the basketball courts.  You didn   t?  Oh no, no street shoes on a basketball court   you   d think that was the  Holy Grail out there. But the main thing I remember more than that was  the year we beat Oklahoma in wrestling. And that was the year, I don   t  know how they got by with it, but it was so full that even the steps were  full of students. That was quite a defeat for Oklahoma because we were  tied going into the light heavyweight and we had a heavyweight and  they moved him down to light heavyweight and we won that by a pin,  which put us ahead by I think five points. Oklahoma had an outstanding  heavyweight. I   m trying to remember his name but I can   t. He was  strong beyond belief. And the Oklahoma State   A M guy, all he did  was just spread eagle   if you ever watch wrestling over there   and he  couldn   t ever pin him. So I think we beat Oklahoma by two points. And  oh my, that was big. Any time you beat Oklahoma, that   s big.  Did the students celebrate after a big game or big event like that?  Not really.  No?  No, we   d generally just pile out and go home. Because Oklahoma beat  us so bad all the time in football that we just went up there and had fun.  We weren   t a powerhouse by any    (Laughs)  You brought some pictures to share with us today that showed the  football games in the stadium and the band out on the field. What was  attendance like at the football games? Was it different from basketball  and wrestling?  17  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  Well, I don   t think so. I think an average of about 15,000 students     student side would have 5,000 students over there. And you don   t know  how many   in those days, you didn   t have any identification and they  didn   t care because the stands you   ll see in those pictures were empty.  So there were probably a lot of guests on the student side also.  Did you take those pictures?  Yes.  You did? So you had your own camera. Did you take a lot of pictures  when you were in school?  Well we   ve got some more but we can   t find them.  We   ve moved too many times.  And we   ve been all over the world and we   ve got so many pictures we  just need to someday get them all out and see where we   ve been.  They are interesting. We   re glad that you brought them to share with us  today. Sue, I want to ask you about your having a car and bringing your  car here. Did very many of the women have cars?  No, I don   t know how many did. But since I lived so far away my  parents wanted me to come home as often as I could. Well they found  out it didn   t do any good because I never came home. (Laughs) The  parking lots weren   t filled   never. And if you did have a car, I would  say, I didn   t have the problem here that I had when I was at Conway,  because there was always someone that wanted to use the car. Well here  nobody seemed interested. I don   t know.  So you didn   t really drive it around much after you came?  I was so busy studying (Laughs) because my parents said,    You go and  you get out and you go to work.    It was really tight because they both  were school teachers and school teachers didn   t make much money. I  don   t really know how they afforded to send me, but they did. It was  important to me to get out as soon as I could.  So that   s why you were taking summer classes?  Went three years and three summers.  Did they send you money every month?  18  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Oh yes, they paid all the bills. Then it was so reasonable but in  perspective it wasn   t, but they were thrifty. (Laughs) And they both  worked.  Some of the other training that you went through for the program that  you were in   you mentioned talking about going and visiting student  homes and teaching students how to serve. What were some of the other  skills or classes that they were a focus during that time period?  Well family life and cooking and sewing and family relationships.  Actually, at the junior high level you did well to teach them to sew and  to cook in eighteen weeks. You   d spend half a year on one and half a  year on the other.  Did you all have a lab where you practiced cooking yourselves?  Yes, yes.  On campus?  When I taught at Broken Arrow we had two kitchens set up so we could  have say six girls in each kitchen working. Then with sewing machines,  we had probably   I   d say fifteen sewing machines.  And so when you were studying that and how to teach it effectively, what  were some things that they told you about working with junior high-aged  students and did they prepare you for when you actually were in the  classroom teaching?  Not really. Really it was good that I started out with junior high because  I was young. I was like twenty I think, probably nineteen and then had  my twentieth birthday in September because I graduated from high  school at sixteen. So it was good that I had junior high students because  they really looked up to me because I was young. I didn   t have any  problems   any discipline problems or anything and they were interested  in learning. It   s not like it is today where there   s so much out there  grabbing for their attention and they were interested in learning to cook  and sew, which is basically what we were working with. And then  family life comes in later. They were so easy to shape and to mold. It  was a good experience.  It sounds like you enjoyed your career in teaching. And then you  transitioned into some other things.  Right because we moved around so much. We were at different  locations two or three years at a time. Then we also have family, so we  19  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  had two children and I didn   t want to leave them. It was hard to find  anybody if I did to take care of them until they got older to go to school.  So finally while we were in Enid  Oklahoma  I found someone that  would babysit and I taught my second year at Lahoma. And then after  that, we moved to Texas and to California and Kansas. What I did when  I got to California and they were beginning to go   my son went to  college. Then I went to work at Pasadena City College. Started out as a  substitute and worked in the registration office. From there I went to  admissions and I worked there as senior clerk in the admissions office.  That was good because I didn   t have anything to take home with me at  the end of the day. I was free. I really enjoyed it because it was in a  learning environment. And then after the admissions office, I moved  over to the career center and managed the career center. We moved to  Indonesia and then we retired and here we are.  Do you come back to Homecoming every year?  I don   t think so.  We were here last year, weren   t we?  Yes. Is that when we blew the game on the last play?  Laughter   I think so.  Do you have any other stories you want to share with us today?  Well the only thing I would add to what Sue just said, along with that, is  that I was just calculating   we had about 7,500 men here and about  2,500 women. And basically the women were almost exclusively in   I  don   t think we had nurses training here in those days   but generally  home economics and accounting and over in those. You had very few in  your chemistry or math or physics. And of course, you never saw any of  the women on campus.  Were there any women in those programs   in the classes you were in?  Not that I remember. We might have had some in chemistry. She was in  Ms. Gerber     Ms. Gerber.  But most of the men in there were either taking veterinary medicine or  were going into pre-med. It was different organic from the Dr. Johnson  one   the organic I took for my classes.  20  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  J. Pierson  S. Pierson  J. Pierson  Mine was foods chemistry.  And the campus in those days, remember, was just   you go over to the  road just north of the Field House   I mean the football stadium. That  was it   power house. Then back up this street to Murray and back  around. It wasn   t all that large in those days and people just didn   t drive  their cars. They either walked or rode their bike, but mostly walked.  Most everybody basically walked.  Did they finish Bennett Chapel while you were here? The funds that you  raised for it?  They must have because I came here in    52 and left in    57.  Okay. What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks loyalty from students  and with the alumni? What is it about this university and this campus?  Well I can tell you from my viewpoint   and of course, I came from a  small school. My education, I realize now, was very limited. And  coming down to Oklahoma A M of course opened up some new stuff  for me. But then when I came back in    52 and had been in the Army,  you realize then what an education was for and realize that you had to  have an education if you were going to do anything in life. I   ve worked  with engineers from every school in the United States and they   re not  one bit smarter or a better engineer than I was. That impressed me, when  I didn   t think I was learning all that much, I was. Oklahoma A M   I  don   t know about Oklahoma University, we always thought that was a  rich kid   s school. And especially in    49, we were all still very poor you  might say. The fact that you could come down and get an education with  no more money than I had was pretty impressive to me. And the benefits  that we derived from having educations.  Did you have anything to add about that?  No, I think he said it very well. We   ve been blessed.  What advice would you give to students today?  Quit playing around, start studying and learn something.  That   s it.  I   ve worked for Arco International. I   ve worked all over the world.  Americans are having a hard time realizing that we   re not supposed to  have everything. I worked with people who have been educated at other  universities besides the United States and the only way we   re going to  21  Neurohr  S. Pierson  Neurohr  do any good is to be educated. That   s all there is to it.  Okay well I think this has been a great interview. We   ve really enjoyed  hearing your stories and hearing about your time here. The fact that  you   ve traveled and been other places, I think your perspective is  certainly different than people who haven   t had those opportunities. And  we   re so glad that you came today and participated in our project here.  Thank you for having us.  Well thank you, very much.  -------  -------   
