 M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  My name is Mark Gregory. Today is October 21, 2006. This is part of  the O-STATE Stories, an oral history project of the OSU Library. I  would like to introduce my mother, Betty Gregory.  Thank you.  So, Mom, let   s talk a little bit about when you came to school here.  Well, I came in the fall of 1942, and spent that year. Then I took off the  next year, this was back during the war, and I taught school for a year.  Then I came back in the fall of    44 and pledged a sorority at that time  and majored in home economics. I graduated then in 1946.  What sorority did you pledge?  I was in Alpha Delta Pi. A friend that I had known through 4-H Club  throughout the years was a member, and she introduced me. So I became  a member of the same sorority she was in. Her name was Jean  McGilliard and we had lots of 4-H Club stories to tell through the years.  Well, it sounds like 4-H was an active part of your life before you came  to college.  It really was. I was very active in 4-H. In fact, that was the reason I came  to Oklahoma A M because I had 4-H Club scholarships to come here.  My parents were both working but couldn   t afford expenses at that time,  so I was very fortunate.  Where was home?  Home was northwest Oklahoma, a little town named Capron which a lot  5  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  of people don   t know where it is, but (Laughs) it   s north and east of  Alva which is the county seat. I guess our claim to fame at that time was  when we had a tornado come through it took our schoolhouse, and our  house was across the street. It didn   t hurt us and we went to school in the  church for the rest of the year. The grade school students went to school  in homes. My mother was teaching and so we had the fourth grade in our  living room for the rest of that year. Then they built the new building  and we got to graduate out of the new building. I also played basketball  there, too.  Did you play basketball up here at A M or what kind of activities did  you have?  I played basketball in the intramural sports, and in   I don   t remember  the year now   we won the girls intramural one year, which we were  very pleased with. We had a lot of fun.  Well, what about campus life?  I didn   t do a lot on campus. Of course, I was a home economics major so  we had our home-ec classes. I was mainly in the sorority and then I  worked a lot with the collegiate 4-H Club people on campus, and was  fortunate enough to make a couple of trips my first year when I was a  freshman here.  Where were those trips?  Incidentally, they both were in Chicago. I was on the meat judging team  for the state, and we went to the International and had our judging  contests. Also we took a demonstration up there, too. That year we  worked in dairy demonstrations and my teammate and I got to go. They  combined the dairy association with the International that year, so I kind  of killed two birds with one stone. But we had some great times, great  memories. Many of the 4-H kids that grew up all over the state came to  Oklahoma A M and we had an active collegiate club that we met with a  lot, and still have friends that we hear from occasionally.  What about places around town and places you hung out? I remember  stories of Swim   s.  Well, yes, there was Swim   s. (Laughs) I didn   t go there a lot. There  wasn   t a lot of places to go because of course then, none of us had cars.  But there were buses that we could get on and ride downtown or it  would deliver you to classrooms around the campus.  I guess to me, the most important place would have been the Y-Hut  or  6  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  YMCA-Hut as indicated by the sign on the building  which people don   t  remember where it is, but that   s where I met your Dad, so it   s always  been a very special part of my life. It was a little place, right over across  the street from this building now  OSU ConocoPhillips Alumni Center ,  right back of the old Home Economics building. There again, my    Big  Sister     sorority sister  played a role in that. She called me and said,     Let   s have a coke when you get out of lab.    I had a chemistry lab that  afternoon. I had lots of chem labs, and I really wasn   t in a very good  mood. I got there and she had detained your father and said,    I want you  to meet somebody,    and so he waited and met me. Fortunately, he called  me again.  And what was Pop   s story as far as coming to school? Where did he  grow up and how did he get to OSU?  He grew up down in the southeast part of the state   very poor part of  the state really. He was the youngest of twelve children, the only one  who went to college and his mother was extremely proud of him. He  went to Murray State College in Tishomingo for two years, which   the  only way he could afford to go was he went in to enroll   wanted to be a  history teacher. The only jobs available were in the dairy barn, so he  changed his major to agriculture and worked in the dairy barn. After the  two years there, then he came up to Oklahoma A M. And there again,  he ran into that. Dr. Wilham talked to him and said,    If you   ll keep your  major as agriculture, I   ll get you a job.    At that time, he was sweeping  out the horse barn instead of the dairy barn. But that was his main thing,  and he loved history but he was good at agriculture, too, and he loved it.  He loved meeting with the people. So we had a lot of fun.  He pledged FarmHouse, but the important thing about your dad was he  came in the fall of    40 and, of course, immediately   the day after Pearl  Harbor in    41, he left school and enlisted in the Air Corps. Of course, he  lost those three or four years before he came back. Something that, to  me, is important is that Dr. Wilham issued an order that anybody who  enlisted whose grades were in good standing, they got credit for that  semester   s grades even though they weren   t here to finish. So he didn   t  lose his schooling and then he came back in the fall of    44, and    45   I  guess in    45 probably   and we had a lot of fun on campus. We   d go to  the old gym for dances. Sororities would have dance hour and the boys  would come. Your dad and I used to go to   oh, we   d go to track meets,  anything that we could go do. I never let him forget about the first one  he took me to because we got up and he didn   t have any money and I  did, so I paid for the first one (Laughs) but after that he always had  enough money to get us in. But we loved to do the things on campus that  everybody else was involved in.  7  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  He graduated in    46 also, but stayed on a year and got his master   s in  1947. And then from there, he worked for Oklahoma State University  for thirty-five years, which was great.  What did he do and what did you do after you graduated from college?  You say he graduated from Oklahoma A M.  Yes, at that time after I graduated, I was supposed to go   I was a foods  and nutrition major so I had an appointment to go to Ohio State to work  my internship off as hospital dietician, but by then I had met your Dad  and we were making plans so I didn   t go ahead and go to Ohio State. So  I taught school. I taught school in Texas for a year, which I never  regretted, even though I would love to have finished as a dietician, but I  never regretted not going up there. I think it worked   I think me having  had the 4-H experience, both out in the county and on campus with all  the leaders, Paul Adams and all the people here, it was easy for me to  work with Ed  Betty   s husband  at times out on his job because he  worked with 4-H as well as adults.  We just felt very fortunate that we both had been able to get through  college and have good jobs, and then have three fine kids. Someone  asked me the other day about   they were giving me a hard time at the  house about something OSU and I just said,    Well, we bleed orange in  this house,    and this young man said,    Oh,    and I said,    Well, we both  graduated, all three of our children graduated, our son-in-law graduated,  and our daughter-in-law was in school   didn   t get completely  through   and we have a granddaughter over there now as a freshman, so  we just don   t talk about any other school.    But it was a good life, and the  job that he had was good, even though he loved history. Even though he  wanted to be a history teacher, he loved to read history. And that worked  in with my genealogy work.  I guess if we could back up a little bit, and maybe I shouldn   t do that,  but when I first got here in    42, as I told you, as we walked past Willard  Hall a minute ago, that   s where I was rooming, and I was rooming with  an upperclassman who I   d never met. We   d been there three weeks and  they called us in for a midnight meeting, and it was a Friday. We had to  be out of the dorm by Monday morning. The WAVES  Women  Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service  were coming in and they  were taking over Willard. So, they put the upperclassmen out in town  and, by then, they  the college  were renting fraternity houses for  victory, coined them    Victory Houses.    I was fortunate to be moved to  Murray with another freshman I had not met, but she was great. And I  always remember carrying my clothes across the street from Willard to  Murray, and this big black car was coming and I stopped, but it  stopped   and Dr. Bennett just waved real big and said,    Good luck,     8  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  and I went on, so   he didn   t know me, but that   s okay.  Dr. Bennett was President at that time?  He was President at that time, yes, and I don   t think he could not  possibly know everybody   s names, and I never met him before. But he  knew I was a student and he knew why I was moving, so it worked out  great.  What about Dr. Wilham? I assume Dr. Wilham is the Wilham things are  named for on campus?  He was a super person, and I did not have as much direct contact with  him as Ed did, but he was   we   ve always been close to   I guess all the  people on campus. I   ve always said, and I don   t know whether you   ll  agree with this or not, but you three kids   it really wasn   t like going  away to college when you came up here then, because in Ed   s work we  were on campus so often and we would bring you. I think of you at  Homecoming. I can remember for Homecomings we   d come up the day  before and stay in the  Student  Union and then I   d turn you two boys  loose in the morning and we said,    Be here at a certain time.    One day  we walked and we found you both out helping some fraternity fix their  fraternity house, you know, for the Walk Around, and I think it was  good to have that closeness.  Of course, for years we had season football, baseball, basketball and  wrestling tickets, and so anybody that wanted to find us during the  season, we knew we   d be up here. I feel very loyal to the university. It  took me awhile to learn to say Oklahoma State after they changed it  from Oklahoma A M, but it didn   t upset me particularly because I  thought we were growing and changing with the time. So it   s been   it  was happy years, happy times.  Anything you want to say, I mean, you kind of summed up where I was  headed here as far as the legacy. You and Pop, both only children in  your home to go to school?  Yes.  And certainly started that for us as children and now you have  grandchildren up here. Anything you want to add to that legacy?  I don   t know what else to add really other than I just think that   well,  I   ve heard your Dad say something to the effect that we truly owe  everything to the university because we got our education up here and  we were able to go out and get good jobs. Your Dad had a good job. I  9  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  taught for several years after you kids were   you were in college, I  guess, by the time I went back teaching   but I was able to teach, and we  had that background of a good, solid education. We had the loyalty, the  fun. I still love to just come up and look around and see things even  though it   s changed a lot. It   s nothing like it was when we were here,  because kids didn   t have cars. Now, that was during the war. My  roommate, when I was in Murray, had a car and I never was sure how  she got her gasoline to drive it, but (Laughs) her father was quite an  important man in the state of Oklahoma, and so she had plenty of gas.  She could drive, but most of us didn   t even have a car let alone be able  to buy the gas, you know, but we really didn   t   we didn   t go off  campus. We did everything on campus. Everything was planned so that  you could attend most anything here.  I think one thing that I like, and I   m getting away from A M now, but  as the buildings have been built, I   ve been pleased to see that they   ve  used the same architecture, the same style because to me, it   s one of the  most beautiful campuses. I just think those years   I actually was only at  school three years. I went for three summers to make it up so that I still  graduated with my class in    46, but   it was busy times, but did it, and  we made it, and of course I   ve always said the important thing was I met  your father up here and we had fifty-seven great years, so all in all, I  think it was a super experience and I loved every minute of it.  Well, it sounds like it and we   and speaking for all three of the kids,  thank both you and Pop.  You   re great. Thank you darling.   O-STATE Stories project member Tanya Finchum joins the interview   Any memories of the library, time spent in the library?  Oh, yes. Yes, very definitely. We would come over to the library. I was  a foods major. I had to take a lot of chemistry. I knew nothing about  chemistry. The first class I went to, the teacher just started as if  everybody in there knew it, and I didn   t. I met a young lady who lived in  the same dorm   well, I met her across the hall from me in Willard and  then she moved in Murray. Her name was Mary Bell, and she was a  whiz at chemistry so she would always help me in the lab, and the  teacher knew she was. Mary would just say,    You do what I tell you to  do. I   ll tell you when we get home.    I said,    Okay.    Then, too, at that  time, they would put copies of the tests in the library, past tests, for us to  come and study. So I spent a lot of hours over there pulling those old  tests and   of course, they   d be changed, but over the same matter.  10  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  In the forties, it wasn   t this current building though, right? Was it in a  different building?  The library   where was it? It wasn   t that library.  I   ve seen pictures of castle   what looked like a castle top? Williams  Hall maybe?  Yes, that   s where it was. That was it, yeah. I was always   probably  right where this building is now about.  I think it was on the other side from Old Central, I think.  Was it?  I think.  Yeah, I believe it was. Yeah, I remember now     So the Student Union wasn   t here?  Yeah, didn   t have the Student Union.  Well, where did students gather?  The Y-Hut. (Laughs) It was a very small place, and Swim   s which was  on the corner over here where Cowboy Bookstore is now or something,  was Swim   s. And we did not have the corner up here like you have now  either, but the Y-Hut was very small and it was run by a blind man and I  never figured out how that man could tell   and of course everybody was  very careful, but he could make change, you know, and everything. And  so that was our main thing. Then we had lots of dances over in the old  gym which is the Architecture building now and sometimes it was   oh,  what did we call them, the Varsity   can   t remember what it was   it was  a band on campus     Oh, the name of the band?  The Varsity something   I can   t remember. It was funny because when  we went, we were married and we went on our honeymoon, we went to  Noel, Missouri to Ginger Blue Lodge and we walked in that night to the  dance room and there was the Varsity band. They had a little fun with us  (Laughs) because they recognized us, but it was mostly just self-contained  things. Oh, we   d go to the movies downtown. We did go bowl  sometimes, but we could always ride the bus for a nickel or a dime   I  can   t remember which.  11  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  What was Homecoming like then?  Nothing like this. We did, as I recall, we still had parades, but not as  massive as they are now. It was a time, lots of fun. We really did, we  had fun. And, of course, it changed. I think probably when the boys  came home from the service, things were   oh, how do you say it? Well  we all knew there was a real reason why we were here, that they   d been  over fighting so that we could have these privileges, and I think people  were more sincere and really worked harder. Of course you still had  your fun and games, but     Do you remember about how much tuition might have been?  You know, I can   t remember, and the figure  31.00 goes through my  head, and surely it wasn   t just  31.00.  It could have been.  I don   t know, and I didn   t even think to look it up because I   m sure I  have it somewhere. As Mark knows, I never throw anything away.  (Laughs) But it was very reasonable, I know that. One of the  scholarships I got paid for all my books. Of course, now they would be  outlandish, but   of course, things were not that expensive. I did, like I  say, I stayed out the one year and taught school and saved my money so  I could come back for the last two.  Well, what did women wear to class back then?  Dresses. We were dresses, skirts and blouses. I don   t ever remember  owning a pair of pants and, in fact   if I recall, when Dad brought me to  college, Mother had made me two corduroy skirts and one corduroy  jacket that would go with both skirts and   I can   t remember, something  else   not very much else though. It was all dresses or skirts and blouses.  I just don   t remember seeing anybody ever wearing pants to class.  Where did they hold graduation ceremonies, or did they do that then?  Oh, we held them in what is now the Seretean Center. It was an  auditorium, and that   s where our graduation service was. I remember  that now.  Was Pistol Pete the mascot?  No, I don   t think we had Pistol Pete then. I don   t believe we did. I think  we were just the Cowboys.  12  Finchum  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  He came along after it became OSU?  I was trying to think. I saw that just the other day when Pistol Pete  was   when they asked him to be the mascot, and I just don   t remember.  It was while we were still in the Big Six, before the Big Eight.  I think, too, one of the things   maybe the reason that I like basketball  and I still have basketball tickets (Laughs) is because I was here when  we won the national championship   the two years in a row. I never will  forget. They  the students  staged a walk out and I was in chemistry  class that day. (Laughs) The professor locked the door, so the kids took  the doors off the hooks from the outside so we could go and join and we  went all over campus, you know? And that was when Bob Kurland and  Cecil Hankins and Weldon Kern were on the team. They all signed my  yearbook that year. They  the basketball team  ate in the cafeteria at  Murray where I was staying. And I saw just the other day, I was looking  and they all signed my yearbook. So, I think that   s the reason I   ve loved  basketball, because we had so much fun then.  Well, what do you think it is about OSU that inspires such loyalty,  passion and pride? Can you put it into words?  Well, I think to me it is the friendship, personally. And I don   t know  why other schools are not this way, but I   ve heard others are. To me,  everybody seems to be a friend of anybody. When I pledged a sorority  some of my best friends never pledged sororities, but they were still my  best friends. And there was no distinction as far as they were concerned  with being Greek or being independent. Of course, I lived as an  independent one year, but that didn   t make any difference. And when I  pledged   I was fine. You know, they were great. I think that to me is  one thing that makes it, well I think   and maybe other schools do this  too, but some of my best friends are friends that were friends when I was  a freshman. I still hear from them. One of my roommates I still hear  from. They   re in Illinois, Mary   s in Nebraska. We don   t get to see each  other very often, you know but, we keep up.  I think with particularly the War years probably, the girls got closer.  There weren   t that many men around   well, there were some men on  campus because the Navy was here. We had the WAVES and the Navy.  We had an Air Force attachment, I think. I believe I   ve got some  pictures. (Laughs) I have to go through my album one of these days. But  as far as, you know, the kids, most of us felt like that those who wanted  to be here weren   t here because they were off doing their duty and we  were very proud of all of them.  Do you get any special feelings when you step on campus these days?  13  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  I don   t know. I always just feel very comfortable. I just feel like even  though it   s changed a lot (Laughs) and I   m not sure where everything is,  I think probably I had a little bit of an advantage in that with Ed  working   he worked for a Co-op Extension and he came to the campus  so often and when the children were little, I just put them in a car, we   d  all come up. And the kids and I would just wander sometimes over the  campus. I think maybe the changes have not affected me as much as  someone who hasn   t been back for several years because those that have  come in and haven   t been here in years, you know, they just can   t get  over it. But I think maybe we kind of saw it change.  You would have seen Theta Pond change into Theta Pond?  (Laughs) Yes. I heard a lot about Theta Pond. I didn   t have much to do  down there. (Laughs) But it was always talked about.  Any other traditions you can think of related to OSU?  No, there   s not really I can   t think of anything.  What about any rivalries with our sister university to the South?  Well, a little bit. (Laughs) We just didn   t have too much to do with  them. Because we wore beanies, not all the time but if you were walking  across campus and somebody said,    What do you say, freshman?    You  said,    Yes, beat OU.    (Laughs) So they drove that into us real quick.  But, we didn   t have a lot of contact. I don   t know that I ever went down  there for a game of any kind. But most of us didn   t, we didn   t have cars,  we couldn   t travel to other schools. We   d like to, you know, but we  attended everything here. My OSU rivalry has escalated since the last  two years. So    (Laughs)  You have a third generation here on campus?  Yeah, we   re real pleased and our granddaughter also pledged the same  sorority that I was in. And of course our daughter had to. So we have  three generations that have been in that house, which is kind of different.  Do they respond to alumni different today in the house?  They   re very nice, they   re very good. I did not put any pressure on them  this year. I filled out a recommendation as a grandmother and  everything, but I did not stress anything because I have seen it backfire. I  know several years ago, when I was working with the sorority a lot, I  saw one really backfire because the alum stepped in and really started  pushing. The question in the girls    minds was,    What   s wrong with  14  Finchum  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  M. Gregory  B. Gregory  M. Gregory  Finchum  her?    Because this alum hadn   t been active before. So I wasn   t about to  push, you know?  After she pledged and I visited with the girls, it was interesting because  once or twice I said something about how the house has changed since I  was here.    You mean you used to live in this house?    And I said,    Well,  before it was remodeled.    So I was kind of glad that they had not  connected it too much, because I didn   t want them to take her just  because she was my granddaughter.  I really don   t know anything as far as rivalries and things like that. I  don   t remember us really, being too much. I don   t really remember then  as the Greeks versus the independents as much as they have sometimes.  We were small then.  Did they have log burnings for Homecoming?  A big bon fire or anything?  You know, I don   t remember they ever did when I was in. I think they  did later. But I don   t remember that they ever did. I   m sure we   d have  gone if they had. I really don   t remember any pep rallies or anything. I  just remember when the basketball team won, those two years they won,  they were the first team to do that. They did a rip cord thing where they  would just go around and just gather everybody up and form a line but  then they had a big, well we went to the auditorium for a meeting so that  they could introduce all the players and that sort of thing. But, I honestly  don   t remember any really pep rallies or things like that. I   m sure there  were. It   s been a few years, so    (Laughs)  Do you still have your beanie?  Yes, I still have my beanie. I don   t know where it is for sure but I   ve got  it. I even bought the boys some when they were little and they used to  wear them. (Laughs)  Well that   s all of my questions, unless you want to ask anything  additional?  I think that covered everything.  That covers some you didn   t expect probably.  That   s good, Mom.  Well, we sure do appreciate you.  15  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  B. Gregory  Finchum  Well, like I said I sat down last night and wrote down my dates as far as  my husband was concerned. You know, I get confused   I knew when he  graduated from high school. Of course, I didn   t meet him until after the  war. And, so I always say well maybe I have the war to thank that took  him out of school for those years because I would have been gone by the  time he got back.  Were you around when Vet Village would have been     No. It wasn   t too many years after that that they built the Vet Village.  Some of our friends lived in those. We married in    47 after Ed graduated  with his master   s. He was president of FarmHouse that last year too. But  I think they built the Vet Village after that. Well, they started having the  vets come back and the vets were beginning to get married. Of course,  some of them were before they left. But, it was exciting times.  My last question is what advice would you offer current or future  students who are at OSU?  Well, some of them don   t realize what a great deal they have right now.  I mean, they   re just going to class and you know, think Mom and Dad  says you got to go to school. I think to try to get the most out of your  classes and to be happy in your field. I have seen students when I was  teaching go off to college and they   d be upset and when they came  home   and they weren   t happy in their field. I think if they could be  happy in their field   but I still think a lot of it goes back to friends and  keep in touch with friends. Through good and bad, because friends can  help an awful lot. And I just think personally I think it   s the only place  in the world we always laugh, we used to tell our children, before our  oldest got ready to go to college. They could go to any place they  wanted to in the United States but the room and board and tuition was  going to be paid in Stillwater. (Laughs) But I don   t think any of them  really worried about that. Of course, Mark got his degree here and then  he went to Penn State to get his Master   s. And we didn   t object to that.  But they all three got their degrees here. And we are very proud of all of  them.  Well, thank you very much.  Well thank you. I hope I didn   t rattle on too much.  No, you did just fine.  -------  -------   
