 Gill, and the date is October 13, 2008. I   m visiting  Judge Thomas Bennett in his home in Oklahoma City. This interview is  for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. Judge Bennett, there are a couple of questions I  want to ask you, but I want to start by saying congratulations on your  88th Birthday.  Well, thank you.  Was that last Friday?  Last Friday, yes.  Did you get candles and cake and the whole     Well, I have diabetes so I can   t eat the cake.  Oh no, that   s terrible  Well congratulations     Thank you.     on your birthday, let me start with that. Could you explain a little bit  about the judicial position that you have? My understanding is that you  still go to work every day.  Every work day. I don   t go holidays or Sundays.  Okay, every work day. Could you share just a little bit about what your  position as a judge is?  I   m an administrative law judge with Social Security. Because I don   t  have a valid driver   s license now, we have the equipment. I can sit in an  office in Oklahoma City and hear cases in places like Lawton and  5  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Amarillo and so on. But as the administrative law judge in charge down  there says we can go anywhere in the United States. Right now we   re  getting cases in this region. We   re trying to keep the region caught up, of  course.  So you represent a region larger than the state of Oklahoma. What  states are in your region?  Well I   m not positive, but out to Arizona I know is included and Texas  and Oklahoma. I believe that   s about the scope of our region.  Now, how many years have you been in that position?  Well, I didn   t start being a hearing examiner until August of 1972. But I  was in Washington, DC in the hearing office until August of 1972. Beg  your pardon, I came to Oklahoma in summer of 1980. Oklahoma City  here in the office when the office was enlarged to 14 judges. But my  volume, of course, was down when I couldn   t travel. The only way the  volume I had for ten years could be done was starting hearings at five in  the morning. I say starting at five, scheduling officially at 6 in the  morning in most places. In some places only seven when I first started.  But there was all kinds of snow and other problems. We   d tell them that  I   d be there at the hearing at five o   clock in the morning and if they had  a conflict, they could be there with their witnesses with them. We   d get  them heard sometime during that day as quickly as we could. I was  averaging about, what was scheduled for these places that were so  badly   we had cases that were heard that first year in which most of  them had requested a hearing more than three years earlier. They were  just backed up and they couldn   t be handled. We got all the black lung  cases. I said we did, but Congress put them into Social Security. But it  was about a half million cases, and that really backs you up. Now black  lung cases were all I started with   on the other hand there were  Department of Labor cases, but they only had five or six administrative  law judges we were told, and they couldn   t begin to handle it. If they  had hired men to handle it in four to four and a half years, five years out,  they   d be outside and they would have to be terminating most of them  because they wouldn   t have any work for them.  I understand that you have the record for having heard the most cases in  Social Security Administration.  The most cases in a ten year period, yes. But at the present time I   m  still   what   d they tell me, I haven   t checked it myself. But I   m still  second. Harold O   Brian also of the Oklahoma City office, the one in  charge of the office, brought aboard in 1971, has kept his production up  and he   s passed me up in the sense of total production.  6  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  What a tribute to you that you   re still going in every work day     Oh, sure.     and working loads. That   s quite a tribute. If I can, let me move back to  your early life a little bit. We were talking earlier about you having  grown up your first seven or eight years of your life in southeast  Oklahoma? Do you have any memories of your dad? Dr. Bennett was a  school superintendent in that area.  Well, my twin sister and I weren   t born until they got to Durant which  was after he had moved from his first job in Texarkana and his second  job up in Boswell, Oklahoma and third job in Hugo as county  superintendent, then in Hugo as a superintendent of schools for the city  of Hugo. And then he went to Southeastern and I   m not sure the exact  time he went to Southeastern, but it was a big move in his point of view.  I understand that you were born in the President   s home on the  Southeastern campus. Is that correct?  Oh yes, across the street from the city of Durant. As you know, at that  time some of the schools were outside of the city limits. But they were  so close to the city limits that everybody would say that the school was  in Durant, but it was across the street from Durant.  So you have been in an education family all your life, starting with your  birth.  It seems that way.  Do you recall how many years your father was president there of  Southeastern?  Nine years, as I recall.  Did he share with the family and later you the kind of the process that  guided him to the then Oklahoma A M, now Oklahoma State?  Well, you   ve got to remember, those kinds of things in those days   if  someone was really moving work in a big way they were noted in the  whole area. Southeastern had a different type of summer school and it, I  am told, had an attendance in Durant just about equal or maybe a little  more than all of OU and OSU put together. Summer school was set up  where the superintendent of schools of different groups in that  southeastern corner of the state would come in and head up one division  or another of the summer school. There wasn   t a lot of housing in  7  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Durant and the city of Durant Chamber of Commerce people got in and  encouraged everybody living out towards the college to move the  children in a little closer and to rent at a very low rate, take a room for  the whole summer session where they could walk to college. And it was  low enough they could afford. Teachers in the rural schools could afford  to come in and have summer schools and end up after two or three  summers, maybe more depending on what the subject was. They would  get college credits for the summer school and those days an awful lot of  the schools were being taught with a head of the school. So teachers that  didn   t even have a high school diploma yet, they were getting college  diplomas at Southeastern.  Well, your dad obviously did a great job there at Southeastern. Did  people from Oklahoma A M come and visit with your dad about coming  to Oklahoma State? Do you remember him telling stories about how he  got to Stillwater?  Well, I   ve heard about it, but the name   s slipped my mind. But the State  Senator from Stillwater and the State Senator from Durant were very  good friends. Which one he talked to first, I   m not sure. But it was first  they wanted him to come in January. He said that he couldn   t come until  after summer school because summer school was a big thing down there  and he had a public relations matter dealing with the Chamber of  Commerce in Durant which was helping greatly. But the different fields  that they were teaching depended on what the students really wanted.  They would get people from the school systems in all of Southeast  Oklahoma just for the summer school sessions. They did a fine job  because teachers not only got their degrees, but they learned a great deal.  It was intended, to start with, to merely help people get college degrees  in that area and not just enough barely to get a teaching certificate  Well how did the family feel about moving to Stillwater and Oklahoma  A M? Were you excited about moving?  Well, children always get excited about moving. But we had a very  interesting life down there anyway. We moved in the summer of 1928.  Mother and the other children in the family, we went into the mountains  of Colorado and up in that general area. Went to the Yellowstone  National Park among other things in the summer of    29. But Mother was  determined that we were going to get educated. Part of our education  was seeing that part of the country.  Your father, as president of Oklahoma A M, now Oklahoma State  University was a very public person. But how was he in private? How  was he around the family?  8  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Well, he was the father of the household. There was no doubt about it.  He had certain things that were   you didn   t interrupt him when he was  studying after supper. Unless it was critical   one of the Deans called in  or something like that. But from his point of view, he had to study all the  time. And he did, in the evening. Unless there was something unusual  happening.  I heard that he was a very busy man, of course, and that he didn   t  always get a lot of sleep and maybe he didn   t need a lot of sleep. Could  he get by on not very much sleep?  Of course, I went to bed earlier, but from what the family was told he  was getting five hours of sleep a night, sometimes a little less. But his  point of view was that he had to be knowledgeable about the things he  was dealing with. Always effort to bring things to the college that was  important for each club, and the other agriculture training for children  and adults seemed terribly important to him. I supposed the thing that  caught my attention first though about the situation was when we went  to Stillwater in the summer of 1928, they had a board action to tear  down Old Central. When Dad heard they were about to come up and tear  down Old Central they had an emergency meeting in the board and they  canceled it. My father had the view that Old Central was the only place  that some of the people who had graduated from A M could identify  with him. And if you were going to have alumni participate in helping  the University they had to keep the places that the graduates, the alumni  associated with.  He was very much supportive of alumni involvement in his presidential  career?  As best as I can tell, yes.  A little bit again on your dad. We hear and read a lot about Henry G.  Bennett the president and Dr. Bennett the educator. Kind of as a family,  what values did you learn from your dad? I mean did he have time to  spend with you and the family?  Oh yes, he was very careful to take part of things such as a birthday  party for the children and so on. He   d been known to adjust what he  was   travel was when he had failed to reserve the time when we were  going to have a birthday party or the like. When we first went there, they  used to put up tents and have students in the school be in the tents so  they   d be there for the different functions of the graduate program.  Well, tell me a little bit about your mother and a little bit about her  relationship with your dad.  9  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Well, I   m not sure if that would be much different than it would be with  other families. Mother raised the children, but Dad was very supportive  of her all the time. For example when Dad proposed to marry her, she  accepted and she changed from being a Methodist to being a Baptist  right away. That was in Durant.  That   s great. Did they have different responsibilities in the family? Was  your dad more the disciplinarian in the family?  Well, I   m not so sure I would say that she was a real disciplinarian. I had  two older brothers and one older sister. I   m sure what they did Mother  approved of, or they wouldn   t have done it. Among other things, we  always had, as long as we lived in Durant, a substantial garden. I was  supposed to mow and rake and what not when I got up to being in the  first grade. It never occurred to me that that just wasn   t a part of what  everybody did. But my older brother saw that I took care of my patch.  Going back to your dad, I heard others say that he could relate across a  broad spectrum. That he could relate to farmers, business men,  politicians, ordinary citizens, students. Is that true about your dad?  Oh, I think it is. Whatever affected the school, he would pay attention to.  And certainly politics affected the school, but it was not dominant in his  things. For example, in those days the Governor always named the  business manager at the college. When Bill Murray was Governor, he  had Clint Strom there as business manager. We were going into lunch  one day when the phone call was from Clint. It was urgent, he said he  had to talk to Dr. Bennett. My sister Liberty never did get the phone and  she told dad and Clint Strom said it was urgent. So Dad went and talked  to the phone briefly, came in and told Mother. Of course, all of us were  in the dining room at that point and could hear what was being said. But  he said that Clint Strom was coming by and they were going down and  the Governor expected them to be there in the driving time from  Stillwater to Oklahoma City, to the Governor   s Mansion.  The Governor   s Mansion was fairly new in those days. The Governor  was very friendly with Clint. They had tea and they visited. And finally  he said,    I suppose you   re here to talk about that bill in the state  legislature.    There were no big dormitories on OU campus or Oklahoma  State campus, either one. People from OU got a bill, a very nice bill to  build a big dormitory. But they couldn   t get it out of the committee. So  going through Clint Strom got Oklahoma A M. Clint and Dad worked  it out. Just a copy of the same bill with the words changed to Oklahoma  State, got authority to build a large dormitory and it would be on the  campus. And Clint says that now the people from OU want their bill  vetoed. He  the Governor  says,    I   ve already signed the veto on that  10  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  one. I suppose you want your bill vetoed.    I   m not sure if it was Clint,  but I was told at that point Dad intervened and said,    Oh no, we want  our bill to be signed as a bill approved by the Governor, and therefore  become a law in the state of Oklahoma.    The Governor said,    Well, I   m  inclined to veto it just like the OU bill.    And that   s when Clint Strom got  into it, almost as if he were going to cry. They were going to surprise the  Governor and it was going to be a great thing. It was going to be Murray  Hall but since we can   t do that now, we   re going to have to not have the  dormitory. I was told the Governor looked at the thing as if he couldn   t  believe that Clint was sincere and then apparently, knowing him, Clint  probably was sincere. An old dear friend of his telling him he wouldn   t  have this honor. So I was told that he reached over, took his pen, signed  that bill, and handed it back to Clint, and said,    You see that it gets back  to the Senate.     That   s a great story. Speaking of stories, at class reunions back several  years, I heard a lot of people come back who remembered your dad  when he was president, and they tell some stories. They said that about  every freshman back in those days, back when it was a little smaller, that  he made nearly every freshman come in and personally met with them.  They said that he rarely ever forgot a name when he walked across  campus. Are those stories true?  I think it probably is. Harry O   Brian is the chief judge where I work  now   the Social Security Office here in Oklahoma City, he was a  freshman at OSU and then he went down to Norman. But he had met  Dad once. They had a small talk, a short talk. When Harold was back for  some reason on the OSU campus right after World War II, Harold says  that he walked up to where Dr. Bennett was and says he looked up and  says,    Well Harold O   Brian, where   d you come from?    Harold said,    I  couldn   t believe that he would remember me even.     Well we were talking a little bit earlier about alumni; your dad was very  involved with the Alumni Association over the years. Very supportive of  the Former Students Association as they called it at that time.  He intended to be, but I   m not sure how closely he was with that.  There are a lot of stories about your dad, and how you got the Quonset  Huts and the student housing after World War II.  Oh yes.  Do you know any of that story? How any of that came about? How he  got the government buildings? He was pretty creative about getting a lot  of temporary   of course it wound up some of that being twenty or thirty  11  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  years later   but temporary housing for students and for teaching. Do  you know that story?  No, I know that those things occurred, but I   m not sure how they  occurred. But he was very pleased to advise students on how they can  get student loans and have housing near the campus. I should say, I was  going to say on the campus, but you know those houses aren   t really on  the campus.  The Vet Village wasn   t. They had their own post office.  It was important to the students to have a place to live, of course.  Well Judge Bennett, turn just a minute to some of your dad   s  international activities, and his involvement there. Did he have  experience in international education before President Truman selected  him for Point Four? He had done some other things before that time?  Yes, he had gone from the United States to Germany. On that trip, I   m  sure he was in England and France, also. But he went over officially to  some kind of meeting that was  to  help the Germans get their economy  going again. He also had made one trip down at the invitation of  Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia to visit Ethiopia about what they  could do. I   m not sure what else he did on those trips, but he made  several trips. I say several, but three or four trips to European Theater  and the only ones I   m familiar with that he went into other countries  before he went over with the group with the support of Haile Selassie to  start an education program in Ethiopia.  Of course the Ethiopians were very poor people and uneducated people,  and they didn   t have money. Getting the school program started there  was started after the Ethiopian Program was started that Oklahoma State  took part in. I   m not sure where it ended up, but they had very good high  school students. Some of them who wouldn   t be normally educated at all  ended up back at Oklahoma A M College getting degrees there. But for  example, they changed a lot of things. I think the first real big program  that caught President Truman   s attention of the Point Four program  actually being accomplished was when Egypt, they had a program  always that wanted to use people of the countries they were helping so  that the United States could get out of it not having a ton of cost factors.  But they put steel points, they could make those steel points with the  local people     You mean plows?     who could make swords and what not. Plows, yes. But it let them  12  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  plow their ground down instead of just four inches which had been  traditional with wooden plows, to ten to twelve inches depending on the  type of soil that was there. It increased their production considerably  because among other things, the ground would hold water better when  the rains came. They wouldn   t come every month, twice a year they had  pretty good rains in there. When it was plowed down 12 inches, it  greatly increased their production and it helped the economy greatly.  Something I   ve been thinking about, when President Truman selected  your dad to head up the Point Four International Technical Educational  Systems Program   there   s got to be a story there, I mean how did a  president from a small college in Oklahoma get to be the head of Point  Four? What was the relationship there? Do you know a little bit about  how that happened?  Oh, I   ve heard talk, but I   m not sure. I never heard my father discuss it,  no. But basically I suppose we   re the first that got into feeding people.  An awful lot of people in the world were near starvation during that  period. But dad was asked to and went to a meeting where  representatives from different nations came and they met in Quebec,  Canada right at the end of World War II. I suspect part of what Truman  had heard about had came that he had taken an active part in dealing  with agricultural need for increase of production and how to do it at  costs that they could afford to have to.  So he had built up a little bit of a reputation with his work in Europe and  his recovery in Germany after World War II and then in Canada     His first contacts in that regard were in Canada. He apparently was  thought of late because he went up on short notice. He took some people  with him from the college, two or three people. I   m not sure how many  traveled up with him in Canada bringing the things he would need. But  he apparently had not originally been planned to be in that program in  Quebec but when he did, apparently a lot of people who went to those  meetings as a political matter did not have the faintest idea about some  of the agricultural problems. Apparently, faculty who had already started  working on the Ethiopian financial situation were very helpful in getting  the information they needed.  Your dad was a real strong advocate for the land grant system, the  college system.  Oh yes.  And then a little bit of that philosophy you know the triangle. The three  parts of instruction and research and extension. He really believed in  13  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  taking that knowledge out to the world and helping people. Was that a  little bit of his philosophy on international education as well?  Oh, I think so. I think that   s the way, well the Southeastern State  Teachers College, and that   s the way Oklahoma A M College came to  be active in the foreign programs.  I heard that Dr. Bennett had a close relationship with U. S. Senator  Robert S. Kerr. I know that Kerr and Truman were close in the Senate  before Truman moved into the Vice Presidency and the Presidency. Did  the relationship that your father had with Kerr, did that help him make a  connection with President Truman?  It probably did. I   m not sure how that relationship started but I would  say that they were good friends in a political sense, but probably in a  personal sense, also. But every now and then the Senator would go up to  Minnesota where he had a place to relax and he or one of his aides  would call Dad and Dad would go and spend two or three days up there.  The Senator and Dad, I think they were good friends, basically, but I  think they helped one another also. Each of them realized that they  didn   t have the contacts to do the things they would like to do  completely. But if they put both of their backgrounds together, many of  the projects that they were interested in could be moved through  contacting those who would be affected by them.  Their relationship started back when Mr. Kerr was Governor of  Oklahoma.  I think it probably got started a little before he was Governor. Bob Kerr,  as you know, had that place for him and his family over there in  southeastern Oklahoma. Quite a lot of activity it would be when Kerr  would have groups down from other areas of the United States to  southeastern Oklahoma. But they needed always to have something we  were doing in Oklahoma that would be of interest to say Minnesota or  have interest in California, but I   m sure in college you know that  different ones went depending on what it was Senator Kerr was  interested in.  In international policy and international education, what do you see is  your father   s legacy? What do you think he   s best remembered for and  the legacy he left?  Well, it   s hard to say. You   re dealing with people who even now so  many of them don   t have enough food, so many of them don   t have  enough of anything to really comfortably grow. My father   s concept was  totally different than most of the foreign policy things where we put the  14  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  money in and we run it and financed it as far as stayed there. Dad   s  attitude was real simple. We work programs out so that they can be  handled, financially handled, by using the talents of the areas involved.  Where some of the government agencies and the areas involved would  basically do the financing starting with only a small portion then  branching where they would take it over completely, because it was  really not an American program, it was their program.  We heard about the steel tips and plows. I heard that your father   s  philosophy was that if you teach a person to fish, then they can feed  themselves. But he believed in technology that they could handle locally  and that they could finance themselves  Oh yes. I think part of his success, and Bob Kerr would have been very  active in that, was figuring out how they could get the local people to  handle it or how they could change a program so that now instead of  being a United States    program there, it would still be a program of the  local people but working into it financially on a slower basis.  Where they have local ownership     Where you use local people and the local people resources to make those  programs go.  It seems like I read sometime that your father said he wasn   t as worried  about communism as a lot of people said. That if you teach people to  feed themselves and set up their society where they have a stable  government and they can feed themselves that communism isn   t really a  vital option for them. Was that his philosophy?  I   ve heard that. And it seems like that would be compatible with what  my father thought, but I never heard him discuss it so I don   t really  know that I would put that to his credit. Although it   s consistent with  what I know about what he was doing.  I   ve read a lot about your dad and his international involvement. He had  some things   he got it right on some things on how to do international  policies and affairs and understood. Perhaps we   d be better off if we had  the same understanding today. Does that jive with what you knew about  your dad?  Yes. No one has to tell you that in  the  State Department you   ve got  several programs that are federally funded and run by federal people     that is in charge basically. The Point Four program was the only  program that was not handled with their resources basically, and  intended to phase out American input as we could and they still have the  15  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  benefit of the program.  I guess unfortunately, your dad, because of his tragic untimely death in  the plane crash, wasn   t in that position for very long. Do you think his  legacy would have been more recognizable had he have had the  opportunity to spend more time on the program?  I think so. Actually, he would have been squeezed out three or four  times when he couldn   t handle the national political situation, even Bob  Kerr. He   d go over and talk to the President and President Truman never  really jumped in where he was telling everybody to just leave it alone,  but he would put them off enough that Dad could go ahead with his  program. But after Dad went out, they, two or three who were  knowledgeable enough to handle it and who had been in the State  Department were also in the plane crash that Dad was in where they all  got killed in the plane. Remember they flew from Egypt across to Iraq. I  think they stopped in Israel somewhere along the way, but I   m not sure.  They got to Iraq and then they flew into Tehran at   the snow was  coming down pretty heavy. They were advised just to circle because the  snow was probably going to stop. If they   d make a wide circle they  would be all right. But what they didn   t tell them was that the mountain  on the east side was above four thousand feet. And the plane was flying  at the time they were advised at about 3,000, 3,500 feet.  Oh, my gosh.  Anyway when it flew into the side of the mountain, they were about at  3,500 feet. Neither the pilot nor the co-pilot had ever flown east of Iraq,  the major city in Iraq.  Baghdad  But nobody in the airport advised them  of the height of the mountains there. As you know, in the airplanes there  they didn   t have all of that information that we would have in American  planes.  Looking back on your dad, what factors most influenced your dad   s  direction of his life? For example I   m thinking the importance of  education, work ethic, religious values, family   he lived the American  dream, didn   t he? I mean he came from a middle class American family,  rose to doctorate and     Well family, there in southeast Arkansas   most of them were rural  people in southeast Arkansas in the smaller communities. They farmed  basically. Not only to eat themselves, but to sell so that they would have  some money. You   d call them middle class I guess. But I don   t think of  farmers in rural Arkansas of being financially well off, basically.  Well, it seems like education is kind of the route that your father and  16  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  your family took to move in and have a piece of that American dream. It  seems like education was one of those values that stayed with him his  whole life about educating people and giving them the opportunity to  better themselves. Is that something that you     If you get proper equipment and don   t buy things that you don   t actually  have to have, agricultural program property used will be better than just  like they were at the Civil War time in the rural part of Arkansas.  Your dad was a hard worker. Did that come from his family?  He went to the first and second grade and then because they were so  poor, they kept roomers and boarders, but they were poor folks. Dad got  out of school, he didn   t go to the third grade or the fourth grade or any of  those grades going up. He did at first just work in the big garden. They  had roomers and boarders and they also fed several who didn   t live in  their place. So they needed lots of vegetables. That   s what he was doing,  plus little odd jobs around the neighborhood when he got into the  program for rural free delivery   for rural mail. It was the first, and at the  time the only rural free delivery in Arkansas. It was a trial run.  Did your father   s parents own their land? Or were they sharecroppers?  No they didn   t. They owned the house that they lived in and had  roomers and boarders there across the street from Ouachita Baptist  College. That   s why they could get a professor to tutor him at night just  for the price of the room. That tutoring was every night after supper. He  didn   t get to eat until everybody else had been fed, you know.  It   s been said by one individual that at Oklahoma State University  there   s three periods of OSU history. There   s pre-Bennett, Bennett, and  post-Bennett. He had a huge impact on Oklahoma State. What do you  see, as his son, of his legacy? What legacy did he leave for Oklahoma  State University in your mind?  Well, I   ll put it this way, he loved the college. Back when he and Clint  went down and got that bill signed for Murray Hall, I don   t think Dad  would have ever done what Clint did, but Clint knew the Governor very  well personally. Clint did the only thing that would cause him to sign the  bill. At least that   s my view of it. But Clint was a real good friend of my  father   s. About as good of a friend as he was of the Governor. So it  worked out really good to have him there.  Well he took a small land grant college on the plains and really built it  into a university, although they didn   t change the name until a few years  later. But do you take pride in that as a     17  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Oh yes. It   s important to the state. I don   t think   but you were there and  know better than I do. I don   t think he went into anything that would just  cost money and look pretty. It had to have a utility for him in order to  spend money on it.  Judge Bennett, kind of changing a little bit. Can you share a little bit  about your education, about your career after you left Oklahoma State?  You graduated in what year, it would have been about 1939 or so?  No I finished college on June 1, 1942, and on June 2nd, I was in the  Army. In 1942, they were short of man power, you know.  They needed everybody. Well, I know in the previous interview, they got  quite a bit of information on the war. But what about after? You got  back from the war, and then went to law school, is that right?  Directly to school. Actually, I went to law school by mistake. I wrote it  to my wife, from Japan, that I was going to come back and go into the  School of Agriculture into their business area for Oklahoma at that time  and I think still can use business administration techniques in where  they   re having crops that are being shipped and so on. So we got back,  we hit a typhoon shortly after Japan. Apparently the captain of the ship  had a reason to get back to San Francisco on schedule. Of course when  that typhoon was literally diving down, up down, up down, going head  on into it, the ship began to leak a little bit. It never got threatened with  sinking, but the pumps and what not that they had to throw the water out  couldn   t quite keep up and finally he realized that he had to turn and go  away from the storm. And so got off course, but he, by radio was given  the information from San Francisco. He would be off almost twenty-four  hours getting in from the regular schedule and to get it dried out clear  because the ship was leaking fast enough so that he could make it to San  Francisco, but he couldn   t go much farther without   but those big steel  things with guns on the inside circled around concrete, and then most  steel things. Three of them at the front of that huge ship   a big ship  right at the end of the war. All three of them were smashed in like they   d  done it with sledge hammers. I couldn   t believe that you could do that  with water.  At least you got back on time, or pretty close to on time.  No, no. That radioman had been in the South Pacific for a short while  and for some reason I   m not aware of, I got the chance to meet him.  And knew him, and he was always wanting to know this, that, or another  thing. I was the only officer taking patrols out deep in the enemy   s  territory. Of course, the reason I went was real simple. I had the best  scouts in the army. Best shots, quickest, very accurate. It made me look  18  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  like a beginner, and I had been on the team that had won the national  championship. I thought I was great. But I was just a beginner compared  to them. Of course, they had been doing that with .22 rifles, killing big  animals that had to be shot through the eye or the ear where it would not  hit the bone before it got to the brain, but it had to be going up slightly in  order to catch the bottom of the brain. So that means they had to get in  close and shoot laying down, shooting up. But they started doing that  with a .22 rifle with just a .22 short shell. From my point of view, we  never were that poor. That .22 ammunition was not expensive, but it was  a very expensive thing to them. They would get the only real meat the  family would get to eat, the ones that were with me. Two of them had  been raised in an orphanage in Louisiana, but fifteen of them in a  household where there was no man in the household. There was no man  in their household, just their mother. Their father or grandfather or  neighbor gentleman that was kind would take them out. But they never  had more than one shell for one day. It took about a year to get to where  they could actually kill an animal that way, that is, where it would drop  dead on the spot. And they would have meat for three or four days if  they killed a big animal. Believe me they were good soldiers though.  We   re getting close to one hour. I want to ask you a couple more  questions and then I want to get back and you recorded some stories that  you were talking about back in southeastern Oklahoma.  Southeast Oklahoma was an interesting place. I can remember, Grandpa  came to live with us when his wife died. He was blind. No one has to tell  you there was a lot of streets that were gravel then in that little town. I  told Grandpa I   d take him walking; I was four years old at the time.  Dr. Bennett, since you   ve been in several places such as Washington  DC, have you stayed active with Oklahoma State University? Have you  been connected with the University over the years?  Well, in a sense. Not regular in the sense you were thinking about. But  when we   d happen to be in Oklahoma we   d regularly check in with  someone there at the university that we knew. But the one I knew the  best is retired, Bob Hamm.  Bob Hamm, sure.  He retired. And the Dean of the Library who I knew fairly well has  retired. So I haven   t stopped by there much.  Well, I guess we were talking earlier about Archie Martin, A. O. Martin.  Oh sure.  19  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Probably the person you remember     Oh very well.      as head of the Student Association  Yeah, I   d known him since   gosh we must have gotten acquainted with  him when I was still in grade school. About fourth or fifth grade.  I think he   s the son of retired physician that still lives up in Perry. I  don   t know if you stayed in touch with him or not.  They were good people.  Judge Bennett, we talked earlier in our conversation about how  important alumni were to your dad and to the college. Do you recall the  association, the relationship, with him and the Former Student  Association? Did he attend a lot of events? Did he visit the reunions  when the Alumni came back? Was he active in that way?  Well, he was very interested in the programs that brought students to the  campus, and very interested in the programs that let them have some  skills they could use and get paid for while they were finishing college.  Have you been on campus lately? Have you seen the construction going  on?  Oh, a good deal of it, yes.  I guess there is supposedly currently underway or scheduled over the  next ten, fifteen, twenty years, we have about 700 million dollars worth  of renovation and new construction. Now would that have made your  dad proud of Oklahoma State University? He had that original plan  where he grew the campus quite a bit. This is another big change. Do  you think he   d be proud of what   s going on today?  Well, I   m sure he   d be proud of the University, because he was proud of  it from the day he started there. To him, it was very important that it be  something higher that would be available to the students of the state.  I guess I have one last question. Have you met Boone Pickens? What do  you think about Boone and his support of Oklahoma State and the  University?  I   ve spoken to him. I haven   t really known him, no. But I think he   s  doing a great thing for the University.  20  Gill  Bennett  Gill  I want to end with a couple of stories. We were just talking in here  before we were on the camera and the audio about some of your father   s  stories when he was down at Boswell and Hugo. Could you share with  us some of the stories from when he was County Superintendent and he  was visiting schools there in Choctaw County?  Oh sure. I think the story I remember the best, it happened not too long  after he became superintendent of the county. He had been  superintendent of the schools at Boswell, but he was now at the county  courthouse. They were having real trouble getting anybody who would  teach school down there on the Red River. Really, it was almost on the  coastal plain just north of the Red River. A colored gentleman with a  high school education said he would take that job. It would pay a little  better than he had been working at. And he wanted that job. At first  everybody was recommended against putting him down there because he  hadn   t had any background with colored students, or white students  either. But finally they were desperate to get someone to run that school  so they just hired him.  About three or four days later Dad rode his horse down there to see what  was happening. When he came on the hill looking down on the school,  everything looked normal. Horses were in the lots for the horses.  Buggies and the other transportation items were there in their normal  places. Nobody moving around. And then he rode on down to the  building and it was apparent that things were pretty normal. He stood up  in his stirrups and he could barely see into the school room and the  students were all at their desks. He could tell something was happening  but he wasn   t sure what it was from where he was on that horse. So he  got off the horse, tied him up there and walked to the door meaning to  talk to the professor as soon as they broke for lunch which was to be  pretty soon. He said I must have exposed myself too much, because he  announced in a loud voice bringing his students to attention that the  county superintendent was here and was going to speak to them. He said  a few words and they dismissed them all for lunch just a little early.  Then he was talking to this teacher, the one teaching the school, and  said,    How do you keep the discipline here?       Oh,    he said,    it   s real  easy. Most of my students bring their meals in pails there in where they  put their coats. But their names are on those pails.    And he says,    When  one acts up, I eat his lunch.    (Laughter)  Well I guess those students bring to point your dad started at the very  basic level. I mean in eighth grade schools, small high schools, and  rural communities. Like at Boswell as superintendent, which is a very,  very small rural school, and then as county superintendent. So his  experience in education really has come from the grassroots up. He  21  Bennett  really understood people, didn   t he?  Oh yeah. About what you   d expect it to be. He was very much interested  in what would be helpful to the students and what would have long  range effects on the students.  I mentioned to you I hadn   t intended to go to the law school. I had  written the letter to my wife from Japan that I was going to go to  agriculture school in a business area. The ship had problems, a big  typhoon. We finally ended up showing up not in San Francisco where  we were originally scheduled to be, but in Seattle, and had a little bit of  time there. But we went from Seattle, it slowed us up. In Kansas is  where I separated, at Fort Leavenworth, and my brother Phil was the  judge advocate for the command general staff school there. I was having  lunch with him. I had called the Dean of Agriculture at Oklahoma  A M. By this time, it was about the 18th of October and he said,    No  way. We started the last week of August. There   s no way you could  catch up and be normal in school. So I   m recommending that you  actually start in January, the next semester.     But I   d known him a long time and he volunteered to give me the name  and business telephones of five Deans of Agriculture from this area. The  ones I can remember are Kansas and Texas A M colleges. I called each  of them and the same thing: no way could we recommend you coming in  now because we   re in October. We were past the middle of October.  Anyway went to lunch   having lunch with Phil. That place was full.  The Judge Advocate General, who was seated next to Phil when they  were getting their master   s degree at Harvard College in law, came in  and looked around, walked over to where we were and said,    You all  have a spare chair, if you don   t mind I   ll just join you.    Then he was  trying to be polite, he was asking what I was doing and I told him I just  wasn   t sure and why. Oh he says,    You can go to Harvard Law School.  All you   ve got to do is walk in there and tell them you are there to go to  law school wearing your uniform.    He says,    I got on my desk this  morning, a request for more funds. They need more money. They   re just  starting school on the 20th or 21st.    20th I think.    I signed in on the 20th.  But anyway, deep snow.  We got into Chicago real late. In Chicago, you change to a totally  different railroad to go into Boston. Me and five others, the other five  were all Navy people being discharged, and we got into a taxi; that  doesn   t sound like much of a problem except all of us had a bag full of  clothes and other odds and ends, like shaving equipment. And you get  into a taxi, and even though the distance is short, it seems like a long  ways. But we got there, and a man opened the door and wanted to know  what train we were going to be on and everybody was telling him the  22  Gill  Bennett  Gill  same thing,    We   re going to Boston.    He said,    That train is leaving  right now, you better get up there quick.    So we went running carrying  our bags. I had fairly serious wounds in my legs with being in a fox hole  with grenades going off. But nonetheless, I was bringing up the rear, but  I was close. One of the fellows, who apparently wasn   t in very good  shape to start with, was panting and he stopped to get his breath. He  didn   t make it. The rest of us made it. I was the last one on the train and  it was moving. Some of the riders leaned out and grabbed the two ahead  and me, virtually going over their heads. The last car was full of guys  just drafted to go into the military. I was on the train. But I went to law  school. Nobody knew I was coming. And there was no problem with the  uniform, because that was the only clothes I had. I didn   t have any other  clothing at the time. But you get some odd experiences as your going  through this great life of yours or mine.  Judge Bennett, is there anything else that we haven   t covered that you  would like to talk about? Anything you would like to say about  Oklahoma State University or about your dad or about anything?  Well, Dad, he came back when he went to Quebec to that meeting  dealing with food for the conquered areas and getting the production  back in Germany for food. He was very much impressed with the needs  in all of Europe for food. He had agreed while he was in Quebec to  make a trip and see what the German problem was on raising food and  transporting food for it to really go to people who were really in need  and were hungry. Those were the only times I talked to him when he  was about to do something in the sense of going to try to help out where  there was a problem. What he was supposed to do was recommend what  would be the best way of feeding the people. I   m not talking about the  military, I   m talking about the total population. Apparently, there were  lots of people hungry in those areas.  Well, I appreciate it very much.  -------  -------   
