 Gill. Today is November17, 2009. I   m visiting with  Gail Gillilan on the Oklahoma State University campus in Stillwater,  Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Gail, thank you for being  with us today and giving us some background information on our  Scholar Development and Recognition Program here at Oklahoma State  University.  Could we start with the beginning, a little about where you grew up,  your family, early experiences in life?  And we have how long to do this? (Laughter) I was born in Oklahoma  City. I have always lived in Oklahoma. After I got married, I lived in  Fairview for a couple of years and lived in Watonga for a year and then  we moved back to Oklahoma City. Been in Stillwater since 1988. My  husband was transferred up here with his job and we   ve had three  children graduate from Stillwater High School.  Did you go to high school in Watonga?  No, I graduated from Northwest Classen High School in Oklahoma City.  Can you share, Gail, about some of your work experiences at Oklahoma  State University?  First job I had working at OSU, I started in at the time, it was called  Home Ec. I worked for a professor doing research in the consumer  studies area. I worked for her for almost a year before she took a job out  of state. Then I started working in the University Scholarships Office in  the summer of 1989   started working with Bob Graalman. We handled  the majority of the scholarships for entering freshman and did that for  several years until they took some of those responsibilities into the  5  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Financial Aid Office and we became the Scholar Development and  Recognition Office and worked mainly with the students applying for  the prestigious scholarships.  Do you remember what year that was? Late    90s somewhere, was it?  That I started working for Bob Graalman or when we switched?  When you changed over     That was early    90s, or I guess    92?  What interested you in the Scholar Development Program? Of course,  you were already working with Bob in scholarships, but were you  intrigued by that change?  I was. My first thought, of course, was taking away all of the  applications of incoming freshmen   what were we going to do? We  weren   t going to have very many people to work with. That didn   t last  very long because we started working with, as I always put it, the best  students on campus. And we work anywhere from a couple of hundred  to a couple of thousand each year. Not all of them go on for national  scholarships, but.  Gail, maybe we could talk about different components of the Scholar  Development and Recognition Program, starting with the Freshman  Research Projects. How are the Freshman Research Projects funded  and how much are the grants?  Right now each student gets  800 a year. The funding is through  Roberson Trust, money that had been basically left to OSU. We took  over the Freshman Research Program about six years ago. The students  apply   they   re usually high school seniors that are interested in doing  some type of research. We try to then match them up with different  professors in each college that are doing research in the area the student  is interested in.  How does your office and the university promote the Freshman  Research Program to the seniors?  We rely a lot on the Undergraduate Admissions Office since they are the  ones that actually go out into the high schools and visit with the  students. We have brochures available that they can take and give to the  students and we ask them to mention it to the students   most of the time  they can, as they are talking with students, the student will say,    I   m  interested in doing this,    or    I   m interested in going into research,    or  6  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill     I   m interested in going to medical school,    or anything like that where  there might be research involved and they give them information about  our office and the brochure and have the students fill out the application  and turn it in.  It   s my understanding that undergraduate research projects, grants like  this, are pretty unusual for universities. Is there a little bit of a buzz out  there around the state? Are other kids at Oklahoma State talking to the  kids that they know back in high school about it?  I was not aware that undergraduate research was not available at every  university across the country. We   ve had the privilege of working with  the Wentz Foundation since about 1995 and part of their stipulation was  it go to undergraduates doing research. As Dr. Graalman has gone out  around the country talking about our program and the undergraduate  research the students are doing, he   s getting feedback from other  universities asking, the main thing was,    How do you get the funding?  Where do you get the money to give the students to do it?    And of  course, it was just money that had been left to OSU, so we   ve just had  the privilege of directing the students to do research.  How many applications in a typical year would you have and out of  those how many would you award?  In freshman research, generally 75-80 applications. We try to award up  to 60. We started doing that, like I said, several years ago. Now the  colleges are selecting the students themselves from our information and  we try to limit it right now to ten students per college, that way we can  kind of spread it out, so to speak, around the six colleges.  So there   s not one committee that makes the decision for all of them,   rather  each college has its own selection process or committee?  Right, the colleges asked about two years ago if they could start making  the selections themselves and that was fine with us.  It was a lot of hassle, right? You were glad to give them a little work.  (Laughs)  Right, and they   re going to be working with the students on a day-to-day  basis more than we would. So it only seemed right.  Gail, could you help me understand, what are the steps for a freshman  scholar and what are the expectations of them if they accept that  800  grant you were talking about?  7  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Okay, most of them will have an orientation course in the fall  semester   how to do research, what research is going on across the  university or in the area that they   re interested in. Each college has their  own orientation course that they have the students in. Then usually the  second semester students are paired up with a professor that is already  doing research and they   re just helping in any way they can   learning  different ways of doing research. Hopefully some of them will end up  with publications from helping the professor.  Does the Honors program help to identify some students? Can a student  come in midterm of the same semester, or do they have to come in  freshman fall?  Right now it   s set up on an academic year basis, so they have to come in  starting in the fall and ending in the spring semester and the students do  not have to be in the Honors program.  Is there a lot of overlap there, though?  There is a lot of overlap between the Honors program and the Scholar  Development  Program .  From your perspective, how important is having the freshman research  grants and that money available to the Scholar Development Program?  It is important because, of course, every student wants money   that   s  kind of normal with everyone.  800 is not really going to make a  definite decision for a student because of the fact that it   s just not that  much, but it   s getting into the research area, getting to work with the  professors, in some cases on a one-to-one basis, that really makes the  difference.  You were talking about the professors they get to work with in a more  scholarly setting. From the other side of that, how do the faculty feel  about that? Do you get very much participation? Can you identify some  people who have been very active in that?  Identify, as in you want me to start naming names?  Sure. There   s the risk of leaving some out, I understand. But are there  some professors that really enjoy that and really get engaged in that?  There are quite a few. It   s hard to come up with professors just on the  spot   you put me on the spot here.  That   s okay.  8  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Some of the departments, though, I can think of   Biochemistry is a real  big department on Freshman Research and then going on into Wentz  Research later on with upper-classmen. We have a lot of them in the Ag  Econ area. We have quite a few in Chemistry and then Engineering, just  every department in Engineering has been able to work with research.  And English has been fairly     English has had some, yes. In fact, our only Rhodes Scholar was an  English major and he had a Wentz Project. We did not have the  Freshman Research Program at the time he started.  We   ve talked about the Wentz Research Project, let me move to that  component of the Scholar Development Program. So the Wentz  Program, if I   m right, is for sophomores through seniors?  Correct.  How does it build honors? Is it connected in any way with our Freshman  Research Program?  Well, the idea is that if the student comes in as a Freshman Research  Scholar, doing research their freshman year, that they would want to  continue doing research. The difference with the Wentz Program is that  it has to be student oriented research. It does not have to be completely  original ideas from the student, just maybe something a little different  from what a professor is doing research on. Maybe the student has been  working with the professor and wants to take that research in a different  direction, they can apply for the Wentz Research Project then. They  have to, of course, select a professor to kind of be their mentor, to  supervise their research. We don   t let them just go out and do it on their  own.  Is there a pretty good carryover of students who participate in the  Freshman Research Project that continue onto the Wentz Research?  Quite a few. Some of them may not get a Wentz Award their sophomore  year, but they may their junior or senior year. So it   s not any kind of a  guarantee, but it really helps them open the door into knowing more  professors and what research is going on.  What is the application procedure for that? Is there a committee that  reviews those?  For the Wentz Research? Yes, the student has to fill out what we call the  project description and then the mentor or the professor would fill out a  9  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  form, basically indicating how he or she would assist or supervise the  student. Then we have a committee selected, a representative from each  of the six colleges. They look at blind applications   they do not know  the student   s name, they do not know the professor   s name. They just go  strictly with the project description and they rank them from basically     right now it   s ranking them from one to five, one meaning yes, I feel that  this project needs to be funded and five meaning no. Then we tally all of  those rankings from each of the six committee members and try to fund  anywhere from 40 to 60 research projects each year.  How many applications would you normally have to get those 40 to 60?  Some years we have 100-120, other years we   ve had almost 300. So it  just varies every year.  So you   re up to as many as 300, but you only award maybe 40, 50, 60?  It   s pretty competitive then.  It   s very competitive.  What is the average amount of the research grant?  Right now it   s valued at  4500 a year.  So that   s a step up from  800. (Laughs)  A big step up.  Well, more stipends, so obviously there   s greater expectations. What are  the expectations of a Wentz Scholar then?  Their expectations, hopefully they will go on doing research. Our hope  is that one of these students working on research as an undergraduate  will go on to graduate school, do more research and in some cases come  up with wonderful inventions, a cure for cancer or something.  What would be the total amount in a given year that you have awarded  for Wentz Scholar Projects?  For projects and scholarships both we have awarded up to  700,000 a  year.  Depending on, I guess, what the earnings of the Lew Wentz Fund are.  Right. It depends every year on basically  what  the entrusted funding  gets.  10  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  In addition to the benefits that they get that you described from the  research, does this help prepare them for competition for national  prestigious scholarships? And if so, how does that work?  Yes, it does. One area that comes to mind is the Goldwater Scholarship.  OSU, as a university, can nominate four students each year to compete  for the national awards for the Goldwater. That is based on your  engineering, your sciences, your math areas. Doing research has helped  the students greatly in winning the Goldwater. About two years ago we  had three students win the national Goldwater Competition. All three of  them had multiple Wentz Research Projects.  Then that is a pretty large factor in the selection process of these  national scholarships, the research they   ve done.  Yes.  They look at that then and they submit their work along with their  application to the committees.  Or they have at least cited their research. A lot of the students have been  named in publications where they may not be the number one  researcher, but they   re at least on the committee. So that counts towards  publications. It helps them get internships in the summer.  Could you describe the working relationship with the Lew Wentz Board  and, perhaps, Trish Houston who is their administrator, does she  interact with the Wentz Scholarship selection in any way?  She is more of an ad hoc member of the committee. She   s always there.  She, of course, tells us how much money, how many awards we can  award each year, but she is more hands-off when it comes to which  projects are awarded. She leaves that up to the faculty because they are  the ones that are much more familiar with the areas and whether the  project can actually be done in an academic year, can it be done by a  student. And then each spring we have the students who have been doing  research projects during the academic year. We have a seminar where  they have poster sessions and they present their research and Trish is  always there. Several of the Wentz Board members usually come to that  so they can congratulate the students on their research.  Gail, you mentioned earlier, in addition to the Wentz Research Projects,  which is where they sort of focus their giving, there   s also some other  Wentz Scholarships awarded.  11  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Yes.  Could you explain those?  There is a general Wentz Scholarship. The main requirements are being  an undergraduate, having finished at least twelve hours at OSU, have a  minimum of a 3.0 grade point average and then there is a short essay to  write. The committees usually look at the extracurricular and curricular  activities that the student is going through and try to award as many  scholarships as they can. We have another scholarship for the non-traditional  students. This one was started about ten years ago at the  request of a non-traditional student who, in most cases, a non-traditional  student is someone who has either not gone to college right out of high  school or started a year or two in college and then left for anywhere  from twenty years or so and then are coming back to try and finish their  degree. And in most cases, they are able to pay their tuition, it   s the  books that they are having trouble paying for. Some books, as you know,  can be a couple hundred dollars per textbook, so we started this  scholarship. It   s called a Non-Traditional Textbook Award and it   s  awarded to either part-time or full-time non-traditional students and the  idea is for them to basically help pay for their text books.  How many in each of those categories that are non-traditional would  you award scholarships to?  Non-traditional is usually a small number, on average twenty each year.  The general scholarship has been anywhere from fifty to 120 each year.  Again, it depends on funding, how much money is available.  And that   s in addition to the research grants?  Correct.  About how much is an average amount of money for the general  scholarships?  The general scholarship right now is  2,700 and the non-traditional book  scholarship for full-time students is  1,500.  How important is Lew Wentz Foundation relationship to the Scholar  Development office? Could you talk a little bit about that?  The relationship? In the way of funding, it is very instrumental in our  progress. Do they come to the college? Are they on a day-to-day basis,  do we talk to them? No. Basically, we just see the Wentz board once a  year. They have a board meeting in the fall, which Dr. Graalman and the  12  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  president of the university always go and that   s where we find out  exactly how much funding we   re going to have for the next academic  year. Then as many of the board members as can come in April to our  end of the year program.  I had the opportunity to interview Trish Houston and my understanding,  from our conversation, was that where they focused their target, the  money has changed over the years from the loans to work study to  scholarships and research projects. When did they change their  emphasis over to Wentz research projects?  If I remember right, it occurred about1994-   95. If I remember right, the  first research projects we awarded were starting the fall of 1995. We had  just taken over the program about a year before that, the Wentz Program  in total, and that   s when they were shifting from, as you put it, a service  scholarship where the students would do like a work study type situation  into research and general scholarship programs.  And how important was that to influencing and enhancing our Scholar  Development Program and preparing students for national competition?  I think that was the best thing because having the money to award  scholarships, having the money to award the research projects, some of  the national scholarships, for the competition, that   s what they look for  is the research that students have done. It   s just helped a great deal.  Well Gail, perhaps we could focus a little bit on the preparation of  students for national competition and talk about that. OSU   s received  some pretty phenomenal national recognition and success, beyond what  I think people could probably imagine in the front end in competition for  the Gates Cambridge scholarships, for Marshall, Truman and even had  a Rhodes Scholar. Could you take me through the process of how do we  identify and prepare and groom and coach, if you will, students to   not  that that   s the sole purpose of the Scholar Development Program, but  speaking from that perspective, we identify students and they sort of self  identify themselves. What   s that process and how does that work?  Okay, one thing we do is each fall, we contact the professors across  campus shortly after the fall semester has started, asking them to identify  students who are active in class, participate in class, are doing well on  tests and class discussions and so forth. We invite them to a reception  where we talk about what our office does. We talk about the Wentz  Program, we talk about research, we talk about the national competitions  for the national scholarships. Most of the students we invite are in the  freshman category. We try to tell them not to necessarily stay in one  major, to possibly consider having a minor or a second major because  13  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  that would make them more competitive in national scholarships. Then  we try to lead them towards applying for Wentz scholarships each year,  just to keep in contact with them for one thing.  When it comes time to apply for national scholarships, again, most of  them, like the Rhodes, Marshall, Gates, they apply as a senior. The  Truman, they apply their junior year. Things like Goldwater, they can  apply either as a sophomore or a junior. The Udall, which is students  going into the environmental areas or Native Americans going into tribal  policy or medicine, they can apply for those as sophomores or juniors.  Most of them, the Udall, the Goldwater, the Truman, we have an OSU  competition first. In fact, we just finished receiving applications from  the students. To give you kind of a walk through, for the Truman the  students would apply, fill out an application, general information,  resume. Truman is based on careers in public service, so that   s one of  the things that we have to see, that the student actually has been doing  public service and the career goals that they have set for themselves will  end up in public service. Then we have a committee   faculty across  campus   that go over the applications. We generally select anywhere  from six to ten students to come in for on-campus interviews. OSU can  only nominate four students each year to go onto the national  competition and then the students that are selected for that, we work  with them on a one-to-one basis on filling out the national application     editing their essays, making sure their applications are turned in on time,  their transcripts, letters of recommendation, everything is turned in on  time.  You mentioned that   s for the Truman, is that true for other scholarships  where we have more students that apply than we can go forward?  Yes.  We have an OSU level competition to decide who is going to represent  the university.  Yes, each one. We do not select them ourselves. There   s just no way we  could do that on our own. We have had the privilege of working with  professors across every area on campus and we   ve never had anyone  turn us down to be on one of our committees. They   re just delighted to  be able to work with the students and help select the students and urge  them on for all the competitions.  Could I assume then that for the different kinds of competitions, you  have professors from different areas because they may be more liberal  arts or more of an arts/sciences area, depending on the focus of that?  14  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  That is correct, yes.  You talked about after (just using Truman as an example) you selected  four Truman men and women to represent the university. You said you  work with them and you coach them, could you describe some of the  things you do? You talked about how your office helps them with the  application forms, etc. What other ways do you prepare them for  competition?  Several years ago all of the national applications were on paper, so one  thing was just compiling all of the papers. Now most of the national  applications have gone to online areas. It   s kind of hard when you   ve  been working with paper every day for years to not have that paper to  hold in your hand, but the students have essays, they have personal  statements, general questions that they have to answer and Dr. Graalman  usually works with them on all of that. I work with them on, they have to  fill out applications such as name, address, phone number, date of birth,  that kind of thing. It   s amazing how many times they will have a little  typo in there. We had one student one year that was born in the actual  year that he was applying for the scholarship.  (Laughs) A child prodigy.  Little things like that that you need another pair of eyes to look at it to  notice things like that. Dr. Graalman works with them on making sure  all of the paragraphs are correct in the way of commas and word splices  and so on and so forth and I get to go in and say,    Okay, this is spelled  wrong or you didn   t fill out this blank,    and make sure on the  application, we   ve got the transcripts and the letters of recommendation  all ready.  I understand that the interviews are a very important part of the  regional and national competition, how do you prepare them for those  interviews?  We   ve just gone through that. We   ve just finished that. For instance, the  Marshall Scholarship we had this year two students go down to Houston  for interviews. Again, we start pulling in faculty members and generally  people that have helped us before that have either been on the OSU  selection committee, or in the student   s area that they   re majoring in and  then usually we have like Bob Spurrier, the Honors director, will come  in and help us out on those interviews. Each faculty person has been  given a copy of the student   s application and as I always tell the  students,    Anything that you put on that application, either in an OSU  interview or a national interview, is open for questions.    So, we stress  that anything that they put on there   if they say,    I know about this,     15  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  they better know about it because somebody is going to ask them about  it. So that   s one of the things. A lot of students, we have found, have not  been in an interview situation; coming from high school into college,  you don   t go through interviews. A lot of them would not even go  through an interview until they start looking for a job and so this is just  good practice for them.  And if I understand correctly, some of the faculty, they ask some hard  ball questions.  Some of them do.  It   s my understanding they tape the interviews and then they sit down  with the student and critique and coach them a little bit.  We have, in the past, taped them and then given the tape to the students.  There will be a lot of students who will want to put their hand over their  face while they   re talking. Which, you don   t notice that you   re doing  that until you see it on a tape. So those are things that really help them.  We try not to make them so self conscious that they   re so nervous that  they can   t go through an interview, just to point out things like that.  And stepping back for a moment, Gail, we   ve been talking about the  specific, more immediate kinds of things, but I guess from day one they  start in their Freshman Research Project or sophomore as a Wentz,  they   re actually preparing them. I know Bob Graalman teaches a class,  Windows to the World, encouraging them to take honors classes. You  mentioned earlier, to have a minor or second major to branch out in  some fields and broaden themselves, is there anything else? These are  the general kinds of things that your office encourages early on or  through the process.  We encourage them to think about having a minor or a second major. I  don   t want to be specific, but for instance, an engineer. There   s a lot of  things specific to engineers that they have to take for their major, but we  encourage them to take more humanities classes to just broaden  themselves. That   s what we try to do or encourage them to do. Of  course, we can   t make them do it, but just encourage them to look a little  bit further than their specific major.  Are there other components or activities in the Scholar Development  Recognition Program that we haven   t mentioned? For example, the trip  to Cambridge in the summer, that or are there other things that you  would want to lift up about the Scholar Development Program that we  haven   t discussed?  16  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  I   m sure I   ll think of quite a few after this is over, but I can   t think of  anything right now.  Bob was excited about the trip to Cambridge that they take that I think  your office sponsors each summer.  Yes.  Can you say a little bit about that?  They usually go to Cambridge, England, for a couple of weeks in July.  They have different professors that will go over and teach different  topics, like next year it   s going to be in the food production area. Last  year it was in the humanities area. We   ve done one on leadership and try  to relate it to the students, how they are doing in college now, like in the  humanities areas, how do the writers from England that are actually in  those areas   the students can walk down the streets and say, this is  where so and so wrote his famous book and that type of thing. And it  really encourages them to get out, to travel more. A lot of the students  will then go on to apply for overseas studies, for Fulbright awards and  different programs like that that we try to encourage them for.  Gail, at the nuts and bolts level where you see it, what makes the  program go? What   s the chemistry there?  The chemistry in the department? We have a very small department. It   s  just Dr. Graalman and I. We actually have a graduate student working  with us right now that is working with the Freshman Research Program.  It   s not like,    This is your job, this is what are you   re supposed to do.     We all work with the students. We all talk with the students. We all look  at their applications. So it   s more of a group effort.  How you engage professors and engage administrators, could you speak  a little bit to some individuals that have really been longstanding  troopers that you would give a five star rating to in the program     administrators and/or professors?  Administrators and/or professors. One administrator that comes to mind  is Ed Miller in agriculture. He has been a supporter in our program for  years. The fact that a lot of the Truman Scholars have been coming out  of Ag Econ probably hasn   t hurt the situation any. We   ve had a lot of  biochemistry. Another person that comes to mind is Russ Reinhart in  chemical engineering. He   s been on the Wentz committee. He   s been on  the Truman Committee. Anytime we need him to come in for a practice  interview, he   s right there. So knowing that we have these people we can  call on has helped us. If we didn   t have all of the support of the faculty, I  17  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  don   t think that we   d be able to do half the things we do.  You mentioned Bob in the Honors program.  Bob Spurrier.  Bob Spurrier. I guess he   s been pretty actively engaged in the program?  Definitely. In fact, when we do our practice interviews, he   s gotten the  reputation of being the one asking the hardest questions and trying to get  the students, I don   t want to say in an argumentative mood, but you  know, try to rile them up just a little bit.  Gail, any administrators out of the provost office, out of the president   s  office, do you know any that have been champions for the program that  you could lift up?  Gail Gates from the provost   s office, Academic Vice President, of  course the fact that she   s Dr. Graalman   s boss, has been for several years  now. Almost everything that we   ve ever approached her on, she   s been  right there trying to back us on every program. Anytime we have  programs, anytime we have seminars, she   s right there to help us.  And I recall the former president Halligan was very positive about the  program and talked about it a lot.  Yes, he was and he still is. Even though he is retired from being  president and is now a senator, he still calls occasionally to find out how  we   re doing and do we have any scholars and who is applying for what.  And President Hargis is a really good backer of our department right  now.  Gail, from your perspective, what is your measurement for success in the  Scholars Program, number of national scholarships earned, personal  growth of students, academic reputation of OSU? How do you measure  success?  How do I measure success? Do I measure the success from how many  winners we get each year? No, I don   t. I don   t think that   s the measure  of success. Working with the students, helping them to succeed either in  college or going onto graduate school, just to encourage them. To me,  that   s what we   re there for.  I guess you   ve seen a lot of students grow in their four years that you  know them. Some kid from a small rural school in Oklahoma to someone  fairly sophisticated and a graduate.  18  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Yes, quite a few. And it   s always   I want to say, enlightening to me   it  doesn   t matter to me. I want the students to win. Of course, I want all the  students to win. But, you know from the very beginning, they all can   t,  but just to see the growth and to be able to encourage them, to see that  they are thinking about   some of them will come in and say,    This is  what I want to do in my life.    And then as they start filling out  applications they have to really stop and think about what they   re doing.  Some of them change their mind, but we   ve always had students come in  and say,    Having to sit down and really think about this has been the  best thing that   s ever happened.    So, to me, that   s the best thing. That   s  what we   re there for.  I guess on a personal level, you interact personally more often with the  students than anybody in the office. In a given year, about how many  kids are you interacting with, how many people do you touch in some  way?  Each year? Other than just handing in an application, for instance, for  the Wentz, we   re looking at a couple of hundred each year. The number  will vary. But the more they fill out the applications, the more they come  back year after year. Those are the ones you really get to know. And it   s  wonderful when you hear from them a year or two after they   ve  graduated, they   ll send an e-mail and say,    Just wanted to touch base  and this is what I   m doing.    And that   s wonderful.  You   re kind of going where I was thinking, to ask for follow up, you   ve  worked over the years with hundreds and thousands of students, are  there some stories that you can tell, are there some favorite memories  that you have of past participants?  Goodness. One student that comes to mind that won the Goldwater and  the Udall, his name is Nick Rasmussen. I have not heard from Nick in a  year yet, but the last time he walked in the office, it   s been about a   I  want to say last summer he came by. He   s at Rice University now  working on his PhD, should be finishing up his PhD very soon. He came  walking in carrying a little box and the first thing I said to him was,     Whatever is in that box, don   t let it out.    Because Nick was a zoology  major, and it was quite often that he would bring bugs over and that   s  one thing I didn   t like. So it was not any,    Hi Nick, how have you  been?    It was,    Don   t open that box.    And sure enough he had his  tarantula in the box with him. It traveled with him.  Gail, are there some heartwarming stories about some kids that maybe  didn   t win a national scholarship, but they grew as a person and that  you hold pretty special?  19  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Oh, that would be hard to narrow it down. It seems like there   s always  something special about each student. One student that I can remember  is Cassie Mitchell. She applied for a Goldwater one year, was not  selected to go on in the competition for the national competition and  because of encouragement from our office, from Dr. Graalman and  myself, she applied again the next year and actually won it then. She  made a point in telling us that without our encouragement, she would not  have ever tried to apply for anything again. She was a chemical  engineering major and is now working on her PhD. And so little stories  like that that you think, okay, maybe you didn   t win the first time, but  we were able to give some type of encouragement instead of it all  deflating some egos or anything.  Gail, you   ve been with the program from the early to mid    90s, so it   s  nearly fifteen years or so. Are there some success stories that have come  through the program that are now in industry and business and  government that you would look to that have at a fairly age  accomplished and done some significant things?  How many names do you want there? Some that come to mind, of  course, one student Brian Begley was an engineering major, won the  Truman Scholarship. He went on into business and I can   t remember the  name of the company he works for now, but he has been very  encouraging for our department, for the university and has come back  several times to talk with students. He has gone over to Cambridge and  talked to students over there about our program and applying for  scholarships. So that   s one of the good ones we hear from. Chris  Stephens, who won the Truman scholarship and a Marshall scholarship,  went onto Yale Law School. He   s now back in Oklahoma City and  working as a lawyer there. Shannon Ferrell who was a Truman scholar,  he applied for Marshall, went onto law school. He   s now back at OSU  teaching in the Ag Econ or Agriculture Law area; he   s very supportive  of our office. He   s another professor now that when we know we need  people interviewing Truman practice interviews, we can call on  Shannon. It   s hard to go back though and call them, in this case, Dr.  Ferrell   to me, he   s still Shannon.  (Laughs) And always will be, right?  That   s right.  What are key events and major milestones in the history of the Scholar  Development Program? Some points you can say,    Hey, something  special happened here.     20  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Well being there when OSU got their first Rhodes Scholar was a big  one. Getting one of the first Marshall scholars when they started that  program and they started   there   s a Gates Cambridge scholarship for  students to go to study in England and we had two in one year. That was  just fantastic. Those students now have finished their PhDs and they are  encouraging students. If a student is, for instance, interested in that  particular area or that particular scholarship, we can still contact those  previous winners and they will give the students some insight and help  them in different areas. Like if you want to go to Cambridge to study,  they could tell you different departments and areas that are doing  research that the student might be interested in.  Was the designation of  OSU as a  Truman Honor Institution pretty  significant?  That was. In December of 2000, OSU was selected as a Truman Honor  Institute for their success basically since our office had started, since  they had started the Scholar Development Office and we had really  started working on the national scholarships and had gotten several  winners. The Truman Foundation selected several universities each year  and in 2000 OSU was selected as one of the Honor Institutes.  You   ve seen a lot in the last twelve or fifteen years, a lot of changes in  the program. How do you see the Scholar Development Recognition  Program evolving in the future?  I   m hoping it will continue on. Dr. Graalman and I are both kind of  thinking of retiring in the next couple of years, so to be able to have the  office continue would be something wonderful for us. I know they   re  talking about trying to endow the office. That   s something that I would  never have even thought of years ago, but now it   s being talked about a  lot and I   m hoping it will happen.  What changes do you think will happen in terms of application emphasis  of the program?  I know since most of the national applications are going to strictly online  applications, I could see our office needing to do that. More and more  students coming into college now have used computers since they were  in preschool. This is long before I even knew what a computer was. So  I   m thinking technology is going to have a big play in the next year or  two.  I   ve got to ask you this question before I let you go, tell me some stuff  about Bob Graalman. I   ve known Bob a long time, but what   s he like to  work with?  21  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  Gill  Gillilan  If you   ve known him as long as I have, there   s nothing I can tell you.  (Laughter)  What does Bob mean to the program?  I think he   s been a wonderful head for the program. He can go out and  talk to people. He can talk to groups. I am the person that stays back in  the office and does the paperwork. That   s where I want to be. In fact,  you had to talk long and hard to get me to come over here and do this.  (Laughter) So from that standpoint, I think that   s one of the reasons he  and I have been able to work together so well because as I say, I can  send him out to do all this other stuff and I can stay back in the office  and answer the questions.  Gail, your role is a little bit different than Bob   s, so maybe I can  conclude with this question. What   s given you the most personal  satisfaction in your work with the Scholar Development Program?  The most personal satisfaction? You can   t help but feeling young when  you   re working every day with all these young, wonderful students. I   ve  told more than one that I treat them all like I   m their mother and I won   t  go into the fact that some of them, I could be classified as their  grandmother now, but we won   t go there. So just being able to work  with them on a one-to-one basis and they   re all encouraging.  What have we left out? You have a unique perspective on how this  works. You do the nuts and bolts thing day to day. Is there something  about the program that we haven   t discussed that would be helpful to  record for people to know about?  I   m sure I   ll think of something later, but now that you   ve asked the  question, I can   t think of anything.  Well Gail, thank you very much. We appreciate it.  Thank you, Jerry.  -------  -------   
