 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Friday, October 3, 2008 and I   m in the Angie Debo  Room here on the campus of Oklahoma State University interviewing  J.D. Edmonson, a 1934 graduate of Oklahoma A M College. This  interview is being conducted as part of O-STATE Stories, an oral history  project of the OSU library. Thank you for joining us today.  Well, I   m here.  Well, I want you to start by telling us where you are from originally and  where you grew up.  I was born near Clinton, Oklahoma on a farm about three east and two  south of Clinton. And that was on November 12, 1909. We lived there a  little over two years and Dad decided he was going to take an adventure  so he signed on with the Yearger Plantation in Mounds, Louisiana to be  in charge of swine production on their plantation. We went down there.  At my age I don   t remember it. But in the second year down there in  1913 there was a nice flood on the Mississippi River and a bend across  the river from Vicksburg   it takes a bend to the West there at  Vicksburg   and the levy broke. That whole country that was flat was  under water.  At the time, my mother and I were back in Oklahoma where her father  had passed away at Ada, Oklahoma. Dad wired and said,    Don   t come  back until I let you know.    And I don   t know, after a while he and one  of the black men rigged up a boat or a canoe with an outside rigger on  each side and they went down the river and tracked to Tallulah, the  county seat, although in Louisiana they have Parishes. He got my mother  and I and took us back to Mounds. Mounds is the   well all that   s there  is the plantation store, a saw mill, and a cotton gin. And oh, at that time  around Mounds there was about 40 blacks to each white person. It was a  5  plantation.  So Dad decided he had enough water so we went back to Oklahoma.  We lived in Clinton and he farmed. We had a quarter section there, and  then he farmed some other land. Wheat and feed grains, because you had  to raise the feed for your livestock and your horse power. We farmed  with horses and mules. And he finally bought an oil pull Rumely Tractor  before we left there. I don   t know how successful it was but the tractors  were not too successful at that time. And the thrashing was done with  steam engines and thrashers. We raised wheat and oats and feed for the  livestock. We raised sheep and we had milk cows and pretty well raised  our living right there on the farm. Of course his main object was raising  Duroc hogs. We raised them and transported them to Clinton   put them  on a railroad car and sent those to Oklahoma City. And we stayed there  through 1920.  We moved to Oklahoma City and bought a little acreage out on south  May Avenue, just southwest of packing town. And he  J.D.   s Dad  was  going into the purebred swine business. Well, that lasted about 3 years  until he was broke and we traded the equity there on those twelve acres  for an old poor farm up in southwest Logan County. We moved there on  January 1, 1924. And believe it or not, my uncle lived on West  Fourteenth Street in Oklahoma City and we had those sheep in his  backyard. We left there about daybreak of January 1, 1924 and drove  that flock of sheep with a team and wagon up May Avenue. When we  got past Sixteenth Street we were in open country, believe that or not. I  wouldn   t want to drag one sheep with a halter on it up that now. But we  went north on May Avenue to Edmond Road, a mile east to  Pennsylvania and then north into Logan County. And then three quarters  of a mile west to our house. So it was a pretty direct route.  Before we left Clinton, I had joined the 4-H club. Then in Oklahoma  City I was in the 4-H club. I had my projects, swine and chickens, and  we had a little corn field, so I had some corn. And while there I took a  trip to Kansas City. While in Logan County, I continued in my 4-H club  work. I expanded it so I had swine and sheep and calves. I showed those  in Logan County at the fairs and at Oklahoma City at the stock show and  state fair. And 1927, I made a trip with the 4-H club to Chicago. That  was quite an adventure for a country boy. And then in 1929, I made  another trip to Chicago. I was older, and saw more things. (Laughs)  International Harvester Company took us out to the plant and that was  quite a thing to see and we saw the Art Institute and, I don   t know, a  bunch of other places as well as the stock show.  Oh, I graduated from Navina High School which was a little old  consolidated high school in a little wooden building. And we had four  6  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  teachers, but we had all the grades. I played basketball and played a little  tennis out on an open court, out on dirt floors. For example we played  basketball down at Deer Creek High School, that   s west of Edmond,  which is now a great big school. We played down there on the dirt court,  so they   ve changed too. We played on the baseball team. And other than  that, Navina High School was a   I graduated in 1927 but I still hung  around there and played with them. They didn   t have as strict a rule as  they do now. And then in 1930, Dad leased the farm for oil and got  enough money to pay off the mortgage and bought a new car. Then that  fall I started school, college here in Stillwater.  Well, I just wanted to ask you one question before we start with college.  As a high school student did you ever come up to Stillwater for Round-  Up? 4-H Round-Up?  Oh yeah. It was up here. Well, let   s see, we moved up to Navina in  1924, so I was up here every summer. And then when I was in college, I  wasn   t up here in Round-Up. But after that I was here every year for  Round-Up, every year until I retired. (Laughter) And then I   ve got one  story that I want to be sure I tell and that was when, let   s see, that was  in   I think it was in 1936. They had a big old tent set up just east of one  of the girl   s dormitories. It wasn   t Hanner, it was the other one. Oh, you  know.  Thatcher?  Thatcher. It was just on the west side of Thatcher. Great big old tent, had  all the kids under that. And that night Mr. Pratt, the state 4-H leader, had  all the legislators there under that tent, and that   s when it blew down,  with all the kids and all the folks under it. No one was seriously hurt but  as a result of that, they got the money for Gallagher Hall. Only it was  named the 4-H and Student Activity Building. And if you can find it  somewhere under the cover there, why it   s still up there  referring to the  original name of the building .  Well that   s a good reason to build it I guess.  Well at that time, the laws were such that the legislature couldn   t  appropriate money for a building, for a gymnasium. But they got it  changed. Well they didn   t build a gymnasium. They built a 4-H and  Student Activity Building.  Absolutely. (Laughter)  And that   s a fact. There   s a lady at Pond Creek, she lived there for a  good long while and she   s now in Denver. She was a 4-H club girl from  7  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nowata County and was under the tent at that time. That I know for a  fact. I wasn   t under the tent. At that time I was assistant county agent in  Kay County and a bunch of us were sitting on the sidewalk just across  the street where we could see and hear everything. Well, that was an  interesting little sideline, after I got through college.  Let   s talk about your early years in college. Did you always want to go  to college?  Yes I did. Because my mother   s brother, who lived in Texas, was one of  the early day county agents in Texas and he finally wound up in Travis  County at Austin and that   s where he spent most of his time as a county  agent. He never was in college, but they picked up a farmer that was  interested in agriculture. (Laughs) So that   s how extension got started. I  think it was the 1914 Smith-Lever Act that established the county agent  system. So that   s some of my background and that   s probably why I  wanted to go to college.  Why did you choose Oklahoma A M?  That was the only one. I was in agriculture and 4-H and that   s their  headquarters.  Okay, fair enough.  The one down south was a society. (Laughter)  So tell me a little bit about the classes you remember taking.  Well let me start   back then you didn   t take any of those ACT tests.  When you came onto campus you took a bunch of tests. And I took all  my tests and some of us students, we discussed them pretty well. My  chemistry tests somewhere got shoved off in the trash or somewhere, so  I had to take it again. (Laughs) Well I never had chemistry, but I made a  pretty good grade on that second test so I got in a class with kids who  had had chemistry in high school. I forgot the first teacher   s name but it  was on a Saturday, well it wasn   t. The lab was on Saturday. And well  that first semester, I wound up with an A in that class.  Not too bad.  Second semester was a biggie, but that   s all right too. But anyway, in  those days it was on a three point basis instead of four like it is now. I  had   well, it was a 2.5 that first semester so I was eligible for Phi Eta  Sigma, which I   m a charter member. They established it that year     snuck by. And as far as that   s concerned, I made the honor roll ever  8  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  semester except my senior year. I enrolled in 15 hours and after classes  started I enrolled in an engineering class, ag engineering. I was one of  two enrolled so they didn   t teach it. That   s the semester I made straight  A   s and didn   t make the honor roll. You had to have 15 hours. I wound  up with the highest grade in the School of Agriculture for the four years,  which wasn   t too good compared to what they do now. (Laughs)  Pretty good for back then.  It was alright then.  Do you remember some of the buildings you had classes in?  Well sure. Whitehurst, of course, that was the main building. Morrill  Hall, the English Building, which isn   t there anymore. It was just south  of the old engineering building. And then, the Library, which isn   t there  anymore. Do you remember where that was?  Was it in the old Williams Building? It   s moved many places.  It was just south of the English Building down there that in   was a  parking lot. Now they   ve got a building in it, but anyway. Then, I had  classes in the old Dairy Building that just went bye bye. And then in the  old Animal Science Building   I had lots of classes out there or the old  Animal Husbandry Arena.  Where did you live while going to school?  My freshman year I lived in Crutchfield Hall, which doesn   t exist  anymore. And then I joined the FarmHouse fraternity and lived there the  other three years. And it was 713 College.  How many fraternity brothers lived in the house?  Oh, there weren   t very many. There were probably fifteen. Twelve or  fifteen lived in the house. That was the old Zeta Tau Alpha house before  they built the one where they still are.  Did you enjoy your time in FarmHouse?  Sure did.  Tell me a little bit about your experiences in the fraternity.  Well, I wasn   t the social type. I learned enough in the dancing thing that  I got by one or two dances. That took me out of competition with one  9  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  certain girl but that   s all right. I found another one that put up with me.  We got along. Now, it was one item, on a couple of occasions I found  the bottom of the pond. One time right at the noon hour when we were  all going back to class, I got dumped in the pond. And oh let   s see, my  junior year three of my fellow members drove to the University of  Illinois for the fraternity annual meeting. That was quite the adventure.  One of the boys had a brother who lived in Chicago so we had to go on  to Chicago and spend a little bit of time with him. And I drove the old  car down Michigan Avenue one night. I don   t think I   d want to do that  now. That was in    33. And then I was back up in Chicago in December  of    33 with the college judging team, livestock judging team. During the  summer, the World   s Fair  A Century of Progress International  Exposition  was up there, so we saw where they started it and where  they cleaned up after it. (Laughs)  Was the judging team very good?  Well, we placed second. Ohio State University beat us, 16 points out of  5,000.  Did you judge all four years while you were here?  No. No, just that senior year. Well, we judged   in your junior year the  team is selected and then in the spring of the junior year we judged at  Fort Worth, in the spring. And that was an interesting trip because that  was in 1933 and the president at that time was inaugurated in March,  early March. And when Franklin D.  Roosevelt  was inaugurated he  declared a bank holiday. If you had a million in the bank you couldn   t  get it. And we were five old boys trying to get a few dollars together to  make a trip. Well, I had a little advantage. I was still treasurer at the  House at that time, so I had a few dollars in the box. We borrowed that,  and I think I helped some of the boys make the trip. But we made it. And  Al Darlow was our coach and he furnished   the college furnished  transportation. We got down there and spent the night in a hotel then  judged the next day. We checked out and then spent the rest of the time  we were there with the boys with the livestock. We got along.  And we won that contest. We were first down there. Bill Ball was high  man and I was third. They put mules in the contest down in Texas trying  to see if we could judge mules, but we did. We won the mule trophy and  the whole contest. So, I don   t know whether they kept mules in it or not.  All the mules they had were those out of the stockyards. They weren   t  real fancy show mules. And during the contest, right at the last of it, well  one old mule broke away and ran off. (Laughs)  Did the team practice a lot?  10  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Yeah, I remember when they took us in the fall, we judged out in  Garfield and Grant County   swine and horses and cattle. I remember  some of those farms out there. J.P. Beale, who   s the father of Forrest and  Art who are both graduates here and Hart taught here for several years.  And anyway, we spent the night in Enid at the Youngblood Hotel, which  the hotel is there. Well the building is there, but the hotel isn   t. I don   t  know, I think it   s just a business building. Then we judged in various  other states and then when we were going to Chicago, we judged in  Kansas City. Oh, in November, early November, it was little better than  a week before the Chicago contest and we judged in Iowa, Illinois,  Wisconsin and Minnesota. So I got a little traveling in with the     interesting college years.  What other activities were you involved with?  Oh I belonged to the Aggie Society and the collegiate 4-H club and then  my junior year I   oh goodness gracious, Block and Bridle and one other  one  Alpha Zeta .  Was President Bennett     President Bennett was here and he did everything in his power to keep  the kids in school. My junior year I came back to school with less than  five dollars. No way to borrow it. Folks didn   t want to lend any money,  if they had any. And he said,    If you   ll enroll, I   ll enroll you, and if you  can pay for it before the end of the semester, you can enroll again.    So I  did. There at the fraternity, I got a job at the grocery store, Farmer   s  Grocery Store down there. Back in those days it didn   t take a lot to  enroll in college. There wasn   t anything as tuition, which is something  now. There   s just fees and the O   Colly and the Redskin and things like  that. That   s all the   stadium fees and your ticket. And I took all that in  of course. At the end of the semester, I had to pay it up and enroll again.  I worked down at the grocery store that first semester and into the  second semester. And then I got a job with Dr. Craft out at the Animal  Science department. He was the genetics teacher so I worked up some of  his figures on his genetics and his pigs. I don   t know what I did, but I  worked. Then my senior year, I worked out at the barns   hog barn. Just  plain old feeding and cleaning. And then I worked with Dr. Hawkins on  a project, a breeding project, with hogs. And the old sows began to  farrow their pigs. For some reason or another they tried to be cannibals.  They tried to eat the pigs so that went sour. Not only that, they aborted  and something happened, so that went sour. Then he was using another  professor   s barns so I had to clean those barns with lye water. And then I  shifted over to the white rats. (Laughs) They were in the basement on  the north side of the old animal husbandry building. Well, it was the  11  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  momma rats that were eating the babies in that deal. So everything I  worked with went sour. So, I wound up my year maintaining the white  rat herd. And all the fellows said that was my pension, ten dollars a  month. That   s how some of the kids got through college. That   s how I  got through college anyway. But I had a good time.  Tell me about sporting events. Football, basketball, wrestling     The four years I was in school here, we never lost a game to OU. We  tied one, but we didn   t lose it, 0-0. Then Lynn Waldorf was our   football  coach. And he went from here to Kansas State. And from  Kansas State one year, to Northwestern. And he wound up there. Then  following that football wasn   t very good. Basketball wasn   t very good.  Fellow by the name of James was the coach. It was a fair team, but it  wasn   t very good. Iba didn   t show up until after I left. But the wrestling  team was good. Gallagher was the coach and those four years, they had  some good wrestlers here. Several of them went on to the Olympics and  won. The one was quite interesting because I followed him because he  became a wrestling coach over at Locust Grove and that   s where my  wife came from, Andy Hesser. Did you ever hear of the Hesser   s?  Mm-hmm  Andy, he was a loud mouth and a lightweight wrestler. But he wasn   t too  bad. And he went over there to Locust Grove. He and his loud mouth,  they didn   t believe half of his stories but they were pretty well right.  Anyway     Did you meet your wife here on campus?  I did. My sophomore year, she came as a freshman.  How did you meet her?  At a 4-H meeting, collegiate 4-H meeting.  What was a typical date like?  (Laughs) Very simple. This old country boy was afraid to touch  anybody, you know. And we went out. My sophomore year, there was a  senior girl here that I liked real well. But she was a senior and she was  from Shawnee. She went into teaching and I was an old country boy and  didn   t have any money, so no travels. Didn   t follow that up. And then I  had one other girl that I was interested in. But she was from western  Oklahoma. And I needed a date there at the fraternity and another boy  who knew her from the area out there, he got a date for me. I had a few  12  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  dates, but she and her boyfriend from Enid, they liked to dance, and I  didn   t, so I cut it off. Of course, I had one on the hook already.  (Laughter) So when I got out, I got a job at Newkirk   s as emergency  agriculture assistant under the farm program, which turned into a regular  job.  Do you remember graduation?  Yeah.  Tell me about it   where was it held? In the auditorium?  In the auditorium and the speaker was President of SMU  Southern  Methodist University ,  Charles Claude  Selectman. Yeah, that   s right.  Did your family come to see you?  My family came. And when I graduated, I didn   t have a job. I left my  name in several spots. So, I went home and helped my brother harvest.  We had a little old combine and we did custom harvesting then. That  was in the    30   s and wheat wasn   t worth anything and it didn   t make  very much and we got about a third of it. The owner got about a third of  it and the fellow that put in the crop got about a third of it, which was  very little. But anyway, we went through harvest and completed it. I was  helping a neighbor thrash oats and Fred Merrifield called me and asked  if I wanted a job. And I got a job as an emergency agriculture assistant  in Kay County.  And did you become an extension agent?  Well, I was up there from July    34 until September    35 and they were  talking about calling the AAA  Agricultural Adjustment Administration   or the farm program unconstitutional and I got an opportunity to become  a regular assistant county agent and went over to Osage County down in  Hominy. There were two assistant men agents, one in Hominy and one  in Fairfax, and one assistant home agent in Pawhuska and a county agent  and a home agent. So I went over there in September. And the county  fair was going on so they put me to work at the county fair. I was the  superintendent of the crops division. The only thing I really remember  there is that there were evidently several Greek farmers in the Pawhuska  area and they were vegetable farmers and they were exhibiting at the  fair. And while I was taking entry, these fellows were speaking in their  own language and you didn   t know what they were talking about  (Laughs) but so what.  So, I went down to Hominy and worked with the 4-H clubs down there.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  And I remember one 4-H club over in Shell Creek, which is immediately  north of Sand Springs, and the only way to get to that from Osage  County was to go back into Sand Springs and come out on the north side  of Sand Springs to this Shell Creek School. And it was a two-room  school   pretty good size school. That was in the fall of    35. If there was  ever any community that was poor with no money, I   ll tell you on the  roads around Hominy you could see folks walking with a sack on their  back with their groceries and things going home. And oil wasn   t worth  anything. The Indians didn   t have any money. The old store there in  Hominy, the general store, Hominy Trading Post, there was   it wasn   t  the Mullendore   s, the Mullendore   s were in the bank. There was one in  the bank at Hominy and one in Cleveland. Drummond   s, the  Drummond   s   the Drummond name is well known here in Stillwater.  Sure, absolutely.  And there were several of those Drummond   s. There was Drummond in  the pioneer store. And I know there was a young Drummond  Frederick  Drummond  that was over here in college and he   s one of the main  Drummond   s, lives in Pawhuska now.  Frederick?  Well, there was three Frederick   s. (Laughter) You had to almost identify  them, that this was the young Fred. But he   s older now. Anyway, rather  interesting. Oh, I don   t know too much other than in college, while I was  here. One time, I took a trip with a man out at the hog farm. He took  some hogs down to   and I went with him down to the school at  Tishomingo. I remember on that trip we left pretty early and down here  west of Perkins, we run into a bunch of cattle on the highway. No  casualties, so we managed. And I tried to hitchhike one or two times. I  didn   t have any luck. I   d get dumped off out in the middle of nowhere.  Did you have a car on campus?  Oh, Lord no  There were only two or three cars on campus that would  run or go somewhere. And we had one in the School of Agriculture and  he was from Amarillo. I can   t think of his name now, and he was real  popular.  I bet.  I   ll tell you that sheep barn is a long ways out there. And walking was  everything. Oh yeah. The cattle barn was out there and the hog barns  were still out there. And the dairy barn was out there and smelled just  like the dairy barn smells. And the boys that worked there, you knew  14  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  who they were.  Mm-hmm  (Laughter). Even though they changed clothes, why it follows them. One  of them lived at the house, Jim Childers. He was on the Aggie Quartet.  He sang at our wedding, but he   s passed away. All my friends that I  knew in college are gone. You wonder why the old man is still around.  Well, what is it about Oklahoma A M, Oklahoma State that sparks such  loyalty in alumni? Alumni are so loyal here. What do you think it is?  Well I know one that isn   t.  Uh-oh.  An old boy up in Medford. He graduated down here and then they have  football tickets to OU,  University of Oklahoma  him and his wife. Oh  you never can tell.  There   s just something about the old institution. And then in my work, I  have had assistants that were graduates here. In fact, after I moved to  Woodward and became a full-fledged agent, and back in those days you  were a county agent, you were in charge of the Federal Farm Program.  Although you had an assistant that did the day to day work you were still  in charge and had the educational work. So Chester came out there in the  spring after I went there in the fall. And he stayed with me for a year.  My district supervisor at one time was my county agent when I was a  kid, he asked me about Chester and,    Wouldn   t he be good   ,       cause  the old boy down in Logan County wasn   t getting along with the people.  And I said,    Well I know one thing, Chester would sure get along with  the people. He   s got a few things to learn yet.    He went down there and  stayed six years. He went home on Christmas and his dad wanted to  leave the farm, so they decided to move back to the farm in Lockney,  Texas. Then he bought another farm and they went into irrigation  farming. So we kept up with Chester Mitchell and the family and that  actually led to one of the professors here on the campus in the Animal  Science Department, Bob Kropp. I don   t know if you   d know him or  not. But he   s been here long enough to retire, but he   s doesn   t.  Connections go everywhere. A lot of the folks that we knew out in  Woodward, I know some of them now live in Medford and all around  us.  Well it   s been a long time since I retired   1965. And I   ve kept busy. I  work for a furniture store there in Medford and then he expanded in  Blackwell and he also ran a funeral home. Oh, I had experience in a lot  15  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  of lines. Worked for a fertilizer dealer, and then I worked for farmers  and got along with them pretty good. If the old machinery went bad,  they took care of it. I   ve had some tractors kind of go bad, but I didn   t  wreck them. I caught it before it went too bad. But it   s been interesting.  Any advice for students nowadays?  Well, you better get your main things ready before you get to college.  Because you   ll have to take some courses with no credit. But I  understand that they got a deal with     NOC  Northern Oklahoma College ?  NOC, right here on campus now for those who have to make up work,  which NOC is a pretty good school and they also have a unit in Enid.  The advanced education is closer to the students now than it was.  Northwestern has a unit in Enid, and they also have a unit at Woodward.  And Woodward has a vocational deal along with Enid and a bunch of  others. But the opportunities are out there and now out here in the  Animal Science Department, you can get about anything out there in the  department. A student can get   when I was in school, livestock  production was it. Production was your animal science. And then it was  just livestock and poultry. We had poultry, chickens. Chicken Thompson  and Hog Thompson. They were professors here. (Laughter) Have you  heard about them?  I   ve had at least one other person mention them.  Well, Hog Thompson, he was an after dinner speaker. He would talk  about feed and feeding of livestock. But the interesting thing about   he  had a son that was also in college at the same time and he was a  newspaper man. He had the O   Collegian and the Aggievator or whatever  it was. And then back in those days, they tried to keep the boys and girls  apart, which is difficult. There was a lady and a man that kind of rode  herd on that kind of stuff. They caught an old Scoop and somebody in a  compromising situation and the next morning, Scoop was a former  student. He just checked out. But later he became editor of the Miami  Herald because we saw him down there when they had these parades. So  he finally got his education somewhere. Oh, we   ve had some characters  around here.  I bet you have. What do you remember of Chicken Thompson?  Well, he was with poultry and I don   t know too much about him. I don   t  know any particular stories on him but I just know there was Chicken  and Hog Thompson. I remember my chemistry professor my sophomore  16  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  year. Now, I can   t think his name. But he was a young man at the time,  and he was also interested in athletics. And I know after I was graduated  and came back here to basketball games, he was taking tickets. So  names get away from me. Darlow is the man that I really remember in  the Animal Science Department. The year after I graduated he left here  and went to the University of Wisconsin. He was up there several years  and then he must have gone to the Point Four Program because I know  that he was over in India. And then when he came back, I think he was  vice-president, wasn   t he? Didn   t he, didn   t he get to be vice president  somewhere in later years? I sure did think a lot of him, he and his wife.  Did you get married while you were still a student?  Oh no, I was out of here. She was a senior after I was out. So, I made  lots of visits from Newkirk to Stillwater. I had a place to stay overnight.  (Laughs) We were married   she graduated after summer school in 1935  and we were married in October 1935. And she thought she was going to  move to Newkirk and suddenly I changed things and took her to  Hominy, which is not a great place. Now they   ve got a prison over there.  Over there close to the little school north of Hominy. We moved from  Hominy in the summer of 1935. Oh, must have been early August. The  town of Hominy ran out of water about two weeks after we moved. I  mean they ran out of water. Their lake went dry. They hauled water from  Cleveland in tank cars. I   ll say that they   ve got a lake out there now that  won   t go dry.  Where did you move after Hominy?  Back to Newkirk.  Okay.  And we lived in   Dorothy and I lived in one room where I had stayed  before until the first of September for our house to be open. Housing  was hard to find back in those days. They were not building. I know  after we moved to Woodward, well I   d gone out there and made  arrangements for a house and then something delayed the appointment.  When I got checked on it, it had been rented. So I had to hunt again. The  next November, I still had a job out there, so I finally got a loan, and we  built a little house. And that was the best thing I ever did. I had a few  head of cattle back home and Dad got to where he couldn   t take care of  them so he sold them. Back in 1937, cattle wasn   t very   you didn   t get  much for them. But I got enough to buy a lot. So I got a loan to build a  house. That loan was for  4,025. That wouldn   t go very far now. Would  it?  17  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  No not at all, but back then     It did. Pretty nice little house. Two bedrooms, bath, living room, a little  dining room, a kitchen, a back porch. Pretty well enclosed. And we  moved into it in April. Early May  of 1939 . Because the second little  girl  J.D.   s daughter  showed up the 21st of May. Well then, it was May  when we moved in then.  Well anyway, we   ve had with the two girls, we had two accidents. Only  one night Dorothy and I stayed up all night, one time. First time when  Eileen was born. Eloise was out there helping her dad do the laundry and  I looked up about like that for something, and here come a little hand  through the ringer.  Oh   I mean it was just   oh I got that thing stopped and reversed and released  and laundry stopped and we took her over to the hospital and he wanted  an X-Ray of that arm, but he wanted her to take some medicine of some  kind but we couldn   t get her mouth open. Oh, Doc says,    Take her home  and keep her warm and comfortable and we   ll see what happens.    That  afternoon she was out riding her tricycle. As far as I know, she never  had any trouble with it.  That   s good   Oh, that little problem I solved. But then when Eileen came along and  she was around eleven months old, just started walking. And she was  walking early. She walked on the old hot floor furnace. And that was     well we hustled her down to the doctor. There wasn   t a whole lot he  could do then but he kind of patched her up and we took her home. Well,  it wasn   t only her feet, but over on her hands. So her hands were  bandaged and her feet were bandaged. We thought we   d have to do  some grafting but we didn   t. She wore corrective shoes for a long time.  And as far as I know now, her feet look pretty good.  Did both of your kids go to Oklahoma A M?  They did for a while. She  Eloise  graduated, the other one went two  years and in the summer, and then her boyfriend was a senior and she  was a sophomore, so they eloped in March. And we found out about it in  July. And they were about to move to Iowa. So they moved to Iowa and  he was an ag teacher and then he started going to school and studying in  between and he got a degree in counseling so he became the school  counselor   spent 39 years in the same system. And then he retired,  bought up some old houses, overhauled them a little and then rented  18  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  them. And then three years ago, little over two years ago, he went to the  hospital to correct an aneurysm and a valve in his heart. Spent 72 days in  the hospital there in Omaha and didn   t make it. So Eileen sold out and  cleared out and moved back to Edmond where the  her  oldest boy is a  doctor.  So you got your family back in Oklahoma?  Well that one, and of course Willie  Eileen   s son  and his brother John  and he   s in Indianapolis. He got into Campus Crusade and then he got  into the ministry work and was working and now he   s changed his job. I  don   t know for the good or not. But anyway, he   s changed. They   re in  Indianapolis and they have two girls. Let   s see fourteen and about  eleven. Willie has three children. His oldest son graduated from Edmond  Memorial High School this spring. And the poor kid had one B on his     and so he was salutatorian. And how many valedictorians    were there?  Eighteen? Something like that, poor kid. You know, he made a good  enough grade on that ACT that he got a free ride to OU.  Well that   s good. Education is good.  Yeah.  Education is good.  But you know.  No matter where it is.  But, he   s having to study a little now. (Laughter) Chemistry.  Sounds familiar.  Pretty well advanced chemistry I think.  Well is there anything else you   d like to tell us today? Any other stories  you   d like to mention?  Well, there   s one or two things I would like to say.  Okay.  When I went to Woodward, the REA  Rural Electrification Act   program was just getting underway. Kingfisher was the first one in  Oklahoma. Kay County and Newkirk was the second one. And I was  there when the old boy came and discussed it with the agent. When I  19  left, they were stringing wires so I thought I would go to Woodward and  I   d have a job to do out there. Well, population was too thin. And you  had to have two users per mile for REA. But a year or so later, they said  if you   d get so much revenue per mile, so that   s when we started.  I called a meeting of Woodward County, Ellis County and that part of  Dewey County north of the South Canadian River. And from  representatives at that meeting, they organized and formed a board. And  we started from there and organized and they were all set and everything  and we met the contract for a little better than 300 miles of transmission  lines and December 7th hit. And you know what happened then,  everything came to a halt. But we   d already built 30 miles and so the  powers that be said,    Well you sure can   t operate on 30 miles so go  ahead with your contract and build that.    We had a little over 300 miles  of line. We built that and we added a quarter of a mile here and there  during the war. And after the war we expanded into Harper County and  Beaver County and got our nose over in Major County.  Dorothy and I attended their fiftieth anniversary in 1990, and at that time  they had 4,400 miles of transmission line. Which is a good size, and it is  doing good. And the oil business out there now is using it. But anyway,  they are also making electricity by wind out there now. I was out there  last November and saw some of those big old windmills. Although the  wind wasn   t blowing very good that day. And they don   t move when the  wind don   t blow, but the wind blows most of the time. So that is a real  growing concern. That brought that country out of the dark and the  living conditions are much better. When we were out there trying to sign  them up to join in, they said  4 is too much to spend for lights. That   s all  they were thinking of. But when that power got turned on, they got more  than lights.  Another project I started out there was the Soil Conservation District.  John Nelson, the district man at Clinton, came up and he and I held a  series of meetings in the county. We elected some supervisors during  those meetings. They held an election and it passed by three votes. They  didn   t know if that was right or not but they decided that the state office  at election had three majority so we went ahead and it is now one of the  better districts in the state. They   ve won a number of honors out there.  So those are two of things that     And then my 4-H livestock program, I think, was outstanding. We  showed cattle, sheep and hogs at the county fair, the district fair in Enid,  at Oklahoma City, the fair and the stock show, at Tulsa. We showed in  Kansas City and we showed in Denver. So we placed well. When I went  to Woodward County it was at the end of all the draught years they had  and the cattle business   there were two men that had a few registered  20  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  cattle in the county. Hardly any cattle   well the pastures were just gone,  gone. But we kind of got the livestock program going in the county and  the 4-H program, and then when I moved to Grant County, why I  followed it up there.  Well, in Woodward County we had the grand champion steer at  Oklahoma City in 1946. We had the group of five steers from county  and schools, three years first and the fourth year we were second. And  practically all those calves were raised right there in the county. So we  left there with a good livestock program. Grant County was   they  showed the reserved grand champion in Tulsa, and the reserved grand  champion steer in Oklahoma City, and we   ve had the grand champion  lamb and reserved champion lamb in Enid. So we   ve done pretty good in  our stock program in both counties.  Pretty good. The whole transmission line set up, that must have been  amazing. I mean you   d have to convince everybody to     Oh, yeah. Those folks out there, they didn   t have any money.  That   s right.  And, of course, then they had to wire their houses. I   m sure some of  them were wired a little scantily. But I   m sure it   s changed by now.  Sure.  I look back. I think I had a rather successful career. Nothing major or  anything like that. I was selected as an individual from the state county  agents on the Dow Study Tour which was sponsored by Dow Chemical.  It was a three week paid trip visiting the southeastern states and the  farming industry. We started in Memphis, went down through Arkansas  and the cotton. Then we saw, kind of, the beginnings of the catfish  industry. A whole quarter section diked up and feeding these catfish in  there and harvesting them. And of course that   s where you get your  catfish anymore. And we saw the paper industry. We went through three  paper mills. One in Crosset, Arkansas where they made cardboard  boxes, that was their primary project.  And then was over in Mississippi. The interesting thing in Mississippi  was the Delta and Pineland plantation which is an English concern. They  bought that land when they had something going on in England and they  were afraid that their cotton supply might need it. There   s one thing  about that, they were raising cotton and pedigree cotton seed. And you  can still buy that Delta and Pineland cotton seed. And on their  plantations, all of their tenants houses were well painted, had screens on  21  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  the doors and windows and were well kept.  Then I don   t know, we got on down in Louisiana and we got over   we  just crossed the Mississippi, but were still in Louisiana and we saw the  sweet potato country. And then we stopped there at the capitol and  looked around a little. We all got down to south Louisiana. That   s  interesting country. Saw the sugar cane   sugar mills. Then we were in  New Orleans and went on down the river from New Orleans, into  mosquito country. We got on down into a grove of orange trees on down  the river and we got out of the bus and were going to see it. And we saw  the trees in a hurry and then got back on the bus. Oh, those mosquitoes  were   then we saw mammoth piles of sulfur getting pumped out of the  swamp out of those deep wells over to where they were loaded on the  boats on the river. Well, that was interesting country.  And then we saw the paper mill at Mobile. And that   s the International  Paper Company. They made bond paper   quality paper. They   d take  those old pulp logs which were, well go on a railroad flat car and eight  feet I think is what they are. They   d run that through a hammer mill and  just say,    Womp,    and that   s it. It   s pulp. And they put these in these big  vats which are probably about three stories high with the chemicals that  they put in there and they heat that and when it   s ready, well they just  roll that pulp on a great long deal and keep rolling along with the heat  under it. And the next thing you know, why, it   s paper of some kind. I  don   t know.  What year did you take this trip?  1960 and we got over into Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia. We got into  Florida just barely. We stayed two nights in Albany, Georgia although  they called it,    All Binny.    Quite interesting. Georgia   s quite  interesting. And we saw a lot of industry. One thing, the Mormon  Church has quite a cattle industry in Georgia and Florida.  I   m from Florida, so I know.  So you know?  Oh yeah, Central Florida, especially the cattle. Mmm-Hmm. Absolutely.  Well, they pasture them down there and then the feed lots are there in  Georgia. Then we saw the Georgia experiment station. And we ate lunch  one day at the Georgia prison farm. They put their prisoners out to work.  We had tin plates and tin cups.  And no knives.  22  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  But anyway, it was a good meal. And then we visited the Georgia 4-H  club camp, Oak Eagle   some kind of eagle. It was built with prison  labor. But it   s a beautiful lay out. And they have all kinds of conferences  there. We went up to the University of Georgia and the chicken business  and went across South Carolina, little of it, and then North Carolina. On  Saturday night we were invited to view the play there that the Cherokee  Indians have, Unto these Hills. That   s when they moved the Cherokees  from Alabama and Georgia to Oklahoma. That   s a play in regard to the  movement.  Then we went on up into Kentucky and the Bluegrass Country. Saw  some of the horse farms and one of the most interesting things that we  saw there was the farm or ranch or whatever you want to call it, had this  big company down in Texas. Anyways, they had their breeding herd of  the Santa Gertrudis cattle in Kentucky to keep away from the foot and  mouth disease that was prevalent about that time there on the border.  That was some beautiful cattle. Saw some of the tobacco farms in  Kentucky and Georgia. And then we wound up back in Memphis and  went through the International Harvester Company making cotton  pickers, cotton picking machines. That was a nice trip.  And then I got to make another trip back to the 4-H congress in Chicago  as a helper from the County Agents Association. Oh, I made a few trips.  Then we made a lot of trips to the National County Agents Conventions.  From Miami, Florida to Seattle. And to Honolulu.  Oh nice. So you got to see a lot of the country.  So I   ve seen a lot of the country. Traveled a few miles.  Mm-hmm. Not too bad.  It   s been an interesting trip.  Well anything else you   d like to tell us before we end today.  Well, I   ve been a member of a civic club. Joined the Rotary in Hominy  for less than a year. Moved to Woodward and joined the Kiwanis Club,  was there a little over 14 years. Moved to Medford and the Lion   s Club  was there, so I   ve been a member of that for 50 some years. I   ve been  president, secretary a couple of times and been a little of everything else.  And they honored me a couple of years ago with the   well the old boy  that was the originator of Lion   s Club. And of course to do that, the club  has to put up a thousand dollars. I   m a member of the Retired Teachers  Association, Retired County Agents Association in Oklahoma and  national. Member of the Methodist church. I think that kind of covers  23  Nykolaisyzn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  Edmonson  Nykolaiszyn  the water front.  Well we appreciate you telling us your stories today. We appreciate you  sharing them with us.  Right off hand I don   t think of anything else, particular. Well, there   s  one other thing. I have endowed a scholarship in the Animal Science  Department. Let   s see how many have we presented. We   ve represented  nine, and seven of them have gone to veterinary science.  Nice  In other words, those vet science kids have to have good grades.  Do you get to meet the students every year?  Oh yeah. Yeah. Well, they have an annual meeting out there where these  are presented in the first week of April. Every year except one when  Easter fell in that time.  Do you enjoy giving back and helping the students?  Oh yeah. And if there   s any residue at the end, why they   ll get a little  more.  Well, that   s good that you   re still a big fan of Oklahoma State. And a big  supporter still of Ag Science. And we appreciate it.  Only thing about   I haven   t helped Mr. Pickens too much. Other than  that I   ve had a season ticket since in the early 1950s. Well, of course,  now she  his daughter, Eloise  uses it.  That   s a long time to be a season ticket holder.  Yeah, it was after we moved to Medford. Woodward   s a pretty good hop  and during the war, why, you didn   t go anywhere. Gasoline was rationed  and tires were almost nonexistent. I   m telling you some of the folks on  some of those tires, I don   t know how they made it.  Well we appreciate it.  -------  -------   
