 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Friday October 19, 2007 and I am at the OSU  Foundation interviewing Bill Kosanke. This interview is being  conducted as part of O-STATE Stories, an Oral History Project of the  OSU Library, thank you for joining us today.  Thank you for having me.  Now I heard that you have some good first-hand accounts of dealing  with Pistol Pete, Mr. Frank Eaton.  Yes, that   s right. I was a student from 1953 through 1957 and I believe it  was 1957 that I was enrolled in the Oklahoma history class taught by Dr.  B.B. Chapman. Dr. Chapman   s theory of teaching history was to bring  in people who had made history. We didn   t have a textbook. We didn   t  have a final exam. We had people come in. He brought in Governor  Henry S. Johnston who had been impeached back in the twenties and he  talked to us. But the crowning achievement of Dr. Chapman   s interviews  was when he brought Pistol Pete, Frank Eaton, in from Perkins  Oklahoma, to give us an introduction to our mascot here at the  University.  Well several guys were deputized to go down and pick up Mr. Eaton.  When they got down to his residence he was asleep on the couch and he  apologized for being asleep because he said,    I stayed up till about three  this morning and fiddled for a dance, and I just laid down there on the  couch and nodded off.    Well Mr. Eaton had a history of not changing  clothes too often or something like that, so he was used to sleeping in his  clothes. But they brought him up to the classroom and for about forty-five  minutes, I guess, he held court and told us of experiences. He was a  U.S. Marshal riding for the Judge Isaac Parker, the hanging judge, in  Fort Smith, Arkansas. He rode the circuit   Oklahoma Territory     5  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  bringing outlaws and this and that. He had a reputation of killing six or  seven men that murdered his father when he was young, so he was a  tough character.  But he talked to us and it was all very interesting   all being recorded  like you are now. When he finished,       Any questions?    Well there   s  always somebody who   s got something, you know, and said   Mr. Eaton  has his pistol on   and he  the student  said,    Pete let   s see that famous  fast draw.    And the old gentleman pulled his gun and he fired a hole in  the wall there. Everybody   s eyes got huge. We had no clue, you know,  that he had a loaded weapon in here. And class dismissed pretty quick  and when everyone walked out they were kind of pale. Our next class  was coming in trying to ask them what happened. (Laughs) That  basically is one experience that I witnessed with Frank Eaton.  One other time, Dr. Chapman   s idea of giving a grade was to have you  participate in a project. He might have a program on KSPI for  something. We   d sing twenty verses of the    Rose of Shawnee    or  something, but you had to do something to get your grade. Well he had a  project to dedicate the first Civil War battlefield in Oklahoma. It   s out  here by Yale, Oklahoma somewhere. There was a granite monument put  up. They were unveiling it and dedicating it that day. Well, we had to  go out there and sign the paper so we would be sure to get an    A.    We  didn   t have anything but be there. But they had this place set up, and one  table had Army weapons from the Civil War, long-barrel pistol that the  Army used, and other weapons. They had Pistol Pete there as the  authority on these firearms. He   s standing there. There are a couple of  little kids roaming around there playing cowboys and Indians and they  walked up to him and said,    Pete, can we borrow your pistol?    And he  kept talking to us about these pistols, and he gave his to these kids and  they took off in the crowd, and he said,    Be careful, it   s loaded.    We  kind of broke up there then ran those kids down before somebody got  killed. Those are two memorable things that I   m glad I saw because the  next year the old gentleman passed on. That was the end of the history  lesson.  Now you   re a graduate of the class of?  1957.  And your major was?  Agriculture economics.  And you   re originally from?  6  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Nykolaiszyn  Kosanke  Lone Wolf, Oklahoma.  All right and why did you decide to attend OAMC?  Well, I didn   t know there was any other place because my dad had  graduated up here. So I always intended to. I was the second generation  and our children, two of them have graduated here now, and we   ve got  two grandsons in training. They   ll be here later.  Wow, that   s very interesting, that   s something we look at, our legacy  families.  Well they   re legacies, these little kids.  Just one quick question for you, then we   ll have you on your way. We  notice, especially with legacy families and with everybody who  graduated from OAMC and OSU, that there is this great intense loyalty  to the college. What is it that makes OSU so special?  Well, I wish I knew. The Governor of Oklahoma told me one time,  Governor Nigh, said when he got to be Governor he appointed people to  the Board of Regents from the universities. He said,    It never made  much difference who I appointed any place except Oklahoma State. If I  appointed somebody, and I hadn   t talked to the people about it       or  something you know.    No, no here   s who we need,    he said,    What I  gathered was that most universities are a place that you go and get an  education and you   re proud and you leave, but Oklahoma State is a way  of life.    And I guess that says as well as anything. It just stays with us.  Definitely.  I   ve been coming back here forty years   season football. Looking  forward to tomorrow.  Is there anything else? Do you have that one college story that   s your  favorite college story that you tell everybody?  Probably not (Laughter).  Well we appreciate you coming by today to tell us your Pistol Pete story.  Thank you. Enjoyed it.  -------  -------   
