 Larson and I am here with Dr. Mildred Rodriguez, in  her home  in Stillwater, Oklahoma. I am interviewing her today as part  of the O-STATE Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program.  Dr. Rodriguez, if you could talk just a little bit about where  you grew up and who was in your family?  I was an only child. I was born and raised in Noble County (well my  mother went to Sterling for my birth, Sterling, Oklahoma). I was born  on 160 acres that was purchased from an Indian in the Indian Otoe  Reservation. It was straight north on 177 and of course the roads were  dirt roads, and when it came time for me to get to school there was no  way to get to school. So my parents bought the place that   s now on US-  64, eight miles east of Perry  Oklahoma . The first year I was in school,  we lived in a little two room schoolhouse that my grandfather purchased  for us to live in. It was on part of his property on Black Bear Creek.  During the year that we lived there, we had a huge rain and Black Bear  Creek flooded. The water rose to the height of two or three inches. I  think that was one of the most memorable things about my early  childhood.  Before you moved to the area on Black Bear Creek, you said it was on  177?  Yes.  Where abouts?  I think it was about five miles north of Bill   s Corner.  And then you moved in closer to Perry for school?  We lived in this little house that was about a mile and a half north of  5  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Sumner on the Black Bear Creek, so that winter, and that   s where I lived  when I started school. And then my parents had bought the house on  what is now US-64, but it was in probate court, so we couldn   t move in  for the first year; we lived in that little two room schoolhouse. (Laughs)  So how did you get to school your first year?  On the school bus, always on the school bus. US-64 was not paved  when we moved onto our property, which is now where I lived most of  my life. Once I was six years old, that   s been home ever since. It   s eight  miles east of Perry on the south side of the road and I always went to  school on the school bus. I was among the first children to be picked up.  It was about 7:15 in the morning, in the wintertime pitch dark. I sure  didn   t want to get out of that bed. (Laughter) And so, the school bus  during bad weather when it rained, we would plow through the ruts on  the road, sometimes about three miles an hour it seemed like. Go  around, picking up all the children, be late to school. But I got off  among the first to get off.  So how long did the route usually take if the weather was good?  If the weather was good, I guess about an hour and a half.  So that was quite a commute into school.  Yeah, and I only lived three miles from school  But we went around and  the school bus, you might be interested in knowing, there were no  windows. It was flaps that rolled up and down, and so when it was dark  until it got light, the flaps were down. It was cold on that school bus.  So were they like canvas flaps?  Yes, canvas flaps that rolled up and down.  So was the bus the way we think of school buses today, except for the  windows?  Yes.  And the bench seats and everything?  Yes.  That   s a long time to be on a school bus every day.  (Laughing) So then while we lived on US-64, it was during that time it  6  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  was paved. I remember it was hot weather, and they put in those forms  and the rattlesnakes would get in those forms   The wood forms for the concrete?  The wood forms for the concrete. And paved road wasn   t like it is now,  it wasn   t very wide and it had a lip on it and (laughs) you had to watch  where you drove, because if you hit that lip, it would just throw you off.  But I learned to drive driving out in the fields, helping with the harvest.  (Laughing) Driving the truck carrying the grain back and forth.  So what age were you when you were doing that?  Oh about fourteen. And, of course, the thrasher was stationery, and the  men would all come from the communities around with their hay racks,  and the binders would cut the grain and tie it with string. Then they  would pick it up and take it to the thrashing machine and then you   d be  there with your truck to catch the grain that came out of the thrashing  machine.  So I take it your family farmed then?  We had that thirty-one acres in farm. They were really ranchers, but we  did have thirty-one acres in farmland. At one time we tried growing  cotton down on the southeast forty. And I remember Daddy going to  town and getting a truck load of people to come out and hoe cotton.  That didn   t last.  So you mainly had wheat?  Yeah. But most of the land was ranching land.  So do you remember how many head of cattle you had when you were  growing up?  Oh, I remember we had a milk cow. I tried to learn to milk the cow, I  never did learn. My mother finally lost her patience and finished up. I  wasn   t much of a milk maid. (Laughs)  Why don   t we go back just a little bit and talk about how your family  first came to Oklahoma, or at least start out with your father   s side, so  your grandparents on your father   s side. What can you tell me about  that?  Well, I don   t know much about my great-grandfather homesteading, but  he homesteaded on 160 in Oklahoma City, and today the Shepherd Mall  7  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  is located on that. There were six girls and two boys. And I don   t know,  I think Aunt Lottie was older than Grandpa, but I think he was next.  And then the youngest one was Uncle Clyde. So the boys were at the  ends for the most part, and the girls were in the middle.  And what was your grandfather   s name?  Miram Kerns. My great-grandfather came down from Kansas.  And they came during the Land Run in    89?  In the Land Run, came into Oklahoma. And everybody, all of the  Shepherds except my grandfather, are buried down in Oklahoma City  close to the Presbyterian Church. And my grandfather, when the Run,  the opening of the Cherokee Strip, then he made the Run up and  homesteaded there on Black Bear, just north of Sumner. And my  grandmother   s father, Poole, homesteaded, oh about just east of Sumner  there. So there wasn   t much more than a mile difference between where  they were. My grandfather used to tell about the night that he  homesteaded, how he stayed out there all night (laughs) guarding his   land , and it was September 16, the Run was, and he stayed out there all  night guarding his property, but of course he couldn   t guard 160 acres.  Especially when the Black Bear Creek ran through it and he had land on  the other side, too  (Laughs) I never knew the father of my  grandmother. But he came, Grandpa Poole, and he had two daughters; I  don   t know if the other daughter came with him or not, but I am sure  that   s how Grandma and Grandpa met.  Just right in the neighborhood.  Right, right. My grandmother was a school teacher, and the first school  in the area was on my Grandpa Poole   s place; the Poole School was the  first one.  And was that a one room or a two room schoolhouse?  Oh, it was a one room.  Do you remember if it was brick or   ?  (Laughing) Oh no, no, honey. In fact I wonder that first winter, how did  my grandfather live out there, because there was no house, there was  nothing  He must have dug a cell or something.  Now I was thinking about the school     8  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Yeah. I know that when my daddy was growing up, and there was the  first house that Grandpa built, it was on the place when I was growing  up. And I remember Daddy telling me he remembered crawling around  on that floor and getting splinters in his hand off of the floor.  So when he was a kid     Yeah. And my grandmother, I still have these two gallon fruit jars.  There was always a cellar. Grandma would can during the year, and my  mother did too, we had a cellar and we canned everything. Oh yes, we  canned  (Laughing) Harvested and canned in that hot kitchen with the  kerosene stove to put the pressure cooker on.  Get everything boiled up     Oh, it was hot in that kitchen.  It never seems to be a cool time of year for canning.  No. And there were no windows, there was a door on the south in our  house, but there were no windows on the south side   So nothing to catch a breeze.  Well the door, but that wall, the stove was on the south side there and  the cabinet over here. Boy, when you were canning and working in  there that was one hot place. I used to sit out on the back porch and  break the beans and shell the peas and do all that. We   d have hands  working for us, I remember, during the harvest time, we   d open up that  table. I still have the leaves of the table that was in that kitchen. And I  don   t know how many leaves we put in that table and there were legs  that let down.  Those old trestles?  Hanging out, and all those people come in there and eat. (Laughing)  How many people do you think you   d have at any point in time?  Oh, I don   t know.  It   s always hard to tell during harvest. There always seems to be so  many.  Well since I was an only child, it seemed like a lot of people to me.  9  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  A lot more people than usual  So with your grandfather   s family, it was  your great aunts that were the Shepherd sisters?  That   s correct.  Do you want to talk a little bit about the Shepherd sisters?  I only knew three of them. And of course, the older one was my  favorite, and fortunately, she was the last one to die, too. She really kept  her marbles all the way through. She was a marvelous lady. She is the  one who stayed home when the others went to Paris to study art and so  forth. She   s the one that kept the home fires burning.  And which sister was that?  Aunt Lottie  Her sister Nellie   s portrait of her was the one that hung in the Paris  Grand Salon?  With her hat on  I loved that picture  I   d like to have that picture.  Do you know where that is?  Somebody bought it before I had a chance. I didn   t know they were  selling them. Man, I really would have liked to have that picture.  So Lottie was the one that stayed home?  She was quite a seamstress. And I remember they had a lake on that 160  and people would come there and go swimming. They had a great big  slide and we would have fireworks on the Fourth of July at that lake.  They had lots of water lilies at the end of the lake. And I can remember  Aunt Lottie down there in a black bathing suit, traipsing around.  So do you know about what year she was born, or when she died?  I have all of that in that box of stuff that     I just wondered when you were growing up about how old she would  have been?  Well Grandpa was born in 1868. So it would have had to have been, she  was a little older than Grandpa. And she was the last to die; I have all of  those dates, but they are in that box.  10  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  You said your Aunt Lottie was a seamstress?  She was a wonderful seamstress. She did the cooking; she was quite a  lady.  It sounds like she must have had a wonderful personality?  She did  (Laughing) I can just hear her talking.  Did she ever marry?  None of those six girls ever married.  Just all very independent.  Freakish, isn   t it? I don   t know. As I said, I only met three of them.  The youngest girl was Edith and she taught for awhile. She had a  master   s and she taught for awhile down at OU.  And was that in the art department?  I don   t know what she taught. I remember my Aunt Juanita, my daddy   s  sister, was visiting and Edith came up with her master   s and wanted my  Aunt Juanita to go over it for her. I was just young and I don   t  remember what it was    Probably never knew what it was.  We never pay attention to those things when we   re young.  Yeah. I was small.  Okay and the third aunt that you knew?  Myrtle. She was sweet.  And she   s the one in the painting at the library?  She   s the one in the painting at the library. Mother liked her a lot. She  was a very sweet lady.  And was she one of the ones with an artistic bent as well?  I don   t know, I don   t have any paintings by her. There was another  sister that I didn   t know and the one I was telling you about, the Indian  that   s in water color, but I don   t think she went to Paris. It was Nellie  and Nettie. And I think Aunt Lottie did go once, but I don   t think that  she was into the painting.  11  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  What do you think it was in their upbringing that influenced so many of  them?  I don   t have a clue  I   d like to know that myself.  Just a very strong art gene?  They were    the ladies,    you know? They weren   t my kind of person. I  didn   t understand them. But that   s because    Aunt Lottie was the kind  of person I am.  A little more outgoing, would you say?  Reality.  So the others might have been a little more, how do we describe that for  the tape recorder?  I don   t know  (Laughing)  Maybe a little less grounded?  I really didn   t know them very well.  I am just trying to figure out how to translate that. But Aunt Lottie, it  sounds like the two of you got along well.  She   s like Grandpa. (Laughs)  Well and did the others all leave? I mean it sounds like at different  points in time they all left     Well I have a painting that Nettie did, which is the main    is it Nettie or  Nellie? Nellie, which Nellie did. Her letters indicate to me that she was  kind of the jefa. Oh, that   s a Spanish word isn   t it? (Laughs)  So the chief or the     The controlling person, yeah. Her letters suggest to me that she was  more of the controlling person. Now if it was because she was older,  and somebody had to do it, who knows? I never met her. She died  before I was born. She died of TB and I don   t know if she was in  Arizona when she died, but she was quite sick while she was out there.  And I do have at least one painting that was done out there.  So your great uncle, I guess that would   ve been Clyde? Did you ever  12  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  know him?  Yes, I knew Clyde.  What was he like?  Oh, Uncle Clyde. (Laughter) When I got to be older I went down and  visited one time, I guess it was after I was married. Anytime I went  through Oklahoma City I stopped and visited with Aunt Lottie.  (Laughs) One time I went and he did farming, I know there is a letter  that Grandpa is regretting that Clyde is out of school and taking care of  some kind of farm things and not in school  And that has come through  in letters that I found upstairs in the first house that my great  grandparents built. So there   s a box of those letters, which the  university is going to get.  And this would be the house in Oklahoma City.  The little, first house Grandpa built. It had an upstairs. And Aunt Lottie  told me one time when, you know, we didn   t know how much longer  Aunt Lottie was going to live. She had a caretaker and she told me I  should go upstairs and look at those, that there were things upstairs that I  needed to go look at.  Where was that house?  It   s on the property there in Oklahoma City. The house is there on, is it  Harn  Homestead ? That farm down there. That house is on that place,  it   s shown to people.  Okay, yeah, I thought that it had been moved but I wasn   t sure.  Yeah, it used to be, it started out, when they passed away and they tore  down the big house. I have pictures of the big house, too, that I brought.  And when they tore down the big house they moved that little first house  that Great-Grandpa built to the zoo  Because the aunts used to give a lot  of money for the upkeep of the zoo. In fact, one of the elephants is  named after Aunt Lottie  (Laughs)  Alright  Good for Aunt Lottie. We can   t all have elephants named after  us. (Laughter)  Because she loved the animals. And they gave to the police force. And  well, that land became at one time, nobody really got out and did a  regular job. They had a putting ground on part of the 160 and they had  that lake thing down there. And then when it became time for it to be  13  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  incorporated as part of Oklahoma City, it was really fought by the family  corporation. I remember Grandpa being given money to support them.  He never talked about it.  Do you remember anybody talking about where the house and the  homestead were relative to the center of Oklahoma City when it started  out?  Twenty-third Street. The 2300 block of Northwest Twenty-third.  I didn   t know how large the city was when it first started out.  Well you go to the Capitol and go straight west. I don   t know how far it  is out to the 2300 block from the Capitol.  I just didn   t have a sense of how quickly the city grew.  I don   t have a clue on that. I remember going down there sometimes in  the old Dodge. Grandpa driving. (Laughter) Grandpa liked to look at  everything on the road and Grandma was after him to stay on the road   That didn   t have any windows in it either and it was cold  I remember  my aunt used to laugh, she just loved to tell this story.    I remember  when you were about five years old       It had beautiful leather seats,  that Dodge did. And we bounced along in that back seat. We were  going down there in the wintertime for Thanksgiving. And she said,     Aunt Juanita, my hiney is cold     (Laughs)  What year would that have, do you remember?  Well, it was about 1928 if I was five.  Those cars would have been cold. And you had a long trip coming down  from the     From the ranch, yeah. Oh, Grandpa loved to get out there. We   d drive  across those prairies, no roads. Those prairie dogs would pop up all over  the place. Grandpa hated those things  (Laughter) Because the cattle,  we had lots and lots of livestock and the cows would get their leg in  those things and break their leg  We had to keep working on getting rid  of them. It was bad.  So with your grandfather   s family, how many children did your  grandparents have on your dad   s side?  There was Aunt Juanita and Daddy, and there was a third child, Leslie,  but he died when he was six months old. And the cemetery is just off of  14  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  US-64. That   s where Leslie   s buried, and my grandparents, and my  parents, and my husband, and I will be buried there. My tombstone is  there with Mario.  So the whole family   s there. Now is that the property that your dad had  near Black Bear Creek? Was that on your grandfather   s 160 acres?  We didn   t have a place, Grandpa just moved that little house in there for  us to have. We sold up there so I could start to school and this place that  was in probate, it was a long time getting out of probate and then it had  to be cleaned up. It was the Bowers'. We bought the Bowers'  homestead.  So that   s where you moved with your parents when you were young?  Yes.  Do you want to talk a little bit about your mother   s side of the family?  We   ve talked about your father   s side.  Yeah, what I know. My grandmother came from Switzerland as a baby,  she was eighteen months old when she came into the United States. Her  name was Aebischer and there were half brothers and sisters and so  forth, I didn   t know any of them. And my grandfather, Henry Jenkins, I  think I saw him twice. I never saw my grandmother. Well, I guess I saw  her when I was born. (Laughter)  But you don   t remember those things.  She died of breast cancer when I was about five. And so we went down  to the funeral. And my grandfather, H. A. Jenkins (I don   t know what  the A is for) was the first principal at Sumner School the first year that it  ran a full year. My mother was the eighth grade teacher. That year she  met my daddy. And they were married when school was out.  Okay, so that   s how your parents met.  That   s how my parents met.  Your father was living in the same area?  With his parents. Right.  How old were they? Do you remember?  Well, it was 1922 and my daddy was born in January of 1901, and my  15  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  mother was born in December of 1901. They were married in 1922.  Okay, and your grandparents on that side, were they farmers, too?  No. He was a schoolteacher.  Oh, I   m sorry, that   s right. Do you know when they came to Oklahoma?  My mother was born in Missouri. She talked about when she was a little  girl, there were lots of rocks they had to pick up. (Laughs) Then they  moved to southern Oklahoma and she went to school at the college at  Weatherford. I had a picture, a big picture, might have been two of  them, that she had when she was a student down there and I gave it to  the school down there.  Oh, I bet they loved that.  I   ve been trying to distribute things where they belong. Because they   re  no good in the attic   Well, and people do appreciate getting to see things like that. On your  mother   s side, did she have any brothers or sisters?  Yes, Wilburn was the oldest, and he ended up living in Florida. He as a  young man was a telegraph operator, and he used to send out those little  pec pecs. (Laughter) Then came Mother and four years later, her sister,  Annetta, and then Uncle Odie, and last, a menopause baby, Juanita, and  she just died this last month. She was three years older than me.  So you had Juanitas on both sides.  Yes. I never called this one    aunt    because she was too near my age.  So were you close with any of those aunts and uncles at all, did they live  around here?  I saw Juanita more than anybody. And I   m very close to her youngest  daughter.  Yeah, because you two were close to the same, I mean you and your     Juanita and I were. And her youngest daughter is a registered nurse and  just a cracker jack. She   s a regional director. They   re just begging for  her and raise her salary without her even asking. She   s a regional  director of the nursing aspect of nursing homes.  16  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  What   s her name?  Judy Adams; she   s in Wichita now. They were just down.  Well good. So is there anything we need to cover on your mother   s side  or your father   s side that you don   t think we   ve gotten to yet?  Not really. I think we did, I told you lots of little things.  We got to how your parents met. I know that your mother was a school  teacher when your parents met. Was your dad farming?  Yes. He had just gotten out of the Navy. He signed up during World  War I and he didn   t weigh enough so he ate bananas so he   d weigh  enough to get in  He wasn   t a very big man.  Do you know where he was during WWI? Had he gone overseas?  I don   t know. He never talked about it. I know that the sisters and great  aunts were absolutely crazy about him. I have a lot of pictures of him  with them out in Colorado. The great-grandparents used to go to  Colorado in the summer.  Whereabouts?  Colorado Springs, I think. I have quite a few pictures of Daddy with the  aunts.  So he was a favorite? (Laughter)  Yes. And Aunt Juanita always felt that they were so partial to Jack.  (Laughter) They doted on him. And he never wanted to take advantage  of that at all. He was so careful about not taking advantage of that. He  could have, but he just felt very like he did not want to take it.  Why don   t you tell me a little about both of your parents in terms of what  they were like. Were they outgoing, were they quiet?  Oh, Mother was into everything (laughter) and sweet and so helpful and  good. She was in to help with the 4-H. She was a repeat president of  the county Home Demonstration Council, in the choir and the Ladies  Aid for the church. Always doing a lot for the church. Just do, do, do  for other people.  Which church did your folks go to?  17  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  First Christian Church. And that church is no more.  Where was it?  Sumner. They   ve all moved over to the Morrison Church, joined the  Morrison Church. Sumner was quite the little town at one time.  I was going to say, it sounds like it was quite a bustling     Oh yeah  We had Joe Dawson   s store, and the post office was in Joe  Dawson   s store. Joe used to take the mail down and put it on a hook and  the train came along and grabbed the mail. (Laughs)  So did you have a train depot in Sumner?  I don   t think so. My grandfather bought land along there so that he  could bring his cattle from the ranch; we owned a lot of acreage. At one  time Grandpa owned about a thousand acres and I ended up with 560  acres, because Grandma sold all the home place and Juanita got some,  but he bought this land so he could bring his cattle down and load them  on the train.  That   s a good idea.  Then they wouldn   t have to lose a lot of weight to get them to market,  see?  Yeah, you don   t have to drive them as far.  Right. And I still own lots in Sumner that were Grandpa   s.  And you have the lots in the vicinity of the railroad?  They   re along the railroad.  So what else did Sumner have when you were growing up? We know it  had a school and     And it had a garage. And I guess they had several others and then the  school was just the Poole School  and it  was just east of there. The  current school, well it is no more. It   s been dissolved. They go to  Morrison now.  When you were going to school in Sumner, how many people did you  have in your class?  18  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Eight or ten. The eight of us graduated together.  And you probably went to school all those years together. It was  probably not a whole lot of people coming in and out. So how many  people in Sumner do you think  there were  when you were growing up?  Well there weren   t as many people living in Sumner as there are now.  But it   s just houses, no grocery store, no filling station, no garage or  anything.  Not as much of a sense of community?  No, there   s a sense of community. They built the fire station and the  Baptist Church is really built up. And that   s the main thing that they  have, the fire station and the Baptist Church. There isn   t any grocery  store.  So when did Sumner start changing?  I don   t know. I was gone.  So were most of the people in the Sumner area when you were growing  up mostly ranchers?  And farmers. Ranchers and farmers.  You said you   re an only child? Why don   t you talk a little bit about what  your household was like when you were growing up. Who used to be  around; I know you   d have your parents, but     Well we used to have a hired hand. Not living in, but usually someone  hired. It was very quiet. I took piano lessons and there were two boys  that were a couple of years older than me that lived within a mile. Well  now the Lesh boys, but the Lesh children were much older than me.  That was just across the road north. And the Nichols boys were much  older than me. And they just had their mother and had a very bad,  difficult life. And then up on the hill were the Yeagers, and he was a  couple years older than me, and then the Smeltzers, they lived just down  the road when you started to Sumner, so that was about a mile from  where I lived, too. So one of the boys would get a car and the three of  us went places together all of the time.  So once you got a little older you got a chance to get out?  Yeah. And before that we rode a horse. But I didn   t like to ride my  horse down  Highway- 64.  19  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Too much traffic?  Too much traffic. I didn   t do much of that.  So what did you do when you were growing up?  Played basketball when it was in season and went to school and took my  music lessons and took care, helped Mama with the gardening in the  summer and the chickens and filling the kerosene lamps and helping  with the wood and the coal and chores we had to do.  You were talking a little earlier about harvest season. Having grown up  on a farm myself, I know harvest season can be very busy.  Very, very busy  I really don   t have anything else to add.  When you were going to school, what subjects interested you the most?  When you were in grade school and high school, what did you really  like? Did you have a favorite subject?  Not really.  Was there a teacher that you had   ?  (Laughs) I tell you who taught me more than anybody else was the  fourth grade teacher, Ms. Bates. Oh my, she was hard, but I sure did  learn. I think she was the foundation. I was thinking about that today, I  think she impressed me and Ms. Eischam when I first started school.  (Laughs) Verona and I have laughed about this. We had a young  teacher when we were in high school. Verona is my dearest friend, she   s  up in Spokane, but her brother still lives here, the Johnsons, and his wife  Abby, still live there just out of Perry. I used to go Verona   s, she had an  older sister who was in the same grade as me, but Verona and me were  really closer to the same age, and it was she who was my best friend.  We still visit every summer, either she comes here or I go there. She  tries to come down for Thanksgiving, so now that I   m here I   ll get to see  her.  But we had this young teacher. We were so innocent, we would just  laugh and laugh about how innocent we were. She was really hot to trot  after the boys  (Laughs) The Johnsons had really a lot of land and they  always had extra horses so when I would go up I   d ride one of their  horses, and we   d go places on our horses. So one time she went with us,  and she got us into all kinds of things, chasing after    we ended up in  some very strange places with that teacher  (Laughing)  20  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Not necessarily a role model, huh?  Well, we didn   t know any better  And we never caught on to it until  after we were married and went back and talked about it  We laughed  about it the other day  (Laughs)  You just don   t notice those things.  Well we were just too ignorant, too innocent to know that anything was  going on. (Laughs) Oh yeah, Mr. Pinkerton. And Gilbert Pinkerton, his  son.  Was Mr. Pinkerton one of the teachers?  Yes, Mr. Pinkerton, I think he might have been the principal.  So you went to high school in Sumner, too. What did you do following  high school?  Came to OSU, A M.  Now had you been to the campus before for any reason?  Didn   t know a thing. Green as a gourd. (Laughs)  What were your first impressions of the campus when you got here?  It was lots of fun. Lots of people, because I was an only child   (Laughs) And it was wonderful   What year would you have started?  1940. And, of course, it was when you went to school in the  summertime, you know it was war time. I finished in three years, and I  didn   t know what I wanted to do. I changed completely before I finally  found out what I wanted to do, but I got out with a degree   everything I  ended up doing had something to do, in one way or another, with  nutrition or the food business.  And what did you study mostly when you were in college?  I was in general Home-Ec education, because that   s what my Aunt  Juanita had done. So that   s all I knew.  So was it the home-ec department at the time?  21  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Yes.  What was Stillwater like?  A little town. I learned to ride a bicycle here instead of a horse.  (Laughter)  Bicycles don   t eat as much.  Well, there wasn   t a place to ride a bicycle at home.  So what do you remember most about your college years?  How much fun I had   Were you in a sorority?  No, I didn   t have the money to do that   Were you in any of the groups on campus? What were you involved  with? Or were you just studying and having friends?  Yeah.  Where were some of your favorite hangouts?  Oh, I guess there was a place along Knoblock there that we used to go.  And once the war started we started having the USO, which was up over  the drugstore there on the corner, across from the fire station. And so  we used to go up there and the movie house was directly across the  street from the firehouse.  So everything you needed was right there?  Right there, yeah. And I lived in housing with a house mother and a  group of girls.  So you were in one of the dormitories?  No, no. Dorms were too expensive. Didn   t have the money.  But they had houses with house mothers?  Yes. And we did our own cooking. We   d bring things from home and  do our cooking.  22  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Did you ever go to the football games or anything like that? Do you  remember Homecoming?  Oh, yeah. Homecoming was a big deal.  What do you remember about it?  Not much.  Just that it was a big deal?  Yeah. Not much. It was quite different. We did go to some football     Oh, it was cold out in those stadiums. Wind blows, it wasn   t much fun  for me once it got to cold weather. I was in the choir.  Did you travel around at all?  No, no. Right here.  You did concerts here.  And oh, I   m trying to think of his name  Ashley Alexander , his wife  that was much younger, it   s his second wife, she works in the Exchange  Bank now. Her son is a musician, too. She plays the xylophone, and he  led the chorus  Student Entertainers . The chorus group, but he was  much older. This is his second wife that was much younger. Also,  Haskell Pruett was a friend, he went to school to my grandfather and  knew my mother and he was down here, so he kind of looked after me  sometimes.  Did he teach at the university?  Yes.  Do you remember what department he was in?  No.  So a family friend.  Yes, a family friend.  Now since it was during war time, or at least part of your time     This is where I met my husband.  23  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Was he in one of the trainings?  He was from California. He was sent to Camp Gruber, Oklahoma and  he applied for the Army Specialized Training Program and Linguistics  because that was his major, which was natural for him because he knew  Spanish before he knew English. So he was sent here, it was called a  star center here. He was sent here to be classified and decide where he  would go and so forth. I met him at the corner in front of the drugstore  there, caddy corner from the fire station. Every time we   d go by there  he   d say,    That   s where we met     We were a bunch of girls staying in a  house down the street and it was exam time, and so we said,    We   re just  tired, let   s go take a break. Let   s go to have something at the drugstore.     So we came out and as we came out of the drugstore there were those  soldier boys. (Laughs) That was the beginning   That   s all she wrote.  That   s all she wrote.  Were there other groups on campus that you remember, with the  military coming and doing any training here?  No. They were here  We used to go to the USO and dance with the  boys. And there was a place down on kind of the low land that we used  to go to dance, too.  Down towards where?  I don   t know where it was, I can   t remember, but it was off to the east  some place there. And we used to go.  Your husband was from California, but his parents had come over from  Spain, is that correct?  Yeah, his father came from Galicia and went to Argentina, and there he  learned the bakery trade and French pastries. Then he traveled up  through Mexico and entered the United States through Mexico. My  mother-in-law, her story is quite a story. Her father was a guard in the  Guardia Civil in Spain. So they traveled around a lot of places. They  were stationed in Burgos a lot of the time, and they were stationed in  Renteria. She was a grown young lady and she and her friend decided to  come to the United States and their way was paid by sheep herders who  wanted a wife   Would they have been Basque, do you know?  24  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Basque. My mother-in-law would say she was Basque and my husband  would say,    No, Mama  You just lived in the Basque, you weren   t  Basque     (Laughter)  But she came from that region?  She came from that region, yeah. And so when they got over here, I  don   t know what happened. I did meet the other woman   s son and they  stayed at a hotel, the Hotel Medea in San Francisco. It was run by the  Astizes, but that   s not important to the story. So while she was at the  Astiz Hotel, she met my father-in-law. He was crazy about her, but she  didn   t care much for him. Anyway, about the sheep herder who paid her  way over, she didn   t like him at all, and she didn   t marry him. It ended  up that my father-in-law paid the Basque man for her passage when he  finally won her over. (Laughs) She had a problem with a goiter and  was in the hospital and he went to the hospital and paid her hospital  expenses and wooed her in, so she ended up marrying him. (Laughs)  And he paid the sheep herder.  He died when he was only forty-eight. I never knew him, of course,  because he died when my husband was thirteen. She never learned  English and she had four children. My husband was a twin. And then  five years later she had Angelo, who ended up on Broadway. And the  young sister who is the only one left, Rosie. Mario   s father was a very  successful businessman. He did the first open market in Hollister,  California and had a French Bakery and bought several houses and tried  everything he could think of. One year he decided (laughs) that they  should grow tomatoes. And Mario says he had him out there with that  old horse and that horse wouldn   t go down the road, so he   d take a big  clod and make the horse go, and the tomatoes, he said it was alkaline  soil and it wouldn   t raise tomatoes. (Laughs) That was one business he  didn   t succeed at, farming.  Other than that it sounds like he did pretty well.  Yeah, he did very well. So when he passed away (he had had his  stomach operated on previously), they said it was a heart attack, but  Mario and I always thought that he probably bled to death, because he  died in the night; in fact Angelo was sleeping with him. Just died in the  night. So after the first year, after that, she took all four children and  went to Spain. Well, the day they took off was in 1936, when the Civil  War broke out. So they were over there a whole year and they never got  into Spain.  Where were they at the time?  25  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  They stayed across in Hendaye, in France. And the wife of one of her  younger brothers came with their child, the wife and child came and  stayed with them and all six of them, let   s see four, five, seven of them,  in a little house that Amanda rented in Hendaye. Mario tells a story of  seeing the German planes go over into Spain with a swastika on them.  While he was there, he went to school for a year and learned French.  Which explains why he ended up in the linguistic school, because he  knew Spanish, he knew English, he knew French already.  And where did they put him in the service when they sent him over?  They sent him to do Italian  (Laughing)  Par for the course. Why don   t we talk just a little more about your own  family now that you   ve met your husband and we can finish up that, and  then the next time we can talk about your career. So you met your  husband, and what year would that have been?  1943. Met him in the spring and we were married September 3. He had  been sent to Champagne-Urbana to the university. My grandmother was  supposed to go up with me to get married and she fell and broke her hip  and couldn   t go. And so I packed up my trunk and sent it and took off  on the train by myself. (Laughs)  That   s very independent of you.  I was an extremely independent child. I look at things my mother had to  put up with me; I was just always very independent.  Do you think that comes from being an only child?  I don   t know. Mama said when I was small she was with her daddy and  I did something and Mama was going to whip me, I guess maybe she  tried it and I just steeled up and wouldn   t budge. (Laughing) And he  was one that Mama said had the switch out at the slightest  provocation   well, he had five of them  So she said he took Mama  aside and said,    Pearl, this child you have to treat differently. You can  beat her to death and she   s not going to budge.    He said,    You   re going  to have to talk to her.    And Mother said from then on she just talked to  me and she said I   d do anything   As long as you had a good reason for it.  Yes, as long as it made sense. But don   t get any whip after me  And  I   m still that way. (Laughter)  26  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  So had your husband been overseas before     No, he came straight from basic training in Camp Gruber, was classified,  then he was sent to Champagne-Urbana for his linguistics and while he  was there we were married. We had quite a wedding. The boys planned  it all and they had a ball. We were married in the Methodist Chapel and  they lined up on each side with their guns crossed and we went down  together. One of the professors in the class gave me away. (Laughs)  And then they had a reception afterwards and then we went off for the  weekend to Chicago.  Had you ever been to Chicago before?  No. We went to the art museum, which I still want to go back to. And  while I was there, Mother had an aunt there in Chicago and so we got in  contact with her and met her. I   m still in touch with her granddaughter.  So after he finished his training there they disbanded all of that and     So the linguistics side     The linguistics part. They disbanded it all and he was sent off to be a  sergeant in the regular Army and sent to Camp Polk. And in Camp  Polk, I worked for awhile until he got kind of settled and found a place  for us. A place   there were other wives and you had to go through  someone   s bedroom to get to the bathroom. The girls had never used a  kerosene stove and they blew it up. Of course, I was raised on a  kerosene stove.  You were the only one who knew what was going on   Yeah  So right away I went to the base and got a job because I had been  working up there. Up there I was director of the dining hall, that was my  first job.  And that was Camp Polk or Champagne-Urbana?  No, Champagne-Urbana. The day we got married I did my interview  earlier that day   So when you came back from your weekend you had a job.  Yeah. When I came back I had a job and they were just setting up the,  we had 3,000 men there on campus and they had to be fed. And so we  were in the skating rink, the ice rink, we set up a dining hall and I was  director of the dining hall. My first job   27  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  More people than you had ever seen in one place.  (Laughing) And we had three serving lines and I had to supervise all  those and I had women from seventeen to fifty-seven in age   That must have been like herding cats.  Well, and nobody knew how to serve anything and you get them up  there in the line and they   d stand there and they   d shake the spoon and  I   d say,    We got 3,000 men in three lines and we have to serve them in a  little over an hour. Move on. You cannot stand there and shake the food  off the spoon  Get going     (Laughs)  So were you in charge of coming up with the menus and   ?  No, I was in charge of the dining room.  Logistics.  Yeah. And before it opened we had to work on the recipes.  So you got to use your home-ec background somewhat.  Yes, somewhat. Biggest job was   this is funny. The line would come  here and come here, she   d have a stack of milk things here and a stack of  milk things here, those little bottles you know in the thing, so she   d  stand there and do this. That was in the days you had elastic in your  pants. One day the girl that was serving (laughing), her pants fell down.  You can   t do a thing   And I said,    Just step one way and one foot and then the other out. Just  keep cool. I will pick up the pants and you keep serving.    (Laughter)  That was the funniest thing. The part that was not fun was, one time  they got in a fight down in the dressing room and I had to break that up,  and this is my first job.  Do you remember what the fight was about?  No, I probably never knew   So when you went to Camp Polk     Yeah, when I went down I worked in the office.  Just the administrative?  28  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  The administrative office, yeah. There was no air conditioning and we  were in those Quonset huts. I got pregnant; it was so hot. And the poor  guy behind me he said,    Oh, you are really suffering.    He said,    Don   t  worry about the fan circulating on me, you can have the fan.    (Laughs)  So then when Mario was sent overseas, I was pregnant by then and I  went home and had my baby and Daddy went overseas.  When was he sent overseas?  The fall of    44.  Okay, so you   d been married about a year at that point.  Over a year, it was November of    44. And I had found a nice duplex to  live in.  Just when you got everything straightened out.  No, right away after that fire and all the rest I said I have got to find  housing   Exploding stoves.  That was just a few days, we lived there a few days and then Mario had  leave and we went to California and I met his family and so forth. And  his mother did not want him to marry me, she had gone to Champagne-  Urbana with all the kids except Angelo, tried to dissuade him from  marrying a camp follower. (Laughs)  Did you ever work that out between the two of you?  More or less. It was never good. It wasn   t ever the best, but she came to  really think a lot of me when she had her stroke and nobody understood  her diet and so forth and I brought her to live with us and straightened  her out. That   s when it finally really got straightened out.  So you came back to Oklahoma     I came back to Oklahoma until Mario got out of the service in December  of    45.  So you were here for a little over a year.  Yes. Because he went over in    44, I came home just before Christmas  and then we left at Christmas time. That   s the last time I saw my  29  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  grandpa. He died the next year.  But he got to meet your daughter.  Yes. Oh, he was with Jacqueline all the time while we were here, yeah.  Okay, well why don   t we stop at this point     Okay, then we   ll talk careers next time. Mine and Mario   s careers.  ------- End of March 25, 2010 interview -------  My name is Mary Larson and today is April 6, 2010. Once again we are  here with Dr. Mildred Rodriguez. We   re going to start by doing some  follow up on your family   s history. There was a part of your  grandfather   s history that we hadn   t talked about much last time. Would  you like to tell me a little more about that?  Well, I don   t know if last time we talked about him homesteading in  Noble County during the Cherokee Strip Run. As time went on he would  mortgage the home place and go buy another 160. (Laughs) Some of  those or several of them up in the Indian Otoe Reservation particularly, I  know, were bought from Indians and those Indians, some of the deeds I  have an    X    for a signature because they were Natives. My grandfather  was quite an adventurer and in I believe 1905, I   m not positive     And this is your grandfather Shepherd     My grandfather Shepherd, that   s the grandpa I know about, that I lived  very close to, I spent every Sunday night with my grandparents. My  grandfather got in contact with the Chamal Colony  run by the Blalock  Company , and the Blalock Company bought land down in   Tamaulipas,  Mexico that was not too far from Tampico, on the gulf. I  still have the deed to that property, although we don   t have it anymore  because we lost it to the Mexican government. He ended up with 640  hectares and they lived down there, my grandparents, their two young  children, and I have some pictures that will go into this, you can see  them, of some of the haciendas and my daddy and his sister Juanita  down there, and the kind of living that it was and so forth     And how old would your father have been? Your father and his sister  were about how old?  I think my daddy, he looks like he   s five I think, probably, and his sister  is a couple years younger. My grandmother didn   t really take to that. I  think they were down there at least a year but they kept that property and  30  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Grandpa faithfully went to the Oklahoma City Mexican Consulate there  and paid his taxes every year. In 1945, Grandpa was not well by that  time and he found out that his taxes were being usurped, that he didn   t  even own that property anymore. So my husband, who   s totally  bilingual, had just come home from the war in December, and he told  Grandpa,    I will help you with that, if you want to try to do something  about it.    Grandpa said,    No, just let it go, it   s done.     Do you know what happened?  No, I don   t know what happened, but I just know that Grandpa just  decided not to follow through on it, he wasn   t well and that was it. And  he died the next March.  When was the last time he   d been back there to visit?  He went back when I was a child, I   m not sure when. I   ll tell you why I  remember that he went back. He brought me this brown sugar candy  that   s in a cone and I remember being utterly fascinated with that cone  of brown sugar, really is what it was. But I still see it in Mexico, that  candy.  About how big was it?  Oh, about like that, four or five inches. I was a child when he went back  down there and I do have a suitcase of correspondence of my  grandfather that I   m going to give to the library. I   m going to look at it  first, I might find some interesting things to continue in my story.  (Laughter) I   m sure I will because my husband got into it, he   s a Latin  American historian and he got into it and he got very interested in it and  planned to do something with it.  With the Blalock Company, what was   ?  There is a short write-up about the Blalock Company on the internet.  Were they from this area?  Yes, somebody told me they were Oklahoman, but I really thought the  initial thing started in Kansas. See, my grandfather was born in Kansas  and it makes sense to me that there was some    but I   m not sure, we  have to go back and look at that internet citing to be sure.  So he had this property down in Mexico and how many acres did he  ultimately have in Oklahoma?  31  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  In Oklahoma? In Noble County he ended up with a near thousand acres.  That was mainly near Sumner and Perry     And there   s one piece, 120 that   s on 177, about five miles north of Bill   s  Corner. It   s the southeast quarter up there and he had land just a mile  from Sumner, because Grandma and Grandpa met. Grandma   s father  homesteaded just right there practically at Sumner, just east, and  Grandpa homesteaded just a mile north, so they were the same  communities. It was Poole and it was my grandmother   s maiden name  and that   s where the first school was built, on the Poole place.  And this wasn   t the same school that your parents ended up meeting at?  No, there was a new consolidated school built later, the Sumner school.  I remember you saying that your mother was a teacher there.  And met my daddy. Grandpa had the 160 then he bought 80 acres west  of it. And then he bought one 160, another 160, and another 120.  (Laughs) It ended up being near a thousand acres. And the bottom land  there on Black Bear Creek was great farm land, all of that. But the rest  of it was grassland.  So did he mainly grow wheat?  Wheat. I remember the big barn there on the home place. Oh, I loved to  go play in that. (Laughs) Up there in the loft in that barn it was so much  fun and  there was  lots of hay stored up there and lots of horses in the  barn. Mother said that Ben, the hired man, came home one day just  laughing his head off. That was the year we lived across the creek. This  hired man came in for supper and he was just laughing and laughing and  they said,    Ben, what are you laughing for?    and he said that I was in  there with him while he was feeding the oats to the horses and I was  watching him chew and I said,    Ben, have you ever watched this horse  chew? His mouth goes round and round     (Laughs)  I used to run back and forth across that Black Bear Bridge to my  grandparents    place. Oh and there were the biggest turtles that came out  of Black Bear. Grandpa had trimmed up the cedar trees, some that were  close to the house. You know, you had outdoor toilets, and so I ran out  to that toilet and there was a place with quite a few cedar trees and it  went up, and there were these monstrous, how big is that? 18 inches?  One and a half feet?  And I was a small child and I saw those enormous turtles and I ran back  32  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  in the house petrified. Grandpa said,    Oh yeah, they came up from the  creek.     Was that your first year there at Black Bear Creek?  We just spent one winter there waiting for that probate court to settle our  property that Mother and Daddy bought on US-64.  Is there anything else that you wanted to talk about with your parents or  your grandparents before we move on to your daughter?  No, I told you about Mother   s activities, I think. I think I told you about  her community activities.  Right, it sounds like she was very active.  Very active, yes. The county agents, the home demonstration agents  always just adored her, relied on her to help them lead things in Noble  County.  Can you talk about what her role was with the Home Extension agents?  Well, she was president of the Farm Council, Home Demonstration  Women in Noble County several times. She was always doing  something. And of course, she helped with the fair every year, big time.  She taught so many homemakers how to do so many things that they just  didn   t know how to do. And if she didn   t know how she read her book  and she found out how to do it and did it  (Laughs)  Did she travel around a lot to do some of these demonstrations?  No, they just went to different people   s homes and we had our county  meetings there at the county seat in Noble County. She did go to the  national, she   d come down every year and stay in Murray Hall and go to  the state meetings. I   m not sure where the national meeting was, but one  year she went as the state representative to the national. And taught her  Sunday school class faithfully, every Sunday.  Do you remember how many women were in the club in Noble County?  Oh, there were at least twenty and probably more.  How often would they get together and meet?  Once a month. And the Ladies Aid got together once a month, the First  Christian Church.  33  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  So your mother would do educational sessions at these meetings?  Yes.  Do you remember some of the things she heard about through the  extension?  Oh, all sorts of things. I don   t remember.  Did you ever go to those meetings?  Oh yes, when I was small and then when I came back home if there was  a meeting, I   d go with her. I enjoyed seeing all the people and we   d go  as kids and just have a ball, Verona and I, the Johnsons. Verona and I  were inseparable. I told you about us going off on the horses. (Laughs)  Yeah, and then going and playing basketball. I said something to  somebody the other day about playing basketball and they said,    You  played basketball?    and I said,    Sure, I was probably the smallest one so  I had to play       I said,    Girls didn   t play then like they do now. Girls go  up and down the whole court now.       Well no, no.    The court was  divided in three parts, and I was the center, and Verona was one of the  forwards.  So you had a six person team?  Right. I don   t know how many people we had, I can   t remember. How  many people are on a team now?  Five. But I think there are at least some places where I   ve talked to folks  when they had the three zones, they had two people     Right, so other people have told you about the three zones, right. Well I  guess that was considered too much activity for women. (Laughs)  Did they have groups when you were young for basketball? Or did you  informally get together, was this at school?  Oh, this was school, we played. Our court was out on the dirt. It was a  dirt court and we traveled around to different schools to play basketball.  Did they have anything like that when you got to college or were you too  busy with your classes?  (Laughs) Well I wasn   t that good. I wasn   t outstanding and I never  considered it. In fact, I struggled through tennis. I had to take so many  34  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  units of P.E. I was not good, I can   t say very good. (Laughs) I struggled,  I got through. The only thing I was good in was dance.  So this was at OSU when you had to take P.E. credits     Oh yeah, lots of P.E.  What kind of dance did you take?  I can   t remember, probably ballroom. I wasn   t bad in soccer, either.  So they had soccer back then?  Well I don   t know if you called it soccer, what did we call it? I don   t  know, but we kicked a ball around like soccer. I was okay at that. But  that tennis was a fiasco and swimming wasn   t any better because my  mother was afraid of water, and I thought I deserved an A because I  overcame my fright  I did make it from one end of the pool to the other,  but Lord knows how I did it; I did it because I had to   Was your mother scared of water just because when you were little you  lived next to the creek, do you think? Or was she scared of it before?  No. I don   t know why she was afraid of the water, but it was certainly  passed on to me. And also, their fear, all of them, that something might  happen to me in water, get off and decide to go in a pond or something. I  would go in with Grandma sometimes in some of our ponds, but she  already knew it was safe for us to walk around in that kind of thing. And  Aunt Lottie down in the city, she   d take me. (Laughs) I wasn   t afraid of  anything with Aunt Lottie.  I was going to say, she sounds like a wonderful Aunt.  She was, she was a great aunt. She was a super-great aunt  (Laughs)  It sounds like you had a lot of adventures with her.  I did. I did have a lot of adventures with Aunt Lottie and she was a lot of  fun.  Did she have a big influence on you, do you think?  Yes, she did. I didn   t get to see her very often, but she did. And even in  later years she had a big influence on me, yeah.  What about her, do you think?  35  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  She   s just so real. So down to earth, so real, and just enjoyed the simple  things.  When you were in college did you talk about what field you were going  into?  No, no. I really didn   t see them that often.  Well in finishing up family, do you want to talk a little bit about your  daughter and her family, on the other end of the family?  Well, we had one daughter. She was born in March of    45, while Mario  was overseas in World War II. He didn   t see her until she was nine  months old. Came home just before Christmas of    45. Jacquelyn didn   t  ever have a chance to be a child. We took her every place with us.  Wherever it was we took her with us and she was expected to behave  like everybody else. She just was the model child and that was expected.  (Laughs) When she was five, Mario was working at home, working full-time  on his dissertation and I was the purchasing agent for the  Nutritional Science department on campus.  And this was where?  Berkeley, UC-Berkeley. So he would make her lunches   you ought to  have her tell the tales about her lunches that Daddy made  And walk her  up the hill to elementary school. We had an apartment there and it had a  fireplace in it; Christmas time, it was perfect, that fireplace. Jackie, I  have pictures of this it was so cute, she had her two front teeth out and  she   d sing    All I want for Christmas are my two front teeth     But  everybody just adored her, wanted Jackie. Another man who was  studying for his PhD was Ed Garcia and his wife, she was a nurse, and  they didn   t have any children and they just doted on her. Everybody did.  She was an only child that was running around with all these adults.  It sounds like she was a little adult, basically. I mean, she was a good  companion.  Yeah  Oh we laugh about her, two years old, she was running around  serving the hor d   oeuvres at cocktail parties. (Laughs) And then we  moved, she had to sell all her toys and everything when Mario finished  his PhD in    52 and Mario got his first job down at Tulane University. I  remember people coming and buying her toys and (laughs) she wasn   t  sure she wanted to part with that tricycle. I said,    Oh Jackie, you   re big  now. We   ll get a bicycle, we   ll get the wheels.    And you know we did.  How old was she when you moved?  36  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  She was born in    45 and we moved in    52, so seven. Starting to school in  New Orleans, the mosquitoes on the way down there, we did pull a little  trailer, and something went the matter and we stopped on the road  between Shreveport and New Orleans, and those, I don   t know if they  were mosquitoes, the bugs, those weren   t mosquitoes, they were bugs of  some kind, and they loved that child  They would just eat her alive  I  remember her being in the car, it was hot as Hades in that car and she  had the windows rolled up   she   d have no part of those bugs  (Laughs)  We got to New Orleans and it was the same story all over again with the  mosquitoes. Oh, and we had to find a place to live and, oh my goodness.  We had a place rented just until we could find a place to live, a place on  Lake Charles Avenue. Then we got an upstairs apartment and it was  over an elderly couple and the owners lived in the other half of the  house. We had this little, I guess it was a one-bedroom apartment up  there, and we wouldn   t let Jackie make much noise because that elderly  couple lived downstairs and she   ll still tell you,    Mom, I remember how  you   d say Strick's gonna get you.    (Laughter)  So your husband   s first position after grad school was at Tulane.  Right.  So I guess you moved during the summer.  Oh, and the teacher there  She was so hard on Jackie. In California, you  don   t teach children (we didn   t at that time, I don   t know what they do  now)   they taught them to print because they felt they didn   t have the  muscle coordination to learn writing first. Well we went to New Orleans  and when you were in whatever grade that was, you were supposed to  already be able to write and she just gave poor Jackie fits  She was so  strict and Jackie didn   t know anybody. It was not easy.  That   s tough when you   re that age.  Yeah. So we lived in New Orleans two years.  And what were you doing?  Well I thought, I   m going to start my Spanish classes, because I had  been trying to speak Spanish, and I thought I knew something, and  everything I did was wrong and I couldn   t understand. Well I found out,  when I went and took classes at Tulane (I had a great teacher, just a  great teacher) I found out the reason that I was having so much problem  was that even in the present tense, there are six different conjugations of  a verb, in the present tense  Hablo, hablas, habla, hablamos. And it   s not  37  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  I speak, you speak, we speak, speak six ways, it   s six different ways in  the present tense  That   s what was driving me nuts.  We   re not used to that in English   (Laughs) Well, see I   d gotten all the way through college and never had  a language. So first semester I took my Spanish class and I did take  Spanish, but I went to work part time and just didn   t do quite as well in  my Spanish. I did okay, but it just didn   t sink in quite as well as that first  semester where I could really devote myself to it. So I went down and  taught, for the first job, I taught part-time down at Charity Hospital. I  hadn   t had formal nutrition, because I had general home economics, and  here I was teaching nutrition to the nurses  I learned a lot in short order  and for years I would hear from them how much my teaching them  helped. Well I   m sure it was very to the point, very practical   You hadn   t had much of that in your undergrad     No, no. I hadn   t had much, not to the point I was ready to do that, but I  did.  Is this what started your advanced interest in nutrition?  Well, I   ll tell you what started my interest in nutrition was that Dr.  Agnes Fay Morgan, when I was a purchasing agent, because I got into  research. We had big research at University of California, Dr. Agnes Fay  Morgan, very famous. She just turned the thing over to me and so I don   t  know anything about all that, all that equipment and everything. I had to  learn  And so I got involved in all the research, and I just found it  fascinating, what we were doing. We had the dog colony up on the fifth  floor and all the graduate students doing their research and all the  professors. It was just a marvelous setting to get me turned on.  Well you haven   t talked much about your purchasing agent position at  Berkeley. What department was that with?  Nutritional Sciences. Agnes Fay Morgan was the chair. And I did store  keeping, started out storekeeper. You just learn, you know?  So Berkeley is where you really got it?  Yeah, Berkeley   s where I got it. And while I was at Berkeley, before I  went over and did that, I worked the summers for Heinz, while they  were doing all their baby foods and ketchup and all that, and I was in the  quality control lab. And you counted all the insect fragments, purity of  the products, the pH and so forth, quality control. Go out every thirty  38  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  minutes and take a sample off the line.  Was that plant right in Berkeley?  Right, Heinz was right there in Berkeley. And then I went over in the  nutrition department. They wanted me to work hours that I just couldn   t  with having Jackie at times and so then I got the job and that was so  much better. I learned so much. Agnes Morgan supported me  throughout, she was just wonderful. When Mario got the job at the  University of Arizona I decided I was going to go back to school and get  my master   s. She was a good friend of Art Kemmerer, who was head of  Ag, Bio-Chemistry, and Nutrition department, so she wrote a very good  letter for me and talked to Dr. Kemmerer.  So she sounds like a real role model.  She was. Yes. I adored her, and yet you   d think she was so stern, and she  never said much. As I said, I walked into the job and she just turned it  over  No explanations, nothing   On the job training. Or on the job learning, I guess. (Laughter)  But if I got stuck, I marched myself in and told her what I was stuck on.  One time we had a professor, Dr. Okey, and she was a spinster and she  had such bad back problems and she really needed a special chair in the  department. I went into Dr. Morgan and I said,    Dr. Morgan, we have  got to do something about Dr. Okey.    She was a great scientist, and so I  said,    We have to get her a chair.    Dr. Morgan sat there awhile and she  said,    You realize that if we get Dr. Okey a chair, everybody else in the  department is going to want a chair.    I said,    Well, I think they should  understand Dr. Okey has a special problem and needs a chair.    So she  said,    That   s your problem.    (Laughs) I got Dr. Okey her chair.  I was going to say, so did you get her her chair?  (Laughs) I got her her chair.  So what were some of the research projects there that you got to know  about while you were there? Do you remember any of them?  Oh, I can   t remember all of those we did.  You mentioned a dog colony?  Yeah, we had a dog, we worked on   the great Dr. Morgan, Ms. Fay  Morgan, she worked on pantothenic acid. Dr. Okey was working on  39  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  cholesterol. One of my friends, she was a graduate student, and we were  good friends until she died, she was working with a lot of radioactive  stuff; that was my first introduction to radioactive stuff.  Sounds like you   ve had a lot of good role models in that department.  I did  Yeah.  All these women with their doctorates.  And students studying and good mature students. Serious stuff.  At that point in time, it sounds like there was a lot of biochemistry  involved with this.  You couldn   t do anything with nutrition without biochemistry.  Were these women being able to get their degrees in biochemistry  departments or were they going through     Oh yeah.  I didn   t know if they were going through some of the other departments  and getting their training in those departments     I don   t know how they were set up.  Okay, well now you   re at Tulane.  Yeah, we got Jackie to Tulane.  You   ve got Jackie and your husband Mario to Tulane and you are  teaching at Charity Hospital     Yes, and then I transferred over because that was a part-time job and I  really needed to work full-time. I transferred over and was employee  training dietitian, which was really more   at that time I didn   t have my  background so I was more suited for that, really. Employee training  dietitian at the Baptist Hospital there. That was quite an experience;  living in New Orleans was quite an experience. I   m not geared for that.  Too much of everything?  No, I am not   I guess I   m color blind. I strongly believe that all people  are equal.  40  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  And not everybody in New Orleans did?  I didn   t know hardly anybody that did. And so, I should   ve just stayed  part-time at Charity, but we needed the money because Mario   s salary  was  2,400 a year. And rent was very expensive. We did buy a house  after the first year. Jackie didn   t have to be quiet for Strick anymore.  (Laughter) It was enough to be stressed out in school by her teacher  without having to be quiet upstairs.  Yeah, right. And so we did buy a house. We only had it a year, but we  didn   t lose any money on it. But I tell you, the move to New Haven after  two years in New Orleans was   things were tight. We owned that house  and we rented up there too and salary wasn   t that much better at Yale for  a beginning instructor. Mario   s mother said she   d help us out, and we  said,    No, we   ve got to do this ourselves.     So you still had the house in New Orleans and     Yeah, and we just sweated it out and made it until we lived in a summer  house on the lake out in West Haven. Jackie would take the bus to  school and trot around that lake back to our house. Now that I think  about that little tyke doing that, you wouldn   t do things like that today   But back then it was different. So it would   ve been 1954 when you  moved to Yale and New Haven and West Haven.  Yeah, I didn   t quite finish with New Orleans, I should finish that. I just  couldn   t take it, the way that the supervisors there in the main kitchen,  she referred to the black people as animals. She said,    What are you  doing wasting your time teaching them how to do things?    and so forth.  And the guy that was a pot washer, oh my God, he   d get fifty dollars  every two weeks, and the place he worked in was a hot hell hole. I had  another young man that lived in practically a shacky sort of thing. He   d  be cold and I   d go in there and find him, he   d come in there because he  was so cold, come in there before work and the food that they had them  prepare, all of this elegant food and what they were fed was pathetic   I remarked about it one day and they said,    Oh, that   s what they like,  that   s their food, that   s what they like.    Well one day two pieces of  chicken   now they counted the pieces of chicken  Two pieces of  chicken were missing, and they were all over all the black people. I  marched myself up there and I threw a fit. Because that   s just inhumane.  And guess what happened. I was told that they would fire me, that they  would write me a glowing recommendation any place I want that I  applied. So I didn   t fit.  41  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  And at the same time, your husband   s position, was it a two year  temporary position?  No, it was permanent. My husband, no, he wasn   t ready to go, he got the  Yale offer. No. He didn   t have any publications, he wasn   t ready for  Yale, no way were we going to Yale. So we went to Berkeley for the  summer, stayed with Mario   s mother and he did research. I told the  mentor   of course he immediately told his mentor about the job offer  and everything you know, Dr. Sleuter. And then when I saw Dr. Sleuter  I told him,    I can   t do this     He said,    Well this is Mario   s opportunity,  this is what he has to do.    And I said,    Well let   s you do something.     (Laughs) So he got together the professors and had a big party. And he  had daughters about the age of Jackie, so they had a great time together,  and they convinced Mario that   s what he needed to do, is go to Yale. So  we went.  So that was a good exit for you too, at the same time.  Well I would have had to look for another job, because we couldn   t live  on   we could live, but it was not good.  So things were better in New Haven in that regard?  Oh, yeah. I drove about forty, fifty miles through the ice and snow and  everything to finish up my course requirements to qualify for the  American Dietetic Association, to be a registered Dietitian. Well, at that  time we didn   t have registered; just to be a dietitian officially, because I  didn   t like going around not being qualified.  And where were you going to finish up?  West Hartford, to an all-girls school out there in West Hartford that  offered nutrition classes.  What was the name, do you remember?  West Hartford. It was Catholic. Sister Enigma, she taught microbiology  and she was so funny  She was so strict. (Laughs) Oh, and I had classes  with another sister, and we were put to be mates and she would pull the  darndest tricks on me in the lab and then just giggle about it  (Laughs)  And Sister Enigma, one day I caught her behind the thing laughing.  After that I teased her. I heard from her for years.  Were they Benedictine?  I don   t know what they were. (Laughs) I just wanted to do my courses.  42  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Sometimes it would be cold and it   d be dark by the time I got out of  some of those labs and I   d have to drive on that icy road all the way  back to West Haven. What guts, huh? But I did it. So I finished that up  and I got a position as a dietitian at West Haven Junior High under Ms.  McNamara, our principal, a good Catholic. She was very prim and very  strict, but ended up, we were really good friends. One day I said,    You  know, Mario has this job at the University of Arizona and we   re going to  go to Arizona.    She said,    Well, when you go, I go.    And she did. She  retired. When I retired, she retired. They had her party  (Laughs)  So how long were you at Yale then?  Mario was at Yale six years. Yeah, and one year was, I think he had a  year   s leave, he got the Robertson Prize and     Do you want to talk a little bit about that?  They wanted Mario to stay on and the professors came to the house and  I made dinner and we had everybody. They wanted Mario to stay on  because Mario was the first Latin American historian they had. The  whole area, Mario was the first one. They wanted him to stay there and  start a Latin American Studies Program, and he said,    I can   t do it  because I have no publications, and I will not really be reputable if I  don   t get my qualifications.    He was working on that, but he did not  have, and what he wrote was documented to the nth degree. It was solid.  There were no opinions; it was solid. It was interesting to read but not  entertainment.  What area of   ?  Well he got his PhD in the colonial period, but after    Tulane was  Central American history and Cal Silver was the political scientist and  so he was very active down there because of all the activity. And we  had, I can   t think of his name, an archaeologist that was big in all that,  too. And so it was probably, I don   t know, but I would venture to say  probably the outstanding school in Central American Studies. It   s gone  downhill now, they say. So his PhD was in the Potos   area, shipping the  silver down and the contraband and all that that went on in the colonial  period in Latin America. Then we went to Tulane and it was Central  America, and so that was our first trip on a plane, 1953 we had to go  down to supervise students in their studies.  Did Jackie go down with you?  No, Jackie went and stayed with Grandma and we went down. Then  there was just a series of things that Mario taught with a group of  43  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  professors for the State Department in later years, in the    70s. They went  down and taught, we had six different professors I think, an economist,  somebody in languages, Mario the historian, a geographer   a great  bunch of guys. Great bunch of guys, and they would go, the State  Department paid their way down there, for six weeks. So to a different  Central American country every year.  So would they do research together down there?  No, they were teaching. These social studies, teaching the high school  teachers and it was a six week summer course for them.  This was in the    70s, so this would   ve been when he was at the  University of Arizona or was that later?  Well I remember going down, I went down and in Panama, Central  American Panama. I remember I got my PhD in    69 and I went down the  summer of    70. And they   d been doing this back and forth, but where  did we leave off chronologically here?  You were talking about what your husband had been doing at Tulane  with Central America.  Yeah, and then he transferred. He was in Central America the rest of his  time and so the rest of his publications are during the Independence  period. He started while he was at Tulane, he started his research on the  Livingston Codes. He wrote on the influence of the Livingston Codes on  Central American history.  And for the people who might not know what the Livingston Codes are,  can you give a short description     Not really. I haven   t looked at that in a long time.  (Laughter) Unfair question.  No, that   s alright I should know. It was the penal system, how we need  to help people was the essence of the story. And then he went on to start  on Frederick Chatfield, the Palmerstonian diplomat that went to  Guatemala and all the British influence down there and other people too,  and it was during the time that the Central American countries were  establishing, in fact they had a Federal Republic of these different  countries. Guatemala is the biggest and it was the center. Frederick  Chatfield, was the way I see it was always, well I think he was a part of  the dissolution of the Central American Republic. He wanted this, he  wanted that. Mario was always tying in the European influence, various  44  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  countries, Spain and its influence, he tied in the Cortes of C  diz, which  are rules that were set up in Spain and the Central American countries  tried to absorb, utilize some of the Cortes of C  diz and what they did, so  he has a book on that.  A number of his books have been translated. The Hondurans just loved  the Chatfield book. They did a second edition  In fact, I think this is the  second edition and in it I think they have a   oh, here on the back they  have a picture of Mario and a write up. You probably don   t have one of  those in the library. Remind me, I   ll give you one. I have a lot of copies,  they sent me a box of a lot of them. That was the first book that he  published and while we lived in Guatemala a year in    64-   65, he beat out  this little book that   s part of a series and they used that all over the USA  in teaching.  And that   s just titled Central America.  Yeah. And this is the C  diz Experiment in Central America 1808 to  1826 , like I told you, they tried it out in the early 1800s.  Now you mentioned that your husband won the Robertson Prize  James  Alexander Robertson Prize of the Conference on Latin American  History . Do you want to tell us a little bit about what that is? Is that  when he was still at Yale?  That was when he was at Yale, he won the Robertson Prize.  And you said that they wanted him to stay at Yale, but there was an offer  at the University of Arizona.  Yeah, he told them no, he could not do that. And then he had an offer  from the University of Arizona and he went there from being at the  instructor level to an associate professorship.  What was it about the University of Arizona that was a draw?  Oh well, he had to have employment and he was not going to stay on at  Yale. Yale doesn   t keep, in general, they bring in young instructors and  it   s a feather in your cap and you go on to something else, but they did  invite him; I don   t know if he got a formal invitation. I don   t think there  was anything ever formal about it, but they tried to persuade him to stay  on and do something in Latin American studies. This is one that they  translated in Spanish, The C  diz Experiment. And the Hondurans  translated that. I was going to pull out the    Livingston Codes        The  Livingston Codes in the Guatemalan Crisis of 1837-1838     for you, the  first official publication.  45  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  It looks like this came through Tulane, so he probably wrote that while  he was still at Tulane and it was published a year later.  Yes. He wrote that at Tulane; that was his first publication. Let   s see  what they called it.    The Livingston Codes in the Guatemalan Crisis.     Yeah, he was always trying to help them. Yeah, and Applied  Enlightenment, 19th Century Liberalism. He was a firm believer in  Liberalism   So did you go with him at the same time? Did you all go down to the  University of Arizona at the same time?  Yes.  And that would have been 1960?  Yes. We always had six years. In 1966, we went back to GW  George  Washington University .  Well let   s talk a little bit about Arizona now.  I did my master   s and I said that   s it. Dr. Kemmerer, head of our  department, Ag Bio-Chemistry and Nutrition said,    Well why aren   t you  going on?    I said,    Because one PhD is enough.    I really got what I felt I  desperately needed, so I think that   s enough. So I was very weak and I  still am in math. Not regular math. So I took a couple math courses and  fooled around and I typed some more of Mario   s stuff, including the  Chatfield book. And my master   s    (Laughs)  Which was enough to keep you busy for awhile.  Yeah. So I took my math course and then came summer time and Dr.  Kemmerer called me in and said,    It   s time for you to get back to work.  We have a NIH  National Institutes of Health  Fellowship. Being a  professor   s wife, it   ll cost you five dollars a year to go to school. What  are you doing?    So they worked me over and I started back. (Laughs)  So what year did you get your master   s?  Well, I should   ve got finished up in    62, but I was typing Mario   s  Chatfield book, and it had to be in, and I didn   t make it until    63.  So this was the summer of    63, you graduated, it was the summer and  now they   re starting to get you to go back, to get your doctorate.  Right. So I went to school a year on my PhD, then Mario got his  46  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  sabbatical and got a fellowship. He got a Guggenheim, and so now I  have to give some money to Guggenheim for other scholars, that   s  something I must remember to do. So I took off a year with him and  Jackie went down for the summer with us. And then we sent her back to  Grinnell.  Okay, so she was in college by that time. She would   ve been about  nineteen?  That was    64 and she was born in    45. Yeah, she was. So I applied for  my NIH to let me go to Guatemala, and it did   What were you researching at this point in time?  Well I just wasn   t sure what I was going to do down there. That was the  best experience I had yet. That was fabulous, because it was at a time  when they were doing the Central America and Panama inquest   let   s  see, what   s the English word? We were looking at the nutritional status  of the population of Central American Panama countries. So we had  bigwigs from the U.S. government from all over, competent people  coming down to participate in the study and to help us set it up. I was  working at the Institute of Nutrition, studying at the Institute of  Nutrition, Central American Panama under Dr. Arroyave. So I got to be  a part of  that , and I met Dr. Sauberlich there who turned out to just be  a great friend. I think he was born in a laboratory, he could just do things  and I said,    How in the world ?    He said,    I don   t know, just nothing to  it.    (Laughs) I really got to know him because we had the pharmacy  students doing our lab work   that was their training for the year. The  Guatemalan pharmacy students were doing our research as whatever  project they had to do for that year. He didn   t speak any Spanish and  they didn   t know much English, and so I got to learn about all the  experiments because I got to tell the pharmacy students  about them .  You got to work as the go between.  (Laughs) And Dr. Sauberlich would just work himself to death, and I   d  say,    Dr. Sauberlich, we   re going to go so and so and I think you should  take the day off and go with us.    (Laughs) Oh, he had the best time  going up the Los Altos with us and seeing all the religious ceremonies  and everything up there and all around. Then he wanted to buy  something for his wife and so I took him out. I went out on the studies of  the people, went to the homes of these people and recorded what they  were eating for three days.  So did you stay with the families?  47  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  I didn   t stay, I went back and forth on the bus to the different places. I  ate some pretty weird food, but the families were wonderful. What a  marvelous experience with Indians; I wouldn   t trade that for anything,  the experiences I had with that.  What do you remember as some of the more unusual food?  Now some of the foods I don   t remember, but I remember being  impressed with the way they made their tortillas and how they soaked  their corn in lye water to free the niacin. Or else if they didn   t then they  would get their, they called it  cal,  and they would get that just out of  the hillside. Bring that in and soak their corn in that lye water.  So it would just be coming out of the natural streams?  No, you would have to shave it off, and then you add it with water. I  would go to the centers where  they were  washing clothes and filling  their water jugs and carrying them around and dirt floors and big smoky  fireplaces that they cooked in. But it was such good people.  Did you get a sense at the time how the indigenous populations there  were being treated by the government?  They didn   t trust the government  Oh, that   s another story. On the  inquesta we had a Brazilian physiologist and he wanted to do the  anthropometric measurements. He spoke Portuguese and I spoke  Spanish and English and he knew some English. He spoke English and  Portuguese. The Indians didn   t understand him, because the Portuguese  they didn   t understand. And so, he would have me go out sometimes  with him to help him with his interpretation.  One day when the girls in the lab, those pharmacy students were a lot of  fun, and one day in the lab they said,    What gives with you two? He  speaks some English and you speak English, why don   t you two talk  English? Why do you speak Spanish?    I said,    Well, because I can  understand his Spanish and Portuguese better than I can understand his  English     (Laughs) It was so funny, the language thing.  You mentioned that they didn   t trust the government.  Oh, they didn   t  Yeah, they would come to me sometimes (this didn   t  happen often, but it did happen to me sometimes) that they   d say,    We  are not getting any answers because they don   t trust us. Would you come  and talk to these people and get some answers for us?    Because the  Indians, I just got along beautifully with the Indians, no problem. I think  it   s a matter of respecting people. I think that   s the whole thing, the  48  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  whole thing. Respecting the rights of other people. This started a long  time ago. (Laughs)  I was going to say, this seems to be an ongoing theme. (Laughter) You  mentioned that you were doing work with     What I did was they drew the blood for me and we were trying to find a  simple way to identify the protein status, especially of the children. So  Dr. Arroyave had the idea that we should look at some of the essential  amino acid ratios. So we were chromatographing the blood and looking  at the different amino acids and then figuring the ratios.  And this is after working with them in their homes to see what they have  been eating?  Right.  So what was the result of  all this ?  We came up with something and it is written up in our study, this big  study that they did, is part of it.  Now, I know when you showed me around your home that there were a  number of things that came from   were they from that trip or from later  trips?  Some things, like I told you about the six pictures I   m going to put up,  the Guatemalan pictures were from that trip. And some things are from  later and in different countries.  Were any of the photos on that page from that first Guatemalan trip?  This Dr. Taracena's grandson gave us, but this was from the most    we  didn   t pick that up there, but it   s from that area.  From Los Altos?  Yeah, from Los Altos. This set of dishes is from there.  We can add all of these photos.  Yeah, this  the wall hanging  is later after Mario passed away, in fact,  when I went to Ecuador. And this is, Mario went down to give a speech  in Venezuela at a conference.  That   s the bird needlework?  49  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Yes.  Was it a weaving or needlework?  I can   t remember. Those dishes are definitely from that trip.  What was your husband working on at the time?  In Guatemala. Well I told you the first part, he banged out the little     The book, Central America.  He did some work on Barrundia, but he never published on Barrundia.  I just wondered if there was a particular thing that he had     There was something I   m sure we were there  for  and he was really  working  on , but I don   t know.  He could have just been doing research for some of the other books too,  right?  He did this one when he had a grant to go and study in Spain a year.  And which book was that?  Our 1776 Revolution, and the Hispanic World. He had a special grant, I  think it was from Spain, the grant was, to do this.  So at the end of your year, you had been in Guatemala for a year. You  had been doing your research, your husband had been working on  research, your daughter got to come down during the summer. What did  you do after that?  That summer we went back and by that time Jackie had married Wayne,  and so we went back to the east coast and saw the newlyweds, went  camping with them. We went back to D.C., because they were in North  Carolina, and we went back to D.C. and drove around the Capitol with  the lights at night, and I cried. Oh, I was so glad to see my country  It  was a different feeling, I can   t explain it. I never thought I   d react like  that, but I was so emotionally moved.  You had a different appreciation for it.  I did.  50  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  So Jackie got married while she was in college?  Yes, while we were away. They were going to come down to Guatemala  for the wedding and the Guatemalans wanted them to stay forever before  they would issue a marriage license. And they couldn   t do that, they  were in school  So he finished up that year, he   s five years older than  Jackie, and they moved to North Carolina for him to do his graduate  work at Duke.  So she finished up her degree at Duke?  No, she finished in North Carolina-Chapel Hill.  And his name, for the record, is?  Wayne Mattice.  Okay, so they   re in North Carolina now. You   re at the University of  Arizona.  And we finished up, we already, while we were in Guatemala, had an  offer at George Washington University, but we had to go back and serve  our year at the University of Arizona, and give our notice, and I had to  finish all my course work. So, I went back and I really two-timed it. I  took so many units  I finished up all my course work, but no research.  You couldn   t use what you   d done in Guatemala?  No, I didn   t have a sponsor. I couldn   t continue that sort of thing. So,  after we moved in, I still had to take my French exam.  You couldn   t have done Spanish?  Oh, I did  But you had to have two languages. I know one of them I  talked them out of me having to do German, and to take either French or  advanced    I think it was I talked them out of German and I got them to  let me take the advanced Spanish exam, because I said I will never have  use for  German  and I did the French exam.  At least you   ve got two romance languages there.  Right. And I said the French is very good for me, because I am in  international nutrition, and the headquarters are in Italy, and French is  the language.  Of that organization.  51  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Right, for FAA, Food and Agriculture Organization, or World Health  Organization, whatever it was at the time, it was the official language, so  I got to do that. And I could translate my own, I did advanced stuff in  French, but my pronunciation was absolutely atrocious. And I just said I  don   t want to ruin my Spanish with trying to do that. I have good  pronunciation in Spanish   well Mario wouldn   t let me talk until I could  do it properly. (Laughter) He   d drill me  Wasn   t going to listen to that   The problem with fluent speakers. (Laughter)  Yeah, right. It was good. I   m so glad, because we went down to  Guatemala and the guy in the library said,    Oh, you speak such beautiful  Spanish, talk to me.    Because I speak Castilian. And they just said, you  speak so perfectly, we just love to hear you. (Laughs) He had adapted,  could go back and forth, you know. I said,    No. Just one.     (Laughter) Now where you were working in Guatemala, they were  speaking primarily which type of Spanish?  Their type. And it   s different, too. I picked it up; they had kind of a little  sing song to it. And it   s very nice and also the kids that worked in the  lab, I went home talking a certain way, and I didn   t know what it was, I  just did what the kids did, you know. And you pick it up and it was a fun  thing for them and I went home with some of that and Mario started  laughing. He enjoyed it, he said,    That   s old Spanish     (Laughter)  Because there are so many different varieties, not everyone realizes that.  Well it was not this bad, that we get in Texas. That is Mex-Tex or  something they call it. It   s very, very poor Spanish. I cannot understand  them. They just murder it. There are some announcers that we have on  the Spanish stations, if you can get some of them, they speak very good  Spanish in the news, but a lot of them just rattle and just murder it.  So you   ve gone through the University of Arizona. You   re at George  Washington University.  And I have to find a place to do research. So, I got lined up with FDA,  Spivey Fox. Everything is gold, I was going to do my research on  chromium. All she had to do was get the government approval for me to  go and I wasn   t going to have anybody involved, I was just going to do  the research. But it would be like an employee, but I said I don   t need  money, I need a place to do research and a sponsor. The government  said no, they could not have a person in the lab that wasn   t employed. So  I was up the creek without a paddle.  52  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  And this would have been what year,    66?  It would have been, we went    64-   65, we worked    65-   66. It   d be the fall  of    66. Well maybe I wasn   t doing that yet, it would have been    67,  because when I got there I still had to take my writtens. And so, a person  that was one of Dr. Morgan, from Berkeley, one of her graduate students  was then working for USDA, and she was in the downtown office. And  so the University of Arizona sent my exams to her. I sat down there in  USDA for a week and wrote. And then I flew back to Arizona for my  orals. Then I was ready to do research. When I started the hump.  By then you were too tired to do anything   (Laughs) So, I ended up with a professor in Biology at Georgetown  University adopting me. And that was different. I worked on proteins  and we experimented with rats. On the effect of a lysine deficient diet  on, looking at our ribosomes and so on, sub cellular particles. God, I  hated to chop the heads off of rats. (Laughter) I didn   t mind once we got  the head off and taken the parts out and the rest of it, but getting the rat  up there and chopping his head off, I used to get one of the custodians, I  got him to chop the heads off every time I could. (Laughs)  Lab work can be a tough business.  I was not good at that.  What parts of the rat were you analyzing at that point?  The livers. We were looking at livers. And I discovered, we did some  stuff on the electron microscope, all this extra particles that weren   t in a  normal rat, these fine little particles, so I did analysis on that and found,  this machine analyzed the different minerals that were in this, and it was  iron. They had built up a real supply of iron in there.  And how did that come about?  My professor didn   t want to believe me, but I showed him.  And this was in the lysine deficient rats?  Yeah. They didn   t grow normally. So then when I finished my PhD, we  flew out in February and Jacquelyn was expecting the second baby,  Valerie that we have today, the mother-in-law was supposed go for the  second baby, I   d gone for the first baby, and she was supposed to go for  the second baby and for some reason she couldn   t, so Jackie was waiting  on Mama to come, especially because we had a sixteen-month old baby  53  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  to take care of while she was in the hospital. It was just nip and tuck,  was I going to finish my final orals in time to get back for the baby   s  birth? Valerie waited. In fact, she was kind of out of shape, she waited  past time. I got there and we flew back and flew to her place right  afterwards when Valerie was born.  And your first grandchild had been born sixteen months earlier. Who  was that?  Christina. And we lost Christina when she just started to school,  suddenly. Haemophilus influenza. I   d rather not talk about that.  So you   ve got your doctorate at this point, you   ve finished up     Yeah. Got the second baby  And so then I signed up, right away, to go to  USDA. There was a special project that they were doing. Writing the  history of the nutrients, all the research, writing up the research that had  been done in the different human nutrients. I was assigned Vitamin-A  and we   re still working on it  And then the second one was folic acid.  And both of them are very complicated.  I was going to say, those are not small tasks.  No, because there   s so many different forms of folic acid, and so many  different things that   ll convert to active Vitamin-A, and so many  different things we   re finding out that they do  Yeah, those were  complicated assignments. And then Mario got the job in    72 at USC.  Okay, and how long had you been working for the USDA?  Three years.  So you got your degree in    69?  Yes. And before I started to work for USDA, we took students on three  week tours in Latin America. The first one was in    68 and we went to  Chile, Argentina, and Uruguay.  So this was through the university?  Through GW. These were graduate students. And then, the second year  we took them, for three weeks, to Brazil. And we started out in Manaus  and ended up with the students in   they didn   t go to the capital with us I  don   t think, because the capital was brand new then. And there wasn   t  much out there, it was just kind of a field and some of it wasn   t even  finished yet. I haven   t been back since   it   s just a big place now. One of  54  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  the favorite places was Belo Horizonte. I found that fascinating, in the  hills, in Brazil. Manaus was interesting in the boat ride on the river, that  was very interesting, then getting off and going up to see the tribal units  and so forth. And those huge, huge snakes and we had one student with  us that was older, Hazel Ingersoll. She was not afraid of that snake that  big around  She   d pick up that thing and wind it around   Were these boas or pythons?  I don   t know, whatever they are, they don   t hurt you I guess, except they  can squeeze you to death I think, if they wanted to. But when we went  up in Rio, when we went up to the peak, you know you have to take the  cable car. That woman, and she was definitely an older student of  Mario   s, probably our age, she had height fear. She wouldn   t go up and I  said,    Hazel, we have to go up, come on we have to go up.       Oh, no,     she   d say. Finally when she let all of us go up there, and we   re up there  doing our thing here comes Hazel in a cable car sitting on the floor  (laughter) so she didn   t have to look. Oh, I used to tease her about that   Snakes didn   t bother her, but she was having none of the heights.  Right. To each his own.  So you   re now in Southern California.  Mario is at USC and I went out and taught a year at Northridge State  University. The first year, we redid a lot in the house we bought in the  Hollywood Hills, because nothing had been done to it, it needed a whole  bunch. We spent a lot of time doing that and finishing up writing on  folic acid. (Laughs) I didn   t get it finished  Then I got the job, I looked  at a job out east, I can   t remember the name of the school out there, but  anyway it was just too far, the commute was impossible. So I did the  year at Northridge, but that was a twenty-five mile trip, and in my  profession, you have to be in the lab  And you have night work, too.  You know, they were graduate students and so I had a night graduate  class and then I   d have to come home, drive on the freeway at night.  And I   m tired. So after a year and living in Hollywood, it was a beautiful  lot we had, up very close to Griffith Park, just a block or two from  Griffith Park, it was lovely.  Sort of around the south?  Yeah, it was a lovely lot and we had a tangerine tree  And some other  kind of fruit tree we had. Big tangerine tree, but I just couldn   t take that  commute. And Mario only had to go in a couple times a week and his  research was not anything about that kind of thing, you know, or  55  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  teaching. So I applied down at Long Beach and got the job. First we  lived in Los Alamitos, that   s near Seal Beach, which was nice. It was  close to campus, not bad at all. And Mario found ways to drive to  campus and avoided the freeway traffic. So that worked very well and  we bought a house in Los Alamitos. But Mario wanted a house on a hill.  So we bought, on Legion Drive, Signal Hill. The little oil town, in the  middle of Long Beach. And just down the hill was the City Hall for  Signal Hill and the police station and everything. And we had a beautiful  view of both bridges and the Queen Mary and the oil derricks that were  covered with buildings.  Which I always found really unusual. They have camouflaged some with  fake palm trees now.  And so we lived there until Mama had her stroke in    92.  And that   s when you came back to Oklahoma?  Yes, that   s when I came back to Oklahoma.  How long was your husband at USC? Did he retire out there?  Yes. He retired out there. We both took that, each school had a six  month thing, in fact I think he didn   t even    He was getting pay without  going in there, but I took the last five years, I took an early retirement,  half time.  So when did you retire for     I retired in    88 or    89.  And what had you been doing your research on when you were down in  Long Beach?  I didn   t really do research.  Teaching?  Yeah, and for the state, I made some    see I was in school food service  for five years, and I think I liked that job better than anything I did, I  was with the junior high. People say junior high kids are difficult and I  enjoyed those students no end. I had a great principal, Ms. McNamara.  We got all this government food and we were turning out batches of  stuff for 500 kids and I   d involve the students in what we did in the  cafeteria, I involved the cafeteria in their class work. They were writing  about it, they were doing decorations for us, we had science projects in  56  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  the kitchen. We did math classes, doing inventory, we found all kinds of  ways to involve the cafeteria in the classes. We had a great science  teacher, an older woman that was really good about figuring out how to  do science in the kitchen. It was fun.  And I used to go and teach the cooks, in New Haven, we had a Culinary  Institute, and one down in Bridgeport, too, but anyway we   d have  summer classes for the directors and some of the cooks and so forth.  And so I would teach in that. Oh, and the director of the state school  food service, Edith Cushman, she retired from her job at the state level at  the same time I retired and they offered me the state job. To direct the  state school food service. I was going away  (Laughter) So I just loved  that aspect, I really enjoyed that.  And how did that translate into what you were doing?  Oh, I did a couple of films   in fact, I have copies of them (it might be  fun for you to put those copies of that in there in the Library with this)     and teaching. The first film I did was about teaching nutrition and I  guess it was too advanced probably for, I don   t know if it was or not, it   s  for non-majors. Explaining weaving chemistry into foods and I love the  film. Sometime I   ll have to show it to you. In fact I   d like to look at it  again. And we showed molecules. So what I did was develop a couple of  films for teaching. What else did I do? I took my students out, I taught  the community nutrition class. I worked with Head Start, I took them out  to Head Start all the time. Yeah, I had a big grant to do the films.  Was that through the USDA?  The state. Yeah. Probably through USDA, I   m not sure.  Now of all the work you did throughout your career, what are you  particularly proud of? It sounds like your work with schools?  I   m very proud of that part.  Are there other things that you really   ?  You know, I did a good job on my publications, too. I don   t see them  cited anymore, but for years they were really cited. I felt it was a good  contribution. And I think that I gave students, I get letters from students  now telling me what they still remember me telling them and teaching  them. I know some of my students that went on to do what they said,  they go back and take my basic nutrition class, which was upper  division, that I taught at the university. They go back and use that for the  fundamentals. So I think I gave them a good background. For me, I  57  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  couldn   t handle research and teaching because I had four classes and  nutrition is moving rapidly and you just can   t keep up and do research  and teach four classes.  And that was something I wanted to ask you about, too; nutritional  science has changed a lot over the years     And I taught it from the current aspect. I taught it from the molecular  biology aspect.  Starting from when you were in grad school until now, what changes  have you seen in nutritional science?  Well, I   ll tell you. When I took my first biochemistry class in graduate  school, in that biochemistry book, I don   t think we   d split the atom.  So there are some major differences in what we knew     (Laughs) Totally different  And you   ve got to stay on the ball to keep up  with all, that   s why I still go to the meeting every year and read the  papers.  You were telling me you were looking at the program for this year   s  meeting.  Yeah, in fact I just got the program, that thick book, that   s the program.  It looks like it   s about an inch, inch and a half thick?  (Laughs) Yes. Of course that   s all the biological things, papers and stuff.  And which conference is that for?  That   s the experimental biology, and it   ll have nutrition, anatomy,  physiology, biochemistry.  What was it like being part of a two career family like that, I mean  having two academic careers? It sounds like each time you moved, you  were able to find something that worked?  Yeah  That was my job. Well and it was good that I had all that variety,  that didn   t hurt anything. And I enjoyed Mario   s field, too.  It sounds like you were very involved in the work he did, too.  Right. Probably meant I couldn   t do as well as I wanted to on my own.  58  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  I think when you   ve got two people in the house like that maybe you  share a little of what you   re researching.  Let   s see. ASPET  American Society for Pharmacology and  Experimental Therapeutics , Behavioral Pharmacology Society, ASN,  which is     American Society of Nutrition?  Yes. Oh these are the guest societies; here are the sponsoring societies.  American Association of Anatomists, and Physiology, Biochemistry and  Molecular Biology, which I don   t know if you say nutrition or  biochemistry, I can   t tell the difference. And Pathology, this Nutrition  Society, and Pharmacology.  So you   ve got a wide range there.  Yes, and you pick and choose. I   ll go to the lipids session, and I   ll go to  some of the nutrition and vitamin sessions; they are lipids, too. So I   ll  just have to look through this and write them down   It   s obvious that you   re still involved in your field, I mean going to your  meetings. I know you   re keeping up on literature and everything     A little bit.  But in terms of nutritional and biochemical science, you   ve established  an endowment at the OSU Library for acquisition of relevant books and  materials. Do you want to talk about what inspired you to do that?  I just feel that it was such an important part of my education and my  being able to work with my students, that it   s indispensable. Students  need to learn how to use all these materials. I always had the librarian  come and get to know her so they could then go to her for help and so  forth, but I wanted them to know that nutrition is not a field where you  bore a hole and pour it in. It   s an ongoing field and in order to be able to  keep up at all, you   ve got to be able to keep up with the research and  literature that   s coming out. And in order to do that, you have to know  how to access it and feel friendly with it. And so that was a big part of  my    especially when I taught a graduate course; well my  undergraduates had to go to the library some, too. I always integrated the  library into my teaching. So I feel that they have a very special role in  what students do, and I mean all students, regardless of their field.  Because it   s constantly changing and moving and you   ve got to learn  how to use it and then that   ll make you be more likely to keep up.  59  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  Larson  Rodriguez  So with your career or with your family, are there things that we haven   t  talked about that you want to cover?  No.  We   ve touched on everything at this point?  I guess we talked about Jackie   s environmental     We might not have gotten Jackie out of college and into her career.  When we last left Jackie she was at UNC and she had gotten married.  Yeah. And then she had her family, but she was always in teaching and,  like me, her husband moved around and so she did something else. One  year she took a class in earth sciences and she loved that geology class.  She got a lot out of that. And she worked in Ohio, where they were,  Akron. She worked in Akron one time in something about the waste  management, and I think that   s what got her into the environmental  sciences so heavily and interested in water. Now she   s helping to  develop the park that they have in Wimberley and she goes and conducts  classes down there and gets some of the neighborhood people and they  take the kids down and they test the water and do all sorts of things.  So she   s basically staying with the teaching side of the family gene.  Right. And she   s really big on the environmental thing. She went from,  when she taught at the Elms, which was a private Catholic high school  in Akron, she taught the computer class, she learned about the computer,  taught the computer classes, taught the chemistry classes.  So a wide range of talents.  Yes. Her master   s was in biology and her husband   s a biochemist and  physical chemist. She   s just educated herself, taken courses, and along  the way, kept up.  You   ve got your granddaughter, is it Valerie?  Yes, she   s a biochemist.  It sounds like there   s something in the water around here.  Oh, and her husband   s a really outstanding biochemist. This is his  second year he   s gotten a national award. I   ve been and I   m going to go  to this one   60  Larson  Rodriguez  There is a common theme running through your family, largely. Well  thank you so much for helping us out with this, we really appreciate all  of your time. We   ll be doing a video tour of your old stomping grounds  at some point, we can go out and do that.  Yeah  I   d like to do that. And you have to take the Guatemalan pictures,  too, once I get them up.  ------- End of April 6, 2010 interview -------   
