 Milligan with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program.  Today   s date is February 5, 2016. I am at Eastern Oklahoma State College  with Trish McBeath, and we are going to talk a little bit about her time at  OSU and her time since OSU. This is for the Cowboy in Every County Oral  History Project. First off, just tell me a little bit about yourself, where are  you from, if you have siblings, who your parents are, all that good stuff.  (Laughter)  McBeath Well, I am from Quinton, Oklahoma. I was born and raised there. It   s a  small town, a rural town in Pittsburg County, population around 1,100, I  think. My parents are from there and where I was raised, along with my  brother, Lance, who also is an OSU graduate. We lived there all our lives  until we went off to college, both graduates of Quinton High School.  Milligan Were your parents from Quinton?  McBeath Yes. My mother was actually born in California, but she came to the  Quinton area during high school and met my dad. They met in high school.  My dad is originally from this area. He   s from Brooken  Oklahoma , which  is over by Lake Eufaula Dam, and lived there his entire life.  Milligan You mentioned that you and your brother stayed in Quinton until you left to  go to college. Maybe talk a little bit about your decision to go to OSU.  McBeath When I was in high school thinking about my college options, a lot of my  classmates were planning to attend a two-year community college and stay  close to home and just live at home and commute back and forth through  school, but I was ready to bust out of my small-town life and try something  new. I decided I wanted to attend Stillwater. I had some family friends that  had attended there. No one in my family had been to college. My parents  both graduated high school, and later in life, my mother attended some  banking schools. She   s a banker, but they did not attend college traditionally  right out of high school. I was really the first generation in my immediate  family to make that choice to go to school, and I had visited campus with  5  those family friends before at football games and that sort of thing. I just fell  in love with the town and fell in love with campus, and it was really about  the only school that I applied to. When I got accepted, I was thrilled, and my  decision was made. I didn   t really even visit hardly any other campuses.  (Laughter)  Milligan Well, how did your parents feel about you going to college?  McBeath They were excited. I think they were maybe a little nervous because I had,  of course, lived my entire life in a small rural town. To move three hours  away made them a little nervous, but they know I   m pretty headstrong. Once  I get something in my head, there   s no turning back, and actually, when I  was a senior and I had already made that decision and started talking about  where I wanted to go to school, I had some people in the community that  told me,    You have no business going to OSU. You really need to stay  closer to home. You   re not going to do well there. It   s too big of a campus.  Start small, and then go.    I   m stubborn. That just made it even worse. I said,     No. I   m going to go, and I   m going to make it.    Once I set my mind to it, I  was set.  Milligan Was it not very common for students from the Quinton area to go to a four-year  college straight out of high school like OSU?  McBeath Not as many. Most of my classmates, at the time, started off at a two-year  community college or went straight to work. I think I was one of only three  students in my graduating class that went directly to a four-year college or  university.  Milligan How big was your graduating class, roughly?  McBeath Thirty-three students.  Milligan That   s     McBeath    pretty small, pretty small. (Laughs)  Milligan Yeah, but even the ratio of students that went on is still tiny even with that  few of the students. What I   m hearing is that a big interest for you was  because you felt comfortable on the campus because you had had a reason  to be there and knew your way around.  McBeath Yeah, yes, and I had some older friends that had already spent two years at a  community college and were heading to Stillwater. I thought at least there  would be some people on campus that I would know if I needed them. Some  of those same family friends, too, had a son and daughter that were there at  the same time. They were adults and working, but they were there in the  6  community. I just felt like if I needed help or anything that I could have  those people to turn to, but I pretty much was going on my own.  Milligan I didn   t even ask this, but when was this? When did you start going to OSU?  McBeath I graduated high school in 1994. I started in August, fall 1994.  Milligan Knowing more about sports and campus and people that you knew went  there, did you have any idea what you were going to major in whenever you  went up there?  McBeath I did. I knew pretty much what I wanted to do. This is a funny story. When I  was in high school, I played on the first organized softball team that our  school had. That was my senior year. We played summer league, but I was  an athlete and really into athletics. I was on that first team. We did really  well that year for being our first fastpitch softball team in the history of the  school, but nobody was writing about us, none of the local newspapers. I  kept looking for stories about this Quinton Lady Savages that were winning  some games in their first year, and nobody was writing about us. My high  school counselor, at the time (she was also my English teacher previously),  she said,    Why are you mad? Just do something about it. You can write a  story and send it in to the newspaper.     I did, just our little community newspaper, sent a story in, and they  published it with my byline. I was like,    Wow. There   s my name in the  newspaper.    (Laughs) I was hooked, and I knew that I wanted to do  something with writing. I just wasn   t exactly sure. I talked, of course, to  admissions counselors and told them what I was interested in, and they said  that,    Journalism and broadcasting really sounds like the degree program  that you want to go into, but take some of your basic courses first. Then as  you go along, you   ll start taking some intro classes in journalism.    Once I  took those classes, I loved it. I never changed my major. Once I set  journalism and broadcasting as my major, I earned my degree in four years.  Milligan All right. What were some of the classes that you enjoyed while you were  there?  McBeath I really loved that first Intro to Journalism class that I took, and my  professor was Dr. Doug Drummond. He just   I just remember one of the  very first assignments that we had was to find a fellow student and tell a  story about them, interview them for a story and write it and tell it. Well,  this was early on in the semester and one of our very first assignments, and  we   ve turned in those assignments. It   s the next class, and I   m sitting in  class. He   s telling us,    Well, some of you did pretty well, and some of you  didn   t. Let   s take a look at some examples, and we   ll learn from them.     Well, one of the first examples he pulls up and puts on the projector is my  7  story, and I loved it. (Laughs) I was so proud of myself. Just going along  through his class, he would meet with me and show me what I was doing  well or what I needed to work on, and we had a lab that went with that class.  We would come in, and three or four of our students would be writing the  same story about the event that was going on on-campus or whatever. He  taught me about trying to find different angles, to tell a different side of the  story that maybe the reader   s not expecting, and finally, when that first class  was over, he really encouraged me and said,    You   re a strong writer. You  really need to look at maybe going to work for The  Daily  O   Collegian  student newspaper,    which I hadn   t even thought of. At that point, I was still  young and early and hadn   t really even considered that. He made me think  about it, and I applied. I got hired as a reporter for The O   Colly. I just felt  like I owe a lot to him and to that class for really getting me started on that  path. He spent a lot of years as an assistant district attorney in Tulsa, and  now he   s a district judge there. He   s not even teaching or in the journalism  field now, but I see his name in the newspaper, in the Tulsa World  occasionally. I remember him fondly.  Milligan Have you ever sent him a note or anything like that?  McBeath I haven   t. That   s something I should probably do, tell him what an influence  he had on me early in my school years.  Milligan I don   t know, just curious. You went and worked for The O   Colly. Maybe  talk a little bit about that.  McBeath I spent a year as a reporter for The O   Colly, and I covered just general news  one semester. Then the second semester, they asked me to cover sorority and  fraternity stories, which was funny because I was not a member of a sorority  or a fraternity. I think that   s probably why they chose me, to have a balanced  view. I covered a lot of their events in the second half of that first year as a  reporter, and then the second year, which would   ve been my senior year of  working for The O   Colly, I went over to the advertising side. Even though  my degree was in journalism and broadcasting, the emphasis area I had  chosen was advertising. I really wanted to see both sides of the newspaper. I  wanted to write as a reporter and then also see the more creative side as  well. I served as a sales representative for a year and went out and sold ads  and then would come back in and create them and get them ready for display  in the newspaper. It was a great time. We had so much fun those years  working for The O   Colly. It was a lot of hard work, but it was a lot of fun,  too.  Milligan What was fun about it?  8  McBeath Just being in the newsroom or the ad room, depending on when I was there,  there was just all of this energy because you   re on deadline or there   s some  story that   s going on on-campus that everybody   s wanting to know about.  You   re trying to get interviews scheduled or whatever, and this is all, of  course, happening while you   re still juggling your classes. We were all busy,  but we all worked late nights there and had a lot of fun together just  spending time together. The newsroom, at the time, was a big room, so was  the ad room, and there was maybe ten desks right in the room. Everybody   s  just right there together. You   re on top of each other, and you   re working.  You   re trying to make a deadline, lots of late nights.  Milligan With working a job like The O   Colly that, it sounds like it kept you pretty  busy, even in the evenings, did you have much room for social life?  McBeath Yeah, I did. Well, I was part of the advertising club, of course. That was one  of the student organizations that I was involved in, but I   m also a big  basketball fan. Of course, I loved football, too. I went to all the football  games while I was a student there, but I joined the Spurs, which is the  basketball spirit group, I guess you   d call it. It   s still there, I know, but it   s a  group of students that help with the basketball program. If recruits come to  campus, they give them a tour of campus and show them around, or they sell  programs to raise money to attend. For example, I was part of that  organization for three years, and we went to the last Big 8 basketball  tournament championship and then the first Big 12. That   s what happened  while I was there.  We went to those tournaments and just supported the team and cheered for  them, but that was a lot of fun, being in Gallagher-Iba  Arena  whenever  there was so much energy and the place was full. This was, of course, before  the renovation, and just so many nights spent there, of course, Eddie Sutton  years and cheering on the basketball team. My freshman year was the year  that they went to the Final 4 with Big Country  Bryant Reeves . That was a  lot of fun, just, yeah, big basketball and sports fan, and that was a lot of  great memories attending those games, the old Lewis Field back, again,  before the renovations to the football stadium that they have now. I can  remember so many games sitting there in the student section in the rusted  bleachers. Back then, our team wasn   t the same team we have now, but we  were there. We were faithful, sitting out there with our orange on. (Laughs)  Milligan Was it still pretty packed at that point?  McBeath Yeah, I think it was. The student section was pretty packed. Again, it   s not  like it is now because they didn   t have the tent city. They didn   t have the  students that camped out overnight to get tickets because I probably  would   ve been one of them right in the middle of that, but we didn   t do that  back then. The tailgating that goes on today, there was some tailgating, but  9  they   re really not like it is now. It   s just a completely different atmosphere  when you go to a game today versus when I was a student there. It   s just  night and day difference, which is great. I love to see all the new people that  are coming and the beautiful, new stadium that we have and all the people  out tailgating on campus. I think it   s wonderful, and all the new traditions  that they   ve started with the walk that the football players do prior to the  game. The Alumni Association has their big spirit rally before the game. We  participate in that stuff, and we didn   t get to do that as students. They didn   t  have all that. It   s pretty fun to go back now and participate as an alum.  Milligan How often do you get back now to go see games and things?  McBeath It depends. We   re finding that as our children get older, it   s a little harder to  keep up with their schedule and make that three-hour drive for a football  game. We get back at least once a year every football season, every  basketball season and baseball season, try to get up and see at least one  game a year, and then we may just visit Stillwater and walk around campus  when we   re off in the summer or on Christmas break when nothing   s really  going on just to walk around campus, eat at Eskimo Joe   s or whatever, just  to come visit.  Milligan We   ll come back to some of that a little bit later, too, but back to whenever  you were in school there, it sounds like one of the big influences was the  O   Colly. What   s the difference between what you know about the O   Colly  now and how it was whenever you worked there? What are some of the  changes?  McBeath Well, back when I was a student reporter, The O   Colly was a regular-sized  newspaper, and it was printed every day five days a week, not on the  weekends. Since then   well, it was actually The Daily O   Collegian was the  name of the newspaper. Now, everyone called it The O   Colly, but the  official name and the masthead was The Daily O   Collegian. Now things  have changed just like the newspaper industry is changing. They   ve come  along with those changes as well, being either forced to or just trying to  keep up with the changing times, but I understand it   s officially called The  O   Colly now. It   s a tab instead of a full newspaper, and I believe they only  print maybe one to two a week. I   m not really sure on that, but it   s not a  daily newspaper anymore. It   s a little sad to see those changes. I can  completely understand keeping up with the industry standard and how that  industry is changing, but it   s a little sad to think back of how it used to be  and how it is now.  Milligan Was it tough for you because it was a five-day-a-week publication? Was it  tough for you to keep up with that schedule and your classes and your  homework and all of that stuff?  10  McBeath It was tough, but it was manageable. When I think back about my college  days, I can   t believe how little sleep I was able to function on. (Laughs) You  just do what you have to do. You work, and you go to class. Then you stay  up late, and you study. You get up in the morning, and you do it all again. I  wouldn   t change any of that, but of course, when I think about it now as an  adult and trying to keep up with that schedule, that would be nearly  impossible. There   s no way I could do it, but I guess you   re young. You just  manage. (Laughs)  Milligan Did you live on or off campus or a combination?  McBeath My very first year as a freshman, I lived in Willham North on the top floor,  twelfth floor, and that was a lot of fun. I resisted living on campus. Going  off to college was going to be a big enough transition. The thought of having  a roommate and living on a floor with a bunch of other girls, I was frankly  probably just scared of that transition, and I fought it a little bit. I had these  older friends that were two years older than me that were going to be living  off campus and going to school there. I petitioned the university to live off  campus, that I wanted to live with them, and they had a pretty strict rule that  all freshmen need to live on campus. I wasn   t really happy about that at first,  but within just a week or two, I realized that was the best decision that could  have happened for me. Living in the dorms and being around all those other  students that were going through all the same transitions that I was really  helped, and I made, of course, a lot of friends that are still friends.  You just build those relationships because you   re just right there together  going through all of the same things at the same time, and I can see that  now, thinking back, of how different my experience would have been had I  lived off campus that first year. When I think about my own children going  to college, I want them to live on campus. I would be great with them to live  on campus their entire time that they   re there, but yeah, that was a good  year. I did move off campus. For my sophomore through my senior year, I  lived off campus with one of the girls that I met on my dorm floor. It was a  lot of fun, but I can   t   wouldn   t trade those memories of living in Willham  that first year. Willham North is gone now. (Laughs) It   s gone. They   ve torn  it down to make room for the new campus housing that they have, which is  more of a suite style, and I think that   s interesting, too. That would probably  be a good fit for a lot of students, too.  Milligan Yeah, they have made a lot of transitions in the on-campus living in the last  couple years. What were some of the things that you all did in your free time  then on campus or in Stillwater? Did you spend time on campus? Were you  out and about town? Did you just go to the movies and come back home?  (Laughs) I mean, what were some of the things you did?  11  McBeath Well, we just did a lot of staying at home or in the dorm room or home  inviting friends over. I mean, we did go out, but a lot of college students, of  course, don   t have the money to go out and do a lot of things. (Laughs) We  just made up our own entertainment, whether it was watching videos at  home or whatever. We did go out to Boomer Lake a lot and walk, just take  walks or play Frisbee. I mean, we did a lot of that, even play catch with a  softball. We did a lot of walking just around campus. That was always a  good stress relief, I found, just to go get outside, get out of your room, put  the books down for a little while, and just go walk around on campus, and of  course we   d go over to the Colvin Center, play basketball or work out. That  was a good stress reliever as well, and I played intramural sports, too, while  I was there. I played basketball and flag football and softball. We had plenty  to do to keep us entertained. We didn   t always need to go to the movies or  go out to find something to do.  Milligan By that point, were people still going to the Strip down by Theta Pond?  McBeath Yes, yes, they were. When I met my now husband at OSU and we were  dating, his college roommate actually owned the Wormy Dog on the Strip.  (Laughs) We did spend some time on the Strip, and that was always fun.  There   s lots of good memories that are probably not appropriate for the  video to talk about, but yeah, I think it was still popular back then, the Strip.  Joe   s, of course, was always popular, even in my day, to go on a Thursday  night or out to the Tumbleweed. They still packed a lot of people in at the  Weed back then, too, and when I worked at The O   Colly, that was one of my  advertising accounts was Tumbleweed. I always knew what was going on  that week just because I had put their ad together. (Laughs) Yeah, we spent  time out there, too.  Milligan That   s a good way to stay informed, forced information. I wanted to get  back to the semester you spent doing the Greek life. Because you weren   t in  Greek life, I   m just wondering how, what were some of the things that you  covered in that? Did you get to know people that way, or was it   I don   t  know. I   m just curious about that position.  McBeath It was interesting for me for being an outsider to the whole Greek system  and the Greek life and how it worked because I didn   t know a lot about it. I  can remember two stories in particular that I wrote were about house  mothers that were retiring. That relationship was really interesting to me,  that these two women for separate sororities lived in that house and spent a  lot of time in that house taking care of those students or looking after them  or whatever and building a relationship with them. Then when they were  retiring, the young ladies that lived in the house, the students were, of  course, upset and sad, and they felt like they were losing a mother figure in  their life. That kind of dynamic was interesting to me and not a way that I  had really thought of Greek life before. I could see how that would be  12  helpful for a student to have that sort of adult, parent-type role model close  by because so many students, like myself, go up on your own, and you   re  figuring things out all by yourself. I could definitely see the benefit of that,  but it was definitely not anything that I had been exposed to while I was  there. I did learn a lot about Greek life and a lot of the community support-type  programs, community service-type programs that they do and are  involved in that I wasn   t as familiar with. You think of the stereotypical  Greek life that are partiers and that sort of thing. It   s not all about that is  basically what I learned and the lesson I took from covering that beat.  Milligan That   s interesting. I wonder that, too, because you mentioned your parents  were a little bit nervous and that other people maybe were more nervous  about you coming from Quinton to Stillwater and how big of a switch that  would be. Do you remember your first couple of months there and how you  felt about making that transition?  McBeath Yes. Well, yes, there was a lot of different emotions, of course. I was so  excited to go out and have this sense of freedom and independence, that I  was going to be on my own. I was scared and nervous. Of course, you  wonder if people are going to like me or if I   m going to make friends, and  then going to class for the first time and just seeing how large, how many  people were in that class, that was a little overwhelming. That   s enough to  make you pause and think,    Wow, I   m used to there being anywhere from  fifteen to twenty people in my class to now I   ve got one of a hundred.    That  was a really different experience, but one of my memories, I have told this  story a lot of times. I   ve gone back to Quinton and spoken to the different  classes, or at my church, they have a senior breakfast every year. I   ve talked  to those seniors about my experience going to college, and I always tell  them this story, that I was so determined to go to college and do well. Then I  got there, and the very first test I took was in a geography class, my very  first exam for college life.  I failed. (Laughs) I made an F on that test, and it was just this huge wake-up  call. You   re determined to succeed, but are you doing any of the work or  any of the things that you need to be doing to do it? Of course, I was having  fun and meeting new people and going to events on campus, but I had to  learn how to study. I had to learn how to really prepare myself and take  notes and study in a way that I hadn   t done before. That just made it even  more determined. I thought,    I   m not going to fail. I   m not going to go back  and have people say,    See, I told you. You should   ve listened to me.       That  just wasn   t going to happen, and I was also afraid that my parents were  going to make me come home. (Laughs) I sure didn   t want that to happen,  either. That first test was just a huge wake-up call, and I, of course, learned  how to study. I learned how to go to the library and seek out help if I needed  tutoring help in certain classes, and I did just fine after that. I always  maintained a high three-point grade point after that. That was another  13  learning   another transition that I had to grow into was how to study from a  high school level to a college level.  Milligan Do you find that that was something that was common with peers that you  may have had at the time that were also from rural areas? Did you have  people to talk about that with, I guess?  McBeath Well, that   s interesting because really the friends that I made were all from  larger cities. One of my very best friends was actually from Stillwater. She  chose to live in the dorms and wanted to have a little bit of that  independence as well, but they were from Guthrie  Oklahoma  and  Oklahoma City and Stillwater, all towns and cities much larger than  Quinton. I really didn   t have someone there that was like me or who hadn   t  at least been through it before. My friends that were older that were there at  the time, of course, had two years of college under their belt at that point.  They knew what to expect and what it was going to take to do college level  coursework, and I had to figure that out on my own. It was a little bit  different coming from such a small, rural school and the expectations of  what I could do to pass and make good grades in high school versus college.  Milligan Well, you can feel free that if there   s other things that you want to talk about  with campus or your program at all, I mean, you can jump in and let me  know, but I   m also wondering, you completed your degree in four years.  What happened once you had that piece of paper and you   did you leave?  Did you go continue on in higher education? Did you go find a job? What  happened?  McBeath Well, one thing I joke about and laugh about is that one of my biggest  regrets in life was that I finished college in four years because I really, truly  loved my time in Stillwater, and I loved my experience. My parents in no  way pressured me or anything to finish. I think that was just an internal  drive, that I wanted to get done. My younger brother is exactly four years  younger than me, and I knew that he would be coming up right behind me. I  was fortunate, very fortunate and blessed, that my parents paid for my  college degree, and I, of course, worked to help supplement living expenses.  I did have a few scholarships to help out with that as well, but they made a  point to save and to make education a priority for my brother and I, that we  really were fortunate we didn   t have to take out student loans to pay for  college. I think that   s probably what drove me to finish in four years, which  is not quite the norm anymore, but I took a lot of summer classes and that  sort of thing to make sure I got through in time.  Milligan That was one of my questions, how financially did that work out, and it   s  interesting in any college but even OSU to look at, decade by decade, what  you needed to have in place before you could actually go and what was  expected of you as far as finances. That   s interesting.  14  McBeath Yes, and of course, in the almost, I guess, twenty years since I   ve been  there, things have changed dramatically with the cost of higher education.  Tuition rates continue to go up. Yeah, it   s a little unnerving how expensive  it is, but being someone that works in higher education, I can see that. I can  see why it is, unfortunately, but I can also see the value in it as well. As  parents, I want to do that same thing for my children, and I want them to be  able to go and study and concentrate on their degree and not have to worry  about finances. I think that that   s going to be hard for a lot of people,  unfortunately. It   s just going to be hard. It   s going to be a sacrifice, but it   s  worth it. I think it   s worth it.  Milligan What happened when you finished? What was your game plan after four  years?  McBeath Well, after four years, I graduated in May of 1998, and I had done an  internship the summer before at an advertising agency in Oklahoma City. I  think that was probably a really good experience for me to learn what the  real world, get a little taste of that outside of school was.  Milligan Was that something your department helped set up or you found on your  own?  McBeath No, they helped me set up. Well, actually, in the journalism building there,  they always had that area where they posted internships and job  opportunities. I always kept a good eye on that, but the summer before my  senior year, there was a job posting. I talked to some of my professors.    Do  you think this would be a good opportunity for me?    It was an unpaid  internship, which was always a little difficult, but they really thought that  that would be a good experience for me and, of course, something good to  put on my resume so that when I was looking for a job after graduation, I  would have that to fall back on. That was actually a pretty good experience.  I lived in Stillwater but drove to Oklahoma City three days a week and  worked at Jordan Associates and spent the summer there. Then following  graduation, I actually had a job offer before I graduated.  That   s always nice to have, when you know exactly what   s going to happen  right as soon as you earn that degree and cross that stage. I guess it was the  week after graduation I packed up my apartment and moved to Oklahoma  City and started work the very next week at Ackerman McQueen, which is  an advertising agency there in Oklahoma City, too, and that was my first job  ever, really, that wasn   t a part-time job. That was my first full-time career  job. I worked in the traffic department, which is pretty much the entry-level,  lowest you can get, but I was there for a total of three-and-a-half years. I  slowly worked my way up, and actually, during that time, my husband had a  job offer in Kansas City. We moved, but Ackerman allowed me to keep my  15  position. I worked from home for some time when we lived in Kansas City  during that time. It was a good experience. It was a lot different than I  expected it to be. I   m sure that   s the case for a lot of new graduates.  Milligan You mentioned that you met your husband at OSU. What year in school  were you? How old were you whenever you all met?  McBeath Let   s see. We met in January 1997. I was a junior at that time, and how we  met, it was the first day of class in that spring semester in January. Dr. Ben  Lee had a behavioral marketing class, and we just happened to sit next to  each other. Dr. Lee asked us, our first assignment in the class was,    Turn to  your neighbor. You   ve got two minutes to find out as much as you can about  them. Write it down, and then you   re going to present to the class. Introduce  the person next to you.    The person next to me was Chris McBeath, and I  interviewed him really shortly. He did, too. We found out our birthday is  only a day apart. He had never heard of Quinton, Oklahoma. (Laughs)  Imagine that. (Laughs) He was from Tulsa. He was a city boy. We  introduced each other, and then after that first day of class, it   s like,    Well, I  know this person.    That was probably Dr. Lee   s whole intent. You know  someone in class. I just naturally sat beside him because I knew him. We  took that class together and became friends.  We worked on a group project together. We would see each other outside of  class, and when that class was over and it was time to come back the  following August, we decided to enroll in another class together. It was the  next marketing class. Again, for that whole semester, we were friends again.  In December (that would   ve been in December of    97), the Cowboys went  to the Alamo Bowl. We were in San Antonio, and we ran into each other in  San Antonio. I was there with a group of my friends. He was there with a  friend of his, and we ran into each other in more of a social, we were at a  bar. (Laughs) We were in more of a social setting outside of the classroom,  and we just had fun. It was the first time we even, I think, thought,    Oh,  wow. Well, maybe we should see if this might go somewhere besides just  being friends.    We came back to class after the winter break in January, and  we started dating. We dated for, I think, about two years before we got  married. It was right there at the end of my college years that we met and  actually started dating, but yeah, we   ve been married since 2000.  Milligan That   s a good track record.  McBeath Yeah. (Laughs)  Milligan Did he follow you to Oklahoma City then when you graduated?  McBeath He did, yes. He followed me to Oklahoma City. He was a business  management graduate, and he took a position with Penske Truck Leasing  16  and started in their management training program. Probably for the first  several years of our marriage, I followed him in his career as he moved up in  the ranks. We stayed in Oklahoma City for two years, and then we went to  Kansas City for two years. Then we came back to Tulsa, and during that  time, I really was following him. His career is what led us to different  places, but while we were in Tulsa, a job opening came up at OSU   s Tulsa  campus in the marketing and communications department. Of course, I  applied. That   s my dream job, to work for my alma mater, and I got that  position. I started as a communications specialist at OSU-Tulsa in 2004, and  I actually worked there for seven-and-a-half years. That was an amazing  opportunity. Early in my career, I started at the advertising agency, and then  I had a couple of jobs here and there that were a little bit different. I worked  for a short time at a community newspaper. Then I worked as a project  coordinator for another position in Tulsa, but they were short-term.  I always knew that probably wasn   t exactly what I wanted to do, but when I  went to work at OSU-Tulsa, I think that was the first time it just felt like,     Okay, this is where I need to be.    It   s not the journalism part that my  degree is in, but working on the public relations side and writing news  releases and that sort of thing, it   s, of course, similar. It takes the same  skillset, but as soon as I started working for the university, I   ve got this  passion for higher education. I just knew that that   s probably where I   m  going to spend the rest of my career, and that was a terrific experience. I  learned a lot from my mentor, my director there, and had a lot of great  experiences, and then this position that I   m in now at Eastern Oklahoma  State College opened up. That was a director position of marketing and  communications. Of course, that would be an opportunity for me to advance  my career, but it would also be an opportunity for me to come home. We  loved Tulsa, actually. We had a great time there. We both did well  professionally there, but when the opportunity came open to move back to  this area and raise our family in this area, in the Quinton area where my  family still live, we jumped at that chance. It   s been a great move for us.  Milligan How did your husband feel about moving from pretty urban areas to pretty  not urban areas, to the place where you   re living? (Laughs)  McBeath That   s pretty funny, too, because if I   m completely honest, he made the  decision to move. He wanted to move down here. He has always lived in the  city, grew up in Tulsa, always lived in a larger city, but when he would  come to visit my family, he loved the trees and the mountains and the lake.  We actually live in the Stigler area near Lake Eufaula, and that is a beautiful  part of the state. He loved being around the water and the trees and the hills  of southeast Oklahoma. It   s just a different landscape, and he could see the  benefit of maybe raising our children in a smaller school around their  family. My parents would be close by to help out whenever we needed  them. He actually convinced me to move back home because I was, of  17  course, one of those people that once I left my small town, I thought I would  never go back. I wanted to live in the city and be able to go shopping or out  to eat or wherever whenever I wanted to, the convenience of living in the  city, things to do and people to see. It took a little convincing for me to want  to move back to a rural area, but it   s been great.  Milligan How long have you all been back?  McBeath We have been back since 2008.  Milligan Enough time to know that you   re okay with it.  McBeath Yes, yeah. (Laughter)  Milligan You live in the Stigler area, and you work in Wilburton  Oklahoma . That   s  a little bit of a commute, forty minutes, thirty minutes?  McBeath Yes. It is a drive. It   s about thirty-five to forty minutes. We live in Brooken.  Our address is technically Stigler, but it   s in the Brooken area in Haskell  County. That is where my parents originally grew up. They lived down in  the part of Brooken that   s now covered up by Lake Eufaula. Once they built  the dam, now you can   t go see where their home site used to be. We have a  history in that area for my family. Yes, I actually live there, and my kids go  to Quinton schools because that   s where I went to school and where my  husband now teaches. He took a different career path. That   s another story.  We drive from there to Quinton for our kids to go to school, and then I drive  on up to Wilburton for my job here at Eastern Oklahoma State College. I  think that   s probably typical of rural Oklahoma or rural America. When I  lived in Tulsa, my commute may have taken me thirty to forty minutes  anyway. I have the same commute. It   s just drive time geographically,  distance versus dealing with traffic. It really hasn   t changed that much, but  when you think about a lot of people say,    Wow, you have a thirty-five-mile  drive to work?   , well, it   s the same amount of time. It   s just I have a  beautiful drive through Robbers Cave State Park and all the beautiful hills  and trees, though. It   s great for me. (Laughs)  Milligan That   s true about our own versus the difference in the idea of the commute.  McBeath I   d be lying if I said I didn   t miss the convenience, of course. Where I live,  to go to the grocery store is a twenty-five, thirty-minute drive. Of course you  miss that convenience, but the tradeoff is that my parents and my ninety-three-  year-old grandpa live two minutes away. I have aunts and uncles and  cousins, and my children are being raised with their cousins. We have a lot  of family time together, and that   s important to us.  Milligan What does your husband teach?  18  McBeath My husband teaches social studies at Quinton High School. After, I believe,  about fourteen years in the business industry, he decided that he was going  to go back to school and follow his love of teaching, which is what he  originally wanted to do all those years ago and was probably advised by a  few people that teachers don   t really make that much money. (Laughs)  Business is the way to go, and he did well. He was successful in the business  world, but that was not his true passion. He decided to go back as an adult  and get his teaching degree in history, and he   s also since earned a master   s  degree in American Studies. He loves teaching. It   s been a great career  move for him, and now that we   re both in education, I just feel like we have  that connection there, that we   re both passionate about education and want  to help others learn or earn a degree, whatever.  Milligan Do you think that there   s still this idea where people that are telling students  in this area,    Don   t go to a four-year school. You need to go to a two    or     You   re already set up for failure if you think you can come from this area  and go to a bigger school    like the experience you had?  McBeath Well, it   s really interesting because now, of course, I had my experience as a  high school student, but now I work for a two-year community college. I can  really see both sides of that, and I think it depends on the individual student.  I don   t think there are people that are still telling kids,    Don   t do this    or     Don   t do that. This is what you need to do.    I think it   s more of a family  choice based on affordability or based on what that student   s capabilities  are. Some students, academically, need to start at a community college, and  there   s nothing wrong with that, absolutely nothing wrong with that. It   s an  affordable option for students, especially in the rural areas that we live in.  It   s an affordable option for them. They   re not all as blessed as I was when I  went to school to have parents that had prepared and saved to pay for that. If  they can come to a two-year community college and get a good quality  education and save some money at the same time before they go to a four-year  university, then it   s all the better.  Milligan Do you see maybe more students than, for example, the three that you  graduated with that ended up in a four? Is that a similar ratio, you think, of  what you see coming out of, for example, Quinton High School?  McBeath No, I think it is higher, maybe not depending on whether they start and  where they finish. I think the overall percentage of students that are going on  to earn a college degree is higher, which is a good thing. Not everyone is  going to have the same experience that I had, of course. Whether they go to  a two-year community college and then go on or if they go straight to a four-year  university, as long as they   re going and seeking out a higher education,  I   m thrilled that they are doing that, and I think there   s even a lot of other  opportunities I   ve learned, of course, since I   ve been in my career, that there  19  are career tech opportunities. Not everybody has to have a college degree. If  they want to go learn a trade, that   s wonderful, too. As long as they   re  finding something that they   re passionate about, that makes them happy, that  they can find work in, I think that   s wonderful because my husband and I  have learned, of course, that just because you have a management degree  and you   re successful in business doesn   t actually mean that you   re fulfilled  or that you   re happy or that you   re doing what you love. Even if you   re  taking a significant pay cut to teach at high school because that   s what you  love and that   s what you   re passionate about, then I   m happy that he did that  and made that choice.  Milligan You mentioned that you go and sometimes you have the opportunity to talk  to high school students about how they make that choice, and you mentioned  a few things that you tell them. Maybe what you just said is the bulk of that,  but I wonder if you do have advice for students that maybe were like  yourself, that they were graduating and trying to really think and have this  idea of where they wanted to be. Is there advice, having come out the other  side of that from this area and coming back into it, that you have for  students or that you could have told yourself when you were in high school?  McBeath Sure. I think the main thing is not to be scared. If you believe in yourself,  that you can do it, then you can because I think people can accomplish a lot  more than they originally thought they could if they just dived into the  situation and try it and experience it because if you   re sitting on the sidelines  and you   re scared and you just are not sure and don   t want to make a  decision because you don   t know what the outcome is going to be, that   s no  way to live life. I think I would just tell those students to put yourself out  there. If you come from a small school like I did and you go out and visit a  large university like Oklahoma State, of course you   re going to feel  intimidated. Of course there   s going to be a learning curve, but you can do  it. I was not a stellar student in high school. I told you we had thirty-three in  my class that graduated. Well, I was ranked fifth. I   m not even valedictorian  or salutatorian or anything like that, but it was my goal. I was determined  that I wanted to go get my degree and do something that I love, and nothing  was going to stop me. (Laughs) Sure, there were some bumps along the way.  There are always going to be that, but I think if you   re determined to  succeed, you will.  Milligan Well, is there anything else about your time at OSU that you want to talk  about? I   m trying to think if there   s a couple of things we mentioned before  we got started. I think we covered them, but I   m not sure if in as great detail  as you were interested in.  McBeath I think, as far as my degree, and because, again, in the career that I   m in, I  hear a lot of people talk about    The value of a college degree is going  down,       It   s not as important as it used to be,    and that sort of thing, but I  20  look back at where I started with just knowing that I love to write and I  wanted to write and finding a degree program that fit that and then going  and seeking out opportunities, whether as a student worker at The O   Colly  or an internship opportunity. From that point all throughout my career all  these years later, I   m still doing what I love, and it may not be exactly what  my degree choice is. The journalism and broadcasting degree doesn   t even  exist at OSU anymore. It   s now strategic communications, which is a result  of the changes in the industry, but I   m still doing, basically, that same thing.  I   m not writing for a newspaper, but I   m writing for an organization or I   m  overseeing the creative work for the college and helping promote the  college. That   s what strategic communications is all about. Whether you   re  writing or you   re filming or you   re doing PR work or whatever it is, you   re  basically telling the story. To look back all these years and know that that   s  what I wanted to start out doing is to find a way to tell a story, I   m still  doing that, and I   m just so grateful. I   m grateful for everything I   ve learned  at OSU. I   m grateful for the opportunities that have been provided because  of my degree, and I can   t wait for my own kids to go to OSU someday and  have that same experience.  Milligan Well, it sounds like you   re getting them used to campus. (Laughs)  McBeath Yes. They are. They have been going since they were little bitty. They   ve  visited campus several times. Since they   re legacies, they are part of the  legacy program at OSU. They have attended Grandparent University several  times. My daughter was part of the vet-med program one year and part of  food science one year, and my son has done agribusiness, architecture, and  aviation. He got to go up in a plane and fly in a plane with one of the OSU  pilots. (Laughs) That   s amazing. (Laughs) Yeah, they have grown up orange  and probably will continue to be. If they want to start here at Eastern and  then go to OSU, I   d be thrilled with that as well, but yeah, I hope they go to  OSU at some point in their college education. (Laughter)  Milligan I do, too. I think that was about all the area I wanted to cover. Was there  other things you wanted to talk about?  McBeath There was one other thing I thought of later that I didn   t mention. During  my time in Tulsa when I worked at OSU-Tulsa, I made the decision to go  back to school and earn my master   s degree. It was, of course, a wonderful  opportunity because I was right there on campus, but that was an interesting  time because my husband and I were both working fulltime. My son was  two, and my daughter was four months old. I went to my husband and said,     Hey, I think I want to go to graduate school.    (Laughs) He was actually  very supportive of that. He didn   t think I was crazy to try to take that on  with everything else we had going on with two little ones and work, but that  21  was a very fulfilling experience. Graduate school is a lot different than your  undergraduate degree.  That experience was so different for me and so eye-opening because you go  to class, and you   re taking the courses that are in your area, that you   re  really interested in, that you   re already working in, you already have a  career in or you have some experience in. It   s not like you   re going and  taking your basic education courses again. You   re in your element, so to  speak. That was a really great experience, to go to class with other  professionals in the Tulsa area that were in my same career field and learn  from professors like Dr. Jami Fullerton and Lori McKinnon, but they were  just wonderful. Working on campus and then going to class at night was an  interesting experience, and there was a lot of sleepless nights. There   s a lot  of times that I don   t remember much during that time, sleep deprivation and  stress, but it was a great experience. I actually earned my master   s degree in  2008 from OSU as well.  Milligan Oh, I had noticed the two diplomas.  McBeath Yes. My master   s degree is in mass communication. I just continued on with  the communication field, and I love it. One thing I have learned, too, in my  career is that if you   re going to be involved in marketing and if you   re going  to sell a product or if you   re going to sell a service, it would be very helpful  if you could sell a product that you believe in because not everybody is so  fortunate to do that. That   s why I feel like I   ve just found this wonderful  place because I believe in education. I can see what it   s done for me  personally, and to be able to sell that to other people and to promote the  value of a college education to people in southeast Oklahoma that were just  like me, it   s pretty satisfying.  Milligan Students that you help encourage to stay here or go out and pursue  education, do you often see them come back because you had that inner  turmoil as well about,    Once I leave Quinton, I   m never coming back   ?  McBeath Right, right. I think probably a little bit of both. I see students that have gone  to school and come back to raise their family in the same community just  like I did, and then I   ve seen others that live far away and make their family  and their career outside of southeastern Oklahoma. That   s okay, too. My  brother actually did that. I mentioned that he was an OSU graduate. He lived  in New York for several years, and now for the past three years, he   s lived  in London. My baby brother who grew up in Quinton, Oklahoma, is living  and working in London. That   s amazing to me, but again (I   m telling his  story now), he wouldn   t be able to do that if he didn   t have the education  and the degree that he has from OSU to go on and have those job  opportunities. He   s out there seeing the world, and I think that   s amazing,  too.  22  Milligan That   s pretty cool. You feel good, anything else?  McBeath Yeah. (Laughs) I don   t think so. I think I   ve hopefully covered most of it.  Milligan I think so. Yeah, I think so. I   ll clarify because I think I can infer, but just to  make sure, you have two kids.  McBeath I do.  Milligan They   re elementary school age now.  McBeath Yeah. Well, my son is thirteen. He   s in the seventh grade. His name is  Matthew, and then my daughter, Ella, is in fifth grade     Milligan    in Quinton.  McBeath    in Quinton. The only other thing I didn   t mention was Dr.  Lee  Manzer.  Do you know Dr. Manzer in the marketing department?  Milligan Not personally, yeah.  McBeath I   ll say that one of the toughest classes that I ever had at OSU was Dr. Lee  Manzer, and I think he   s been there for several, several years. He was tough,  but I feel like I learned probably more from his class than many of the others  that I took. He had a way of teaching that I thought was so different. He told  a lot of stories during his lecture and not that that   s uncommon, but what he  would do is he would use those stories to illustrate a concept that he was  trying to teach. Then it would show up on our tests. If you didn   t take notes  or remember the story and the moral of the story that he was trying to tell,  you   d pay for it on that test. (Laughs) I had a couple of classes with Dr.  Manzer in undergraduate and then one class with him in my graduate  program as well, and I knew when I saw that schedule pop up and that it was  Dr. Manzer, I thought,    Oh, this is going to be hard.    (Laughs) It was. It was  a challenge. Even ten years later as an adult working on my graduate degree,  he was still tough, but I learned a lot from him. He   s, I think, a really big  asset to OSU.  Milligan All right. Well, thank you very much for your time.  McBeath Thank you.  Milligan It   s been interesting.  McBeath Yeah, it   s been fun to talk about OSU and all those years ago. (Laughter)  23  Milligan It wasn   t that long ago.  McBeath It feels like it. (Laughter)  Milligan I know.  -------  -------   
