 Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Today is Tuesday, August 7, 2013. I   m Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the  Oklahoma State University Library. Today we   re interviewing Dr. Helen  C. Miller as part of the O-STATE Stories Oral History Project. Thank  you for joining me, today.  You   re welcome.  Well, Dr. Miller, let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you.  Could you tell me the year you were born and where you were born?  Well, I was born in 1925 in Indianapolis, Indiana, to George and Lucy  Carter. My mother was a German lady. Her real name was Louisa  Ernestina Lydia Niehoff. My father was George W. Carter, and his  father was George W. Carter. If you look back in the history of Jimmy  Carter, you   ll find that there was a relationship with George W. Carters  for quite a while. His ancestors all come from Georgia, and he   s part  Cherokee Indian. My grandmother was part Cherokee.  And did you grow up in Indianapolis?  I grew up in Indianapolis. It was during the Depression, of course, 1925.  Those were Depression years. We were part of the poor, so we didn   t  have very much money. We lived rather frugally.  What did your parents do for a living?  My father, before the Depression, had bought a lot of rental houses, so  he was living off of rental property income. When the Depression hit,  his renters couldn   t pay the rent, so he lost several of those houses. My  mother had never worked before, except as a cleaning lady. We didn   t  really have a very steady income. Things fared better when the war was  over, the Second World War, and my mother got a job. She worked then.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  She got a job, and that income helped. My father started buying houses  again. We had a quite a long time when we were pretty poor.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  No, I was an only child.  During the Depression, could you tell that a Depression was going on?  Oh, yes. I was very aware of how poor we were. We often didn   t have  food. I remember one Christmas, we had oatmeal for lunch on a  Christmas day, just things like that. I never had any new clothes. I   m not  feeling sorry for myself. I   m just saying it was a fact of life.  What was school like for you during your early years?  Well, I walked to school. I went to grade school number thirty-four in  Indianapolis, which was about two blocks from my house. It was an  interesting school because it was a good school and I learned a lot. There  was one black boy in that school. His family lived across the street from  the school, and his parents were the janitors. His mother was a maid, and  his father was a janitor in the school. It was interesting because I  remember he was included in a lot of the things that the people   he  went through eight grades with us. He was included in a lot of activities,  but a lot of activities, he wasn   t included in, either.  When I graduated from elementary school, I went to Manual Training  High School. There were three big schools in Indianapolis at that time.  One was technical school, and that taught people skills and trade stuff.  There was a manual training school, Emmerich Manual Training School.  That was the school, as it said, where they had lots of courses in  woodcutting and cooking and stuff like that. I went there. I thought I  would be a secretary all my life, and they taught typing and secretarial  stuff. It turned out that that was a very good academic school, also. I  majored in English and history and education in case I   d ever have a  chance to be a teacher.  When I got into my first English class, it was with a lady named  Gretchen Kemp. She was also in charge of the school newspaper, so she  invited me and a few other people to be on the Booster staff, which  Booster was the name of the school paper. So I spent most of my time at  Manual working on the Booster in my spare time. I also spent a lot of  time with two women who taught the physical education courses. I know  now they were lesbians. I didn   t at the time. Didn   t have any idea about  that. They were also very encouraging to me, so I spent a lot of time in  the gym. At that time, I was very physically active, and I became  6  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  badminton champion and champion on the parallel bars in the gym.  I eventually became school editor of the Booster, the student editor. That  was in my senior year. Gretchen Kemp, to show you how good she was,  later became head of the journalism department at the University of  Indiana. She moved from Manual High School into that job at the  university. She was wonderful. I had a lot of really great other teachers,  also, so I had a very good education at this manual training school. From  there, I went to Butler University.  Were your parents encouraging of you going to college?  Well, no, I never thought I would. I never expected to go to college. I  really expected, most of my life, I   d end up working in an office, but in  my senior year, there was a chance to apply for scholarships to Butler   University . There was a foundation in Indianapolis called the  Indianapolis Foundation. They gave scholarships to some students to go  to college. I applied, and I got one: full tuition and books for four years  at Butler. Butler is a private university, and it   s a high-cost university.  It   s also a very good one. I had to spend two hours getting from my  house on the south side of Indianapolis to Butler on the north side of  Indianapolis, riding a bus all those years. It was one hour to get to  Manual from my house. Anyway, the scholarships that year went in  Manual to three of my best friends, three of us who had worked on the  Booster all those years. The three of us then, on scholarship, went to  Butler, so they continued to be my friends in college.  Wonderful.  Yes, it was neat. It was wonderful. I   m very grateful to the Indianapolis  Foundation. I sometimes wonder if they still do it. That takes care of  high school. I was a nerd. My only non-A grades were in typing and  shorthand. (Laughs)  Secretary, huh?  Secretary. (Laughter) I didn   t get straight As or anything like that  because of these secretarial courses that I took. I wasn   t any good at  them. The one summer of my, probably, junior year in high school, I  worked in an office. It was the only year I ever did. One summer in high  school, I worked selling hats, believe it or not, in a department store  downtown. That was my senior year when I didn   t want to work in an  office again. I had been a Girl Scout. No, sorry, Campfire Girl. My  mother was a Campfire Girl leader. I went to a camp called Camp  Delight. A lady who was running the camp came to me when I was  selling hats and asked if I would like to work as a counselor at that  7  camp. I said,    Oh, yes.     That was how I spent my senior year summer was at that camp as a  counselor. I taught nature study. I didn   t know a lot about nature, but  that was the kind of counselor they needed. What I did was have people  make leaf spatters, prints, you know, and identify very common trees  and common birds on field trips. That was interesting because that was  the beginning of nature study for me. I worked at that camp for, I think,  three summers as a nature counselor. Of course, I realized I didn   t know  very much. By that time, I was at Butler, so one of the first courses I  took at Butler was botany so I could learn more about trees and stuff.  Because it was in    41, every boy who graduated with me from Manual  was in the Army, drafted, so when I got to Butler, there were no men. It  was mostly all women and a few 4F men. The people who were teaching  courses at Butler were without their usual men students.  After I took botany for one semester, which was a lab course, the  instructor in that course asked me if I would proctor the labs next  semester, so I became a proctor in botany labs. I had that job for quite a  few years at Butler. At Butler, I was going to be, and was, an  English/history/education major, same thing I majored in in high school.  My English teacher that year was another really remarkable woman. She  had a degree from Oxford University. She took me in hand and really  changed my life because she was so good and she was so helpful. She  kept me employed the whole time I was at Butler so I could buy food  and pay for transportation and stuff like that. I worked on the yearbook  for a couple of years and taught these biology labs as a proctor. As a  proctor, they gave me access to a herbarium in the botany department, so  I had a place to put my books and hang out. That was where I met some  people that were very influential.  I learned something about classical music from another student. I  learned to play chess from a student who was also hanging out in the  herbarium. I took all the botany courses I could take at Butler. They  were short courses in trees. You learned how to identify trees by bark,  buds, leaves and winter and summer. I learned how to identify ferns. I  learned how to identify mosses and spring flowers. Because there were  no men around, the botany professors had to take girls to do things with  them. The botany professor whose lab I was teaching in used to come by  my house on weekends to take me on field trips. For four years, I went  on a lot of field trips in Indiana and learned the flora of Indiana. I  learned how to identify plants, learned their scientific names, and  learned a lot about the plants of Indiana and the Midwest. This is  important because later, when I got to Cornell, I knew all the plants that  were out there, too.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  I graduated from Butler, Cum Laude because I didn   t get to finish a  paper that would have made me Magna Cum Laude. The main thing  about Butler was the fact that there were so few men that women took  their places and gave us opportunities we would never have had  otherwise. I would never have had that kind of close relationship with  botany professors if there had been a lot of men around. It just wasn   t  ever done. You have to remember, this was a time when women were  not doing very well in the world. There were no women teachers at  Butler, and when I got to Cornell a few years later, there was only one  woman in the college of agriculture. But anyway, back to Butler.  When I graduated from Butler, I was offered a job. I didn   t apply for  this. I was offered a job at Manual High School as an assistant to the  woman who was running the Booster, which I   d worked at and been  editor for when I was in high school. Her sister was a friend of mine.  When she learned that I was graduating with an English major from  college, she offered me this job. I hadn   t applied for it. I didn   t know  what I was going to do when I got out of college, but I didn   t have to  look. I was offered the job, and I took it. So for two years after I  graduated from college, I taught high school English and ran the school  newspaper, the Booster, again.  So at Butler you graduated with an English degree     And a history degree and an education degree.     but not botany.  Not botany. I had all those elective courses, but I wasn   t a major.  Just an interest.  I know, but it   s a good question because I loved botany by this time. I  had already taken a course, a night class, at Indiana University Extension  in zoology while I was at Butler. No, I   m sorry. This was when I was  teaching English     At Manual.     at Manual, right. I took that course. I was already beginning to think  about this, you see. Then after two years of teaching high school, I had  the nerve to apply to Cornell. You ask,    Why Cornell?    The reason was  there was a man there named Palmer who wrote a book which I had  been using for many years to help me when I was teaching these nature  courses at the camps. I forgot to tell you that I went to numerous  different camps as a nature counselor when I was at Butler. I had an  9  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  experience as a nature counselor at a camp in Michigan, and two years at  a nature camp in Wisconsin, and one year at a nature camp in  Connecticut. All this time, I was a nature counselor. I was using this  man   s book to help me do a lot of stuff. He was from Cornell, so I wrote  to him and asked if I could be admitted.  He said he could not accept me, but he said that I should apply to the  Botany Department, and I did. They accepted me with just those two  hour courses that I   d had at Butler. The reason, I learned somewhat later,  that they took me was because the Botany Department at Cornell was in  a building with five stories. These were labs, offices, research facilities,  and one floor for graduate students. When I got there, there were four  women on that floor, and three of us were new. They wanted women.  They really were trying to get women, you see. I wasn   t aware of this at  first, but I really realized it later. The one woman who didn   t start at the  same time I did was from India. She was getting her PhD in Botany from  India. When I walked into that aisle of offices, it was all men, and there  were two women in an office next to me. They became, of course, my  really good friends during those years I was at Cornell.  What motivated you to want to go to grad school in the first place? What  did you hope to accomplish?  Okay, I hated being an English teacher. (Laughter) I really did. I was  lousy at it. Most of my time I spent with the Booster, but I had to teach  English classes. I didn   t like grading papers, and it was hard to make  those kids (big classes, you know) interested in literature or writing.  They had to write, and I had to grade all those papers. I didn   t like  grading papers. I didn   t like teaching English. I wasn   t good at it. I don   t  think I was good at it. I know I wasn   t. I wanted to get out of that. I  wanted to teach in biology. I knew I had to do a lot to get qualified, but  by that time I   d had this course in zoology, and I had read this book and  taught nature study at camps.  When I got to Cornell in the Botany Department, I wasn   t ill-prepared.  This is sort of interesting because there was a young man in that aisle of  graduate students at Cornell, first year. His name was Dan Ward. He was  from Crawfordsville, Indiana. He was a taxonomist. He wanted to be a  taxonomist. He also knew the flora of Indiana very well. When we took  Flora of New York together, I beat him on lab tests all the time.  (Laughs) He and I became really good friends. Right now, he is retired  from the faculty at the University of Florida where he taught taxonomy  and wrote  Keys to  The Flora of Florida. (Laughs) That was my  heritage, you see, from going out for years with this teacher in botany at  Butler. I was really pretty equipped in some fields of botany. But  anyway, I took all the botany courses you had to take to get a degree,  10  and got a degree in botany.  That was kind of interesting, too, because I was going to leave the  Botany Department to get married. The guy I was going to marry   I  don   t know. I shouldn   t be telling you this, probably. Anyway, he was a  pilot in World War I. He got shot down over enemy territory and had to  walk out. He was a very interesting man, and he was also a plant  taxonomist. When I was there at Cornell, he was part of the herbarium.  Do you know what a herbarium is? It   s a place where they store plants.  I   d lived in the herbarium at Butler. He worked in the herbarium at  Cornell, which was a huge place. Two of the faculty members there  became really good friends of mine and my friends. We interacted a lot.  He was one of them. He was a big jokester. He used to tease me  incredibly a lot, and he very unexpectedly asked me to marry him. I  wasn   t ready for that. I didn   t know how to reply, but I was graduating  with a degree in botany, no job, no work, no nothing. He was from  California. I thought,    Well, maybe I should marry him.    It was not a  question of,    Do I love this man?    I admired him; I liked him. Anyway,  I said yes. Then he backed out. It turns out that he was gay. He didn   t  want to admit it, but he finally decided he had to. So he was a gay  person in my life.  He went on to California, and I was left behind at Cornell in the Botany  Department. Everybody was so sympathetic and so caring about,    What  is Helen going to do?    They all knew about this, so they were very  helpful. For another year, I stayed on, trying to decide whether I could  get a PhD or find a job or whatever. Then, during that year, one of my  friends at Cornell was a woman named Nan. She lived in Nantucket.  Nan was on leave from Miami University in Ohio where she taught  biology to non-major students. She had taken a leave of absence and  promised to go back after two years. She had decided she was going to  get married and go live on Nantucket. She told her department head she  wasn   t coming back, but she recommended me for the job. See? I was  offered the job, no interview, no nothing. They took her word for it.  The man who was department head called me, and I had to decide over  the phone whether I wanted to take that job. Well, it had been a year,  and I hadn   t decided on a PhD program at Cornell, so I took the job. No  interview, no nothing. That   s the second time. I went, and I taught at  Miami University in Ohio for two years. I really kind of enjoyed that  period of time because it was teaching biology, which I loved, and I  thought I was doing an okay job. I met some really nice people, had a  really wonderful history there. The first year that I was there, I went on  an American Youth Hostel trip to Europe. Well, no, I think that was   I  beg your pardon. I took the American Youth Hostel trip earlier. I spent  11  eight weeks in Europe bicycling. The next year, I led a group to the  West Coast and back, of youth hostelers. The third year, I took a trip  with youth hostelers to Europe. That year was the second year that I was  at Cornell.  Dan Ward met me over there, and we did hosteling for four weeks  together over there. That was a fun time, too. Dan Ward was really a  very good friend of mine. We had a wonderful time there, with lots of  experiences. (Laughs) I got off track, didn   t I, because I was teaching at  Miami. The second year at Miami, I decided, instead of going to Europe  and leading another trip, which I could have done, I was going to take a  course in invertebrate zoology. Remember, I hadn   t taken much  zoology. I   d taken the zoology summer course at Cornell once. Anyway,  went to North Carolina   s biological station that summer. That   s where I  met Rudy Miller. He asked me to marry him, and I didn   t decide right  away, either. (Laughs)  I went to the University of Wisconsin for a semester to try to start a PhD  in zoology. Up there, I became an ethologist. That   s a person who  studies   that   s what I wanted to do. I wanted to get my degree in  ethology. I was going to work on crows and blue jays, but they were  very hard to study because the sexes are the same. I knew I was in for a  struggle. After one year at the University of Wisconsin, I married Rudy.  We went to New Orleans where he was getting a master   s degree. That   s  a very short story of that. We got married in Oxford, Ohio, where all my  University of Miami friends were with me. From then on, it   s the story  of me and Rudy.  The first year, we lived in New Orleans. I was sick a lot the early part of  the time I was there. I had to go to the hospital. At the hospital, because  I   d been married at an Episcopal church, when I entered the hospital  Rudy put down our religious affiliation as Episcopalian. An Episcopal  priest visited me in the hospital. He was asking me about my  background just in a friendly sort of way. When I told him that I had  been teaching biology before I got married, he perked up, and he said,     Really? In college?    I said,    Yes.    He said,    Have you ever taught it in  high school?    I said,    No.    He said,    We have an opening at the  Episcopal school for a biology teacher.    Third time. I said,    Oh?    So I  got the job as a biology teacher at the Episcopal Church school in New  Orleans.  That   s how I spent the second year that Rudy was getting a master   s  degree. I was teaching down there. It was a wonderful experience. I  really enjoyed it. I met a woman there named Florence Swan, who was  an art teacher. Florence took me under her wing. I think I learned an  awful lot from her. She used to pick me up in the morning and take me  12  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  out there and take me home, so I was in her car a lot. She showed me  around New Orleans and showed me a lot of interesting places. I  remember she was so clued to beauty that she knew every tree in New  Orleans that had any color in it in the fall. In the fall, she took me around  to see all these individual trees that were orange or yellow or some other  color. That year when I was teaching there was a very unusual year for  New Orleans. They had their first snow storm ever.  Wow.  Yes. It snowed, and it snowed. The kids   I can remember seeing this  happening because I was in class. The kids were looking out the  window, and they couldn   t believe this was happening. Here was snow  coming down. The first thing you know, everybody poured out the doors  to be in the snow. They   d never seen snow before. The snow came  down. It covered red poinsettias and flowers, all the lovely flowers that  are blooming in the fall. Snow piled up a little, and people made  snowmen. They even put them on their cars and drove around with  melting snowmen on their cars for a couple of days. That was a very  interesting experience, snow in New Orleans. It was in December. I  don   t think it   s snowed there, since. Anyway, that was that year in New  Orleans with my third experience of not having to apply for a job.  Rudy had decided he   d go back to Cornell to get a PhD. By then, I was  pregnant. We left New Orleans, and we went to Cornell. We got one of  the student housing things, and I expected to have a baby. Well, we  spent the summer in Cornell, Rudy getting ready for his degree, getting  his committee set up and everything. I was just getting ready to have a  baby. Well, the baby was born dead. It was possibly, not certainly, but  possibly attributed to the fact that there   d been a German measles  outbreak, which affected quite a few of the students when I was teaching  at that Episcopal school. was exposed to that German measles virus.  When the baby was born, they could see no sign of whatever. It might  not have been that. Nevertheless, it was in late August. The baby, we  had named her Laura, and she was born dead.  Here it was, late August. I was at Cornell and without a baby, very  depressed. My husband suggested that I should try to get a PhD,  (Laughs) which I had tried to do, you know. I was sort of reluctant to do  it, but on the other hand, it turned out to be easy. The reason it was easy  for me to start and do it was because I was interested in ethology. The  person who taught ethology at Cornell was a man who had taught  ornithology when I was there as a graduate student, and I had taken his  courses. I   d studied under him, and he knew me. I went to him and asked  if he   d take me on as a student. He said yes, and he said,    I also know a  project for you.     13  It was to study the behavior of sunfishes. The reason he suggested that  was because ethology was a new science. This was the study of animal  behavior. It was a study originated by a man named Konrad Lorenz,  whom I knew all about. I   d read his books. The people in Europe had  already studied the behavior of two of the most prominent fishes of  Europe. One was a family of cichlids. The cichlids had a common sort of  similar group of fishes in North America. These were the sunfishes. My  major professor, Bill Dilger, suggested that I study the behavior of  centrarchids, so I took it on. It was easy for me to do this because Rudy  was an ichthyologist. He knew how to handle fish tanks. It was a big  help. I couldn   t have done it without him. He collected fishes.  We put tanks in the apartment we lived in. I studied sunfish behavior for  three years. I had a baby during that time, another child. This was Mark,  my oldest son. He lived with us in that apartment with a dog, our first  dog, Tam, for about two and a half years, I guess. Then Rudy got a  chance to study when he graduated and got his degree. I still hadn   t  finished mine when he finished his. I still had to write a thesis, so that  last summer I was in Cornell, I spent the summer writing, longhand, if  you will, my PhD thesis. My major professor in botany took care of my  baby. (Laughs) She was wonderful, the wife of this professor. She took  care of Mark while I wrote the thesis. Then I went home to Indianapolis  and had another baby because I was pregnant by this time, again.  My father died while I was in Indianapolis. Rudy and I decided to leave  me there with Mark and Tam, our dog, for the baby to be born in  Indianapolis instead of in the Netherlands where he was going to go to  study with this ethologist that he   d gotten a post-doc with. So he went  off to the Netherlands. I stayed in Indianapolis, had a baby, and had to  decide how and when and under what circumstances to finish my degree  and get to Europe. I spent, I think it was from August to about, maybe,  early December in Indianapolis with this new baby who was born in  September. Then I went back to Ithaca with a new baby but not the dog.  My mother decided to keep Tam. She was going to keep him for a year  while we were gone. I took the two babies, went back to Ithaca, took my  PhD exam. I   m trying to remember all this detail. Then I took the babies  and flew off to Europe.  I   ll always remember that PhD exam because when I went in, I told  these three men who were on my committee that I had to be out of there  by a certain time because I had to nurse my baby. Of course, this is  unheard of. You don   t tell your PhD examiners how long they can take  with you, torturing you, but they let me go. At the end, Bill Dilger, this  really good friend of mine said,    Helen, what are you going to do with  your PhD? You   re going to end up being       I knew he thought I would  14  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  just be a housewife and a mother because I already had two kids. He  said,    But I wish you luck.    So I went to Europe and   you want the  story of Europe?  Sure.  (Laughs) Okay. We lived in an apartment that was owned by somebody  who was on sabbatical in the United States just as Rudy and I were sort  of on a sabbatical in Europe. The apartment below us was owned by a  man who was a doctor and his wife, Carla Overbeck. They had one little  girl who was Mark   s age. We were above, and they were below. They  immediately got acquainted with us. Lekia and Mark played together  most of that year. It was very good for Mark because he didn   t have any  toys, and, of course, Mike was an infant.  Michael was the most active infant you can imagine. He learned to crawl  almost before he could cry. (Laughter) The whole time we lived there, I  can remember him crawling all over that apartment. I   d have to go chase  him. The reason it   s kind of interesting is because he later became a very  good, top-notch crawl swimmer. He was one of the top swimmers in  Oklahoma when he went to high school. Anyway, that year that I spent  in the Netherlands, I met a woman who lived down the street who was  English. She was a great Agatha Christie fan. She had lots of Agatha  Christie books, so she loaned me her Agatha Christie books. All year  long, I read Agatha Christie mysteries and watched my babies, washed  diapers.  The people at the lab where Rudy was working learned about my paper.  They took it practically sight unseen, read it, published it in the journal  Behaviour. The whole journal took my entire thesis and published it. At  the time, Behaviour was the most reputable behavior journal in the  world. That was kind of a cue, something valuable for my biography if  you wanted to know. Anyway, my paper was published almost before I  left the Netherlands. Another funny story, one of the men at Rudy   s lab  was a Scot who taught at the University of Edinburgh. He was studying  cockroach behavior, just an aside. Because we got to know him fairly  well, he invited us to stop at his house in Scotland on our way home  from Europe. Of course, it was an invitation we could hardly refuse, so  we did. Before we left, he came to our apartment and says,    I have to tell  you folks, the house you   re going to be living in in Scotland is haunted.  There is a woman ghost there.    (Laughs) Of course, we thought that was  wonderful. He said,    You needn   t be afraid, but I wanted you to know  ahead of time in case she appears.     Well, we had bought a Volkswagen van while we were in the  Netherlands, so we took that, drove with our two kids, took a ferry, I  15  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  think, to England, drove north to Scotland, and got to this house. When  we got there, it was dark, and it was raining. It was a very scary kind of  night. We moved into this house, which we knew had a ghost in it, and  that night, Mark got sick. He cried, and you could tell he was just in  terrible pain. I didn   t know what to do. He had a high fever. Rudy, with  all the courage in the world, I thought, went out in that storm to look for  a doctor. Later, he said he remembered seeing a sign of a doctor when  we drove by this little town we were in. Sure enough, about an hour after  he left, he came back with a doctor, believe it or not. He knocked on the  door and got this man out of bed. The guy came, and he diagnosed Mark  with the measles.  Oh, my.  So we had to call these friends of ours who were loaning us the house  and tell them their two children had been exposed to the measles. I   m  sorry, I forgot to say that they were there at the house when we got there.  No, were they there? I don   t remember. We thought they should know  that we had the measles. Oh, I know. We stopped at their house when we  were on the way up there and met their children and exposed their  children to the measles, so we thought they should know. They came up  to the house. They arrived the next day. We spent that whole week  taking care of one child with the measles and waiting to see the ghost.  The interesting part about it was that when the doctor who came that  night, that first night, he said,    Have you seen her?    He said,    Don   t be  afraid of her.    He was referring to the ghost. Every time he came, he   d  ask,    Have you seen her?    When I was out with a buggy and Michael,  who was an infant still and I was wheeling him around in a buggy, (I   d  take him for a walk) people would say,    Have you seen her yet? Have  you seen her yet?    We always had to say no. We never did see or hear  that ghost. Everybody in that town firmly and absolutely believed in that  ghost. It was a woman who had lived in the house that burned down.  This cottage that our friends owned had been the carriage house. She  was haunting the carriage house. Not everybody can tell a ghost story.  No. Well, from Scotland, did you finally make it back to the States?  When we were in the Netherlands, Rudy knew he had to get a job, so he  was applying for jobs in the United States. He was applying with the  Fish and Wildlife Service and with any university which was advertising  for an ichthyologist. There was one job that he was hoping to get with  the Fish and Wildlife Service in New Jersey, but they wanted an  interview. We couldn   t afford to send him for an interview. The only  place that was willing to accept him sight unseen was Oklahoma State  University. They agreed to give him a temporary, one-year appointment,  16  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  sight unseen, on the basis of his resume. We didn   t want to come to  Oklahoma because I had had a history of bad experiences with  tornadoes, another interesting story. I didn   t want to come here. Rudy  wasn   t particularly interested in coming here. It wasn   t a very  prestigious place, but it was the only place that would give him a job.  We came thinking we   d be here for a year.  And then look what happened.  And then look what happened. (Laughter) We drove our Volkswagen  across country, stopping at Rudy   s parents to visit them in New York  and my parents in Indiana where my mother was living alone with     remember our dog Tam? That   s kind of an interesting story, too, because  we expected to bring Tam out here with us, but when we got to Mother   s  house, we stayed for about a week with her. When we were ready to  leave, packing up and everything, Tam was hiding the whole time under  Mother   s bed. When we were taking the stuff out to the car, he was  under the bed. When we got to the car and closed the door, and Mother  was standing in the door waving goodbye to us, here comes Tammy.  Stood there and watched us go. He chose.  He stayed with my mother until they both died. He died a year or two  before she did. Eventually she brought him out here. Anyway, we drove  from Indianapolis out here. We came in on Route 51. Somebody had  been spraying herbicides on the vegetation out on Route 51. Everything  was brown and dead. There was a detour over to south Stillwater. We  had to drive through south Stillwater, which at that time was a black  neighborhood, in order to get to the house of Dr.  Roy  Jones, who was  head of the department. Boy, was that a good impression of Stillwater.  Well, I was going to ask you what your impressions of Stillwater were.  Oh, it was awful. That isn   t the end of it. Dr. Jones had arranged for us  to have one of the student housing apartments. I had dressed up in my  best dress to meet this department head who was going to be Rudy   s  boss. We drove over to the house, and he talked to us for a while, and  then he got in his car and drove us over to the student housing, which is  still there. Our apartment, the one we were in, is still there. They   ve built  a lot more. It was a second-floor apartment. When we walked into that  apartment, it was covered with red dust. You can just imagine. We were  ready to move in, so while they stayed in the car with Dr. Jones, I had to  get together and mop up and clean up that apartment enough that we  could move into it. I got my clothes dirty. Everything was just filthy  when I got through with that. It took me a long time to clean it up.  Finally, we did move stuff in. That was how we moved into an  apartment at OSU.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  I was used to taking my kids out on walks. I wheeled Michael, and Mark  walked. One of the first things I did after we got settled was try to take  this walk with them. There were no sidewalks. At this time, there were  cow pens, I think, on the right side of Farm Road, and there was a barn  on this side. It was all dirt and all farm stuff out there. There was no  place to walk, really, so I never walked these kids after that first day.  The first semester I spent with the kids in that apartment. I made some  friends. There were some interesting stories with the friends I made  there, too. At the end of that first semester, I was offered a job teaching  biology in the Zoology Department. That was because Rudy had told the  department head about my background.  The Zoology Department, the Microbiology Department, and the Botany  Department shared responsibility for an introductory, non-majors  biology course. They had to staff the lectures and use graduate students  for the labs. The Zoology Department people hated to teach that course,  the people who were zoologists. The botany people hated to teach that  course. Here I was, a perfect person, so at the end of the first semester  here, I was offered a job to teach biology. Fourth one, if you   ve been  keeping track. (Laughs) Never interviewed with the department head. He  just took Rudy   s word for it. I suppose he could   ve checked (I don   t  know whether he did or not) that I had any background. He never asked  me to show any kind of resume or anything, any diploma, anything.  They just took your word for it.  Took my word for it, Rudy   s word for it. I started teaching biology.  Were they large classes?  Oh, they were these huge   these were non-majors. They were huge  classes. I had two sections. About the same time, (I   m not sure whether  it was that first semester or the next semester) they hired Becky Johnson  to teach, also. I do remember the first couple of years we taught that  course, we didn   t have an office. We didn   t have a desk. We just had  sort of a transcript for what was supposed to be going on, I guess. We  didn   t have a desk. We finally got a desk in what used to be a coffee  room in the Zoology Department. No windows. The two of us shared the  desk. We put our books and stuff in different parts of the desk. It was  years before we each got a separate desk and finally office spaces of our  own. It took forever.  The first three or four years I taught biology, I was an assistant  instructor, I guess, part-time instructor. Becky and I found out that we  were paid less than the janitor in the building and less than the graduate  18  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  student that was coordinating the course. Becky and I were not very  happy. We were not very happy campers. It seemed to us that we were  just not being treated right. She was very active in the women   s  movement, which was sort of developing even here at that time. I did not  participate very much because I had too much to do. I was a mother, by  that time, of three kids. Leslie was born the year after we got here.  Second year, I guess, we were here, she was born, my third child. I had  the problem of children and husband and family and the whole bit. We  moved out of that apartment into a house the second year we were here.  By that time, I think Rudy had decided he kind of liked it. He liked the  people. I had a job.  Stillwater grows on you when all those things fall into place.  Yes, right. The second year I was here, one of Rudy   s colleagues was  John Thornton. His wife, Beth, asked me to join a bridge club. I had  learned to play bridge when I was at Tulane because Rudy played bridge  at Tulane. I had learned it so I could play with him. I joined the bridge  club the second semester I was here. I joined that bridge club. I   ve been  in it ever since.  So you were telling me about bridge club, and I want you to work back  around towards your pay equity. Did anything ever happen with that?  Of course, I got a raise eventually. I have a funny story because one time  in a   what do they call these little things you get when you have a  Chinese dinner? Fortune cookie. I got a fortune cookie which said,    You  will get a pay raise,    so I stuck that in my drawer. That was in that  drawer for years. One reason why I couldn   t get many pay raises was  because Rudy was department chairman for some years. He couldn   t  give me a raise. When he left that job, John Thornton got it. John gave  me a raise, and I threw the fortune cookie away. I was never, I thought,  paid really very well. It was not as bad as it was in the beginning, of  course. During the years I   ve been here, bridge was one of my groups of  friends. The other group of friends I had was the Audubon Society.  Tell me how that got started. I believe you were involved with its  beginnings?  The Audubon? Yes. I don   t remember how long I   d been here. Probably  just a few years when somebody from National Audubon Society came  up to me and asked me if I   d be interested in developing a chapter of the  National Audubon Society here. There was an Audubon Society here.  There were a lot of women who were birders, but they didn   t want to be  affiliated with the national chapter. I agreed, and I got John Couch, who  was a lawyer in town, to help me. The two of us did the paperwork that  19  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  was necessary to apply, and we recruited some people, some of the old  members and some of the members who wouldn   t join us because they  didn   t want to be part of it. We set up and got a small group of people  together to be a Payne County chapter of the National Audubon Society.  I was the first president of that. John Couch was the second. I was  president for two or three years. I don   t remember, now. I guess you can  only be president for two years.  I held every office available in that, every possible office available to  anyone in that organization in the years to come. I have been going to  their meetings all these years and being a member of that chapter until  this past year. I quit going because the meetings were at night. I just  couldn   t handle the driving at night and the walking and everything, so I  quit. I pay my dues, but I   m not really a very active member anymore.  The Audubon chapter here still prospers in spite of the fact that the  Sierra Club had to give up here years ago. The Audubon Society is still  doing pretty well, partly because we have a wonderful   Tim O   Connell  is very active in it. I don   t know whether he   s president. He   s been  president. Susan Walker is very active in it. They have a lot of people in  that department over there that are active in it. They keep it supplied  with graduate students and students to come to the meetings.  And there   s a scholarship?  Oh, well, yes. We established a couple of scholarships. One was given to  the man who raised the most money for these scholarships. One was  given to me because I was the first president, I guess, and the longest  member, so there   s a scholarship in my name, yes.  Let   s see. If you could guess, how many students do you think you   ve  taught biology to?  I have absolutely no idea.  Hundreds, thousands?  Oh, thousands. I mean, I   d have a hundred in one semester.  And where did you teach these classes on campus, what building?  They were in various buildings. I mean, the classes were in various  buildings, anywhere where there   s a large lecture room. I taught in the  Classroom Building. I taught in Ag Hall. Probably those two were the  most frequently used buildings. Did you also know that I taught other  courses?  20  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Tell me about those.  This was Introductory Biology for non-majors. There were people on  campus who wanted their students to have four hours of biology without  having to spend time in labs, so the Biology and Botany Departments  got together and decided to offer some two-hour courses. I offered to  teach. I was already into ornithology, of course, since I   d been a birder  at Cornell. I was learning birds out here, so I offered Field Ornithology,  which was taught in the summer, and I offered Human Origins, which  was just a subject that I was really interested in. I developed a course  around it. I taught Environmental Science, but I was leaving that until  last. I thought there was another one.  Anyway, I taught those three two-hour courses. Human Origins,  Environmental Science, and Field Ornithology. I taught a lot of the  extension courses for the Extension Department in the summer. I taught  Birds of Arizona and Birds of South Texas. There was a unit which  taught classes in the summer for Elderhostel people. I taught Birds of  Oklahoma. People would come here from all over the country just so  they could see scissortail flycatchers, roadrunners, prairie chickens, and  painted buntings. Those were the four birds that everybody wanted to  see. I taught those courses along with biology, almost the whole time I  was here.  How did you get the nickname    Killer Miller   ?  I have no idea. I have no idea. You heard that, huh? I wasn   t going to  mention it. (Laughter) I hated that.  Did you really?  Yes.  Were you a tough teacher?  I thought it was unfair.  Really? Why is that?  Because I was no harder on my students than any of the other teachers  were. I guess some people thought I was, and it matched. I think it was     Killer Miller   . If my name had been something else, they probably  wouldn   t have attached that name to it.  It probably would have been a nicer-sounding    (Laughter)  21  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Maybe. I hope.  Do you ever hear, through the years, back from your former students?  Yes, quite a few of them, as a matter of fact. One of my former students,  I hear from all the time. I don   t know if you want to hear this or not. Ann  Redelfs was a student of mine. Did I tell you I wrote the lab manual for  the biology courses?  No, you did not.  Well, I did. Almost as soon as I started teaching, they needed a new lab  manual. As soon as I got in charge of it, I wrote the lab manual for it. I  spent one whole summer, I think, writing it. Ann Redelfs was a graduate  student at that time, and she contributed to one of the labs. She  suggested how I could develop one of the labs. She was a graduate  student. She later worked in the graduate student office here on campus.  Then she got a job with a computer company on the campus at Cornell.  Then she got a job with a computer company in San Diego. She finally  got a job as the Assistant Director of the Cornell Laboratory of  Ornithology. She was there for a couple of years and then finally quit  that job, I think because she has a very strong personality and the  director and her, their personalities clashed. Anyway, she quit, and she  runs her own business now. I hear from her all the time. There   s another  graduate student who works with people on the reservation. I can   t think  of the name of the reservation out West, a large Indian reservation, not  Hopi, but  Navaho . Anyway, she works there teaching Indian students.  She was so motivated to be able to get help for her students and her  classrooms that she got herself a PhD so she could apply for grants and  stuff. She does that. She was one of my students at one time. I could  look her name up.  Did you write other texts?  Yes.  In your spare time.  In my spare time. (Laughs) I wrote an environmental science textbook.  And that   s probably before it was a hot topic.  No, there were already lots of environmental science books out there.  There were quite a few. I got interested in environmental science as a  biology teacher, reading about all the stuff that was going on. It aroused  my interest. When I went to the University of Washington on a six-  22  month sabbatical one time, I studied with Gordon Orians, who is an  environmentalist. I took one of his courses, and while I was out there, I  started writing by hand an environmental science book. I worked on that  for years. I finally got a publisher interested in it. It was the Mosby  Publishing Company. They took my manuscript, which, by then, I   d  typed. They took my chapters, chapter by chapter, and sent them to  reviewers, and the reviewers would make comments.  There was a panel of reviewers, probably about six or seven people who  taught environmental science. Those people criticized and rewrote my  chapters. Then I   d take those, rewrite the chapters, resubmit them to the  panel, and so it went through twice. At the end of that process, I had a  book which had been reviewed by a panel of reviewers twice. Then  Mosby decided they didn   t want to get into the environmental science  textbook field. They fired the editors that I   d worked with for two years.  They told me they just weren   t interested in the book anymore. I believe  them because they never have submitted an environmental science book.  I think they decided the competition was too much, and they just decided  it was a poor decision. They   d spent a lot of money on it, but I had an  environmental science book which was in pretty good quality because it  had been reviewed by so many people. I submitted it to a few publishers,  and they turned them down. There are lots of environmental science  books out there, so I don   t know that it will ever get published.  Interestingly enough, my daughter was in contact with a publisher over  another matter and asked kind of casually if they were interested in an  environmental science book, a new one. They said,    Yes, do you have  one?    So my daughter is now working on that book to submit again. It   s  in good shape. I keep it up to date. I have three books which I keep up to  date. One of them, of course, is the environmental science textbook.  When I couldn   t get that published, I thought, well, maybe I could just  take some of the material from it and make a book out of it that could be  published or used as a text without all the pedagogy and everything. I  did a book called How People Change the Planet, was the name of it. I  kept that up to date. I tried to get that published. No luck.  Then, two years ago, I took the last chapter of the textbook, which was  called    The Biosphere is a Commons.    I took that last chapter and  developed it into a book. That book, I am now trying to sell without  much luck. This one is much more marketable and I think a much more  important book. It is for general consumption, and the whole name of it  is The Biosphere Is A Commons: Can We Save It From Ruin? You know  what a commons is?  A commons is something that   s owned by everybody and owned by  nobody, that everybody has access to but nobody owns. It   s available for  23  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  everybody to use. Of course, a commons is subject to ruin if you overuse  or abuse it. The idea of a commons was first introduced to literature by  Garrett Hardin   who told this story about how   there was a group of  people who lived in a village, and they had a huge pastureland which  they all grazed their livestock on. It was a commons because everybody  used it. They used it for years and years. Then one year, one of the  members of the village decided that, heck, he   d like to put another cow  on this pasture, so the other people decided,    Well, we will, too.     Finally, they had put so much livestock on the commons that it was  overgrazed and didn   t support any livestock at all. This was a ruined  commons.  That fable is what he used to express his concern about the commons  that is the biosphere. The biosphere consists of living things. It   s a thin  skin around the planet   s hard surface, consisting of all living things, soil,  air, climate, and water. Those things have always had elements or  characteristics of a commons. We   ve always been free to dump anything  we   ve wanted to in the atmosphere, always been free to dump anything  we want to into the water of the earth. We   ve always been free to use or  misuse our soils. As far as climate is concerned, it   s a little harder to  think of that as a component, but it affects soils, water, and atmosphere.  It is really part of the commons. Of course, right now it   s the one that   s  being changed the most by free access because of carbon emissions and  methane emissions.  Hopefully somebody will be interested in it.  I hope so. I think people ought to know this. I have a passion for people  understanding the problems we face. I really do.  Even in retirement.  Even in retirement. Even at the age of eighty-seven. (Laughter)  Well, looking back, you ended up coming to Stillwater. You didn   t think  you were going to be here that long. How did teaching at OSU and  being in Stillwater impact your life?  My husband, of course, is the one who made all the decisions in our life.  Actually, that   s true. His decision making was always good. He was the  one who decided to stay when they offered him a permanent position, or  at least an assistant professorship, because he had, in one year, learned to  like the faculty. He thought he was going to like hunting. He learned to  hunt, so for a couple of years, he was a hunter. He hunted birds. He  hunted ducks and pheasants. He never hunted deer. He never hunted  geese. He did like the hunting that he did. Now he   s sorry that he ever  24  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  did any of it. That was another reason why he stayed was because he  was beginning to like the lifestyle. The second year we were here, we  bought another house, which was a very nice house. We were  comfortably situated. We loved our house, and the kids were pretty  happy here. I was pretty happy with my job. Well, I wasn   t very happy  with my job, to be perfectly honest, but it was a job.  Did you want something more?  No, I didn   t. I think I wanted better pay, better recognition, maybe.  Becky Johnson and I went through a period where we were so  dissatisfied that we began writing novels. I never told you that. I   ve  written four books. The first one was a novel. She was going to write  one, and I was going to write one. The reason for that, the reason we  decided to do that as a way to get rid of our frustrations, was because I  knew a woman who had had two novels published. They were both  romance novels. I thought,    Heck, if she can do it, I can do it.    (Laughs)  I told Becky this, and she said,    Heck, I can do it, too.    (Laughter) So  the two of us started. I don   t know whether she ever finished hers. I  wrote mine. I was having arthritic pain in one hip. That hip was  bothering me a lot that year. I wrote that novel to get over my hip pain. I  had to use a cane to get around on campus and everything. I finished it,  and I never ever looked at it again. It   s still in my closet, sitting there.  Was it a romance novel?  It   s a romance novel.  How about that   How about that. (Laughter) It   ll never be published. I   ll never show it to  anybody, but I did write it, and I did finish it.  That   s what matters.  It was fun.  Do you feel that sense of accomplishment when you finish writing?  Oh, yes. It   s kind of frustrating not to have anything published. Of  course, I wrote the lab manual which was published. I guess I could  count that. I   ve written quite a few articles that were published. I   ve had  articles published in the publication of the National  Cowboy and   Western Heritage Museum, Persimmon Hill Magazine. I   ve had  published articles in the Outdoor Oklahoma magazine. I   ve had articles  published in The Oklahoma Observer, which is a statewide newspaper. I  25  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  wrote a column called    The Nature Trail    for the NewsPress for several  years. I wrote an article published in Birder   s World.  Where   s the best place in Oklahoma to see birds?  (Laughs) What kind of birds?  You named the four: the roadrunner, the scissortail     You can see all those around Stillwater. To answer that question, it  might be the Great Salt Plains because there are a lot of migratory birds  that go through there. Another place is there   s a big wildlife sanctuary  down in southwestern Oklahoma, just right down in the corner. It   s a big  preserve, big sanctuary.  And you have three kids?  I have three kids. Mark is my oldest son. He lives in Edmond and works  in Oklahoma City. I have a son, Michael, who lives in Japan and is  married to a Japanese woman. He   s an oceanographer. He   s an eel  specialist. He knows more about eels than anybody in the world. And  Leslie, of course, works here in Stillwater. She writes for the Fire  Protection Publication Services. I am very grateful to her for living here.  You know, most people, if they have daughters, they expect to go live  where their daughters live when they   re older so they can be with their  daughters. Daughters are handicapped in that they have to take care of  their parents when they   re old. Anyway, Leslie left here and went to  Berkeley. She spent a year in Berkeley, and I thought she probably  would get a degree and get a job and go somewhere. We expected to  someday follow her. But what did Leslie do? She came back here. She  didn   t have a job, but she very quickly got one. She   s been here ever  since. We   re very grateful that she came back because we didn   t have to  move. (Laughs) Just an interesting side bit.  Looking back on your life, when history is written about you, what  would you like for it to say?  Well, except for you, history is never going to be written about me. I  care about the environment. I like to teach. I had five near-death  experiences that I survived. I must have been destined to do something  useful. I wonder if that could be that book which may alert people to  some of the problems that we face. So far that hasn   t materialized. Want  to know my near-death experiences?  Sure.  26  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  The first one was when I was leading the Youth Hostel trips in Europe.  We were riding through Rotterdam in the rain. Youth Hostel leaders  always have to be at the back of their group. I was at the back of a group  going along on a bricked street. I was riding along, and all of a sudden I  was on my side. I had fallen. My bike had slipped out from under me. I  felt a car go by and hit my head. Another car screeched and went  around. I missed death by car crushing my head by not even an inch in  that episode. I have a feeling that if there is still somebody alive in the  Netherlands who is older than I was then, they   d live to tell the story  about how they almost ran over the head of a bicycle rider. Two cars  almost killed me. That was the first one.  The second one was when I was leaving   no, the second one was when  I lived in Oxford, Ohio. I was sleeping one night in my upstairs  apartment in a house. I woke up with my hair standing on end. It was  just energetic. I ran to the window, and there were leaves blowing down  the street. The trees were bent like this, way over. It was pouring rain. I  thought,    Oh, my. We   re having a real storm.    I hadn   t heard any  thunder, but I went back to bed. The next morning, the news was just  full of the fact that Hamilton, Ohio, which is about five or six miles  down the road from Oxford, had severe damage from a tornado that  touched down that night. The tornado path they traced in the paper had  knocked out some livestock barns and other farm stuff just south of  Miami  University -Oxford, and that path went right over my house. I  know I was under a tornado, which if it had been down any further, any  lower, it might have really wiped me out. I consider that my second  near-death experience.  My third one was when I was leaving North Carolina   s Duke University  Biological Station to return home to Indianapolis. I was meeting a friend  who I   d met in Europe the year before. He was coming to this country.  He was from Denmark. I had been up all night finishing a paper which  we were supposed to write as part of the curriculum at that lab. I was  really sleepy, but I couldn   t stay another night because I had to meet  Finn. I was driving very sleepily, and I woke up at one point, and there  was a car coming my direction on the grass on the other side. I was in  his lane, and he was honking like crazy. He woke me up. If he had not  avoided me, we would   ve crashed head on. I could   ve died in that. I was  very much awake after that, believe me. Anyway, I consider that my   third  death experience.  So you had the bike, the tornado, the car     That   s three. Okay, I had triple bypass surgery. I was in the recovery  unit. They thought I was okay, but one night I got up, and I remember  that I had to go to the bathroom. There was a guy who was holding a  27  bedpan, and I fainted in his arms. The next thing I knew, I was in bed,  and they were showing me my hand, which was absolutely black. I had  had a swarm of blood clots which had developed as a result of that  surgery. It was a delayed development, but they tracked that blood clot  swarm all over my body. They had heart people. They had liver people.  They had brain people. If it had settled in any organ, I would   ve been  dead, but they settled in my arm, my left arm, at that. I   m right-handed. I  was happy about that event, which could   ve caused me to die. I mean,  that was a near-death event. I was in the hospital for weeks after that.  They thought I would die, of course, when they were tracking all those  blood clots.  The other time that I had a near-death experience was when I pulled a  tick from right here (gestures), swollen, off of me. Two nights later, we  were watching the debate between, I think it was Gore and Bush,  second-term debate, probably in October. I got up, went to bed, and that  next morning, Rudy couldn   t wake me up. I was in a coma. I knew about  the tick, but I don   t know whether Rudy did. They took me here and  flew me to Tulsa where I was in a coma for at least a week before I  woke up. When I finally did wake up, they   d called Mike from Japan.  He   d had time to get there. He was by my bed when I finally opened my  eyes. They didn   t know whether I was going to live from that for a  while, but when I woke up, I was pretty sensible. I seemed to be okay. I  went to rehab and did, you know, the exercises you always do when  you   re coming home from the hospital.  When I got home and I put on a pair of shoes that I always wore, (they  were just comfortable sandal-like shoes) I couldn   t keep the shoe on my  right foot. It just would not stay on when I walked, so I realized there  was something wrong with my right leg. I kind of blamed it on that virus  that had caused me to be so ill. They had done tests on that virus, and it  showed a mild reaction to Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, but I didn   t  have any spots or anything like that. They ended up concluding that they  could not identify the virus which had caused me to go into a coma.  The fact is, ever since then (this was in 2008) I have not been able to  walk right. This leg just gets worse and worse. I can   t walk correctly.  That   s the reason I use   it just doesn   t want to work right. It   s a funny  thing to say, but it just doesn   t want to work right. My leg doesn   t work.  There   s a problem with the knee. Anyway, that was the other near-death  experience. Interestingly enough, I have a friend, one of my bridge club  people, who knows of a man in Texas who had a tick bite that sent him  to the hospital, and when he got home, he was incapable of walking at  all. So there is a virus out there that does this to people, but apparently  it   s not very common. It   s not really recognized. They haven   t been able  to diagnose it. This is my biggest problem right now is not being able to  28  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  Nykolaiszyn  Miller  walk very well.  Too many close calls.  Too many close calls, but maybe it was meant for some good reason.  Well, usually. (Laughs)  I enjoy being alive, so that   s enough, I guess. (Laughter)  Absolutely. Buying lives.  Even though I can   t walk very well, but yes.  Is there anything else you   d like to share with us that we haven   t spoken  about today?  I think I   ve told you an awful lot. (Laughter)  Well, we appreciate your time. Thank you so much for sharing your  stories with us.  You   re very welcome. I should thank you for being interested enough.  -------  -------   
