 Gill, I am interviewing Josh Pulver. Today is  September 3, 2008. We   re here in the Edmond Low Library on the OSU  campus. I am a faculty member of the Oklahoma State University  Library, and this interview is being conducted as a part of the O-STATE  Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Well,  Josh let me ask you, can you remember the first time you saw the  mascot, Pistol Pete?  That   s tough. It was about 1994-95 at a football game. You just noticed  him down on the field shooting the guns and everything, so I didn   t  really notice much at the time. I was just here as young child.  How old were you?  Let   s see I was twelve, so not too young but young. I didn   t know much  about the school at the time. I was not a huge OSU fan at the time but  quickly became one after those several years.  What was your first impression of Pete when you first saw that guy in  there?  That   s a big head  (Laughs) That really was my first impression,    Well  that   s a huge head.    I remember hitting my dad, I was like,    Dad, Look  at that head     And you know that really was about it.  Josh, lets back up and ask you because you said you weren   t a huge  OSU fan growing up, tell us little bit about your background, where you  grew up, a little bit about your life until you got to Oklahoma State.  Okay, well I was born in Newcastle, Oklahoma. I was six weeks old we  moved to Kingston down on Lake Texoma and lived there for three and  a half years. After that, I moved to Piedmont, Oklahoma for three and a  5  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  half years and then my dad was moved again to Sand Springs,  Oklahoma. We lived there for almost 10 years, most of my educational  career was there. We moved towards the end of my junior year, to Elk  City, Oklahoma where I finished out my school and then I moved here  to Stillwater and I   ve been here ever since.  And some might wonder why your dad moved so often?  (Laughs) My dad is a United Methodist Minister, here in the Oklahoma  Conference. Right now he   s the district superintendent in the Oklahoma  City area.  What factors influenced you to come to Oklahoma State?  For one I liked the environment. I grew up the fan of another school and  I really fell in love with the environment here. That was really one of the  major factors, and another was the degree. I wanted to become a  landscape contractor, and OSU is one of three schools in the nation, at  the time, that had landscape contracting so that was really something I  was looking into and took advantage of that opportunity to come to  school here, a couple of degree   s later I finished with something else.  (Laughs)  Tell us a little about your OSU experience maybe apart from your Pistol  Pete activities while you were here at OSU. Some of the things you may  have been engaged in?  I was mainly involved in the OSU Marching Band. My first three years  here on campus were heavily involved with the marching band, the jazz  bands, the concert band and the spirit band for basketball games. Some  of the more fun experiences I had in my life were due to my  involvement with the marching band. And then Pistol Pete later of  course. But the band allowed me to go to New York my freshman year.  So, I have pictures on top of the World Trade Center six months before  they came down in 2001. Then I was able to go back as Pistol Pete to  New York and was able to visit Ground Zero. So a lot of experiences  like that. Getting to go to Boston, South Carolina, things like that.  I became involved with the off-campus student association with the  Student Government Association. I became a senator. I was very active  in helping approve the bond issue for the students help pay for the  stadium. And so that was kind of a little   one of the vital things that  came up when I was involved with SGA. I was very involved with my  church, also, while in Stillwater.  Stadium, you mean the Gallagher-Iba Arena? The bond, was that part of  6  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  it too?  Mm-hmm.  Josh, when did you first think you wanted to be Pistol Pete?  Camp Cowboy, just before my freshman year. I came up to Stillwater  and went out to Camp Cowboy and I was sitting at the bonfire on Friday  night. And all of a sudden I had the life scared out of me by this shot  gun. Pistol Pete came out of the woods and was shooting off the gun and  took his head off right there, which is something that you   re not  supposed to ever see, really. We try to keep it so people don   t see the  transition from    Josh Pulver    to    Pistol Pete    so that it doesn   t remove  the mystery. But Pistol Pete came out and took his head off and was  talking about you know everything that he did as a mascot. What it  meant, and what it represented. That right there is the first time that I  really said,    Hey, I want to be Pistol Pete.     Did you know anyone personally that had been a Pete?  Not before that. I had not met anyone. I did meet that same Pistol Pete  later that year in New York City. We were able to hang out together on  that trip, on the basketball tournament trip. And got talking to him some  more, got to talk to him. And it made a little bit better impression on me  that it really was something I could do, and something I really wanted to  do. So I went for it.  Can you share with us a little bit about the tryout process that you went  through to be a Pete?  The first year I tried out, I went in and signed in at the clinic and went  through a five day clinic. We met each day with the current Petes, put  the head on for a little bit. Went to Body Works one day to get in front  of the mirrors so we could see what we looked like. Went to Gallagher-  Iba   the floor to be able to see what it   s like to be in the arena and  everything that was around it. Went out to Lewis Field a couple times to  see what it was like to be down there on the field with the head on. Just  try to put us in some different areas that provided a different feel for it.  Got to hear some of their stories and their experiences of throughout the  year of what they had accomplished.  Then we went to try-out. And that night was a very nerve wracking  night. I can remember it to this day. We had to sign up for a time to  interview and you walked into the room at your time and you sat in front  of a group of former Petes. I remember that year there were seven  former Petes around the table. And you have, I was at a chair in the  7  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  middle of the room. It was just unbelievably nerve wracking. I was  almost in tears, I was so nervous. Just because all of these guys are there  wanting to make sure they are picking the right person. And it can be a  little bit intimidating. A little intimidating with that. They ask tough  questions about your personality, your knowledge of OSU and the  history Pistol Pete. They want to make sure that they are choosing  someone who   s not going to screw up and not embarrass the school.  What years did you serve as Pistol Pete?  I was Pistol Pete from April 2003 to April 2005.  Two years. Were there two Petes at that time?  There were two Petes. I was a Pistol Pete with Jared Wiley, both years.  I don   t know if it happened very often, but I think we were one of the  few pairs that went two years together. But we also had a good time.  Jared and I were both chosen All-American both years, which is an  honor, and something that has always been used as a bragging right  among some of the former Petes.  A comment and a question. The comment, as I recall, Jared is a little  smaller than you (Laughter). And you were termed Big Pete and Little  Pete.  Yes.  Can you share with us   is it the handkerchief you have that identifies  which one by color?  Yes.  Could you share that with us?  Back in the late    90s, I believe it was, one of the Pistol Petes, they were  a little more similar in size than Jared and I were, and decided that so  their mom   s could tell the difference, one would wear a white  handkerchief and one would wear an orange handkerchief. That was to  tell the difference. That   s always been kind of the way people always  come up to me and ask,    Are you the white handkerchief or the orange  handkerchief?     Which one were you though?  I was white. I wore the white handkerchief. And the color handkerchief  goes with the head. We have two different heads that we use each year.  8  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  The white handkerchief and the head, they kind of stay together. So  whenever you can see the handkerchief you can say    Hey, I wore that  head.    It gives you a little bit   some memories to come back to you.  Were the heads the same, Josh?  For the most part. On the outside it   s very hard to tell any difference. On  the inside of the head, they are very different. One head has kind of a  lighter inside. The head that I wore has a very dark finish on the inside  of it. So it   s like you   re in a black hole most of the time. The other head  is kind of a white on the inside, so you can see everything. Also, the  hats   the helmets that are inside are very different.  Come back to some my question about your earlier comment about  being an All-American   how do you get to be an All-American? Is there  a process?  We go to cheerleading camp and mascot camp each summer. And at that  time is where they choose All-Americans and it   s based on your  performance, your creativity, your dedication to being there on time for  one. A lot of things go into it. It   s mainly your performance there at that  camp that determines whether you become All-American or not.  How many attend and out of that how many make quote All-American  status?  We probably had, my first year we probably had around twenty mascots  and about twelve of us got All-American. It varies from year to year and  there wasn   t a set amount that they would have to reach camp or not. It  really was just who stands out as a mascot. It really is kind of an honor.  For me it was,    Well I guess the other mascots were pretty bad.     (Laughs)  Did you have to be asked to participate in the competition? Could  anyone enter?  Well, I mean, it was your school, whether your school went or not. I  mean that   s   we did skits and everything like that. It was based on your  performance in those skits. It really wasn   t a competition per say, but  just kind of how well you performed during your sessions and  everything like that.  You were earlier talking about your Pete head and so on. Could you tell  a little bit about the outfit that you had? Let   s start with the head and  then we   ll talk about maybe the rest of it. You described it a little bit, but  could you elaborate on that some?  9  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  The head, it   s 45 pounds of fiberglass and it   ll sit   you know it   s there  the entire time of course. I don   t think you could have 45 pounds on  your body and not know it   s there. I   ve never seen something so well  balanced in my life. I could shrug my shoulders to where my head was  totally out of the helmet which is usually worn   used to stabilize it. And  it would just sit perfectly balanced on my shoulders. It was amazing to  me that something so big could be so well balanced. That was just  something that was kind of weird. The eyes on Pistol Pete are strictly  what you see out of. So you have a straight vision, straight forward.  And then we also have a hole in the chin, on the head, so you can see  down to write autographs. Most of the time people see Pistol Pete  looking straightforward signing autographs out here near his stomach.  And people    Well, what are you doing?    And we try not to tell very  often what we   re doing but we   re inside the head looking like this,   motions  signing an autograph.  I guess it helps you see little kids too. Being able to see low?  Sometimes. Yeah there   s been several times where you didn   t see a kid  until they were right there running right into you. So, it   s a rude  awakening sometimes. (Laughs)  So the vest and the outfit I mean where did you   of course the University  provides the head, what about the rest? You know you   ve got the chaps  right? And the vest and so on?  The University purchases us four pairs of white shirts now. I don   t know  what it used to be, so I   m not going to say too much. I don   t want the  older guys to get mad. Four pairs of Wranglers and four white shirts.  And then with that, they provide us with a vest each year, a black leather  vest. Chaps they get handed down each year   orange leather chaps.  And then a gun belt with a gun of course and all of that get handed down  each year. Then also the University purchases us orange boots. I was  lucky enough that we had some custom boots made. One year, I found a  really good deal with OSU-Okmulgee. They used to have the boot and  saddle shop   great place. They made our chaps and our boots that year,  and did a phenomenal job for us. But all of that and also the  Yalesberry   s donate money for spurs every year. So each Pistol Pete will  get a set of spurs while they   re Pistol Pete. And that started in 2003.  What about compensation in any way? Do you get a scholarship for  being Pete? Or is there some way you   re compensated for your time you  spend being Pete?  We   re not on scholarship. We   re not scholarship student athletes. We are  considered student athletes but we   re not on scholarship. The  10  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  compensation we do receive is for doing private appearances away from  the University. We   ll do birthday parties, weddings, go to the hospital,  you know do some hospital visits. Other things like that, and we charge  a small fee for that   mileage and then an amount per hour we   re in  character.  Josh, speaking of that, how many appearances would you make say  athletic related and non-athletic related? Just yourself and then both  Petes together in a year   s time?  My first year I know I did around 250 appearances.  Yourself?  Yes. So between the two of us, I think we did around 500, close to 500.  It was probably in the 480 to 500 range. So then the next year, it went up  a little bit. I did I think I did around 260. Not by much, but I did a little  bit more. It all depends on how athletics are doing. Not only doing  athletic appearances, you know you   ll go further in the tournament or  something like that. OSU fans tend to have Pistol Pete come out for  some more events when OSU athletics are doing well. We really did  kind of see a fluctuation based on the season, to see what was going on.  About what percentage of breakdown, how many of those would be  personal? Out of those, say you made yourself about 250?  A good majority. I mean, over 50 percent. I hate to say too much more  than that because when we get to basketball season there   s a month  there, not a month but several weeks where you have men   s basketball,  women   s basketball, wrestling, softball and baseball. And so that was     you know we had five different sports going on at the same time.  There   s a couple of weeks, everyday   almost every day you   re doing an  athletic event. Then on top of that, you   re doing other appearances at the  same time. I would say that a majority were private appearances, but we  also did a quite a bit for the athletic department.  Josh, your experience as Pete, was it anything like what you thought it  would be? Kind of going in and looking at it after?  It was so much more. Going into it, I tried out twice before I was  chosen. My first year I tried out I was not chosen as Pistol Pete. I was  devastated. And the second year I tried out I did receive   I was chosen  as Pistol Pete and immediately it became, it was the best two years of  my life, Jerry. And it was just one of those deals that the memories that I  have from that time will last with me forever and I hope they do because  it was such an awesome time. Not just as Pistol Pete, but a lot of that  11  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  reflected into both just my regular life. You know we had a lot of fun.  Met a lot of new friends that I would not have met if I hadn   t have been  Pistol Pete. I really cherish those two years.  Josh, did you have difficulty balancing your two lives as Pete? Can you  kind of share what a typical week would be like for you?  Which season? (Laughs) You know it was very different. There was not  one week   there were not two weeks identical. It really kind of  depended on was it a home game or an away game. Was it basketball  season because you might have two or three games in one week or four  games. You know and depending on seasons like that. And during the  summer, it was pretty quiet a lot of times. There was nothing athletic  going on, so all of your appearances were private appearances during the  summer. And so that was kind of a dead time for me during the summer.  Just kind of going about it. I did some of my practicums for my courses.  And so I did a lot of that during the summers. Then you know during the  school year, carrying twelve hours of school, of class, was very  demanding in itself for some people, myself included. I think I  maintained 14 hours the entire time I was Pete, which is not a whole lot  of hours but when you add a full time job on top of that, it becomes a  pretty good work load.  Between classes, there were a lot of times I went to class wearing my  Wranglers and my shirt or my Wranglers and a t-shirt because I would  have to leave right after class to go to an appearance. I remember one  Friday I had a class and left class just a little bit early so I could try to  make it Tulsa for an event and I ended up having to make it to Tulsa in  about 45 minutes. So you know some of those things that you just really  tried to make it work. You studied when you could and for me, it was  amazing. My best GPA   s were while I was Pete. I was not a very good  student before I was Pete. And I think part of it had to do with I was into  a major that I was really interested in. The courses meant something to  me so I was able to focus on them a lot more. And spend the time that  was needed to make good grades.  And had to manage your time with care, too.  Yes, and that   s one thing I did find out. When I was busy and I had to  get things done, there wasn   t a question. I had to go through and do it  all. I found earlier and later when I had a little more time on my hands, I  wasn   t in such a hurry to get things done, and would put things off a  little bit more.  Going back to your on field experiences, can you tell us a little bit more  about how you felt the first time you went out as Pistol Pete?  12  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  It was crazy. It was the day after I became Pistol Pete. I did a softball  game. We always had such an importance on gun safety and that was the  first time I had ever shot a pistol. Now, I had used shotguns and  everything like that quite a bit but the first time I ever shot a pistol was  at that softball game. It was nerve wracking. I knew gun safety, I knew  everything about it, but I had never shot a pistol before. And so that was  very nerve wracking for me. But also it was amazing because it was  something I   d been trying to do for a year and a half at least. I   d been  striving to become Pistol Pete for a year and a half. I walked into the  locker room   to the office area at the softball game and opened up the  head   opened up the sack that was holding the head and I was just like,     Wow, I   ve accomplished it.    I have accomplished one of my major  goals in life. It was just such an awesome experience that first time just  to put the head on and go out and shake hands and mess with the police  officers a little bit. You know you have to give them a hard time. I will  remember that time forever.  Was there a particular sporting event or venue or setting that you  enjoyed more than the others as Pete?  There was one specific   well. I have one football and one basketball.  The basketball event that really stands out to me was when we beat St.  Joseph   s in the Elite Eight in 2004. We were not supposed to win that  game. St. Joseph   s was on a hot streak that year. But we had been on a  hot streak too, one of the best years in Cowboy Basketball in a long  time, winning wise. So we went into that game and just came out. And  then John Lucas    last second shot just sealed the deal for us. Then when  Nelson missed his shot on the other end, the place just went crazy. I ran  out on the court and was just elated. You know how just   the emotions  going through you at the time, you can   t explain it to someone. There   s  just so much joy. The first thing I did was find the guy that hands out all  the hats to the team, and the guy who hands out all the t-shirts. And so I  grabbed a hat and a t-shirt from him so I had a souvenir. (Laughs) The  St. Joe   s fans were very bad. I would put them above OU on the  worthless column. (Laughs)  Now your football experience?  Yeah, my OSU football experience, that was just awesome. They let me  climb up and cut down part of the net and then I also got to share a seat  with Barry Sanders on the way back to the hotel. That evening was by  far one of the best evenings of my life because it was just incredible.  Football, one of the best times that I ever had was at the Cotton Bowl.  Just the history there at the Cotton Bowl and being able to   the Alumni  Association had a huge tail-gate party. There was over 4,000 people  13  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  there. There was a whole lot of people there. Just walking into the  building and the place went crazy. And with the cheers and everything  that was going on. The electricity there at the Cotton Bowl was just  amazing. That   s also something   the sea of orange taking up the entire  half of the stadium that was amazing because I could go to any side of  the stadium and lead a cheer and it was awesome. People were just  going nuts because we were at the Cotton Bowl. We had been through  some bad seasons there in a row and we had been to the Houston Bowl  the year before, but to reach the Cotton Bowl that was a big deal for us.  And a lot of excitement with OSU there.  And again, did you enjoy say wrestling, basketball, football   was there  a sport you enjoyed being Pete at more than another?  Yes.  What was your favorite?  Football.  Football?  I   m a big guy, of course. As you mentioned earlier,    Big Pete.    Football  was the one sport where I could easily move around and not have to  worry about being in anyone   s way. Basketball games were tough on me  because I had to spend most of the time sitting on the floor and then  getting up, sitting down, getting up, sitting down. I was really confined.  Now I did make two half court shots, and that was a good time at  basketball. But football really, hands down, was my favorite sport.  Josh, going back to you talking about becoming Pistol Pete, did you  study up on Frank Eaton   the character of Frank Eaton, Frank    Pistol  Pete    Eaton, who they named the mascot after?  Yeah.  What do you remember about Frank Eaton that you tried to portray in  your Pete?  I think one of the things that stood out to me the most was his toughness.  I had heard stories. You know when you hear stories about someone,  you never know just how much of a tall tale it is. I had someone tell me  one time that Frank used to work barefoot in his blacksmith shop and  they told me that one time they were watching him work in this  blacksmith shop and watched him pick up a coal with his toes and put it  back in the fire. And that   s hard to believe just because of how hot those  14  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  coals get but the person remembered that about him. It seemed to me  that no matter what the story was, Frank Eaton was a very tough man,  and at least portrayed that. So everything I did, I tried to portray a big  tough man, but at the same time, a man that had a big heart. Frank  seemed the person that would always do something to help someone else  out. And the fact that he had so much love for his father to avenge his  father   s death you know that   those little things just seem big to me. So  I tried to portray not only toughness, but a caring side of Pistol Pete. I  think that   s what, if someone does remember me as Pistol Pete. That  they would remember me as being big, but also as being a caring Pete.  Does it make a difference, did it to you that when you think of mascots  from different school versus Pistol Pete, that Pistol Pete was based on a  real person?  Yeah, it does. It gives you a sense of pride that you really are portraying  someone. You know when you have like a cougar or a wildcat, that   s  something that anybody can be. But somebody really was Pistol Pete.  And there   s a heritage to it, and a pride that goes along with being able  to say that I was able to portray Pistol Pete. You know especially here at  Oklahoma State University that means a group of people thought you  were worth representing not only the mascot, but the university. Beyond  that, not only the University in some cases the heritage of our state in  this area.  So you know you feel like Pete better captures the spirit of OSU and say  the state than other mascots?  Mm-hmm. Yeah, I don   t think the tiger represented the heritage very  well. And it   s understandable why the tiger was our mascot. That   s part  of our heritage, so I appreciate that. But Frank really was a good symbol  of the wild west and what really happened around here during those  times in my opinion. So, I believe it was a good choice to make him our  mascot.  Josh did you feel a special sense of responsibility in representing the  University as Pistol Pete?  I did. You   re under a magnifying glass as Pistol Pete most of the time.  And it   s just the simple fact that when you have that head on, it doesn   t  matter what you do, somebody   s going to see it. Even if it   s during a  play, if you fall over or do something, someone   s going to notice it. So I  found myself really analyzing my actions while I had the head on  because when I was Pete, I wasn   t Josh any more. So I tried to do away  with most of the reactions that Josh Pulver might have and really kind of  do it as Pistol Pete would have had. You know if we fumble the ball, I   m  15  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  not going to sit there and whine about it. Which I wouldn   t do anyway as  myself, I don   t want you to think that. But you know Pistol Pete is going  to be very encouraging to the team as the mascot cause that   s your job.  I remember one of the hardest times I had was my last year to do it. We  played Texas here in Stillwater in basketball. We were supposed to win  that game and go on. ESPN-U debuted here in Stillwater that weekend  and had a great time. And it was such a great game, and we lost at the  end of the game. I remember being under the head and just bawling my  eyes out because it was my last game in Gallagher-Iba Arena and such a  huge game for us but we were losing it. But at the same time as I was  crying my hands were clapping. And I   ll never forget that feeling  because it was such an odd feeling to me to be crying on the inside and  not being able to stop crying but then be clapping at the same time. And  trying with emotions, it was really weird. That was one thing I enjoyed  about Pistol Pete was that no matter what expression you had on the  inside you could show something different with your emotions.  Josh, did you enjoy the interaction with OSU fans and maybe  particularly kids. Do you mind telling us a little bit about that?  I did. You know baseball games, I could literally sit down in one spot  and sign autographs for several innings straight. And kids would just  bring anything they could find to get signed. You know whether it was  something which their parents really did not want them to have signed  and they snuck away from them or body parts. I signed little kids fingers  a couple of times and I   m going to tell you right now, that   s pretty hard  to sign a child   s finger. That   s not very easy. But you know that was  some of the interaction we really had.  The fans   I loved to lead cheers. Jared and myself trained the fans to  follow us pretty well when we were leading cheers. So I would go out on  the field especially and rack off the shotgun a couple of shots and lead  an    O-S-U    or something that. I took that as one of my other personal  responsibilities to keep the fans involved with the game and in cheering  to help the team on.  Josh you mentioned earlier a couple special times for you, but could you  think of maybe some other special moments that maybe weren   t  highlight shots that won the game. But just special memories you have of  being Pete?  Yeah, Special Olympics was an awesome time. And I have always had a  very special place in my heart for children or adults with developmental  disabilities. The thing I   ve enjoyed about Special Olympics, it doesn   t  matter to anybody there. And everyone there is unique in their own way,  16  Gill  Pulver  which we all are anyways. But to me that   s just kind of the epitome of  acceptance has been Special Olympics. Because everyone   s an athletic,  everyone   s a star, and everyone accomplishes some type of goal. That   s  something that was just an awesome experience for me.  One other experience I had that I   ll never forget, happened just a few  weeks before I stopped being Pistol Pete. I was called by some nurses in  Guthrie at the hospital in Guthrie to come visit a gentleman who was  dying of cancer. I went down to the hospital and walked into his room.  They had purchased an orange hospital gown for him with a Pistol Pete  on it and walked into the room and it was a total surprise to the family  that Pistol Pete was there. They had no idea that Pistol Pete was coming.  So I walked in the room and the gentleman was lying in his hospital bed  and just started bawling. The joy in his eyes and but also the tears that  Pistol Pete had come to visit him and how much it meant to him that  Pistol Pete had come to visit him overwhelmed me and also part of the  fact was that he could have passed as my grandfather   s identical twin  brother. That really kind of hit me hard but my grandfather had had  some medical problems around that time so to see this gentleman in the  hospital bed that looked exactly like my grandfather and he was crying  because I had come to visit him   that Pistol Pete had come to visit him  just really took my breath away. I sat there for ten minutes just holding  his hand. And he just kept thanking me for coming and everything. It   s  one of those experiences that you just take away from it. You know that  while it touched them, it changed my life more than anything. That   s one  of those very special moments in my life.  You talked about some of those special moments that you had. What did  being Pistol Pete at the time, what did it mean to you?  I had always wanted to be a mascot, but my involvement with marching  band and football in high school never allowed me to accomplish that  goal. And so being a mascot was something I always wanted to do. I  loved being an idiot. And you know, I don   t mean that in a bad way. My  mom has always called me her little idiot, which is a compliment  because I am not afraid to make a fool of myself. I think quite honestly  that that   s one of my finer qualities is that I can take myself and  embarrass myself sometimes, but not in a bad way. I don   t want to come  across that way. I might embarrass myself to bring some joy to someone  else   s life. That   s one thing I   ve always enjoyed doing. And being Pistol  Pete allowed me to do that.  So many people found joy in having Pistol Pete around. And it   s just the  fact that he   s a fun guy, a big guy with a big head like I mentioned  earlier. But what he represents and everything   it was just really an  awesome experience to be able to hide my own identity and still be able  17  Gill  Pulver  to have fun with people. I mean it was just one of those things that   I  mean seriously to be able to be someone else for a minute and have fun  with it is an awesome experience. But then also be able to be yourself at  the same time and allow your personality to come through that character  really was a great experience for me.  Josh, you talked about kind of making a fool of yourself, can you think  of   picking up on that can you think of your most embarrassing moment  or moments that you had as a Pete?  Yeah I can tell you a couple. Probably my most embarrassing moment  was   I used to run with a flag behind the cheerleaders after touchdowns.  Bullet would run out and then the cheerleaders would follow Bullet and  then I would follow the cheerleaders you know with my flag. And that  was just kind of a staple of what I did. When I was Pistol Pete and we  scored a touchdown I would run out with my flag and wave it on the  field and then run off the field.  My last ever football game at Boone-Pickens Stadium for me, we were  playing Baylor. And usually, I would do the pre-game and the Jared  would do the first half and I would do the second half. Well Jared wasn   t  ready to come on the field yet. He hadn   t changed. So, I was still Pistol  Pete when we scored our first touchdown, which was very quickly in the  game as we were playing Baylor. (Laughs) So I grabbed my flag and I  was running up behind the cheerleaders and I got to the end zone. And  darned it if that carpet didn   t reach up and grab my foot. (Laughs) I  tripped and I just slid in the end zone. And it was pretty funny because  even after the game you could see the marks on the turf from the little  black rubber pellets where I had slid where my legs had slid on the turf.  I caught myself out with my hands with the flag and the head never  came off. And that   s the one thing I remember myself thinking the entire  time was,    Please God do not let this head come off.    But the head  bounced on the ground and everything and I don   t know how I kept that  head on. But I did and I immediately got up and kept running and  walked over to the sidelines and put my flag down on the ground and  walked right off into the tunnel and took the head off. I was done for a  little bit because it hurt. The face had hit me in the head and it was an  experience.  The funny thing was that my mom was videotaping it at the time and so  we have the memory of that happening. And it   s funny because you can  see the video camera following me out and all of a sudden, right after I  fall, the video camera cuts off. That   s where my mom put the video  camera down to see if I was okay. But then all of a sudden the camera  comes back on and I   m back running around. So, it was a fun  experience.  18  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  I dropped my gun one time and that   s also very embarrassing because  you   re supposed to be a gun expert, twirling, and everything. To drop  your gun is not a very good thing.  Did you have trouble finding it?  Actually finding the gun wasn   t hard. Finding the bullet I dropped one  time on the field that was hard because it was a black bullet. I knew I  was right in that area so I was searching around everywhere and  everywhere and finally I found it. But that was pretty amazing.  Basketball, probably my most embarrassing time was I hit the  cameraman three times attempting half court shots. The guy with the  video camera for the Jumbotron, I hit him three times. It made it a little  bit better that I had gone to high school with the gentleman so I wasn   t  hitting a total stranger. But still I went over and gave him a big hug  afterwards to apologize for hitting him three times with a basketball.  Earlier you talked about what it meant to you to be a Pete. Looking back  now years past, what does it mean to you now having been a Pete?  It   s an extreme sense of accomplishment for me. Throughout my life, I  had strived and tried out for several things and I had usually fallen short.  And for me personally it was just the fact that there was something I  wanted. I greatly wanted it and couldn   t think of anything else I wanted  at the time and accomplished it and became Pistol Pete. That for me was  a very   provided a lot of personal growth. And it was just throughout  that experience   you know the personal growth that I experienced  through being Pistol Pete. Not only being able to accomplish a goal, but  then being able to carry it out, and learn time management skills, and  communication skills because you deal with a lot of people.  That was probably   those two years were probably the most personal  growth I   ve seen. Aside from after graduation. The last three years being  a graduate, I   ve seen a lot of growth. But as far as my educational career  those two years were probably the most personal growth that I   ve ever  witnessed. Aside from that, dealing with alumni now while working  with the Alumni Association you see that sparkle in their eye when they  see or talk about Pistol Pete. Just knowing that you were able to part of  that really kind of gives you a nice little     Do you find yourself being as part of an introduction to an individual or  an audience as say a former Pete? Does that happen to you? Does that  come up much?  Not that often. And that goes back to when I was Pete. I think part of it  19  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  was some of my personal experiences not having   there were times  when I didn   t have an identity. I was Pistol Pete. I   m not going to say I  got tired of that, because there   s nothing wrong with being known as  Pistol Pete. But I also wanted my own identity at the time and I wanted  to be Josh Pulver instead of just    Hey, this is Pistol Pete.    And my  grandparents forgot that at times, that I had a name besides    This is my  grandson, Pistol Pete.    But you know, right now it really   it might be  something that comes up in conversation later but that   s not any part of  my initial introduction.  Is there still a special bond Josh that exists between former Pistol Petes?  I think there is.  Do you still get together? Do you reminisce?  I think anytime that you have a very   that you   re part of a group of  people and you share an experience that not very many other people do,  that   s going to automatically give you a bond. I can talk to a former Pete  that was 20, 30 years ago or even longer than that. And you  automatically have something in common. You can share your  experiences but even if you don   t get into what happened while you  were Pistol Pete, you still have that common bond and you can find  other things to talk about at the same time and you know what else was  going on in your life at the time. We   re able to come together and share  some of our funny stories and some of our do   s and don   t   s.    Oh you  don   t want to do this,    and    You want to try to do this little bit too.    So  it provides a good group.  Speaking of being remembered as Pete, your legacy Josh, how do you  want to be remembered as a Pete?  As a Pete?  Mm-hmm. How do you want to be remembered for your years as Pistol  Pete?  That   s a tough question. I don   t know if I   ve ever thought about it  before. I think, kind of going back on what I said earlier, being  remembered as someone that allowed my personality to come through  but realized that it was not myself. You know, I want to be remembered  as somebody that was fun and that goes into kind of my life. My life  hopes and dreams too. As Pistol Pete especially, I want to be  remembered as someone who represented the University well, was never  inappropriate, but also someone who was able to help inspire others at  sporting events and bring joy to people.  20  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Great answer and I liked your earlier comment about portraying Pete as  a tough guy, but a guy with a big heart.  Yeah and I did not want to totally repeat myself, but it   s true. You know,  Pistol Pete to me has always been larger than life. And being a fairly  large man, that was something I was able to help portray, I think. But  also, I love to give people hugs all the time. I would hug anybody. I  would almost hug someone before I shake their hand as Pete. But that  wasn   t being a hugger, but showing love. I think that   s one of the things  the world needs more of right now. Especially today, you need to share  love with people. And I   m not weird with love, but just reach out to  people and care.  You   ve alluded to some of this, but how did being Pistol Pete change  your life?  You know it gave me confidence. It gave me a new confidence that I  didn   t have before. And while as Pistol Pete you walk with a swagger, it  allowed me to personally not walk with a swagger or be cocky, but be  more confident in my personal   in my everyday life. And to approach  situations or people with more confidence I think is really one of the  areas that really affected me. Not only that, but you know I became more  self-reliant. As Pistol Pete you have to go to a lot of places, and you  have to figure out how to get there. You know that   s just kind of a small  thing but you know going to Dallas or other cities like that and really  learning how to get around really kind of will change your outlook on  things. Because you   re not afraid to get out there and try new things. I  think that was really something for me that really helped out.  Are there some lessons and some disciplines that you learned?  Personal restraint is a huge lesson that a lot of people need to learn more  of but that   s also something that comes into it. You know especially as a  mascot when you   re out there. And Pistol Pete is different from other  mascots. Other mascots have a full body suit for   you really don   t know  who   s in that character a lot of times. But Pistol Pete, if you know the  two Pistol Petes at the time you   re going to be able to pretty much tell  who it is. Especially with the   they do the calendars and everything.  And it really kind of holds you accountable to your actions when you   re  out there. So, like I said, personal restraint is something that you really  have to   if you don   t have it before, you have to learn it quickly  because you can embarrass yourself and the University very easily.  You talked about discipline and managing your time and your grades  and your activities.  21  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  Gill  Yeah, you know when it comes down to scheduling appearances because  that   s something we do. The Athletic Department will just send us the  requests and we manage the appearances based on our class schedule  and our other appearances. So deciding what you can do in your allotted  time, the 24 hours of the day. Making sure you manage that time  appropriately and knowing that you need time to study. But also that  class does come first and learning things like that really did help me out  a lot   really able to manage time.  Josh, what would you tell a young man today that was considering being  Pistol Pete?  Do it. Make sure you   re in it for the right reasons. I think   and I don   t  think we   ve ever   I don   t know anyone who has not done it for the right  reason, but some people go into it not realizing how much dedication it  takes to be Pistol Pete. You have to be dedicated 100 percent to being  Pistol Pete, or it may not work out for you. It   s very tough. It   s not going  to be easy, but it   s definitely something that   s worth the struggle to  become Pistol Pete and then portray him throughout the year.  Josh would you do it again, looking back? Knowing what you know  now?  Would I do it now again? Or would I do it back then again?  No looking back if you had the chance to do it again, would you still do  it?  Oh yeah, definitely. At the end of each year you have to try out again. If  you want to continue, than you have to try out. So at the end of our first  year Jared and I both tried out for our second year. And that was one of  the questions they asked me,    Do you think that you will enjoy being  Pistol Pete as much a year from now, as you do right now?    And my  answer was simple. At that time, after finishing my first year, I wanted  to be Pistol Pete another year more than I had wanted to be Pistol Pete  before I ever got it. There   s nothing I regret about it. The two years was  a perfect time. At the end of those two years my body was starting to  wear down a little bit physically, my knees. Because you   re carrying  about 70 pounds of extra weight on you all the time and so it became at  the time   there was never an appearance that I dreaded. Never a time  that I dreaded being Pistol Pete. It was always a joy. You never want to  get to the point where you   re dreading being Pistol Pete. Because when  you don   t find the joy in it anymore, people will pick up on that and you  won   t be as effective.  Josh is there any kind of closing thoughts you   ve had or comments that I  22  Pulver  Gill  Pulver  didn   t ask or talk about?  You know I think just kind of in closing we really do have something  special here at Oklahoma State University with Pistol Pete. Even though  New Mexico State and Wyoming have both used their versions of Pistol  Pete, but the fact that Frank Eaton lived here   around this area, really  does provide the history and the heritage that we have here. And Frank  Eaton was our mascot. It really does provide some pride in that. And  that   s something that isn   t to be taken lightly. I don   t think that anyone  who has ever put on the head of Pistol Pete does take lightly. It   s  something that we all cherish and we all know just how powerful it is.  I appreciate it Josh.  Thank you Jerry.  -------  -------   
