 Gill. Today is October 17, 2008. I   m interviewing  Shane LaDuke in the Alumni Center on the Oklahoma State University  campus. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Shane, first of all welcome  back.  Thank you.  This is a pretty special time for the former Pistol Pete mascots, isn   t it?  You bet.  Can you tell a little bit about your reunion, what you guys are doing?  We   re invited back every year to participate in the parade. Since I live in  Arkansas and have lived over there for a while, I haven   t been able to  come back for a number of years. So I   m really excited about seeing a  lot of my old friends and seeing   actually the changes to the University  is one of the most exciting things that I   m interested in seeing.  Is there something special this year about the Petes though?  Well yeah, the fiftieth anniversary and it just seems like yesterday I was  here, yet I was years 22 and 23 and here we are at year fifty.  That   s great. What was your impression, do you remember, when you  first saw Pete?  Yeah, you   re overwhelmed with that big head and the big hat and his  guns and his demeanor and how he walks around and he   s kind of in  control of the crowd. And you know, as a little kid, you   re in awe.  5  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  That   s great. Well what, maybe backing up a little bit, tell us a little bit  about where you grew up and your family.  Well, I grew up mostly in west Texas, but there was a short period of  time when we lived over in Tulsa. I had two sisters that attended  Oklahoma State, so that was my Oklahoma State connection. But I did  graduate from Amarillo High School in Texas and Amarillo   s only five  hours from Stillwater, so I chose to come over here. I first started out  trying to play football at Oklahoma State and I was a walk-on and  separated my shoulder. So my story was I was going to go back out the  next fall   I separated my shoulder in the spring time. One of my friends  that I grew up with was a cheerleader and she talked me into trying out  for Pistol Pete. So I didn   t even know what that entailed and she said,     Oh all you have to do is sit in an interview.    So I went in there just  thinking,    I   ll give this a shot.    And I got picked. As a freshman.  As a freshman?  Yeah.  So spring of your freshman year.  Spring of my freshman year. So that put an end to my football career,  which was probably god   s blessing. (Laughter)  At least you only had one bad shoulder, huh?  That   s right. That   s right. And did it for two years. Did it my sophomore  and junior year, and just had a ball.  A part of your Pete experience I want to come back to obviously, but  what are some other things you were involved in, Shane, at Oklahoma  State in terms of programs, activities, leadership things?  (Laughs) I don   t know how much, you know since I did become Pete as  a freshman, in fact that was kind of the   I wasn   t a member of a  fraternity or anything like that. Pistol Pete was basically the only thing I  was a member of. I wasn   t a member of any other organizations other  than the Spirit Squad. I was just a regular, no-fraternity connection  person. That   s about it.  What was your major?  I was a business major, business administration and management.  Let me come back to your Pete deal, tell me a little bit about what the  6  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  try-out was like. Do you remember what you had to do? Did you have to  portray Pete? Was there an interview?  I sat down at a big table. I think there were probably about 12 to 15  people there. There was only one ex-Pete, Kurt Carter was there. And  some Spirit people that were involved in the University back then and  maybe a couple of cheerleaders. I went to the interview in a coat and tie  and answered some questions about what my background was and why I  was trying out for Pistol Pete and I told them the football story. Then  they had me put in Pete and they gave me some kind of a situation that  may have happened at the game and I tried to act it out the best I could.  You know you leave those interviews and you don   t know how you did.  And they said they   d call Sunday night between 4 and 6, so I was  waiting in my dorm room and they called. Back then, they had a Pete  and an alternate Pete and I was the alternate Pete for my sophomore  year.  Who was the main Pete?  Don Giles was the main Pete.  And then the next year?  And then I was the main Pete the next year and Rob Reynolds was the  alternate Pete.  Great. Do you remember when you first, a little bit about your outfit and  so on. The head piece of course is the part that stands out. But can you  tell us a little bit about that? What it was like? And then a little about the  rest of your outfit?  Yeah, a lot of people think that that thing is a real heavy, hard to carry  around thing. But it set on your shoulders so easily that it really wasn   t  hard to carry around and on a hot football day it acted as an umbrella, as  a shade so you didn   t get hot inside of it. It was kind of a shade for you  actually, or for me it was. The vision part of it was the hardest because  you could only see out the eyes and the ears. And then they have a little  hole below the chin that you could, if you were walking up steps or  something, or if there were little kids around you, you could tell if you  were getting ready to step on them or something.  (Laughs) Important.  I don   t know how much it   s changed from then till today, but that   d be  interesting to see it today and see what it   s like.  7  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  What is your first memory of Pete and your first round in the athletic  field?  When I got elected to do it the spring semester of my freshman year, for  the next year, there was actually a baseball game. And Don Giles was  actually the alternate from the year before and so he just said,    Hey, you  want to go be Pete at a baseball game?    So he just gave me the uniform  and I was cold turkey on my own. (Laughter) And so I remember  walking over, I lived real close to the stadium and I just remember  walking over there as Pete. And back then Pete didn   t go to very many  baseball games, but I think we were playing OU or some Big Eight  team. I just remember walking around and of course I was very shy and  didn   t know exactly what to do, but when you walked in, everybody  was,    There   s Pistol Pete     So you just kind of took on the role. So that  was a good experience for me to do instead of walking into a Big Eight  football game in the Fall semester.  Do you remember when you were trying out, did you learn on your own  some of the Pistol Pete kind of characteristics, the swagger, the different  things? Did you get some help or did you just sort of pick up on those  yourself?  I kind of picked up on that myself. One thing that Don Giles and I did is  we took Pete over to the wrestling room and in the wrestling room they  have mirrors all around. So one of the cool things about doing that is you  could see what other people saw you doing and how you walked and  anything, any mannerisms you did. You know, if you wanted to act if  you were sad or mad or whatever, you could kind of practice in front of  the big mirror. That was a good way to practice.  When you got selected, did you have this conversation about behavior, I  mean things in public that were expected of you and not and any     No. When I did it, we were totally on our own. We didn   t have any  rules, we didn   t have any guidelines. In fact back then, we would take  the head off during football games a lot and just set it beside us. I   ve  noticed over the past twenty years that they don   t do that anymore. They  don   t ever take the head off in public, which I think is a great thing. But  I just did it because that   s what the Pete before me did when they wanted  a break. They   d just take the head off and set it down.  Had athletics taken over yet?  No.  So you were still under the Student Activities     8  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  I think we were under the band or something. Like I said, we were  completely on our own. We didn   t have any direction. In fact if  somebody wanted us to do a parade or something, they usually came  through the Alumni Association. I think Kurt Carter was there so he  would set me up with the parades or something like that to do. It  would   ve been neat to have been under the Athletic Department. That  was a great move for them to do that, but we were on our own, basically.  I was talking to Matt Ketchum, I think Matt was talking about the  change as a good move.  That   s what I   ve heard.  You made a lot of appearances that were non-athletic appearances,  right?  Right.  Can you tell us about some of those?  I did a lot of parades. I did two different wedding receptions. People that  were just OSU alums and it was a surprise to both the bride and groom  both the times I did it, because their parents asked me to just show up as  if I was a good friend. And they knew I was at the wedding but they  didn   t know I brought Pete. And so during the reception I just walked in  and danced with the bride. You know, just for pictures mostly. So that  was fun. And parades were always fun. The most fun I had probably was  during basketball season because the year I was Pete, Bill Self was a  player and Leroy Combs and we had Matt Clark   really good basketball  team. So that was a lot of fun and I got to know the players really well.  And that face-to-face you know, back then in Gallagher-Iba you were  right there on top of the players and the fans. So I really had a good time  doing that.  Did your experience match your expectations as a Pete?  Pretty much. I mean there were always a few different surprises, but  they were always good surprises. I always loved to get little kids  involved in anything I did. I remember one football game, it was at  halftime and for some reason I got these two little boys down on the  field with me. We ran a football play and it probably covered 50 yards to  where we all three ended up in the end zone as a touchdown. And I  remember looking up in the stands and everybody was doing the wave.  You look back on it and it   s hard to remember exactly everything you  did, because it   s kind of like a dream. You think,    Wow was that really  9  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  me?    Like tomorrow I   ll look down there at Pete and think, that   s not  what I looked like, or something like that.  Did you enjoy doing basketball games more than the other sporting  events?  I   d say so, because we did have a really good basketball team. Time outs  were always fun to go out and time your gun to where it went off at the  right time. I remember the year they did let me go buy a twelve-gauge  shot gun to shoot blanks which made it even more loud. I think they still  might have that gun too. I think I   ve seen that. That was a lot of fun  because that gun was really loud in that gym. And you always shot it  when people weren   t expecting it and got their attention. So it was a lot  of fun.  Did you find it difficult ever, balancing your two lives? I mean your  student life, your real life and then your Pistol Pete life.  A little bit. My grades probably could have been quite a bit better my  sophomore and junior year. I struggled a little bit because I probably  gave Pete a little bit too much attention. In fact, friends of mine wanted  me to try out and do it my senior year and I said, I   ve got to get out of  here one of these days. So that   s why I opted not to do it my senior year,  I concentrated more on my studies and gave somebody else the  opportunity to have fun.  Just how many events, both athletic and non-athletic events total, did  you make in your time?  How many events? I would say probably about fifty throughout the year.  And they probably do more, twice as much as that now. We didn   t even  go to all of the basketball games when I was Pete. We didn   t go to all the  football games when I was Pete. We only traveled when the band  traveled to away games which was usually one of the Kansas games and  then OU, of course. But we never went to Nebraska. That was just too  far of a trip back then. And we didn   t have the funds to do it. We did get  to go to one of the big trips when we went to play San Diego State one  year out in San Diego right around Thanksgiving, so that was one of the  big trips we went too. Then we played in the Independence Bowl when I  was   I can   t remember if I was in my sophomore or my junior year. But  that was down in Shreveport and we drove to that. I always traveled with  the cheerleaders and the pom pom girls, so I   m sure they   re all under the  Athletic Department today.  They are. Well, let me ask you about the historic Frank    Pistol Pete     Eaton. Was it special for you that OSU   s mascot was after a real  10  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  person? Was it different than being an animal or mascot of some kind?  Yeah, it is. I would say yes because you heard a lot of stories about  when he used to come on campus and I don   t know if the stories are true  or not, but they said when he came on campus he still carried a side arm  and it was loaded. Somebody said he shot his gun one time into a ceiling  in one of the buildings. Is that true?  So yeah, that   s a true story. And he tracked down the guys that killed his  father. I mean he   s a legacy. I think it was a great pick and I don   t know  of any other university that has a legacy like that actually.  Do you think Pistol Pete embodies the spirit of OSU and the state of  Oklahoma generally?  I do. I think the western cowboy is one of the old school great American  idols that people look back and there   s not too many of those out there.  Being a cowboy is   I mean, no matter what part of the country you   re  from, I think everybody looks at the old western cowboys as part of  America   s heritage and part of the Midwest heritage for sure. So it   s an  ideal mascot.  Did you ever do any mascot competition when you were Pete?  No, they had that two years afterwards and I think Rick Wilson was the  first All-American mascot the very first year they started giving out All-  American awards. I was proud that he was two years after me and he  was a great Pete. I just tell people that I taught him everything he knew  to do.  Are there some especially memorable moments that you experienced as  Pete that you can share with us that really stand out in your mind?  Well, maybe the most embarrassing or the most   it   s even in the college  yearbook   is we were playing Kansas in basketball at Gallagher Hall,  and I can   t remember what the score was but it was a pretty close game.  At halftime, I was walking out in the middle of the court and our team  was already out shooting layups and I guess the Kansas team came out  and their cheerleaders had come with them. So their cheerleaders came  out on the court and did a tumble, and one of the guy cheerleaders from  Kansas tumbled into me and knocked me over and it actually knocked  me out for just a moment. When I woke up Coach  Paul  Hansen and  Leroy Combs were over me. They go,    Shane, are you all right?    And I  go,    What happened?    And of course the cheerleader was above me and  he thought he   d just broke my neck. I said,    I   m okay, is the head  okay?    and they said,    Yeah, it   s okay.       Cause I thought it might have  11  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  cracked or something. So they gave me the head and I stood up and  acted like I shook off the hit and then I shot at the cheerleader and  walked off the court. It was a little bit embarrassing because I didn   t  know exactly what had happened because I never saw him coming but it  all worked out in a fun ending I should say. And we won the game.  Any special or heart-warming memories that you have of some kids you  worked with or maybe it was an athletic event, some of your other  activities?  I remember one basketball game there was this little girl and she must  have been about three or four years old. You could tell that she was just  fascinated with Pistol Pete. Somehow I got her to walk out on the court  with me at halftime and the band started playing a slow song and I got  down on my knees and we started slow dancing at mid court. You could  just tell that she didn   t want it to end. She was just loving it. And to this  day, I remember I said,    Golly, that little girl, I hope she remembers this  the rest of her life,    because I haven   t forgotten it. It was just the  perfect   I had a lot of little kid experiences, but that was the most  heartwarming to me. That was really cool.  Did you enjoy working with the kids? Because Pete   s kind of a kid  magnet isn   t he? Wherever you go?  Oh, absolutely. To walk around and when people would see you no  matter how busy or how in a hurry you were, if you had to leave it was  kind of disappointing to know that you had to not shake somebody   s  hand or give somebody an autograph or something. Even though it  wasn   t me, Shane LaDuke, it was Pistol Pete. But they wanted to see  Pete and touch Pete and maybe see if Pete would talk to them or  something. So yeah that was my life   or fifteen minutes of fame. I got  to have that every Saturday afternoon at a football game or something.  When you   re walking to the game or when you   re walking away from a  game.  I was talking to one Pete and he explained that he had the experience  that you all have this alter ego, you were this other person when you  were Pistol Pete. Did you feel that sense?  That   s exactly it. When you put on the head, you became the character.  I   m a pretty outgoing person anyway, but I still feel like when I put on  Pete I wasn   t Shane anymore. I try to become the mascot and do the  things that the mascot was supposed to do.  The swagger?  12  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  The swagger and the cockiness and whatever, without doing anything  that would not be respectful to the other team.  Speaking of your conversation, did you feel a special sense of  responsibility as you were the school mascot, you represent OSU?  I did. One other special thing I got to do was when Governor George  Nigh, when he was the Governor he had a party one summer at the  Governor   s Mansion. And somehow Pistol Pete got invited. It was the  summertime so I don   t even know how they got a hold of me. But I got  to go to the Governor   s Mansion and the Sooner Schooner was there,  Pistol Pete was there, and Michael Martin Murphy the country singer  entertained everybody. It was cool because I was representing our  college. I got to sit down and talk with Michael Martin Murphy for  probably an hour before he sang, and that was one of the special things I  got to do as Pistol Pete. Probably the most special was being a guest of  the Governor of Oklahoma.  Right. Fantastic. You mentioned your embarrassing moments, but any  other either special or embarrassing memories that you have that you  can share with us?  The other thing I can remember is we went to a basketball game at the  Lloyd Noble Center and it was at halftime and their little Top Dog or  something came out with the basketball. He was shooting layups all  around me because he was very mobile and able to do that kind of stuff.  I remember he tossed me the ball and the first time I couldn   t even find  it and then I finally found it and I was like at the top of the circle. I threw  a ball up, you have to shoot underhanded and it was like nothing but net  from the top of the circle. And I just kind of walked off like, there you  go. It was at Norman so it was perfect. That was back when  Wayman   Tisdale was playing for OU and they had a really great team. That   s  another great memory that I have. Everything was in sync that night.  Did you ever get heckled by the opposing fans or have anything thrown  at you or anything like that?  Yeah. One time at Gallagher Hall, the OU-OSU wrestling match was  going on. Back then, like I said, when a match was going on we usually  took the head off and put it right beside us. I put on the head after one of  the matches and it was full of Wild Turkey whiskey. Somebody had  thrown a wild turkey cup of whiskey in there. I was sure it was an OU  fan. I pulled it down and I went,    Oh no     And all this, you know, I  smelt like it too so I think I just left at that point because I didn   t want  anybody to think I   d been drinking. But that was probably   just a dirty  thing that happened. But not too bad. Usually down in Norman, it  13  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  seemed like when I was Pete I always had friends that played for OU  and so I   d hang out and see them after the game. But the OU people  were really respectful to Pete for the most part. They didn   t heckle too  bad that I can remember, for me anyway.  Looking back today, what did it mean being Pistol Pete to you?  I think today it might be even more special than it was then. Just because  especially this year   the fiftieth anniversary and this great reunion you  guys are putting on for us. Just to know that my name is going to be  inscribed at the University here forever, that means a lot to me. Just  because one day, hopefully my kids and my grandkids for generations to  come or anybody who ever knew me or knew my family can walk  through Gallagher-Iba and there   s a place over there that has all of our  names listed of who was Pete when. That   s pretty special. Like I said, it  meant a lot to me when I was in school, but now as our university has  grown and it   s become the university that it is today, it   s a really neat  deal.  You were talking about the reunion earlier; do you maintain contact  with some of the Petes that you knew? Is that a special bond that you  guys share?  You know I think that this reunion will help us stay in touch. I see a lot  of them every now or then in Tulsa, when I   m in Tulsa I run into a few. I  even have a work relationship with an old Pete that I didn   t even know  was Pete until I met him through work. Scott Noble was his name. So  you just never know who you know. Walking up here today, I   ve seen  two or three Petes that I recognize from back in the    80s and we   re into  the late part of the 2000   s so there   s been a lot of Pete   s that I   ve never  even met or know what they look like. I might recognize their name only  just by looking at the website.  When you think about having been Pete, do you think about a legacy?  Do you still get introduced occasionally as a former Pistol Pete? Has it  kind of branded you for life?  It seems like all the time. In fact, my wife she didn   t go to school here,  and she still, every now and then, if we meet someone that went to  Oklahoma State, she   ll go,    Hey, did you know my husband was Pistol  Pete?    She went to that other school in Oklahoma, so for her to even  bring that out means a lot to me. I think she   s proud that she is married  to a Pistol Pete.  Are there some lessons that you learned from your time as Pistol Pete  that you   ve carried with you?  14  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  I think part of being a humble person   I was Shane LaDuke, but I got to  be Pistol Pete. That was something you could brag about when you   re in  college and you had a lot of pride in doing it. At the same time, to  protect that legacy and being humble and just to know that that was an  honor that was bestowed upon me and nothing that I did really   I mean,  Shane LaDuke was honored to be the Pistol Pete. I think there   s a little  more humbling in there that I   ve taken with me in the past fifteen years  than probably when I was Pistol Pete. When people introduce me like  that today, I almost get a little bit embarrassed, you know it was so long  ago and it was a great honor to do that but     What do you hope your legacy will be as Pistol Pete? Or being  remembered as Shane LaDuke    Pistol Pete   ? What do you hope they  remember you most for?  I hope they remember me as being the Pete that interacted with the kids  and always was opened to what the kids   if a kid wanted to see Pete or  play with Pete, I hope they remember that I always tried to do my best to  stick around and sign any autograph or give out any   if I had any tokens  or anything to give out to kids. I always did that.    Cause to disappoint a  little kid   if my little girl was here tomorrow and she saw Pistol Pete  and he walked away from her, I wouldn   t want her heart to be broken  that she didn   t get to touch Pistol Pete or see him up close or something.  So that   s what I hope that people remember. That I did always try to be a  spirit leader and represent the college in the best way I knew how to do  that.  What would you tell an OSU student that wanted to try out for Pistol  Pete? What would you tell them?  Well, first I would just say you   ve got to get in there. If you   re going to  try out, you   ve got to become the character. I would say what I did,  practice in front of the mirror. You don   t have the head, but just imagine  putting the head on and doing what Pete would do, and become the  character. You   re not Jerry when you put that head on, you   re Pete. So  walk around and be Pete and don   t be Jerry. From what I   ve seen over  the years, all of our Petes have done that. I   ve never seen a Pete that I  was disappointed in.  Great. If you had to do it all over again   if you had an opportunity to be  Pete, would you do it?  You bet. I would do it. I don   t regret trying to be a football player, but I  think the cards were just stacked in my direction when it happened, it  happened. I have some great memories and some great contacts and  great friendships out of the whole deal. I have no regrets. I had a lot of  15  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  fun.  You graduated from high school from     Amarillo, Amarillo High School.  Anything you want to share with us that we haven   t had a chance to talk  about that   s special to you or you   ve been thinking about that we  haven   t covered?  The only other thing is, I went to the same high school as T. Boone  Pickens, and went to the same college, but I just don   t have the same  money.  You   re still working     I   m still working on my first million.  First billion as he sees it.  Yeah.  Well Shane, thanks for coming. You guys are having a special weekend  reunion here together. You   ll be leaving here in a few minutes to go over  to Gallagher-Iba. So is it fun to be part of all these festivities that are  going on?  Yeah, I   m really excited about what   s going to happen. I   ve got a sister  and a brother-in-law that are coming up from Texas who were also  alums here. And they haven   t been to a game for a while, so we   re all  going to the game tomorrow and bringing my little girl over. She   s never  been to an OSU game. We   re all real excited about what   s going to  happen tomorrow. And hopefully we   ll get by Baylor and be 7 and 0.  Is it pretty exciting for you?  It   s very exciting. I mean that game last weekend was   I had people  who are Hog fans in Arkansas who were calling me making sure I was  watching the game. So it was really exciting. Really exciting.  In closing, I   m just going to ask you two sets of questions that work  together. One, I want you to tell us a little bit about your life briefly  since you left Oklahoma State University. And then did your experiences  as a Pete help influence your life and provide discipline that you   re  provided in your career? Answer the last question first and then go back  and bring us up to speed on your life.  16  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  LaDuke  Gill  I got a business degree and but I   m actually in sales and marketing  customer service. From my customer service background and marketing,  and being able to deal with customers, I think I got a lot of that from  Pete. You know, when you   re Pete you   re dealing with the fans which  you might call customers, and you are wanting to make them happy,  keep them smiling, do the right thing. In my job today, that   s what my  duties are, is to keep my customers happy and to make some sacrifices  that you may not want to make but that   s what I do. I think that I   m good  at what I do and part of that comes from what I learned here at  Oklahoma State and part of that might have come from being Pistol  Pete. Then what was the other part of the question? What do I do today?  Can you catch us up on your life a bit since you left Oklahoma State  University?  Well, I lived in Tulsa for a large part of that time. My wife and I,  Shannon, live in Hot Springs, Arkansas now, which is   we love the  town, the state is definitely a one college state. They   re all Hog fans over  in Arkansas. We get along with them great. They don   t have any  problem with Oklahoma State. They have more problems with Texas,  that   s their old rivalry. We love living over there. Hot Springs is a resort  town so there   s lakes and horse racing in the winter time and we enjoy  living over there and enjoy the lakes and the Ouachita Mountains. It   s a  good place to live.  What company are you working with?  I work for Triumph, which is an aviation company. They have 42  different companies throughout the United States and some even over in  Thailand and Ireland. But what we do is we   re an aircraft repair station.  So we deal with all the major airlines: Southwest, Delta Continental, and  FedEx and UPS and anything that flies the big birds. We   re a repair  station so they don   t fly the planes into us. They truck the parts into us,  we fix them and truck them back to them. But Hot Springs is a good  place for customers. They like to go visit Hot Springs, so it   s a good  place to have a business like that.  Shane, thanks.  You bet. I hope I did it all right.  We appreciate you stopping by with us. And again, congratulations on  your fifty year   now I know it   s not your fifty year, but Pete   s fifty year  reunion. It   s great to have you back on campus.  17  LaDuke Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
