 Sherman. Today is September 7th, 2010 and I am in  the home of Louis Meissner in Stillwater, Oklahoma. We are  interviewing Mr. Meissner about his experiences teaching and working  in Ethiopia. This interview is being conducted as part of the O-STATE  Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Thank  you, sir, for allowing us to interview you today. To start off with, can  you briefly describe your life story prior to your experience in Ethiopia,  like where you grew up, what type of family were you in, brothers and  sisters and what not?  Okay, I grew up on a farm in Pawnee County, Oklahoma. We grew  cotton and corn and wheat and oats and we had some cows. I did some  farming the whole time I was in high school and then custom hay baling.  How much acreage did you have?  We rented land and we rented as much as three hundred and twenty  acres at some times.  So you were sharecroppers?  Sharecroppers, yes.  Whose land did you rent?  Well, my high school years, we were on the Culver Place, which was  called Culver Place. We had rented some other land. It didn   t make any  difference who owned it.  Now, where in Pawnee County were you?  Eleven miles south of Pawnee on Highway 18.  5  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Close to Payne County?  Two miles from Payne County.  So, not that far from Stillwater. What high school did you go to?  Pawnee High School.  Pawnee High School? And how big was it at that time?  About three hundred to three hundred and forty students.  Fairly large for a rural Oklahoma school.  It was the county seat. Pawnee was the county seat.  Did you have much interaction with Native Americans?  I worked with them and went to school with them.  You went to school with them?  I worked with them and went to school with them.  And what were those experiences like?  Very good.  Now, what year did you graduate high school?  1949.  1949. So this was after the war? This was after World War II?  Yes.  Could you possibly describe that time period, how things were and did  you have vehicles? What kind of vehicles     Everything for me got better and better after I was born. I was born in  1931 and we had that Depression and everything improved year after  year from that.  What things improved?  6  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Everything, everything improved.  (Laughter) Now, did you have tractors growing up or did you still have  horses drawing, or   ?  We had both horses and a little Ford Ferguson tractor.  Ford Ferguson? Was that the first tractor that you drove?  Yes, that was the first one I drove.  And what year was that Ford Ferguson?  1939.  So a fairly new tractor then.  It was fairly new.  Did you have cars or trucks to drive?  We had an automobile all the time. All the time that I was growing up,  we had an automobile, and a pick-up that I used when I was baling hay.  So what kind of truck was that pick-up?  It was an old International.  Old International?  Half-ton.  They don   t make Internationals anymore, truck wise. So you worked on  the farm, did you have any time to partake in high school athletics or  anything like that?  I didn   t. I had so many home chores to do that I didn   t participate in  athletics. I had FFA  Future Farmers of America  projects, cotton  production, wheat production, beef production, pork production.  You were a busy guy.  I had plenty to do on the farm.  How would you describe a typical day for you going to high school?  What time would you get up and that type of thing?  7  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  I   d leave for the school bus at seven o   clock because I had four miles to  go to the school bus.  Really? And did you have to do any chores before?  Oh, yes. We had chores to do.  What were your chores?  We had to milk the cows. I had to take care of my hog project, my beef  project.  Now, did you show at the fair with your FFA projects?  We had the livestock show, yes. We had what they call the junior  livestock show. I got grand champion steer one year. My main interest  was vocational agriculture because I wanted to qualify to teach  vocational agriculture.  Did you sell that steer at the auction?  Yes.  And how much did that steer get?  Thirty-two cents a pound.  Thirty-two cents?  Thirty-two cents a pound. (Laughs)  Now was that good money?  That was more money than I ever had before. (Laughter)  What year was that, the grand champion steer?  1948 or    47.    47 or    48.  So you were a junior? Going into your junior year in high school?  Must have been a junior.  What did you do with that money?  8  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  I bought a 1947 Ford tractor and a stationary hay baler and baled hay.  There you go. So the money went back to the farm.  Yes.  What was your reaction when you found out that you won?  I guess I expected to win.  You expected to win? (Laughter) That   s a good thing. Where was the  livestock show?  Pawnee, Oklahoma.  Pawnee, so it was Pawnee County livestock?  It was the Pawnee County Livestock Show.  Was that in conjunction with the fair?  No, this was just a junior livestock show.  And what kind of steer was it?  It was a Hereford.  So, what made you interested in going into vocational teaching, then?  Oh, I thought it would be a lot better than farming. (Laughter)  You laugh. And was that the case? After all these years, was that the  case?  Well, it got me employed after I worked for the college food units in  college and it got me employed with Oklahoma State University for  Ethiopia.  So you went to college at OSU, or   ?  Well it was Oklahoma A M at the time, but they changed it to OSU  while we were overseas.  So in    49 you graduated high school, right?  That   s right.  9  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  You went to college first, or you joined the military first?     49 to    53, I went to college, and I joined the military in December    53.  Okay, I   m just trying to get the timeline down. Did you ever make a trip  down to Stillwater prior to coming to OSU?  Not much, just barely.  Just barely. Ever do like FFA convention or anything like that here on  campus?  I don   t remember any convention on the campus at the time. I remember  we brought an animal down that died and we didn   t know what from.  We brought it down to the veterinary clinic and they decided it was  black leg. The black leg had settled in the side, so when they skinned it,  they could see it was black leg, so we knew what caused it to die.  So you came in the fall of    49?  Yes.  And what was your impression of campus at the time?  Oh, I found everything desirable.  Desirable?  I started out at a little housing called Oretoopa Halls, which was military  housing at the time and they weren   t using them. We had to pay eight  dollars a month. (Laughs)  Eight dollars. (Laughs) That   s definitely less than what I pay now.  Then I worked at the college food units. I got to wash pots and pans  anytime I wasn   t in class. So I had plenty to eat and a job.  What cafeteria did you wash those pots and pans in?  It was Cordell Hall at the time, and then the dietician got transferred  over to Willard Hall and she wanted me to transfer over there with her  and work for her, so I did. I worked a lot of hours for the college food  unit. I thought about Ethiopia before I got my bachelor   s degree. I got  my bachelor   s degree and went to the Army. Came back and I was  working on my master   s degree, and then in January    56, they called and  10  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  said,    How would you like to go to Ethiopia?    and I said I   ll check with  my wife. I said,    How would you like to go to Ethiopia?    She said,     Okay, where is it?    (Laughter) So we got us a job without even  applying for it.  That   s a similar reaction to what the Bigbees had. Jenice said,    Okay,  where is it?    Okay, let   s focus in on your OSU college days. Is that all  right? Get a snapshot of what campus was like back then. How big was  it?  I thought there was about twelve thousand.  About twelve thousand?  About twelve thousand at that time. I   m not sure.  Okay. Now, what was your impression of buildings or   ?  Oh, I was very pleased. They   ve changed a lot since that time, but I was  very pleased.  Now, did you see the library being built?  Yes.  Was it done, was it completed by the time you were done with school or  no?  Well, it was completed before I got my master   s degree. I   m not sure  what year they completed that. I got to see the smokestack of the old  power plant go down. I   m not sure what year they finished the library.  They had it finished soon enough to put my master   s degree thesis in it.  (Laughter)  It   s still over there.  I guess so.  Did you see the Student Union completed?  Yes, the Student Union was completed just about that time.  What was your impression of that building?  I couldn   t imagine a building like that.  11  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Did you partake in any dances or anything like that there?  No, I wasn   t a dancer.  You weren   t a dancer. Did you play bridge over there? I know there was  always a bridge game going on.  No, I never did learn the game of bridge. I guess about the only thing I  did in college was wash pots and pans and carry food up for the students  to eat.  There   s nothing wrong with that. Were you involved with any  extracurricular activities? Like student organizations or   ?  We had the Future Farmers of America and a few things, but I wasn   t  real active with it. I did make Junior Master Farmer when I was a senior  in high school.  Did you work in the dairy barn on campus?  No, my work was the food unit.  So the food unit   so you were paid through meals, or were you just  paid   ?  We started out at thirty-five cents an hour and ended up at fifty cents an  hour. (Laughs)  That   s better than nothing.  We had plenty to eat. We had to buy a meal ticket, but we still had  plenty to eat.  So you lived in the vet housing all four years, or   ?  I lived in Cordell Hall part of the time and in North Murray part of the  time.  Oh, so when you got transferred over?  Yeah, North Murray was right across the street from Willard.  So convenient for your work.  Very much so.  12  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Do you remember any of the professors that you had?  Yes, I had Don Orr, Roy Dugger. I haven   t heard from any of them    I  don   t think they   re living now. Fred LeCrone was horticulture. Don   t  remember much.  Did you have Horace Harper or no?  Excuse me?  Harper?  No, Harper doesn   t ring a bell.  Did you go to any of the athletic events during your time there?  No, but when I was working in Cordell Hall, I could hear when they  made a touchdown.  Oh, it   s right there.  No, I didn   t.  Did you meet your wife at OSU?  No.  How did you meet your wife?  When I was graduating from college, she was graduating and getting her  Registered Nurse degree. It just happened that there was three seniors  graduating from high school and they wanted to show off their caps and  gowns and one of them was her sister. So when I went over to pick up  the graduating seniors, I met my wife.  Okay. And then you signed up for the military or were you drafted?  I was deferred until I got my bachelor   s degree and then I volunteered  for the draft.  You didn   t want to be drafted per se.  No.  You   d rather get the service out of the way.  13  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Well, I knew that after I got deferred to finish my bachelor   s degree that  I was obligated to get that taken care of.  Now, you served in what division? The Eleventh?  Tenth Medium Tank Battalion.  Tenth Medium Tank. And they were based out of Camp Chaffee,  Arkansas?  Well, they   d train there anyhow.  They trained?  We had the training there and I worked in the supply room as company  clerk and our company armor.  So you   re the one that handed out like boots and uniforms and what not?  Blankets.  What do you remember about Camp Chaffee?  I remember that most people didn   t like it.  Where was that in Arkansas?  Right there close to Ft. Smith.  Okay, on the western side there. Western side of Arkansas?  It was the western part of Arkansas, just pretty close to the center on the  west. It   s right on  Interstate  40 as you go across.  Was it just the location of it, is that why people didn   t like it?  Most people didn   t like basic training. (Laughs) They just didn   t like it.  Oh, so you had basic out there?  I had basic training there.  Oh, you had basic?  I spent all my time there.  14  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  So you were a clerk out there then, those three years?  Well, two years. I didn   t have to spend three. You got out early if you  came back and went to school, so I came back and got my master   s  degree at Oklahoma State, Oklahoma A M.  Was your master   s degree paid for with the GI Bill?  They paid me a hundred and sixty dollars a month to get my master   s.  That was much more than washing pans. (Laughs)  Yes.  So you came back in    53, here right?  I came back in    55 and got offered a job overseas in January    56. Got my  master   s in May and went overseas in July.  Oh, okay. Since we   re up to that point, we can discuss that. You were  part of the initial stages of going over there, is that correct?  Well, I think they started in    52 and I went over in    56. I believe that   s  the time period. The reason I got to go over, they wanted an agriculture  teacher and a registered nurse. (Laughs)  That   s right.  They wanted the combination and we just happened to fit the  combination, and it was a good opportunity.  Now did you hear about Ethiopia prior to you being offered the  position?  I heard about it when I was working on my bachelor   s degree and then I  forgot all about it. Then I went to the army and came back and got my  master   s degree. I was working on my master   s degree and they called.  That   s all I had heard.  What did you hear about prior, as an undergrad?  I just heard that they had a program going. I was interested at the time,  but I knew I had to go to the military.  Going back to your undergrad, did you ever meet Dr. Bennett in person?  15  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  I don   t believe I ever met him in person. I don   t believe so. Dr. Willham,  that followed him, he was in the agriculture division when I was in  school, so I got to know Dr. Willham more than Dr. Bennett. I knew that  Dr. Bennett had a twenty-five year building program and after he was  killed in that airplane crash, they completed that twenty-five year  program, including the library and the Student Union and several items.  What were your impressions of Dr. Willham?  Excellent.  He taught you, or   ?  He was my advisor.  Oh, he was your advisor? And how often would you have to see him?  Oh, I got to see him when I had an F in American History first semester.  (Laughter)  Why did you fail that class?  I thought I knew American History because I had an A in high school  and they had these essay type questions and it had to be in ink. I was  left-handed and I ran my hand through the ink, and I had an F at mid-semester.  First thing on my transcript was a D in American History and  believe you me, I was glad to get a D. I knew I had to have a hundred  and thirty two credit hours to get my bachelor   s and I wanted every hour  I could get. A lot of people would drop a class with a D if they weren   t  going to get a good grade, but I didn   t dare drop a class.  What did Dr. Willham say to you?  I don   t know. (Laughs)  He just gave you a warning.  I don   t know. He was a good     So, who approached you about going?  Dr. Bill Abbott was the one that   s office had called. We just told them  we would, and they fixed up the papers.  So you were working on a master   s in Ag Ed, or   ?  16  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Ag Ed.  Ag Ed? Okay.  I got a three hundred dollar raise when they found out I was getting my  master   s. Went from forty-eight to fifty-one, so I was happy. Five  thousand and one hundred dollars. At that time that was good money.  Were you planning on to teach? What was your goal before...  I was going to be a vocational agriculture teacher is what I had planned.  That   s what I was qualifying for.  So the opportunity came up. What was the main reason why you wanted  to go over there?  Be employed. (Laughs)  Be employed?  That   s the main reason.  Was this a pay raise for you?  We got a twenty percent hardship allowance. Twenty-five percent  hardship allowance. So I got six thousand dollars plus housing, utilities,  travel.  Wasn   t really that hard, was it? (Laughs)  Wasn   t a difficult decision to make.  What was your family   s reaction here?  They didn   t really want us to go. My mother-in-law was in favor of it  because she always looked on the bright side, but we didn   t give them a  choice. My daughter was ten months old when we landed in Ethiopia,  and she was ready to start school when we came back.  Now was that the one that we met here?  No. No, this one we adopted in    66.  Was it Bill Abbott   s office that arranged for you to go over?  Yes.  17  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Did you actually have a formal process that you had to go through about  getting papers ready, orientated   ?  We didn   t have a lot.  Didn   t have a lot.  Didn   t have a lot. They got our passports and told us what we should  take with us.  Did you have to get any shots or anything like that?  Oh, yes.  What kind of shots?  All of them. (Laughs)  All of them.  I had had a lot of them in the military, but there was some we had to  have renewed.  Like malaria, or   ?  I   m not sure what all they gave us without digging up the old shot  records.  Did the college put on any orientation like    This is what you need to  know about their culture,    that type of thing?  It wasn   t a lot. We talked with some people that had been there and  corresponded with some that were over there. It wasn   t a lot of  orientation though.  Did you yourself do any research about it?  No.  No? So you left in July?  We left July the first from Stillwater.  How long did it take for you to get over there?  18  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  We were over there by the fifteenth of July. We flew to Washington,  D.C. and New York and I   m not sure. We flew to a few places in  Europe. We landed and then we went to Cairo, Egypt, Khartoum, Sudan  and Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and then Jimma, Ethiopia.  How were you transported from Addis to Jimma?  We flew.  You flew?  Flew on a little DC-3 with seats on the side.  Tiny prop plane?  Like they used in the army. Like they used during World War II.  Did you have to ship furniture or anything like that over?  The furniture was supplied.  So you just bought clothing and   ?  Mostly clothing and food. You   re surprised how long corn flakes would  last. (Laughter)  Now, were you initially assigned to Jimma?  Say it again?  You were initially assigned to Jimma?  Oh, yes. We spent all five years at Jimma.  Okay. Describe for me your housing situation over there.  The Italians built houses during their occupation from 1935 to 1940 and  that   s the type of housing we lived in. It was not bad. Better than I lived  in when I was going to college. (Laughs)  That   s good. How many bedrooms and   ?  We had two bedrooms at that time.  Did you have any servants, or   ?  19  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Four.  You had four servants?  At times. We had a gardener, a house boy, a cook, and a babysitter.  A babysitter. That   s surprising. Do you remember their names at all or  no?  I   d have to review that.  That   s all right. This housing, was that just primarily set aside for the  teachers of the technical school or   ?  It had been set up for a school by the Italians. They had several houses  that they refinished, but made them very comfortable to live. The  temperature was forty to eighty.  Not too bad.  Forty to eighty, three hundred and sixty five days out of the year. No  snow.  No snow. What did the Italians want to do? Did they want to make a  school, or   ?  The Italians were going to make Jimma the capital. Jimma, Ethiopia, as I  understood was going to be the Italian capital, but the English chased  them out in 1940.  I didn   t know that.  See, the English had Kenya.  Yes. And the Sudan, right?  I think so.  Didn   t they come from the north and knock them out?  I   m not sure how that worked. That was before my time.  All right, just wondering. The Emperor decided to use Jimma as the  technical school?  Yes. Between Dr. Bennett and Emperor Haile Selassie.  20  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Because the structures were in place or was that the main reason?  They built a new dormitory. That was about the only new building they  had when we started there in    56, but they built a new shop building and  so forth after that.  Now Jimma, was it a town, was it a village, was it a city?  I don   t know what the population was. It wasn   t as big as Stillwater, but  I don   t know. They had the army school there, the military school there,  and they had our school. I don   t know what the population was.  So both schools, was that the main economic factors that ran the town or  was it a trade town?  I won   t even venture to say. I don   t know.  Could you describe Jimma in geographic terms? Where was it in  Ethiopia? Was it in a valley? Was it in mountains? Was it in the desert?  Well it was about five thousand feet. So we   d say it was close to being  called mountains, but there was peaks higher than Jimma close by. Not  as high in elevation as Addis Ababa.  Did you have any difficulties adjusting to that altitude?  I liked it.  You liked it?  I liked that altitude. That was excellent.  How far away was Addis?  Approximately two hundred miles.  Two hundred miles? How would you get to Addis if you had to?  There was a gravel road that you could drive, or you could fly on the  airplane. The airplane came in about every day.  How long of a flight was that?  Hour and a half.  21  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Not too bad then. All right, so did you live in the same place all five  years that you were there?  Same house.  And you just had the one child over there?  We had the one that we took over and the one that was born there.  One was born there? And you didn   t need any extra space for the  children or that was adequate enough?  Say it again?  You didn   t need any extra space for the children or the space was  adequate?  We had enough space.  Describe for me the development of the Jimma Agricultural Technical  School. How was it started?  Well, they were set up to train Ethiopians to go back into their tribe and  teach their people. Our objective was to train them to take our positions.  So after five years, one of the former students, one of the first students  that they had, after getting his master   s degree here in the States, came  back and took my position. We extended the second tour to three years  instead of two so that we could finish the job. It felt like it was pretty  well complete, but they had some communist problems after that.  Were you there initially at the opening of the school?  No, it started in    52 I think, and we went over there and started in    56 to     61. Did have the occasion when Emperor Haile Selassie went over to  Brazil   s celebration of their new capital, the military and the other  people decided they would overthrow the government. So I happened to  be in the capital city at that time. (Laughs)  Really?  I was in a little Volkswagen Beetle when they shot missiles over my  vehicle into the Imperial Palace grounds. I put up a white handkerchief  on the antenna and drove away. (Laughs) As soon as the Emperor landed  back in the country, it was over. He said,    There   s only one law in  Ethiopia and that   s Haile Selassie law.    (Laughter)  22  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  How many students were at Jimma during your time there?  I would guess as many as a hundred and fifty. We had the four classes,  ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth. It would be getting close to a hundred  and fifty. We tried to have students from every tribe. Some of them had  different languages basically than the others, but they were taught  English from the fourth grade on up, so we were able to have our classes  in English.  Was it policy to have representation from each tribe or   ?  Tried to have.  Tried to have it? Would the technical school recruit students or how  would they get students in there?  I wasn   t in that area. I don   t know exactly what all they went through to  get   how they decided which ones would come and which ones  couldn   t, but they were good learners. Man, they could memorize that  paper as fast as you could read it, almost.  That   s what I   ve heard. They have good rote memory.  They were good learners. Anxious to learn.  How old were the students? What ages did you teach?  Oh, I would guess that most of them were probably sixteen, seventeen  and eighteen. Some of them didn   t know when they were born, so I  don   t know.  So the equivalent of sophomores, juniors, and seniors in high schools,  you would say?  Approximately in age.  Now, this is a vocational school, so what kind of classes did they take?  You said they build a shop, so they would have to take woods or metals  or   ?  I taught some woodworking and horticulture, myself. About the same as  you would take. About the same as some of the classes I had here at the  university. I   m not sure what level you would call it. Mostly high school  level at Jimma. They built a college over at Alemaya. I visited over  there, but I wasn   t interested in being transferred there because of my  daughter   s school.  23  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  When did Alemaya come into operation?  About 1955. No about 1959. Again I   d have to look that up. I don   t  know for sure.  Initially Jimma was   I   m trying to think   so Jimma was set up for  mechanical arts, that type of thing?  It was set up to qualify them to go to college.  So it was a feeder school, basically.  Yes.  But not all students made it up to Alemaya, then?  No, but they did have students at Alemaya from some of the other  schools, from Addis Ababa and so forth. The population at the college  got pretty high. I   m not sure what the highest number that came.  You briefly discussed that you taught horticulture and woodworking.  Were those the main classes that you taught?  That was the main thing that I taught.  So what did you teach in horticulture? Like what types of plants did you  teach them how to grow?  Mostly vegetables.  Mostly vegetables? Native plants, or   ?  Tomatoes and onions. They really liked onions. Potatoes. They liked hot  peppers. Man, some of that food was hot. (Laughter) They had bananas.  They had a few orange trees, but orange trees didn   t work out very well.  Bananas worked out pretty good.  Did you bring any crops over that you wanted to grow or did you bring  any seedlings?  No, I didn   t.  Okay. The school provided the seeds for use in the course?  Yes.  24  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Did you have garden plots or orchards or   ?  All my students had a garden.  On campus?  Oh, yeah. We had the area that we called the garden area. Most  everything right there in Jimma, most of the land there was horticulture.  And they had a farm out south of Jimma.  And did these support the school?  Some.  Did some of the students   they had to work the farms, right? To pay for  going to school there?  To learn. They had to do the work to learn.  And was the school self-sufficient then?  I don   t know. I don   t know how much was paid. It wasn   t self-sufficient.  I don   t know how much the Ethiopian government supplied  and how much OSU supplied, or Oklahoma A M.  Now what kinds of wood projects did you have your students do?  The main wood project I had that they liked was building them a box for  their clothing. They didn   t have any place to keep their stuff. About like  that. About like that. (Gesturing) Hinges and it opened up.  So like a nice chest.  Pretty much waterproof. They really enjoyed that because they knew  they wanted a place for their clothes when they traveled home and so  forth.  What kinds of woods did you have for use?  Well, we had a little lumber company there that sawed the lumber rough  and then they had to sand it down. I   m not sure what the main one was  anymore. I used to know, but I can   t remember what that main lumber  tree was. I don   t know.  Okay. The students    schedule. Were they broken down into semesters,  25  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  trimesters, quarters, or   ?  Semesters.  Semesters? How long would each semester last?  About the same as here.  About three and a half months?  About three and a half months.  Did they have a holiday break or   ?  Oh, yeah. They had our Christmas and then shortly after, they had their  Christmas.  Oh yeah, the Coptic.  They had a few holidays.  So, school would start in August, similar to here, or no?  Mostly in September. Mostly September to after Christmas. About the  same school year that we used to have here.  During the summertime or during their main long break, did the  students stay on campus or did they go back to their home villages?  We had both. Some that stayed and some that went home.  Who did you work with at the school?  We had ten American families there.  Do you remember some of their names?  Oh, yeah several of them have died, but there was the Siegenthalers, the  Turners, the Rouks, the Evans. Have you met Evans?  Yes. Conrad, yes.  Conrad and Joy Evans went over the same time that we did, same  summer. We had the Siegenthalers, Wilsons, Turners, Evans, and I   m  trying to remember that other one    Then we had the Darlingtons, the  Vances, and ourselves, and the Rouks, several of them.  26  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Dr. Kindell was the president of it at that time, right?  Dr. Kindell was there for our second tour for a couple of years and then  Dr. Bob Meisner was there a year while we were there. So, we had Dr.  Rouk, Dr. Kindell, and Dr. Meisner for the head ones while we were  there.  Did you have much interaction with them at all?  Oh, yeah. We all had dinners together and card games quite a bit. We  were a big ten-family group.  So it was Dr. Hugh Rouk? Is that correct?  Dr. Hugh Rouk was the first one.  What can you remember about him?  He was there from the beginning. He was quite a character.  What do you mean by that?  He had his stories. He said we   d go into a classroom and tell our favorite  joke and it just fell flat. They didn   t understand our jokes. (Laughs)  What do you remember about working with Dr. Kindell?  Oh, the thing I remember most about Dr. Kindell is that we went on a  picnic and we saw two leopards drinking water. I had my .22 rifle.  That   s all we had with us. We were all in a little Volkswagen Beetle, I  had my .22 rifle. He said,    Shoot that male leopard.    I said,    No, I might  just wound it and I might hurt somebody.    He said,    Go ahead.    I still  got the skull out here. (Laughter) That   s all that   s left. They didn   t do a  good job of tanning it, but I hit that leopard right in the corner of the eye  and it just laid over. I was never more excited in my life. Eight foot from  head to tail.  That   s a nice sized cat there.  It was one of the trophies that most of them wanted, but I got the largest  one. I wouldn   t do it again. Wouldn   t do it again.  Who replaced him, Dr. Kindell?  What?  27  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Who replaced Dr. Kindell? Meisner?  Yes, Bob Meisner.  No relation?  No. He spelled his with one    S    and I spelled mine with two. Debatable.  There might have been some trace back because those names got spelled  differently at times when they came, but as far as I know, we didn   t  know of any relation between Bob Meisner and myself. But the students,  they wanted to see the Meisner with one    S    or the Meissner with two     S   s   . On the plaque that they sent   have you seen the Ethiopian  plaque?  No.  I think it   s at the library, but I   m not sure. They have both of us    M-E-I-S-  N-E-R,    both of them. The plaque that the Emperor had made for us  had my name and his name just with M-E-I-S-N-E-R. But if you haven   t  seen that, you might want to find out where it is.  So, how many courses would you teach each semester?  Oh, I wasn   t overloaded. I think three.  Three? Okay. Did you have to do any research at that time, yourself?  I didn   t.  But other faculty did?  Some of them got research for their doctor   s degree and things, I didn   t.  Which parts of your assignment were the most difficult for you?  I didn   t have any difficulty.  You said you enjoyed it, right?  Oh, yeah. One of the most difficult ones that I had after school was out  in the afternoon, I   d go out to boar valley and shoot a wild boar.  (Laughs)  Such hardship.  28  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  It was a hardship. (Laughter)  Did you cook the boar? Did you bring it back and cook it?  The young ones, we utilized part of them, but the old ones, no. Of  course, we wanted those old wild boar tusks, about that long.  What would you use the tusk for?  The tusk?  Yeah, what would you use it for, decorative?  Show.  Show?  Just to show that you got it. The things that would make the farmer  happy would be if he shot the wild boar or the baboon. The baboons  would break their coffee trees, so they wanted to get rid of the baboons  and they wanted to get rid of the wild boars.  What types of learners were the Ethiopians? You said they were good  learners, right?  Oh, yeah. They were good.  Were they attentive? Would that be a good word to describe them or no?  Attentive?  I don   t know.  Did you have any problems with the language at all?  With the?  Language?  No, I had interpreters. They could interpret each other. I spent my time  mostly with English. I did learn a few Amharic words, but most of the  time mine was all English or all through an interpreter. The students  could interpret Italian and different tribes.  How many courses did they have to take each semester?  I can   t answer that, I don   t know.  29  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  And it would take, what, two to three years to complete going through  the technical school?  We usually figured four years.  Four years, so like a normal high school then.  Yeah.  Besides vocational training, did they have to take any math and  reading?  Oh, yeah. We had a math teacher and a science teacher and livestock  and     Did they have to do any physical education?  The one that taught math usually took care of the physical education.  They had these soccer teams and so forth.  Was soccer their big sport?  It was the main one.  That was the main one? Okay. What was the interaction like between the  school and the village?  Oh, generally good.  What about the school and the military school, was there any  interactions?  They had a little competition there at times.  In terms of?  Playing soccer.  Ah, so it was like a rival?  Yeah. The military school and our school had a little friction over the  soccer.  Did you ever meet the Emperor?  30  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Meet who?  The Emperor.  Oh, yes. He came down to visit the school for a field day. Emperor Haile  Selassie. Quite an individual.  What was your impression of him?  Excellent.  Excellent? What do you remember most about him?  He was just a little short gentleman. Just a little short gentleman.  Now, did he remember you more than once or   ?  I don   t think so.  Did you ever have any receptions?  They had at least one reception there in Jimma while we were there.  But you never met him up in Addis?  No, I didn   t.  Did you ever visit the Imperial Palace without him there?  I didn   t go in the Imperial Palace. I went in front of it. (Laughs)  And you ducked away from rockets. Describe Addis at that time. Do you  remember much about that city?  The visible from the street was pretty much up to date. Behind in the  alley was way, way behind.  You said that there was a coup attempt when Selassie was out of the  country one time. Was there any other political turmoil that was going  on?  That coup attack was the main thing that I had experience with. I came  to the capital after to bring back some blankets for the schools, and I  happened to be there when they made the attack. It cost me two blankets  to get back home. They stopped me on the road.  31  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  How did Ethiopians view Selassie? What did you think?  Most of them recognized that he was in control.  Was he a fearful dictator or no? Would you even use the word dictator?  Well he was a   I guess you   d call him a monarch. He was in charge, but  he knew that when the people got educated, they wouldn   t be pleased.  All right, so your wife was the nurse there?  Yes.  And that was her main responsibility?  Yes.  You had overseers for your two kids when she was at work?  Yeah, we had an excellent what they call mamiti.  How do you spell that?  I don   t know.  Oh, it   s one of those things I couldn   t figure out. Mamiti?  Mamiti. I   m not sure how they spell it.  What other kinds of activities did you participate in? You hunted, right?  You would hunt every day from the sounds of it.  Oh, I could go wild boar hunting anytime after school. Did a little bit of  fishing. Went down to one of the rivers, that there hadn   t been a vehicle  down there since the Italian occupation. Had to dynamite a big old stone  off the road to get down there. Something would get ahold of that line  and they   d take it up and they   d set down and you couldn   t move them.  But I did catch some good size catfish. I call them catfish. It was  excellent, but they said when the Italians were there, there were fish two  meters long in that river and I don   t doubt it. There were crocodiles in it  too. (Laughs)  What was your overall impression of the country itself?  As far as farming was concerned, we went clear back to the oxen and the  wooden yoke and wooden plow deal with a little stick sticking down  32  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  with a metal pulling it. We had, I   d say, five thousand years of   we had  a filmstrip called    Five Thousand Years of Agricultural Machinery,    and  they went clear back almost that far. At the farm, at the school, we had  modern tractors, so it was quite a difference there in agriculture. And  then the cattle, we tried to get some of our type of cattle in there, but  they didn   t survive too well compared to the ones that they had that were  able to survive. Chickens, chickens went over real good.  I heard that some of the heavy tractors actually didn   t work quite so  well. Was this the case?  The heavy tractors didn   t work?  Quite as well as they did in the States?  Oh, I didn   t have any comparison at the time. Fuel was expensive and  they couldn   t afford them. We had to learn to drive on the other side of  the road for vehicles. The nationals would see how close they could run  in front of you without getting hit. They figured if they got across, you   d  run over the devil that was behind them. We heard a lot of stories. I   m  not sure how many of them were true. I truly enjoyed it.  Did you bring your own gun over?  I bought all of mine after I got there.  How did you acquire that gun?  The rifle?  Yes.  Well, my wife bought me the .22 for one of my birthdays and I bought  the .270 Winchester from another man that had been there and he had it  for sale. That   s the one I really like. That   s the one I could get a wild  boar at two hundred yards, and the baboons. Then I sold it to one of the  Ethiopians that had a coffee plantation and he wanted to use it to keep  the baboons out of his coffee. I had a good buy. I got a Volkswagen  Beetle shipped in for a thousand dollars. Drove it three years and sold it  to one of my Ethiopian students that was fixing a coffee plantation, for a  thousand dollars. The reason I was able to was because they had a 100  percent tariff coming in. So it was a good buy for him.  Did the technical school teach how to grow coffee? Was that part of  the   ?  33  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Yeah, that was part of it.  Did you teach that or no?  No, I wasn   t in charge of that. Hugh Rouk was the main one for coffee  and Tom Siegenthaler followed up with that on the coffee growing  research.  What were their main crops?  Main crop was coffee.  Coffee? And that was basically a cash crop?  Coffee and corn were the two main ones, as far as I could determine.  They had the little what they called teff. So I   d have to put teff and corn  and coffee and vegetables. Peppers.  Was teff the one crop that was sold to the Middle East, or was that chat?  Chat was kind of a drug like deal. Teff was a grain that they made their  injera out of, their bread.  Speaking of that, did it take awhile for you to get accustomed to  Ethiopian food?  I never tried to get accustomed to Ethiopian food. (Laughs)  Why is that?  I didn   t like it. (Laughs)  You didn   t like it? Why didn   t you like it?  I didn   t eat enough of it to learn to like it. We had a cook, and we never  got into Ethiopian food. Some of them did, but I didn   t.  Did the cook cook American recipes then?  Yes.  So, even pork products? Would the cook cook you like a ham or any  bacon or anything like that?  They didn   t like to touch pork. They didn   t like to touch pork, but they  would usually fix whatever we had.  34  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Now, did they enjoy the American food? Did you ever share with   ?  Well, they liked hamburger when they found out it was made with beef.  Did you participate in any American traditions such as like Christmas,  Thanksgiving, Halloween, when you were over there?  Oh, the staff always had all of those. The staff always had their  Thanksgiving and Christmas. I don   t remember doing too much  Valentine   s Day or anything like that.  Did you have the students participate in these celebrations?  Say it again.  Did you have the students participate in these celebrations?  Not a lot.  Not a lot? Not even the Christmas or   ?  Well, we   not a lot.  Okay. Did you participate or celebrate any Ethiopian holidays?  Well, we let the students off. We didn   t necessarily celebrate it.  Okay.  At least I didn   t. Some of them may have.  How long did it take for you to feel acclimated to Ethiopia? Did it take  awhile for you?  I didn   t notice any change.  Didn   t notice any change?  Didn   t notice any problem. They said because of the elevation and the  temperatures at noon, we had two hours at noon to eat and take a nap.  Then we   d go until five o   clock in the afternoon.  Did you see any other people having difficulties adjusting to Ethiopia or  no?  35  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Well, some of the wives had difficulty, seemed like. I don   t think the  men   I don   t know of any men that really had any difficulty adjusting to  it. It was so much better than what I had. See, when I was working on  my master   s degree, I lived in a little garage down here on Ninth Street.  We lived in a little garage apartment. Had a little shower and a room and  a kitchen area. So the housing was a lot better than I had in school.  (Laughs)  So, we talked about the food     We got to travel in some of Egypt and Kenya and the Red Sea and the  Indian Ocean area, Mombasa. We got three times through Europe and  one time around the world. We got to go around the world by taking  tourist class. Instead of taking first class from Jimma, Ethiopia to home,  we took tourist class and went around the world in 1958.  This was your break, right?  Break time.  When your two year contract was up.  In 1958, we got to travel around the world.  Describe that for me. Like, where did you start with and where did you  end up?  We went from Jimma to Addis Ababa, Addis Ababa to Aden, from  Aden   oh, let   s see, I don   t know where we went in Europe, but then we  came over to Hong Kong     Did you go into India at all?  Yeah, we went to India, Pakistan, India, Hong Kong, Japan, Hawaii, and  California. Yeah, my oldest son was around the world before birth.  How long did it take you to get back? That sounds like quite a journey.  We had a six week total to go around the world.  And the price was covered because you didn   t pay first class?  Yeah, we were allowed first class and we went tourist class. That   s one  thing about that. We had transportation, utilities, housing, salary, 25  percent hardship.  36  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  That still gets me, the 25 percent hardship.  I feel like we really had the opportunity.  The only hardship that would stand out would be the separation between  the families back in the States.  No television, no telephone. It wasn   t a hardship. I wasn   t used to it. For  some of them it would   ve been a hardship because they had to do  without some things. I never had anything before I left, so I didn   t have  to do without. (Laughter)  For you it was probably a step up, right?  It was amazing for me. I had a good income when I was doing custom  hay baling in the summertime. Over there where you didn   t have  anything to spend it for, you could save it and buy your first house. We  could have paid cash for our first house when we came back.  Did you record your stay in Ethiopia at all?  No, I didn   t.  So you didn   t keep a diary?  No.  Did you take a bunch of pictures or   ?  Oh, I   ve got a lot of slides. A lot of slides and I had part of them put on a  disk and I had some eight-millimeter movies that I had put on a tape and  a few things, photograph wise, that if somebody wanted to look through  them, they probably could.  So, you would write home?  Write?  Yeah, write letters?  Yeah.  How long would it take for you to receive a letter?  Well, I never did determine that. I don   t know.  37  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Didn   t you have Armed Forces Post Office privileges?  They had airmail from Jimma, Ethiopia. The stamps were fairly  expensive, but of course we could afford them because we had a good  income.  So you had a VW Beetle, then? Is that what you used to   ?  We could use the school vehicles the first two years and the last three  years, I had the Volkswagen Beetle, which would go any place a Jeep  would go. If you got a high centered, it wouldn   t take much to get it off  of it. Then I bought a missionary   s Jeep while he was on home leave and  used it for a year and sold it back to him. I   d go where there wasn   t any  roads or where there had been and you just barely get around a boulder  or something.  Did you like to explore the countryside?  Oh, I always wanted to see what was at the other end of the trail. We  usually had a student with us to interpret. Did a lot of driving.  Did you see any other parts of the continent of Africa?  We just saw Kenya and Mombasa and Aden, Asmara.  Did you ever do a safari or no?  No, not what I   d call a safari. We landed in Khartoum with the airplane.  We landed in Cairo, Egypt by air and had to stay, wait a couple days for  transportation overnight and so forth. I enjoyed that. The family that was  with us, they didn   t particularly feel comfortable, but I thought it was  interesting. We got to ride the camels. I said,    I did my share of  travelling in those five years.    I originally thought that when I got back  here I   d take the Pan-American Highway and maybe even up as far as  Alaska, but I never did. After all that travelling, I just as soon see Alaska  and the national parks and everything on television. They did a good job  with those national parks.  As you think back, how do you feel now about your Ethiopian  experience?  I think it was a wonder, marvelous. A marvelous opportunity.  Do you think it fulfilled Henry Bennett   s vision?  I don   t suppose he would have been pleased at the number of them that  38  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  didn   t survive the communism, but I would guess that with the college  and everything, it probably fulfilled Dr. Bennett   s vision.  Now, when you were over there, speaking of OSU presidents   Dr.  Willham traveled over there, correct?  Dr. Willham came over one time.  Did you meet with him at that time?  Yeah.  Did he remember you from being a student?  Oh, I didn   t check that out. I just know that he was pleased with the  program at the time, or I thought he was.  How did your Ethiopian experience impact your life?  Oh, it got us off to a beautiful start. We talked to some of the vocational  agriculture teachers. They said,    If you can save a thousand dollars a  year, that   s doing real well.    We were able to beat that by a long ways.  Got us off to where we could pay cash for our first house, if we wanted  to.  What do you think the legacy is of the OSU-Ethiopia project and  cooperation from the    60s and    50s?  I didn   t catch it?  What do you think of the legacy of the project? What do you think that  is?  I wondered about that and I still   I don   t know how to describe that. I  hope we did some good, but the amazing thing about that was that the  missionaries that some of the churches sent over did just as much on a  fraction of the cost. So I guess it would have been a more economical  way of doing it, but I was sure glad to be part of the program.  Have you maintained any relationships from your time over there?  No. I haven   t.  What about with fellow faculty?  Oh, faculty. We have a meeting next month with all of them together. Of  39  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  course, a lot of them that went over when I did, no longer survive. The  men part. Mrs. Rouk is still alive and Joy and Conrad Evans are still  alive. Mrs. Siegenthaler is still alive. The Darlingtons are not. I   m not  sure about Bill Vance and Stevie Vance. Mrs. Wilson is up at  Hutchinson, Kansas. Quite an experience.  Now, what have you done since you   ve come back?  Dallas, Texas.  You were down in Dallas? What were you doing in Dallas?  My oldest son is with American Airlines. As far as work, I spent twenty-six  years in Nebraska.  Nebraska? Whereabouts in Nebraska?  Columbus, Nebraska, right straight north. Interstate 35 from Wichita  goes right up to Columbus. Highway 80 joins with Highway 81. It   s on  the sixth Principle Meridian, and the Indian Meridian out here and the  sixth Principle Meridian are the same.  So directly due north?  Just exactly, practically due north of here. Twenty-six years.  Were you teaching up there?  I worked as a territory sales manager for Cargill Incorporated.  Oh, the seed company.  No, Cargill is a grain company. Corn, corn elevators and wheat. Barge  transportation down the Mississippi River. One of the largest private  companies in the United States. Then I worked for the junior college at  Columbus, Nebraska for three years, and then I bought and sold grain  for fifteen years before I came back to Oklahoma.  What made you decide to get out of the teaching business?  When I decided that I was teaching my agri-business students that they  could make up to a hundred thousand dollars a year in direct sales, and I  was working for twelve thousand. That   s when I decided. (Laughter)  Wait a minute, I   m teaching this, I should go into this.  40  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  I decided if I really believe that, I wouldn   t be teaching. So that   s when I  got out of teaching.  Why did you retire to Stillwater then?  My parents and my wife   s parents were here. They were close by. My  mother lived in Pawnee. We came back and lived west of Pawnee for  five years. Then we came here back to Stillwater.  What did you think of all the changes that Stillwater has undergone?  Oh, I thought that was amazing how much the college has spent. We  spent more on the stadium for example than what we spent on the whole  junior college complex, land and all. (Laughs) We set up a junior college  there at Columbus, Nebraska, a two million dollar project. They build  one building here, two million dollars.  Now, when did you move back into Stillwater?  1996.  And you   ve been here the last fourteen years?  Yes.  I was going to ask, did your daughter have a tough time readjusting  coming back to the States from Ethiopia?  Well, you know, she   d just started to grade school and I don   t think it  was too difficult, but I don   t know the whole story.  Is there any other thing that we haven   t discussed that you would like to  share?  Well, I just appreciate the time. I just appreciate the opportunity to get to  go there. Outside of doing custom hay baling when I was in college, I  didn   t have a large income and that was just for a little short period of  time each summer and I didn   t even mind the military because I had  food to eat and a place to live. This Ethiopian trip was far beyond my  expectations. It   s like they say,    I bargain with life for a penny, and life  would pay no more. I didn   t realize at the time that life would have paid  what I bargained for     (Laughter) I graduated about the time that T.  Boone Pickens did, but I   ll tell you, that man really brought in the  money. But I won   t say that he was any happier than I was. (Laughs)  But compared to my income and his income, no comparison.  41  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  Meissner  Sherman  It sounds like you lived a, from all of your experiences, that you lived a  fulfilled life.  Oh, yes. There   s no doubt about it. As I say, everything got better for me  from the time I was born during the Depression up until even my  military service.  And that   s all you can ask for, really.  If you enjoy what you   re doing, you   re on vacation all the time.  That   s right.  -------  -------   
