 Finchum  Norris  Today is October 19, 2007. We are in the ConocoPhillips Alumni Center  on the OSU campus to talk with Buetta Harrington Norris, a graduate of  1954 with a degree in home economics. So thank you for joining us  today. It   s a pleasure.  Thank you.  We   re going to start by having you tell us a little bit about your  childhood   where you were born, siblings, that type of thing.  Okay, I was born in Big Prairie, Oklahoma which is in Pittsburg County  and during World War II they took our home and built an Army Depot  there. It was called a Navy Ammunition Depot and now it   s an Army  Depot. It was just a country community. One grandma lived on one  corner, one of them lived on the other corner, and my aunt lived on  another. So everybody was related in the community. I have one older  sister that is ten years older than me and then I have a brother that   s  seven years older than me. So I have been the baby and I have been the  middle child and I have been the oldest (Laughs) of the family. My  mother and daddy had three families. They had the two older ones and  me and a sister that is two and a half years younger than me and then a  brother that   s two and a half years younger than her. And then they  waited till I was a senior in high school and had a little girl.  So there   s six of you?  Six.  And you   re in the middle.  And we were raised on a farm and then when World War II came along  Daddy and Mother both worked at the Naval Ammunition Depot. And  5  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Daddy worked with a construction company, Brown and Root. Then  Mother and Daddy went to work at five in the morning and came home  at five in the afternoon, seven days a week.  Seven days? Oh gosh.  I was ten years old and so I took care of the other two children and     Had dinner on the table when they got home?  (Laughs) Well yes, I started to   I won   t go into to those. I had some  terrible experiences about that. (Laughs) I think I tried to fry a hen one  time. But that   s when I learned so much about cooking and how to cook  homemade stuff. That probably was the one reason I majored in home  economics.  Well how did you come to come to OSU?  Well I wanted to major in home economics. I really wanted to be a girl   s  basketball coach.  Really?  But back then they didn   t hire girl   s basketball coaches, you know? So I  planned on coming up here and majoring in vocational home economics,  being a teacher. And then I planned on getting a minor in coaching girl   s  basketball. Well, vocational home economics   you didn   t have time to  be a girl   s coach. Besides that, they told me I couldn   t get a job when I  got through being a coach anyway (Laughs) so I just went in vocational  home economics. Which you had to have a lot of science and a lot of  chemistry and, you know, a lot of things. But I did take it and my home  economics teacher talked me into it and my principal.  How far from home to campus then?  Well it   s probably about three and a half to four hours. Back then there  weren   t any buses and everybody didn   t have cars. You had to catch a  bus and then go to Oklahoma City and then come to Stillwater.  You probably didn   t go home very much during the school year?  Well no I   it   s real funny actually. I probably came home more the first  year because I got a little bit home sick. I started and it was  Thanksgiving and then Christmas and so   we didn   t have to move out  of the dorms at Christmas either. We didn   t finish our semester at  Christmas. We came back in January and finished the semester.  6  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  So you had time to do homework in between if you hadn   t done it.  Mm-hmm.  So you came by bus each time then?  Well if I didn   t catch a ride with somebody, some boys. I have ridden  the bus all day long. And they let you out at the nine mile corner at  Perkins.  And then how would you get from there to campus?  Well somebody would meet us there and we had another bus that came  from Stillwater and picked us up.  So no taking laundry home to mom then, huh?  You didn   t really go home very often.  Were you the first in your family to go to college?  Yes.  Did your younger sisters   I mean your older ones?  No, well my older sister and brother didn   t go. My oldest brother was in  the Navy so he didn   t go. And then   my older sister, she got married  really young. But she finished high school and she was taking some  courses and stuff. My other two sisters   one went to Southeastern  Oklahoma in Durant and one went to Ada and finished at Tahlequah,  then went to Muskogee.  So you led the way. Have any of your children come here to OSU?  Two of them.  Two of them have graduated?  My middle   my youngest girl which is the middle child. She graduated  from here in 1983. She has an English major and teaches English in New  Orleans at a private school.  Can you remember how they enrolled you? The enrolling process.  Yes, I don   t know whether to tell this or not.  7  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Go ahead.  But anyway, I flunked the entrance test in English and I was salutatorian  of my class. So you can imagine taking the test   it was a real small  school. There were only twenty in my graduating class. We just didn   t  have any English background. So that   s what Dr. Kadel taught me. And  that   s why she enrolled me in all the English and speech courses. We  had to take entry tests then and we did it in the big gym.  At Gallagher?  Mm-hmm. We took tests down there. We got our books and took tests  down there.  As a group?  Yes, as a group. We took each test, you know. And she couldn   t believe  it. She looked at that and I flunked the English exam to college and it   s  been embarrassing ever since. But I got a salutatorian scholarship to  come to OSU.  That was my next question. How did you pay to come?  (Laughs) Well I got the scholarship, which back then paid    100  scholarship paid for your tuition and books.   100 for the year or for the     Mm-hmm for the year.  And then the dorm would be?  Yes, you had to pay for your dorm extra.  So did you have to work to cover it?  Yes, I worked at the Student Union with Abe Hesser in the State Room.  My mother and another was co-owner of a little Streetcar Caf   in  Pittsburg County, Oklahoma. And she made homemade pies every  morning and put on a pork pot roast, a beef pot roast and you know, the  really country cooking. So I worked in it in the summer   when I wasn   t  in high school. When I came up here, I had an interview for waitressing  in the State Room which just opened up. The Student Union just opened  up   the library just opened up. And so Abe Hesser was a hotel-restaurant  manager and was managing the State Room. I was the only  student that he hired. The rest of them were ladies that were older from  8  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Perkins and around here. I   ll never forget he said,    Now, she   s just 18,     most of them are married,       don   t be telling stories she shouldn   t be  hearing.    But back to the real nice thing about it, is what they did. See I  didn   t get through until about nine o   clock. What I would do, I had eight  o   clock classes and I went to class until 11 and I went and put my little  uniform on, my cap, and went to the State Room and worked in the noon  hour. Then went to class at two     You changed back?  Yes and then went back for the evening meal and it wasn   t over till nine  o   clock. We didn   t close till nine o   clock. But I learned a lot there and  I   ll tell you why   I had never had fried shrimp, and oysters, and I was in  charge of the salad bar a lot. We made our own dressing. There wasn   t  thousand island dressing, ranch and all that. Before all that, we made our  own dressings. And so I learned how to do a lot of things as far as food  is concerned and entertaining and stuff like that.  When did you have time to do homework?  Well I was just going to say, they gave questions out to me, Abe Hesser  made them. He knew it was hard for me   the chemistry and so he would  have them  the other workers  when we   d get un-busy he would have  them give out questions to me.  But, I also worked the banquets. We got fifty cents an hour.  Okay.  (Laughs) Before I graduated we got seventy-five, but anyway. Did you  know that I made enough tips for all my spending money? It was unreal,  especially in the State Room. I worked the OU/OSU ball game and the  Governor   I think it was Governor Turner.  Roy Joseph Turner served  as governor from 1947 to 1951  You probably wouldn   t know. It was a  whole group of people and they left me a  10 tip and that was something  back then, a  10 tip. But anyway Abe Hesser went ahead and became  head of the Student Union. So he ended up becoming a real good friend  of mine. And he was later tourism director for David Boren when he was  Governor of Oklahoma.  A good reference letter when the time came.  Yes.  Were you also a dorm mother or a counselor?  9  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  A counselor. I took the counseling course and I was a dorm counselor.  That   s how I paid for my last two years room and board. The thing that  was exciting about that was you got a whole room and a bath together  again, you know. So that was real exciting. But you had to take a  counseling course     Before you started.  And it really came in handy when I was teaching home economics.  Was that hard to be in charge of a floor?  Well it wasn   t really for me because what I did was I walked into each  room and I told them   I knew that girls slipped out. We had     Curfews?  Curfews from eight o   clock every school week until Friday night and  then we could stay out until 11 but never past 12 o   clock. Sometimes  you could get permission to stay out until 11:30 or if you had something  really, really special out of town, you could get permission. And I went  in and I told them,    Now, if you want to go to the movie, tell me and  sign out. Or you come tell me that you need to go   then it   s going to be  all right. Or if you need to go to the library and study, if you   ll just tell  me so I know where you are and be honest with me about it, then it   s  just fine with me.    And I let them go. I didn   t have any trouble. I had  one little girl that called me back   I think she was in Colorado and she  forgot to sign out   you had to sign out when you went home. So she  called me and said,    I forgot to sign out     She wanted me to be sure and  know where she was. But I didn   t have a bit of trouble with them.  What happened if they were late without having permission?  Well, they   of course, you couldn   t go out. I wouldn   t let them go  anywhere. They couldn   t go to the movies or anything. Now this was  just the freshman and sophomores.  Okay.  It wasn   t juniors and seniors. But we had girls that made ropes and went  down. (Laughs) The thing that I remember in the dorm was, it wasn   t in  our dorm, but we had a panty raid then. That was the panty raid year.  Okay, it was the early    50s?  Mm-hmm.  10  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Really?  The panty raid   I had two or three friends of mine and they were going  home the next day. I mean it was no question whatsoever, they went  home. And Dean Stout was the Dean of Women then and we couldn   t  wear jeans or pants and you couldn   t wear your hair curled or up. You  had to have skirts to wear to school. The only time you could wear jeans  was on Saturday morning in the cafeteria. You could wear your hair  curled up on Saturday morning. Because you know we wore it in flat  curls then. But anyway, the funny part of it was she was very, very strict  and she did not want you wearing patent leather shoes because they  reflected your underwear. And you were not supposed to wear red  because it brought out the animal instinct in men    (Laughs)  Are you serious?  I   m serious, girl.  Not because it was OU  University of Oklahoma  colors.  (Laughs) No, just because it was   of course we laughed about it but we  didn   t get to wear jeans. I didn   t have the figure for the boy   s jeans and  see, you only had boy   s jeans. And then the girl   s jeans zipped up the  side. So you didn   t wear jeans.  You could have made your own I guess if you were in home economics?  Yes, well we probably couldn   t make boys jeans. Boys jeans just  weren   t, they didn   t have patterns for it then. But it was fun. Dorm life, I  wouldn   t trade for dorm life.  Kids miss out, I think.  Yes. Of course we didn   t have co-ed dormitories. When my girls came  up here to school, you had to sign up here then if they could stay in the  dorm and I wouldn   t sign. They   d say,    Mother don   t you trust us?    And  I said,    Yes I trust you.    That was the fun part of my life was to live in  the dorm. We ran around in our shorts and pajamas, and you know, got  in the corner and played cards, and we gave each other permanents and  colored our hair. I mean we used to have a ball. We didn   t have old boys  around. (Laughs) I mean it was just fun, you know? And I said,    You  didn   t have to cook your meals or anything like that. We just had a really  good time.     Did you have dances in the dorms?  11  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Yes and that was part of your counseling duties. We had them out on the  terrace.  Okay.  Out on the terrace. I don   t think we had them every night. It   s what you  call a social hour. See, the boys could only come to the living room in  the dorms. And then they   d buzz for you and you   d come down.  Okay.  They weren   t allowed upstairs on any of the floors at all. And they  weren   t allowed out of the living room. The only time they were allowed  out of the living room was when they carried our luggage or our things  upstairs when we moved in or moved out or whatever.  What did you do for music?  Well sometimes we had a band and sometimes we had records. All the  big bands were famous then. And you know we had an Allied Arts series  back then. Oh we had the Four Lads and all of those came in and we   d  have them. You had tickets like you did for the football and basketball  games. Do they still have where you had to do odds and evens?  No.  See there wasn   t room for everybody to get into Gallagher Hall, so it  was odd and even. So you had odd and evens   according to what your  name was. You had odd and even tickets, you know. Some games you  could go to and some games you couldn   t. And they had the same thing  for Allied Arts. So you just picked the ones that you know and you got  to go to. But you could usually find someone that wasn   t going to go.  Trade?  Trade with you.  Are there any bands that stick out in your mind that you went to see?  I know the Four Lads were one and then Benny Goodman was here and  we had some country westerns. (Laughs) And Lefty Frizzell.  I know him.  That   s some of the ones that I remember. The only reason why I  remember about Lefty Frizzell   my roommate was going home and she  12  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  went to OCW  Oklahoma College for Women , which is a co-ed now  but it was a girl   s school then. She is a dietician, and she   s two years  ahead of me in school. But we were running around together and then  we moved together up here. She moved up here with me. One reason  because she was going into dietetics and this was the best school for  dietetics. So she moved up here and she had a real good friend that was  going to be a dietician also. She had never heard country and western  music and she wasn   t crazy about country western music either but I  was. We went over there and she said,    Well what are you supposed to  do when they start playing it.    And I said,    Well when it gets real good  you just say    Ah-hah.       (Laughs) And before we got through with that,  she would say,    Ah-hah.    She loved it and I got a big kick out of it.  And did you dance?  Yes. But at the dorms we had dances out on the terrace.  If you were supervising, could you have a date yourself?  Yes. You could dance with them. You had to get it started.  Okay.  You had to get it started. And then my husband was thrown in Theta  Pond when we got engaged.  So he   s a graduate of OAMC   he graduated from here too?  That   s where we met.  Okay. So that moves us into another direction now. What was a typical  date like?  Well you didn   t have a car so you walked most everywhere you were  going. The only time you took a taxi was when you had a formal. The  Student Union ballroom was really popular. Also the TV room because  you see, TV just came out. You had TV rooms all over the Student  Union. We did not have one up until I was about a junior or senior in the  dorms   in the living room. We only had it in the living room. So of  course we had dances all the time. You   d have the Military Ball, the  Spring Ball, the sororities had their dances and everything. But the  ballroom in the Student Union was filled all the time, with dances. And  then they had, of course they had them on the terrace, too and  everything. The Student Union was really, really popular. It was brand  new and it was just really, really popular.  13  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Great places for kids to congregate.  And hang out. That   s where everybody would hang out.  What else would they do there besides the dances?  Well they had movies that they   d show in there. And they had all kinds  of meetings. They had religious meetings.  Did it have a cafeteria too?  Oh it had a cafeteria and every floor had a snack bar and a jukebox on it.  Is the cafeteria where the food court is now?  No, that whole bottom   see the State Room was   that   s all changed.  The State Room was over there where   there   s some shops over there  now. And it would be down in the hotel. Now the hotel is, as far as its  range, I think is about the same. The State Room now is called the     Rancher   s Club.  Rancher   s Club. You see, it   s right off of the hotel but it was down the  hall.  Okay.  And the cafeteria was just   it   s kind of like where the cafeteria is now  but it   s not near as big or anything as it is now. And it was more like   I  guess you would probably say it was more like a school cafeteria then.  You went through a line   a buffet line.  Is that where students in your dorm would go to get food then?  Yes, now you were required   I kind of believe you were required to eat  in the dorm, especially your freshman and sophomore years.  There probably weren   t many choices out in the community anyway.  Well the thing was, the dorms have got to have a number of people that  they know are going to eat there. And they   ve got   it   s something like  that.  It   s a business?  And we took taxi when we went to formals or anything, especially if it  14  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  wasn   t at the Student Union. We would just walk when it was at the  Student Union because I lived in Willard. Now David  Buetta   s  husband  lived in Bennett, clear over   it was way over there.  So tell me about him getting thrown in Theta Pond.  Well, see, he   s a year younger than me. We belonged to Wesley  Foundation, that   s where we met really, at Wesley Foundation. That   s  the Methodist church youth organization. You know, the center is right  across from     Right.  We helped to build a center. They built it. We were gone. It didn   t open  until 1954. But he went into the service and then he came back and  finished. But anyway, we had visitors on Wednesday night and we had  standing room only. We just had the little house over there then, a little  white house. We took all the inside walls out and built a Wesley  Foundation and we had a secretary and an assistant director and all that.  But we had that thing packed every Wednesday night. He claims when I  was a sophomore and he was a freshman that I came in with some girls.  And he turned to the boys, of course he wasn   t thinking anything about  getting married or anything because he was just a freshman, and he said,     That   s the girl I   m going to marry someday.     Love at first sight.  Well I don   t know. But anyway, when I was a junior and senior, you  know, he came over to the social hour with a bunch of boys from  Bennett. And so it was about half way through the hour he asked me to  dance and I had never seen him, never paid any attention to him rather.  He said when they left the boys said,    I think you could go with that  girl.    (Laughs) I said,    Well I was just being nice.    (Laughs) But  anyway we didn   t start going together until I was a senior. When we got  started going together, they threw him in Theta Pond. That   s what they  did then.  What time of the year was it?  Oh it was during the school year. It was close to   it probably might  have been in the spring. But see, school is out in May and so it wasn   t  warm by any means. And we had a reunion this weekend, this  Wednesday and Thursday, and there were forty-some of us there. Every  one of us met at the Foundation. It was a Foundation reunion. And  nearly every one of the guys got up and said about getting thrown into  Theta Pond. They all got thrown in Theta Pond when they started going  15  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  together. But we all met at Wesley Foundation. It   s really exciting  because nearly all of us have been married fifty years. There weren   t  very many divorces.  That says something, doesn   t it?  Yes.  So you got married right out of college then?  No, no he volunteered for the service and went to Germany. And so we  decided we   d be real practical and I would teach school in vocational  home economics. I got my first job. I thought I   d get way away from  campus because that   s when he decided to go to service. So I thought I   d  get way away from the campus and that would decide whether we really  needed to be serious or not. But anyway, I went to Eufaula, Oklahoma.  That   s between Muskogee and McAlester and he went to Germany. We  thought I   d save my money and when he came back we   d get married  because he was going to finish school at OSU. So we didn   t get married  until    56.  Until he finished?  Yes, until he got back.  Do you come back for very many functions at OSU?  Oh, now?  Yes.  Oh yes. Well you see we had season tickets to football games. He went  out for football at OSU when he was a freshman and he got kicked in the  head. (Laughs) Then he quit. He was out unconscious for a few days.  What were sporting events like then?  Well, we never won in football.  You had to wear dresses to that too?  No, we could wear pants if it was real, real cold. But most of the time we  wore dresses to it.  A dress up affair, too.  16  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Mm-hmm. It was pretty much a dress up affair. And we didn   t know  what sweat suits were then. So you know, of course we had corduroy  pants and stuff like that that we could wear. Mostly dress pants.  Well if you were interested in coaching girl   s basketball, did they have a  girl   s basketball team here then?  I don   t believe   they might have. But it wasn   t organized. We didn   t  have what you call   now there were intramural sports. But I took  ballroom dancing. I took archery. I took bowling. I took swimming.  Swimming?  Yes. Then you had to know how to swim before you could graduate  from OSU   or Oklahoma A M.  Everybody had to know?  Everybody had to know how to swim.  I   d have sunk.  (Laughs) Well I had a hard time and I never would have made it because  I didn   t   well, I knew how to dog paddle and all that. But as far as the  back stroke and the butterfly stroke and all that, I didn   t know. I had a  girl that lived next door to me and was a P.E. major. She   d get me up  every morning and oh, it would be so cold. And we   d go over to the old  gym, not the     Where the Architecture Building is now?  Probably     The gymnasium it says on the side.  Yes, the old gym is what we went to. Oh, that place was cold. And she   d  make me dive off of that diving board and then swim the length of that  pool. Then I had to get up and turn around, dive off of that diving board,  swim the length of the pool. She got me through that course. (Laughs)  What happened was the swimming teacher got pregnant and we got a  new one. And the swim teacher taught until she was really pregnant but  she couldn   t get in the pool with us you know and show us a lot of  things. But I learned how to swim.  Do you stay in touch with that person who helped you through that?  17  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  No. I can   t even remember her name now. It   s hard to say.  Do you stay in touch with any of the ones from that time period?  Oh yes, this whole bunch     And you knew them too?  Yes, there   s about seventy of us.  Scattered across the country or mostly in Oklahoma?  Yes, in fact we had a woman from Hawaii and one that came here from  Australia. We have them from everywhere.  How often do you get together?  Well we have a reunion every other year but we have a planning  committee the year before. If we don   t have it the year before, we have it  the first of the next year. We had this one in April. My husband and then  a couple from up close to Muskogee were co-chairmen so I   ve been  working. (Laughs)  So when you step on campus what do you think?  Well we went on a tour of the home economics building Wednesday.  We always go on a tour of something when we have a reunion here. And  so my sister-in-law was the one that helped build the heritage center. She  volunteered and worked with that for years. She passed away this past  July or the July before last. So she got us a tour of it two years ago when  we were here. So we went in home economics  Human Environmental  Sciences  the other day, and oh, it has changed so much. Dean Pat   Knaub  showed us around and she  sister-in-law  was a real good friend  of Pat   s. And I set up the tour and everything. All the scientific work  they do now, like on diabetics and heart trouble   I   m just impressed,  very, very impressed.  Sewing machines aren   t anything like they used to be.  Oh no, they weren   t even making those then. And then the thing that I   m  really interested in   I really got a wonderful education at OSU. I  designed my own house. I drew up the house plans, I can re-finish  furniture. The first house we had, I did all the furniture we had and did  all the curtains. We owned a small town department store, and so  everything I learned about fabrics and styles and decorating windows   I  use it everyday. I mean, knowing fabrics and how to buy, you can know  18  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  if it was really constructed well or not or if you are getting a good  bargain or not. And style shows. I had a demonstration course on how to  give demonstrations so I would give style shows and fabric things to the  Home Demonstration Club and the 4-H Club, to the Home Economics  Department. I would take my fabric and how to make a dress and a  pattern and all that stuff.  You knew your beveled seams?  Yes, yes. I just wouldn   t take anything for the leadership. And then I got  a lot of leadership from the Wesley Foundation. We had a banquet last  night. They would get up and say, they are leaders in the church, they  are leaders in the community, and I do politics. I   ve had the president of  OU, a real good friend of ours, David Boren. We campaigned for him  when he ran for governor and he   s been at the house. I   ve had teas for  him. Learning how to entertain, you know, living in the home  management house, which Dr. Knaub said the other day   that was pure  torture. (Laughs) They don   t have them anymore but you had to live in  the home management house for six weeks. You had to manage the  groceries, you had cook the meals, you had to do the laundry, we had to  have the old type of irons, you know with pressures. We did all the table  cloths. You had to have a smorgasbord, you had to have tea. During that  time you stayed six weeks.  And how many of you at one time?  Well it would probably be seven or eight of us. Sometimes there would  be nine. I did it in the summer time which was a great time to do it  because you didn   t have to rent a room or anything in the dormitories.  And that was the summer that I went to Madison, Wisconsin with the  national Kappa Phi, that   s the Methodist girl   s sorority. And we went to  Madison to the national convention and there was a doctor from  Madison that had a sailboat at the retreat that we were at. So he took all  us girls on a sailboat ride. We   d never seen a sailboat before in the flesh  and we went on one. So that was quite a treat.  Was that the furthest you   ve been from home?  Probably, yes I   m sure it was. I had never seen the Great Lakes before. I  hadn   t traveled very much before. But we   ve traveled a lot since then.  We travel a lot.  And you went to a conference in Columbus, South Carolina?  Yes, and that was the interracial conference. See segregation was going  on when we were here.  19  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  How did that come about that you got to go?  Well Wesley Foundation   our pastor, our student pastor   he   s in his  eighties and he meets with us all the time and helps us with our reunions  and everything   wonderful person. He doesn   t have a prejudice bone in  him. So that was his goal was to teach us not to be prejudice. And all of  us came from   well in my small town there was a light on there every  night. And I   m sure you coming from Tennessee you can understand  that.  I can.  So anyway, we befriended Langston University, their Wesley  Foundation. This retreat was coming up this convention in Columbus,  South Carolina. Well, we took two from Langston with us and then there  were about four or five of us. I guess there were six of us in all. And we  drove over Christmas holiday. And that was quite an experience because  we couldn   t even buy Dairy Freeze because they were with us. We  couldn   t eat in the cafes, couldn   t stay in a motel. So we stayed in  churches and we slept on the floor. We   d have to stop and one of us  white kids would have to go in and get sandwiches and we ate  sandwiches and stuff all the way down there, you know.  But we stopped   this was quite an experience   we stopped at a Dairy  Freeze to get a freeze because we all loved orange slushes and that kind  of stuff then. And they had the jukeboxes at all the Dairy Freezes and  everything. I don   t even know if they call them Dairy Freeze or not. But  anyway, we stopped and went up and they looked and saw those colored  kids in there and they wouldn   t serve us. They wouldn   t give us an ice  cream cone.  That was in South Carolina or Mississippi or where?  It was somewhere between here and there, I don   t remember exactly  what town it was in. But you know, you got the feeling and you   d be  kind of embarrassed and you   d get to thinking,    You know, if they  weren   t with us we could be having a real good time.    (Laughs) But that  wasn   t what we were doing and it would go away. We would have some  fun doing something. And then it   s real shocking, we had it at a colored  school in Columbus, South Carolina, and we stayed in a convention hall  downtown and then they bused us out to the school. Well the minute we  got off of the bus, they had picketing   they were picketing with signs.  And they had,    Jesus Just Black.    And that was a shock to me. I never  thought about it, but you get to thinking you know, he   s black to them  but he   s white to us, you know. But we had a really, really good time. I  learned a lot.  20  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  So was there a mixture then, about half and half? Or more     Probably, probably. But now we didn   t go into town for anything. Now  see this is in    52.  You were probably afraid to.  Yes that was about the time we had the first   we had them over for a  meeting and everything and our student pastor got fired for that here in  Stillwater.  For doing that?  We had them over   but we didn   t dance. They said we danced, but we  didn   t dance. You know those two deep party games, swinging games,  you know. Put your little foot in and bunny hop and you know all of  that. But that   s all we did. We didn   t have individual partners dance. But  we were chastised for having dancing with the coloreds in the basement  of the Methodist church in Stillwater, Oklahoma. (Laughs) So it sounds  like I was kind of a rebel   it was kind of rebel times I guess you would  say. (Laughs) But I had a lot of experiences at OSU   or Oklahoma  A M.  They changed the name, what did you think about that?  Yes they changed the name.  In    57-   58.  Between the time   now David graduated from OSU in    58 see. I think  they changed it right after I graduated. It didn   t bother me. And now I   m  glad they did change it because we really were getting beat known as  just an agriculture school and I think we really need to     Broaden our horizons?  Broaden our horizons. And come to find out, I just found out on  Wednesday that the home economics name that they changed, that was  the original name that the founder of the school back in 1908 wanted to  call it. It was something similar to the name, not exactly the same name.  Came full circle. Well how much in your closet is orange? How many  orange outfits do you have in your closet?  (Laughs) A bunch. I really   well, what   s real funny, I   ll have to tell this.  I have all my friends get me OSU stuff and David bought me a stained  21  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  glass OSU. And it   s beautiful and it   s made out of stained glass. So I  couldn   t figure out where I could hang it. I wanted to hang it in the  living room or dining room so you could see it from the road. (Laughs)  But anyway I hung it in my little kitchen window over the sink. So every  time I wash dishes I can see it. All of my friends got me placemats and  cups. Oh I   ve got a Barbie, an OSU doll that one of my friends found  somewhere and thought,    I   ve just got to buy that for her.    I   ve got  house shoes and pajamas. I have a lot of decorations for the house     napkins and cups and everything.  So when we played Troy  in football , (Laughs) I don   t miss a game   if  there is any way possible   on the radio, sometimes we don   t get it on  the TV. We had to buy the Nebraska game the other day but we did. We  do have the game on DirecTV on football and basketball. We   re real big  sports fans. But anyway, I had the placemats out, my OSU placemats  and the coasters and the cups and everything. And we got beat so bad  and it was terrible, and I was going to have company, my cousin was  coming from Oregon. So I got out my fall harvest centerpiece and all  that kind of stuff. David said,    Well we put the placemats up     (Laughs) I didn   t think you were that kind of fan.    Put the placemats up  because we got beat. (Laughs) I said,    No, I   m having company.       Uh-huh,     he said. We went to a wedding the other night and one of the girls  punched me on the shoulder and she said,    After the Nebraska game, did  you get the placemats back out?    (Laughs) David had told her. Said,     Did you get the placemats back out?    No, I bleed orange.  Pretty much. Well what advice would you give an incoming student or  someone thinking about going to OSU?  Well I don   t know whether it is true now or not, but back then a lot of  kids would go home a lot on the weekends and stuff and they didn   t  enjoy the campus life. And they don   t live in the dorm like they used to.  Now I don   t know whether dorms have changed or not, but that was part  of the   I would say, it   s good to live on campus and get involved. Then  I would participate in even more than I did and I participated in a lot.  But you can sure learn a lot of leadership and a lot of helping people.  We did, anyway. We   re really active in church and the community and  politics and we do libraries and we do Main Street and the chamber and  we do big town elections and organize retail   sidewalk sales. And you  know things like that. I feel like we learned a lot of that at OSU.  A lot of civic pride. Do you have any special memories about the  library?  Well I studied a lot. David and I studied over there a lot. We used to  date   it kind of used to be a favorite joke about it in my day,    Meet you  22  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  at the library.    That was a real good place to hang out because you  didn   t have very many places to   that and Boomer Lake (Laughs). But  we did a lot of studying. You   d see couples there all the time studying.  And it was just wonderful. It was the most wonderful thing I   d ever  seen.  Do you remember which floor you spent most of your time on?  Yes, mm-hmm. And like I said, I took that library course or snap course  and liked to have bombed it. But it   s not because   it   s hard, it   s really     cataloging and all. I learned how to catalog and all that stuff at OSU. I  took it and I took a religion course to raise my grade average. Both of  them liked to eat my bread basket.  Were the two big rooms there? Like the reading room and the browsing  room there?  Well I haven   t been in it in several years.  No, when you were here?  Oh yes.  Could students use them?  Yes, as far as I know we used every room in that library.  Okay.  Then in the archives and everything where all the records were kept and  everything. And of course, I took the course and we learned how to do  books and everything. It was really   that has helped me a lot with our  local library. When we were going to   I was on a committee and we  were going to do the decorating of our library. So many ideas and it had  been a long time since I had house planning in college and then color  schemes and everything had changed. So I made a motion that we get a  designer out of Texarkana   we   re real close to Texarkana. We were oh  so happy we did, with the end results. I told my husband, I said,    You  know that   s the prettiest men   s bathroom that I   ve ever seen.    He said,     How many have you been in?    (Laughs) The decorating is just  beautiful in that library and the landscaping. The city fathers didn   t want  to just lay the grass. So we decide that we wanted it landscaped and we  have a fountain and a gazebo in the back and you can go back there and  take a book and go back there and read. And we have people that have  donated benches and deer you know and statues and angels. But we have  butterfly trees and we have a lot of butterflies and we have mockingbird  23  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  houses and the grade school kids give their pennies and stuff to buy food  for the birds and do different projects like that.  A community affair.  And that is the pride of Broken Bow. But I was just a little bit  disappointed when they told me they weren   t having the degree in  library science anymore because we have a hard time in the system  getting librarians that have a degree in library science. When we first  started out with the system, it takes care of seven counties. And there  are   I don   t know how many libraries are in it and so we hire all the  librarians   the system hires all the librarians. The town does not hire the  librarians. The cities and towns only own the buildings. They don   t even  own the furniture and the books and stuff in the building. So when I first  started out in the system, we had to pass a millage that would add on tax  to support the systems and so we   ve done that twice. We   ve done it once  and then raised it again. It was pretty hard to do sometimes too.  When I first started out we had a hard time getting books. I had to beg  for them all the time. And then they decided you got your books  according to your circulation. So you got new books according to your  circulation. Well then they came out with VCRs and DVD   CDs and  VCRs. Well our librarian had been there for several years and she said,     I   m not going that way. I   m not going that road.    Because she said,    I  think a book needs to be a book to read. You don   t need to be listening  to it on whatever.    Well of course, so I said,    You   re not going to get  any VCRs and CDs until you have some to check out because you   re not  going to have the circulation. You don   t have any circulation figures.     So I said,    Do we have any petty cash?    And she said, yes we did. And I  said,    Just go to Wal-Mart and buy some CDs and VCRs.    And so she  did and that   s one of our biggest things right now. And I guess we may  have thirty computers.  That   s pretty good.  I mean they are constantly used. And like I said, we have technology to  do it all and our check out things. Our copy machines make more money  than any other library in the system. It   s because nobody in town has a  public copy machine. So we keep up with all the copy machines in the  system, the nine counties, with our copy machine. It   s used constantly.  And of course, when they use the copy machine they usually check out a  book. And then we, like I said, we do about eight to ten thousand books  a month, circulation. But we didn   t pay librarians anything, it was just  unreal. You had to almost love the job to do it. And they still are not  getting, the librarians in that system don   t get   but they finally got a  healthcare plan for them and a retirement plan for them. I   ve worked on  24  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  all kinds of committees to get that because I felt that was real important.  Sounds like you   ve represented the university very well.  Well yes, on the libraries.  On all of it.  It   s been hard. David says it   s been my asset for years. And we   ve had  book signings and I usually do a tea and the refreshments and the finger  foods or something when we have a book signing. We have several  authors which come out to Broken Bow.  Orange punch? Orange colored things?  (Laughs) No, I haven   t got that far yet.  Well someone told me I was supposed to ask you about trees.  Oh, well we have trees down there. I wonder who was that? (Laughs)  We have tall pine trees with clear river bottoms and it   s beautiful. That   s  God   s country. But anyway, and then it goes on up to where I   m from.  They really think Southeastern Oklahoma quits at McAlester      That   s what I heard.  But it goes on down to Broken Bow. And Broken Bow is where the  pretty part of it is.  Okay.  But anyway, and then the MK T Railroad came through   see I live  close to McAlester and so the MK T Railroad went by my house when  I was growing up and when I was in high school. Well they had an  intersection just about almost even with my house. It was a little bit  down. And the whistle blew on the train. Well if you are just visiting me  or David   my husband, came up and visited me but he thought it was  just running through the bedroom. But you get used to it. You   d know  about what time it was   well of course during World War II it ran every  thirty minutes, the train did. That   s back when the trains were really  popular. And so anyway, I wrote my dad when I was up here and I said I  wouldn   t be near as home sick if I could just hear a train and see a tree.  (Laughs) Hear a train and see a tree.  But where the basketball came in was our superintendent of school  played for the New York Knickers basketball. He could make a basket  25  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  with his nose. But anyway, when the girls would get good he would take  us over. Well we were in a Durant tournament one time, that   s what they  would think of it with the train. And we couldn   t get there on the bus  because it was snowing, you know, snow and ice was on the ground. So  he rented a coach on that train and he bought us new satin warm-up suits  and they were gold and black. That   s what our school colors were. We  all got on this train, the whole team and we went to Durant on the train,  it   s a straight shot. And he was from down close to Dennison, Texas. He  had friends and we stayed in their houses because we didn   t have the  money to stay in a motel. And we thought we were pretty sharp. We  were pretty good, too. We went to a tournament and we got on that train  and we took the whole coach over. And that was exciting.  Yes very much so.  That   s when I learned to be a basketball player. I taught school at  Ripley.  Okay.  I taught home economics and I was there till David finished school.  So a little over a year?  So it was    55 to    58. It was about three years. And I had student  teachers.  And then you got married and moved back to where?  We moved to DeKalb, Texas first.  Oh, Texas.  And then we took over his dad   s store in Broken Bow and that   s where  we retired. We were in the department store business from    58 to    02.  We had everything from babies to grandmas and grandpas. We sold   do  you believe this   we sold jeans for  3.99 and  1.99   Wranglers.  Children   s jeans for  1.99 when we first went to DeKalb, Texas in 1958.  Now they are what,  50?  Yes.  Is there anything I haven   t asked you about?  Well I   ve probably talked too much.  26  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  No you   ve done great. We   ve covered a lot. Let me just check and make  sure we haven   t forgotten anything. The only thing I was going to ask     what was your favorite spot on campus?  Well probably the library was. Of course I loved Willard Hall because it  was right there in front of Theta. And it was really convenient to  everything. And then of course I worked at the Student Union. The  Student Union was a favorite, too. Probably the library or the Student  Union would be the best.  Good answer. (Laughs)  Well it really was. That   s where I spent a lot of my time.  What was Homecoming like when you were here? Did they have house  decorations?  Yes.  Did they have a parade?  Yes, they had a parade and decorations and everything. I think the game  itself might be a little bit different. The boys didn   t walk over there and  of course, the stadium wasn   t nearly as big. But we stomped our feet  then.  Okay.  Seems like I remember the cold games real well. But anyway, but it has  always been a big event.  Walk Around wasn   t     More so than it is now. I think so. Just not as many, you know. But I  mean   you didn   t miss Walk Around. Nobody missed it because we  walked a lot anyway. There was no way to drive around because nobody  had cars. So it was more of a foot Walk Around than it is now.  So do you come back to most Homecomings?  Well just about. I come back to a lot of Homecomings. And I love the  basketball bash. They didn   t have those back then. Because basketball  season hadn   t even started.  If your husband lived in Bennett and you lived in Willard     27  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  He had quite a walk.  And then if you went on a date, did you walk downtown?  Yes, we   d walk downtown to the movies. But like I said, a lot of dates  ended up at the Student Union. A lot of times we   d go and watch the TV  because it was new and it was exciting. So we   d watch TV in the  Student Union, and besides that it was dark. (Laughs) They had it in a  room and it had to be almost dark because it was black and white.  What were some of the shows back then? Do you remember?  Oh yes. There was Bonanza and I Love Lucy and the family shows,  Leave It To Beaver and young family   what were they called   All in  the Family.  All in the Family.  And of course, the Frank Sinatra Show and the Andy Williams Show and  the Hit Parade and all of those.  Then you still had to be back to your room by eight o   clock?  Well yes. You didn   t date much during the week because you had to be  in by eight o   clock. But I don   t really think that was a bad deal. Because  when you come on this campus when you   re a freshman, especially if  you come from a small town or even a big town, your first time to be  away from home and you   re on your own, you need a little bit of  guidance. It   s so easy for them to not study and we had study hours. We  had study hours and pretty much you   re going to study between eight  and ten. You didn   t have a TV to watch. You could listen to the radio  but you know, you were pretty much going to study. And you had room  check too at 8:15 so you could go back and see if they were studying or  playing cards or whatever. Of course, you could play cards all you  wanted to after ten o   clock. But I don   t really think it was a bad deal.  And also, back then they sent our grades home.  To your parents?  Mm-hmm. Your parents had a lot of control over     It   s more mechanical and technical than it was then. We had the old  chicken wire and stick the paper through and tissues and we   d always try  to come up with something different. And now the parades, I think, were  probably a little bit better because everybody had a float. Everybody had  a float. And I think the Homecoming Queen was a little bit more...  28  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  Finchum  Norris  A bigger deal?  Yes or maybe just because I was young and it was kind of an honor and  a really a big event to be the Homecoming Queen. And all of the college  functions were really important. The dances and nearly every  organization had some kind of dance. They at least had one two or three  times a year. And then you had a Christmas   all the holiday dances. But  Homecoming was really   it   s always been really, really important.  Gives you time to wear your orange, right? Well if you don   t have  anything else, we will draw this to a close.  Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing your story today.  I enjoyed it.  -------  -------   
