 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Monday, April 4,  2016 ,  and I   m interviewing Colleen Branson for the Cowboys in Every County  interview series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Colleen, I understand you were a  journalism major at Oklahoma State. You have been director of the  Mannford Public Library for almost thirteen years.  Branson Yes.  Little Thunder Just shy a month. You are also involved with the Mannford Pilot Club, the  Historical Society, and you are an avid animal rescue person. I look  forward to hearing more about your life at OSU memories, your current  work. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Branson Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Branson I was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico. My dad was a Marine and he was  stationed at a military base at the time.  Little Thunder Wonderful.  Branson It would be if I remembered it. We left, I think, I was just over a year old. I  lived in Texas, North Carolina, Wisconsin, Virginia, and Louisiana.  Little Thunder Wow. Changing schools a lot.  Branson Yeah.  Little Thunder You mentioned what your dad did for a living. How about your mom?  Branson She was a homemaker.  5  Little Thunder Brothers and sisters?  Branson I have two older brothers. My oldest brother, Paul, is the senior graphic  designer with OSU. He actually received his bachelor   s and master   s from  OSU. My middle brother Scott, he got his bachelor   s in Management  Science and Computer Systems from OSU. He now works in Texas for     I think he works for a city doing computer stuff. You can tell I   m real  interested in his job. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Were you in Louisiana for part of high school then?  Branson I graduated. I went to eleventh and twelfth grade in Louisiana. Too close to  New Orleans.  Little Thunder What was that like?  Branson It was fun. For a teenager, it was a lot of fun. Been to Mardi Gras. Been to  the French Quarter and Bourbon Street and all that stuff that you get to see  on TV.  Little Thunder Right, and graduated around what year?  Branson I graduated in    82. Right after that, we moved to Stillwater because my dad  retired from the Marine Corp and started teaching at OSU.  Little Thunder In what field?  Branson He taught public relations, and then after his PhD, he was in Mass  Communications.  Little Thunder Great, so you have memories of Stillwater too?  Branson Yes, I do.  Little Thunder In addition to college experiences. What were some of the schools that stood  out for you that you attended, bearing in mind that you attended a number of  them?  Branson I think, Quantico. I spent quite a bit of time in Quantico, Virginia, which is a  Marine Corp base. It also has the FBI Academy there. It was kind of a neat  place to be in. I went to third through sixth grade there.  Little Thunder Kind of a special culture, I imagine.  Branson Yeah, yeah. I have a lot of fond memories of going to the pool. You had to  buy this little tag and stick it on your bathing suit. It was good times. Then,  6  high school was a lot of fun, like I said, being close to New Orleans and  French Quarter.  Little Thunder Right. What was your favorite subject in school?  Branson Reading. English.  Little Thunder Good for a librarian.  Branson Yes, it is.  Little Thunder Because I was wondering if there was any early school experience that kind  of foreshadowed your interest in being a librarian?  Branson Oddly enough, I remember in the sixth grade (this is a really strange story)  my sixth grade teacher, Mr. Hall, apparently was an alcoholic. He would  drink in class and we didn   t care. We got to do our own thing. I spent a lot  of time in the library. I remember going through all the fairy tale books from  different countries, reading every single one that I could. That maybe goes  back all the way to sixth grade.  Little Thunder Wow. Did either of your parents attend college?  Branson My mom did not. She became a homemaker just as soon as   my brother  was born about a year after they got married. My dad   trying to  remember   he has numerous degrees. I know that he has a degree in  psychology from the University of Wisconsin. I know he was the editor of  the newspaper at Quantico. I don   t remember if he has a journalism degree  or not. Which is probably why I went into journalism.  Little Thunder You got to go to his work place?  Branson No, actually, I didn   t. But just, I think, knowing that   s what he did. He  seemed to enjoy it a lot. When I got to OSU, I didn   t know what I wanted to  do.  Little Thunder Did they encourage you to go to school there since your dad was there?  Branson Yes. I   m hesitant to say this. I was eighteen and living at home. My dad  said,    You either need to get a job or go to college.    So I got a job and went  to college.  Little Thunder Where were your working?  Branson I worked at Wendy   s for a long time. I can   t remember how many years. I  worked at Wendy   s and then I worked at Long John Silvers. I worked one  7  week at Winchell   s donuts, which was next to Wendy   s. I don   t think it   s  there anymore.  Little Thunder There in Stillwater?  Branson Uh-huh.  Little Thunder So you were both working and going to school?  Branson Yes.  Little Thunder How many credit hours did you take initially?  Branson I would take anywhere from twelve to eighteen a semester.  Little Thunder Good load. Did you know, entering college then that you wanted to major in  journalism?  Branson No. I didn   t realize you have to go to a specific college of   College of  Journalism or College of Education. At the time, I think I wanted to be a  teacher, so I went to the College of Education and enrolled. I think after the  first semester, I switched to journalism.  Little Thunder Who were some of the professors that stood out for you?  Branson I cannot remember their names. There were several in journalism that I can  remember their faces and the classes, but right now I can   t remember their  names. I think one is still there, actually.  Little Thunder Did you work on the O   Colly?  Branson I did. Very few of my stories got published. They just weren   t dynamic  enough. I was more of a feature writer. I liked the soft stories, the people  stories.  Little Thunder Great experience. You probably didn   t really know anybody then at OSU  when you entered since you had gone to school in these different places?  Branson No, no. But I made some really good friends there.  Little Thunder Where did you stay?  Branson I lived in my own apartment.  Little Thunder From the beginning?  8  Branson From the beginning. Yes. That was an interesting experience, living alone  with a cat. I had a cat.  Little Thunder And paying the bills     Branson Paying the bills. My dad was very generous. He helped out with school.  From my job I was able to pay my rent. I didn   t drive, so I didn   t have to  worry about a car, insurance, or gas. In Stillwater, you can walk everywhere.  Little Thunder Right. Was there another favorite class or two you had outside of your  major?  Branson I took Poetry with Nuala Archer and I really, really enjoyed that class. I took  all the poetry classes I could. The advanced. I don   t know if it went any  farther than that. It kind of spoiled me on reading other people   s poems.  Little Thunder What buildings did you have your classes in?  Branson Mainly the journalism building. (Laughter) I can   t remember all of them.  Wow. I do remember the second semester I was at school, I had some kind  of chemistry or ag class all the way across campus early in the morning. I  dropped out that semester. (Laughter) I could not handle that. At the time, I  really didn   t know what I wanted to do. I dropped out and I went back to  school.  Little Thunder Was it hard to get back in?  Branson No, I think once I figured out what I wanted to do, I enrolled and got my  degree in three years after that because I would take summer school as well.  Little Thunder Right. Did you have time for a social life between working and going to  school?  Branson I sure did. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Tell us a little bit about that. What were some fun things you did?  Branson We would   I met, oddly enough, I met somebody in my first semester in  speech class who was from Mannford. We got to be friends. He   s still here  now in Mannford. Through him, I met some other people, Brad and Mark.  We hung out and we would go to different functions and concerts. There  was Steven Wright, the comedian. I remember we went to see the movie,  Eraserhead, on campus. I don   t know if you have seen that movie. It   s  weird. The director accomplished what he wanted to accomplish because we  walked out of there, just feeling weird. You know, just hang out at people   s  9  homes. I remember Eskimo Joe   s when they only served Coors and Coors  Light. They didn   t have t-shirts or cheese fries.  Little Thunder Right. That is interesting that you ended up in Mannford and you were  hanging out with the Mannford group.  Branson Well, one of the Mannford group actually introduced me to my first husband  who was from Mannford. So after I graduated from OSU, we moved back  here.  Little Thunder Did you marry after graduation?  Branson Uh-huh. Yes. There   s another weird story. When I was going to college, I  was dating a young man named Morgan, and him and I and his family, we  were going to Big Splash in Tulsa. There were several women in the car, so  we had to stop for a tinkle break. We happened to stop in Mannford. There  was a gas station at the intersection here in town. I remember getting out of  the car and going,    Oh my gosh, who would live here? I would never live  here.    Because I didn   t see anything else. I thought,    This is it.    Oh my  gosh. Never say never.  Little Thunder That   s a cute story. What do you remember about things like Homecoming  at OSU, or parades or     Branson I am trying to remember if I went. I think I went to one Homecoming  parade. I saw my first streaker at OSU. I think it was down by Washington  Street. Yeah.  Little Thunder In between classes?  Branson No, I think it was   there was something going on. There was either a  holiday because things get kind of crazy around Halloween or Homecoming.  Little Thunder Right.  Branson I seem to remember there was a lot of activity out and about. And then that.  Little Thunder How about memories of the library?  Branson I remember doing a lot of research papers and having to go into the library. I  am the world   s best or worst procrastinator. I would wait until a few days  before it was due and just do everything I could in one night. I remember,  there are some places in that library that look a little bit scary. I would not  go down that aisle. I would find some other reference to use. Or you   d open  a book and there   d be pages cut out. I thought,    Who would do that?    That   s  terrible.  10  Little Thunder How about memories of Theta Pond or sporting events? I don   t know if you  went much to them.  Branson I didn   t. I   ve never really been into sports, so I didn   t ever go to any sporting  events. I had my one and only blind date at Theta Pond.  Little Thunder How was that?  Branson That was not good. (Laughter) It started out fine. Then, he mentioned that he  was really into certain types of activities that were shocking to me. I was  like    Okay, bye.     Little Thunder Good you were meeting in a real public place.  Branson Yes. I was thankful for that.  Little Thunder How about any memories, special memories of Graduation Day?  Branson I had a false graduation because my last semester I took a statistics class,  which, my math brain is not fully developed. I did not pass Statistics. But I  went through the ceremony, anyway, because I didn   t know I didn   t pass  yet. We hadn   t gotten our grades. I ended up having to take a couple classes  after that to make up for that.  Little Thunder Right. Now, after graduation, how did you   what did you do next?  Branson I moved to Mannford and got married. Experienced culture shock because I  went from New Orleans to Stillwater to Mannford and it was very, very  different. We lived out in the country and it was   I didn   t drive.  Little Thunder Because you didn   t have a car or you just hadn   t learned?  Branson Both. So my brother was teaching me how to drive. I took the driver   s test,  or not driver   s test, the permit test. I got that. Then eventually, I got my  driver   s license and a car. As soon as I got mobile, I went and applied at the  Mannford Eagle Newspaper here in town and got the job as reporter. About  a year after that, the editor moved on, and I became the editor of the  newspaper.  Little Thunder Wow. So you put your journalism degree to use.  Branson I did. I worked there a couple years. That   s how I got to know the town and  people. Then, all th at  time I was working at the Mannford Animal Clinic  as kind of a vet tech, but I wasn   t skilled.  11  Little Thunder You were doing that part time?  Branson Uh-huh, uh-huh.  Little Thunder Okay.  Branson I cleaned cages and stuff like that and bathed dogs. I loved that job so much  that I just didn   t want to quit. I worked both jobs. Sixty to seventy hours a  week got to be a little much. After a while, I left the Mannford Eagle. A  gentleman started up his own newspaper called the Mannford Star. I went to  work for him as the editor. I would go to different places every week. See  what was going on and take pictures. The library was one of my regular  stops. The director started asking me if I wanted to help her out with story  time. I said,    Sure.    I would come down and I would do story time with the  kids. Eventually, a position opened up here. I was becoming increasingly  disillusioned with the newspaper business, so I left there and went to work  here.  Little Thunder Were you finding you didn   t get to pursue the stories that you wanted or     Branson Might have been a personality conflict. There was other things. I was  meeting other newspaper editors who had become hardened, I guess, to  some situations that were very sensitive. I thought,    I don   t want to get to  that point. I don   t want to have a collection of accident pictures in my desk.     I thought,    I better get out now.     Little Thunder This positon opened up. It was just for a librarian?  Branson It was just for a librarian. Actually, it was one full-time position, I guess, but  between the library board and the director, they couldn   t decide on just one  person. So they hired two of us for part-time positions. The other girl  eventually went on to bigger and better things. I think she became a teacher,  so they offered me the full-time job.  Little Thunder What have been some of the opportunities working for a small town library?  Branson What do you mean?  Little Thunder What have been some of the good things about working for a small town  library?  Branson You get to see people grow up. It   s good when people come back and say,     This is my son or daughter. I remember when I came in here and you gave  me my library card.    I think,    They   re much older and I   m not.    (Laughter)  That   s neat, watching people grow up and being a part of the community.  Because we try to do things within the community. We were recently at a  12  health and safety fair at the school. We always try and be in the Christmas  parade and that kind of thing. I think the best part of this job is the people.  Little Thunder You have one person working under you? Is that right?  Branson Yes. We just lost our part-time person. I   ve been interviewing and just today  hired somebody.  Little Thunder How about some of the challenges of being director of a small town library?  Branson Well, the city is really good to us. I look at and talk to my colleagues. We  have a really good budget, but sometimes it still doesn   t seem to be enough  money when you want to buy books. And our space is limited right now.  We   re looking at expanding. Until then, whatever books we put in, we have  to take something out. That   s challenging.  Little Thunder Have you expanded the book collection much?  Branson I think we have. I   m pretty sure we added two shelves, two full shelves since  I have been here. It   s grown quite a bit. We   re bursting at the seams.  Little Thunder I hope you get that new space.  Branson Yes.  Little Thunder How did you get involved with the Mannford Historical Society?  Branson When I started working at the Mannford Eagle, one of the ladies who  helped   she was on the ground floor when the historical society formed     she invited me to come to a meeting because she wanted the newspaper to  have a connection with the historical society. Because good publicity is  everything. I started going to the meetings and then, I joined.  Little Thunder What are the goals of the society?  Branson I think I have a brochure. Because it   s probably better, more eloquent in  here than I could come up with. (Reading)    Seeks to record and promote the  historic diversity of the land and settlements that once stood close to the  junctions of the Cimarron and Arkansas Rivers.     Little Thunder Okay. It   s really a beautiful area.  Branson It is. The museum, which is at that end of town, across from McDonald   s     we   re actually at one of the highest points in town. You can see the lake  really well from there. It   s really amazing.  13  Little Thunder I   ll have to take a trip up there.  Branson Yeah.  Little Thunder Now, you belong to the Mannford Pilots    Association?  Branson Uh-huh.  Little Thunder Which I understand helps children with brain injuries?  Branson Yeah, I was going to look that up. We call it the ABCs of Pilot. Wow, I   m  blanking out right now on the Pilot Club. We visit the Pre-K school and do  presentations on helmet safety and crossing the street and that sort of thing.  We recently have been helping the LD  learning disorder  classes at the  schools get the equipment that they need. We   ve also helped the nursing  home. I think one year they bought TVs, big screen TVs for them. We  recently started going up there once a month and doing a story hour     Little Thunder So it   s intergenerational services you provide?  Branson Uh-huh.  Little Thunder How neat. You meet once or twice a month?  Branson We meet, Pilot Club, meets twice a month. Yeah.  Little Thunder How about your animal rescue work, do you     Branson I think she   s  Branson   s friend who recommended her for interview  is  exaggerating about that. Of course, I have two dogs that have been, three  dogs that are rescued. But I have four all together. I guess they   ve all been  rescued. And   let me think   I   ve got five cats. They were all   last one  wasn   t a rescue.  Little Thunder But it   s true that in the country, people dump animals a lot, don   t they?  Branson They do. That is one thing that is really near and dear to our hearts up here.  Couple times a year, the library tries to do something for the animal shelter.  We   ll have a Santa Paws Tree. I plan on doing something this summer  during our reading program to benefit the animal shelter. In fact, I have a  bag of leashes in my car right now for them.  Little Thunder How neat. It really does position you to do some different things for the  community, doesn   t it?  Branson It does. I never envisioned I would be here or this active in my town.  14  Little Thunder Or claim Mannford as your town?  Branson Exactly.  Little Thunder How do you think OSU   earning your degree there   impacted your life  overall?  Branson I wouldn   t be here if it weren   t for OSU. Even though I didn   t end up  pursuing my degree, I think I   m where I   m supposed to be. None of that  would have happened without OSU. Going to school, it taught me discipline  and responsibility and respect. All of that I had at home, but it   s different  outside of the home.  Little Thunder How do you show your OSU Pride? Is that important to you?  Branson It is. It   s very important. However, my, the other librarian that works here,  she   s an OU  University of Oklahoma  grad. It   s funny because there   s this  back and forth about OU and OSU. For a while, I welcomed that here  between us, but then, I guess I took it a little more personal than she  intended it. So, I said,    Hey, guess what? We   re not doing that anymore.     OU is a good school. They have good programs and it   s a beautiful campus.  But so is OSU. And they   re better? (Laughter) It   s so crazy here because  some people are vehemently one way or the other.  Little Thunder Do you think it   s sort of divided territory then? Sort of half-and-half?  Branson I think it   s probably forty-five, forty-five and there   s small percentage that  that family are both. We can get along.  Little Thunder What are some ways that you   ve stayed connected to OSU? You mention  that you don   t really care for the sports scene. But what are some other  ways that you stay connected?  Branson I try to read I think it   s called the State magazine, which my brother helps  put together. My husband works in Stillwater, not for OSU, but I still go  there. My dad has   my mom started a scholarship program in my dad   s  name at the school of Journalism and Broadcasting. They have a dinner  every year, honoring and giving out their awards. We go to that. I try to keep  up with what is happening. Sometimes I go there and I   ll pick up an  O   Colly. I feel so old.  Little Thunder That   s neat, the scholarship   s a neat thing. What advice would you give to  OSU students today?  15  Branson That is a good one. Follow your heart. Do what you want to do. Don   t do  what somebody else expects you to do. Because it   s true,    Do what you love  and you never work a day in your life.    Well, maybe some days. It   s worth it  to have a job that you care about. I remember when I was going there, one of  my friends that I hung out with, Brad, he said when he started going to OSU  somebody told him,    If you fail a class, you take it over. If you get a better  grade, that cancels out the bad grade.    He believed them. Then there were  kids, students who just wouldn   t come to class. I thought,    Why are  you   why   .    Because it   s not cheap. I don   t understand why people would  enroll and then not go. That was perplexing.  Little Thunder How about faculty or administrators? Have any advice for them?  Branson I remember, I wanted to succeed and do well in a class when I thought that  the professor or TA  teaching assistant  cared about me. Maybe they didn   t  know my favorite color or middle name or anything like that, but they cared  about how I did in class. That meant something.  Little Thunder What can you tell us about Mannford or Creek County, even, that a visitor  should know or see or experience?  Branson There is an incredible amount of history here. I   ve walked down to caves  that have petroglyphs in them. Of course, there   s caves that the Dalton and  Doolin gangs have hung out in, but what cave in Oklahoma hasn   t housed a  criminal like that? I don   t know. I   m at a loss again.  Little Thunder Well, the petroglyph cave was special. Certainly, just the lake. I mean, being  near the lake.  Branson Yeah, being out on the lake is pretty special. It seems like a lot of OSU  students and alumni are really loyal to the school. What do you think it is  about OSU that sparks such loyalty? At times it feels like a really big  family. We   re all connected some way. You can see an OSU person  somewhere else completely, and in another state, and you   ll connect. I think  that is neat.    Oh, we   re friends.    Just because they went to OSU, it feels like  family.  Little Thunder Is there anything that you would like to add that we didn   t cover today?  Branson Oh, I don   t know. Probably. But can   t think of anything. (Laughs) It   s really  strange. You called the day after that friend that I mentioned, that I met my  first semester, has had a tragedy in his life. I   ve had to contact my other  friends that were a part of the group, so we can all pray for him and his  family.  Little Thunder Be there for him.  16  Branson Yeah.  Little Thunder I   m sorry to hear that.  Branson I can   t think of anything else. I know that some of the best memories I have  were when I was going to college. I hear people talk about college and it  being hard work and it was, but I had fun, too. Think I had a four point in  English and a 3.5 in Journalism. I wasn   t a slouch.  Little Thunder No, and you were working on top of that.  Branson Yeah. It was a lot of fun.  Little Thunder It   s important to make time for that.  Branson Yeah, I think so.  Little Thunder Thank you for your time today, Colleen.  Branson You are welcome, Julie. Thank you.  -------  -------   
