 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Wednesday, May 4, 2016. Also joining me is Anna McDougal. Today we   re in Cotton County, Oklahoma, interviewing David Gammill for the Cowboys in Every County Oral History Project. David, so nice to have you today.  Gammill Good to have you here.  Nykolaiszyn David, let   s learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell me the year you were born and where you were born?  Gammill Nineteen fifty-three, I was born in Wichita Falls, Texas. My parents lived just a half a mile east of our location right here, and I grew up there in that location. Their doctor was in Wichita Falls.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, tell me a little bit about your parents.  Gammill They are lifelong residents of Cotton County. My dad and his family farmed. My mother   s dad had an electric company in Devol, but when they got married, they full-time farmed as their only source of income. Raised three of us kids. I have an older sister and younger brother. We were all born at the same hospital in Wichita Falls. We went to a small country school called Ahpeatone. I went through the fourth grade before the school disbanded, and my brother was in first grade. Because of the school disbanding, all the kids, (there were forty kids in that school) we were allowed to pick where we wanted to go to further schooling, so we picked Walters. We were the furthest students that attended Walters. We were nineteen miles     Nykolaiszyn Wow   Gammill    on the end of the bus route. Our kids ended up going to Walters, too. Same situation for them: we were the first ones on the bus and the last ones 5  off. We payed dearly for the privilege of being able to go to Walters, but it was the best school in the area at the time.  Nykolaiszyn Going back to your time at the country school, how would you get there?  Gammill They had a bus route; they had two buses. In fact, my dad drove one of those buses. You know, it was one of those deals where the local farmers a lot of times trying to pick up some extra pay doing some extra little jobs around. That was one of the things he did.  Nykolaiszyn Well, thinking about your time during those early years, what would you take for lunch to school?  Gammill We ate at the lunch room. I was there for four years, and we had two different cooks during that time. The first two years were great. We had a very ingenious cook. She had a lot of different things, and she was a good cook. The last two years, we had red beans four times a week, (Laughs) and it wasn   t so good. It was kind of interesting because the school went through the eighth grade. There were four grades in one room and four grades in another room. At lunch time, we all had to go down this one little hall, and it had a place you had to wash your hands before you could go eat. Then go in, sit on the benches in the lunch room.  It had outdoor toilets when we first started. The last year, they did eventually get indoor toilets. It was a husband-and-wife teachers. One taught the upper grades, and one taught the lower grades. It was an interesting time. It was actually a hard learning experience at the last because the school was disbanded because of problems within the school. The last teachers fostered a lot of discontent amongst the community. It broke the community up, too, when they disbanded it, and we went our ways. My grandmother lived at Walters, and I had cousins that went to Walters, and so we wanted to go there, too.  Nykolaiszyn Is the school building still standing?  Gammill Yes it is. We go to church there still. They consider it a community building. We don   t own it, but they let us keep having services there for keeping it up. We   re the only ones that use it. It had an old gymnasium, and it fell into disrepair over the years because we couldn   t maintain it. We didn   t have control of it anyway. The roof is falling in. It was built by the WPA back in the day. It was a poured-concrete gymnasium, and the shell is there, still in fantastic shape.  Nykolaiszyn Was it an easy transition to go to Walters for you?  6  Gammill Oh, it was a big, big change. It was a big school compared to where we had been. We had forty kids in our whole school in Ahpeatone, and there were seventy-five kids in my grade in Walters. My grade was bigger than most over there. Then, just dealing with town and so many kids, we were not used to going to town like that at that time. That was   64 when we started going to Walters. Over time, it was the best thing that would happen, but you   ve got to also give credit to the little country schools because, of the kids that went to Ahpeatone, almost invariably it would be an Ahpeatone kid that was valedictorian or salutatorian at Walters. There was a lot of talent in this community.  Nykolaiszyn Being raised on a farm, I   m sure there were a fair amount of farm chores you had to do. With your commute to Walters, how did you work in your morning chores, or did you have morning chores?  Gammill We really didn   t. We had chickens, but we didn   t   . The only thing we had milk cow for in my youth was when we had show calves. We had nurse cows for the show calf, but they had given up on milking by the time I got big enough to do that. As we got older, then we all, all three of us kids, had show calves, and we were absolutely   our job to take care of them, morning and evening. It was an easy enough thing if you get up early enough to do it.  Nykolaiszyn  In  4H or FFA?  Gammill Yeah, both. My sister was in 4H through the whole time because back then they didn   t have girls in FFA. Then, me and my brother were both in FFA. I was the president of Walters FFA as I went through.  Nykolaiszyn While you were going to school at Walters, are you drawn to any subjects in particular?  Gammill I was drawn to science and math. I ended up being the salutatorian for my class. After I graduated, they changed the rating system. I would have been valedictorian, but there was a girl that did not take chemistry and trigonometry and engineering and everything else, and she was valedictorian. I just had a 3.99 average, and so   . (Laughs) Back in the day, there weren   t scholarships, free rides that went with it anyway, but it was just a matter of pride.  Nykolaiszyn Were your parents very encouraging with education?  Gammill Oh, yeah, absolutely. Neither one of them went to college. My dad, he was always studying farming operations. Then, when things got hard on the farm, he actually got a correspondence electronics course, and he became a TV repairman on the side. I don   t think it ever amounted to much money, 7  but it showed you his potential, that he could learn to do that with a set of books. They were always pushing us kids to be the best that we could be.  Nykolaiszyn Well, kind of take me through your first exposure to OSU. How did you start thinking about going to school, going to college at OSU?  Gammill Well, it was my intent when I was a senior in high school, I was going to go to vet school, and, of course, that was the only place. They had an OSU vet college day for seniors, and I went up for that. It was one of those life changing moments, you might say. When I was fourteen years old, I ran a combine here on the farm. I got my hand in the combine, and it pinched the end of my finger off and split between here and ran a bolt through the back of my hand. That healed up okay, but it left me   that I   m sensitive to cut flesh. It never dawned on me that there would be a correlation, but I went to vet day up there, and they were working on a horse. They had cut into its shoulder, and I turned white as a sheet and nearly passed out.  I mean, my legs wouldn   t hold me up. We decided that probably wouldn   t be my course of action, but I decided that was the place to go to get the best education. I decided I was going to go to OSU anyway, just pursue something else, which I did. I went into animal science and ag econ when I got there. That was what initially   I guess it was other things, too, because when you   re in FFA, you go to OSU regularly through high school, anyway, to different contests and conventions and stuff like that. I was familiar with the campus somewhat, and it   s still built on that notion that that was the best school in the state.  Nykolaiszyn Well, when you   re graduating high school, what year did you graduate high school?  Gammill Seventy-one.  Nykolaiszyn When you graduated in    71, how did you get to Stillwater? It   s your freshman year; you   re moving in. How did you get to Stillwater?  Gammill Well, there was some function that we had at Walters for seniors, and there was a person there from a fraternity. He said    You ought to come live at our dorm.    It was kind of silly, but I really had no clue what a fraternity was and really what he was talking about. He was ag-based, and he said that their house was ag-based and that they   d like for me to go there. I thought,    That   s what I   ll do     That   s how I ended up at AGR house. One car, with a suitcase and a box or two of belongings, and drove myself up there. It was so simple back then. I   d move home for the summer. I could get it all   it wasn   t no problem at all to move it in the car. My kids, move them to college, and my gosh, it takes a moving van. (Laughter) Anyway, that   s how I got there. I was invited to join AGR, which I did, and lived there. Of 8  course, that was going really from a small town and moving away from home, and moving into a fraternity was a totally different world.  Nykolaiszyn Well, what were you driving? What kind of car did you have?  Gammill A   65 GTO, hot rod, three deuces, if you know what that is. That   s a hot rod motor. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn How   d you get that car? How   d you come across it?  Gammill Oh, we bought it at a used-car lot in Lawton, and I worked summers and got paid. That   s the way we handled things as I was a kid. We kids worked on the farm for my dad, and we got paid hourly wages. We kept it written down on a card or on a calendar every day that we worked. He   d pay us at the end of the summer what we   d earned, and I paid for the car. By that time, we were allowed to keep our show cattle, and so I was having a few calves to sell by then, too. Anyway, it was back in the day when a car probably got twelve miles a gallon, but it didn   t cost but twenty-five cents a gallon to buy fuel, so it was easy. I will say, the one big support that I got from my parents going to college is that they did pay for all my gas and insurance on the car. I had scholarships and other   . I worked through college, but I had scholarships, paid a lot of my way.  Nykolaiszyn You drive to campus; you move into the AGR house. Describe the house for me back then.  Gammill Most everybody lived in a great big square dorm at the back of the house with bunk beds, just rows and rows of bunk beds. There were some other rooms, and as time went on, I was able to move into one of the rooms when I got a big brother. He had a room. Everything was, oh, I guess you   d say pretty controlled. There was strict rules about no women in the house, no alcohol in the house, and you   re in by this time on certain days. You got to keep your grades up and act like a gentleman and such stuff as that. Some things were policed better than others. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember your house mom?  Gammill It was Mom Bea. I am trying to think what her name really was.  Nykolaiszyn That   s what I hear a lot of people call her. I was just making sure it was the same one while you were still there. (Laughter) What did you think of Mom Bea?  Gammill Oh, she was good for teaching manners, and that   s about it. (Laughter) Didn   t have whole lot more function than that. I guess she   d tend to keep 9  things a little more calm at the functions that she was at. It was interesting and all that.  Nykolaiszyn Well, how did you decide on your major? You switched, of course, from vet med.  Gammill Oh, in the back of my mind, I always hoped that there would be a way to come back to the farm, even though it certainly was not guaranteed. My dad   s operation was certainly not big enough to support two families. I had the interest in that, and yet I also had dreams that I   d get an education of my background that I could find a job with, back then, Farmland or some big ag company that would pay me for what I could do. I guess it   s just one of those things that God leads you in different ways and opens doors and closes doors. When I got out of college, or was finishing up, I was the third highest in my class in the college of animal science. I went to every interview that could be gone to.  I was offered a traveling  feed  salesman in Nebraska or a 4H agent in Duncan, Oklahoma, and neither suited me. They didn   t pay diddly, and it was going to require me to be away from home. The traveling feed thing was four nights a week away from home. The last two years at OSU, well, I was working for the animal science department in research. They offered me the management of the new animal research building there when I graduated, so rather than go off to some great big job, I stayed there working for OSU. It paid okay, but it wasn   t nothing that I   d want to do for the rest of my life.  Nykolaiszyn Before we get to a lot more after graduation, are there any professors or classes that really stick out in your mind from your time on campus?  Gammill Oh, definitely. Dr.  John  Goodwin, the ag economist, and he was also sponsor for the AGRs. He was an amazing person. Anybody that ever had his class, they   . He mainly taught one class, beginning econ class. Of course, we had contact with him throughout the time because of AGR ties. Anybody that ever went there and had his class remembers him because he knew everybody   s name. Every kid that was in the college of agriculture went through his class. He knew everybody   s name. Ask you where you   re from, and he   d remember that, too. He had a different way of testing. His tests   I think you were allowed, what, three hours for semester tests, three or four hours.  Well, every single person would spend three hours because he said if you knew anything, he wanted you to have a place to write it down, and then he graded on a curve. It was a grueling thing to get through his tests. Then, the other one was the Dr. Wettemann, Robert Wettemann, in the College of Animal Science. I worked for him, and he was a wonderful, kind man. Very 10  intelligent. There were a number of people. I was trying to think   . The guy that had slaughter class, he was Cajun. I can   t remember his name offhand, but, anyway, he was really a good teacher. It is kind of an odd subject that might inspire a person, (Laughs) but anyway, I do like it, too.  Nykolaiszyn You mentioned you worked while you were in school. Before you ended up working with research, did you have other jobs on campus?  Gammill Right, I believe I started out   because in high school I worked after high school at a auto parts store in Walters. I went up there, and I didn   t work the first semester because pledging took up a gob of time. Then second semester, I got on at Simpson Pontiac in the parts department, and I worked with a couple of guys there. The next semester, Simpson Pontiac moved to a bigger building downtown, and they didn   t use me in the parts department that year. I just did, like, janitorial work for them, cleaning up and all. Then I worked for a food service. I think the guy   s name was A. J. Little, the boss man out there, ol   crusty, Army guy, it would seem, that was head of the food service department. There were a number of us AGRs that worked out there for him. We cut meat, and we packed meat, and we delivered stuff to the dorms and to the fraternities. Learned to dip snuff with that bunch, and similar valuable things. (Laughter) I did get a better job. It had its perks. Every now and then, you could get on the bakery run, something you volunteered for. You got on real early morning. It was like five in the morning that you had to do it, but you got some things that fell on the floor. You   d get a donut or a roll (Laughs) that supposedly fell on the floor, and you had plenty to eat.  Nykolaiszyn Well, what would you do for fun?  Gammill Well, I wasn   t a real fun guy, I guess. (Laughs) I came home twice a month, or every other week, because I was dating Debbie, my current wife, high school sweetheart. She was two years behind me, and I came home every other week. My dad was paying the gas, so I worked all day Saturday doing farm work for him. Then we went out Saturday night, and then I went back to school on Sunday afternoon. You know, me and had a few guys that might go out a little bit during the week but not very much. Of course, the fraternity back at that time, they had stuff scheduled. They were promoting activity between the fraternities and sororities, and I had to protest that I didn   t want to go to the dance deal with the other girl because I had a girlfriend. They were pretty good. They let me out of that, and I didn   t go. I was pretty studious, and I studied a lot.  Nykolaiszyn Didn   t spend any time at the Strip or   .  Gammill Not very much. Back then, I did more after I got married (Laughter) than what I did before. Things got interrupted some, too. I went the first year and 11  became a member of AGR. Then that summer my dad had my brother at home helping with the farming, and I got a job working in Walters for the rural electric. Halfway through the summer, my dad had a heart attack. I laid out the fall semester and planted the wheat crop, and so I didn   t go. During that time, also got engaged. When I went back to school, I did not move back into the fraternity. I was still a member and attended the business meetings and stuff, but I had plans to get married. I bought a trailer house and started making payments on that, so that when we did get married, we   d have that place to live.  Nykolaiszyn Where   d you park it?  Gammill B and H Trailer Park south of town. You went down (well, shoot, I   ve forgotten the name of the road) the first road that goes south out into the country, as you come in from the west. You go, like, a mile or mile and a half south and then turn back east, and it was laid out there in that flat creek bottom. Had a roommate from Walters that lived with me to help pay the way back then.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. Well, thinking about what   s going on in campus and politically, what was the climate like on campus?  Gammill Oh, the things that stick out the most back in that day, it was the time of hippies and waterbeds and streaking. That   s while I was there. In fact, it was after I got married (it was the next year,    74) that that streaking incident happened there on the Strip. It was also the time the Vietnam War was going on. I guess kind of a significant thing, my first semester at school was when they had the lottery for the draft. All us guys in the fraternity, we were sitting around listening to see what number they got, and I actually got a low number. I was fifty-four, so I was called up for physical and stuff. I had mild asthma, and I took asthma treatments as a kid. Because of that, I was rated 4F, so I didn   t end up having to go. It was a time when that lottery part went in, you did not get relief from duty just because you   re going to college. I don   t guess there was anybody out of my pledge class that ended up having to go. That was during the time, while we were there, that the Tumbleweed was built, and the Jail on the Strip was built at that time. Those were the big dance hall, drinking spots.  Nykolaiszyn Would you take part in the streaking?  Gammill No  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn I have to ask.  Gammill No, I didn   t. (Laughter) In fact, I missed it. I didn   t even get to see it  We   d been down to the Strip, but we weren   t there at that time. (Laughs) 12  Nykolaiszyn You never know  You mentioned, also, waterbeds. So that was the big thing?  Gammill It was, and we got one when we first got married. It was one of those deals that I didn   t know what I was doing. I lived in a trailer house. (Laughs) You put a big, something that heavy in there   . I was a country boy, and I figured,    Well, we better block all that up and take care of that,    which we did. It was a challenge because, really, they were just new at that time, and people weren   t aware of what all it would do. It was fine during the summertime, but you lay on it in the wintertime, and the water just sucks the heat away from you. They didn   t have heaters, or I couldn   t afford one, when I first got it, so that was a challenge. We eventually got rid of it because we just could not stay warm. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, you mentioned kind of what happened with looking for a job as you   re inching closer to graduation. Do you remember much from graduation? Did you have your family come up?  Gammill Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Everybody came. It was kind of hard on my brother because he ended up going to junior college over at Wilburton  Eastern Oklahoma State University  and his graduation was the same day mine was. My folks ended up coming to mine and then running off soon as mine was over, and then going down there to be with him after his was over. Oh, yeah, everybody come; everybody came to it, both sides of the family. Everybody took pictures, and it was a neat thing. My sister did go to college. She hadn   t graduated by the time I did, so I was the first one to graduate from college.  Nykolaiszyn Was it at Lewis Field?  Gammill Yes.  Nykolaiszyn Did you attend many sporting events while you were in school?  Gammill Oh, not a whole lot. Sports never has been a real big thing for me.  Nykolaiszyn You graduated; you took the job with OSU. How long did you stay in that position?  Gammill Less than a year. Again, my dad   s health never had gotten very good, and he ended up getting sick. It wasn   t his heart that time. They thought it was legionnaires' disease. Anyway, it was like a deep infection internally, and they couldn   t figure out what was wrong with him. He was in the hospital, like, for three months. He never did come back and be able to work full time after that. They called me up and offered me to come into partnership with them, and so that   s what we did. When you take that on, (a lot of people don   t give it a whole lot of thought) it is a lifelong commitment when you 13  come back into a business with an elderly couple to see them through. My mom   s still alive, (she   s ninety) but she   s still able to live on the farm out here because my brother and I both live here close by and help her out. She   s pretty spunky.  Nykolaiszyn When you came back to the family business, how many acres at that time did your father have?  Gammill He had about nine hundred acres of crop land, and probably four hundred of pasture. Had, I think, seventy cows. I knew coming back   course, I had college degree, and gung ho, and needed to expand in order to try to support two families. You don   t acquire new land real easy, but we began getting more land, and immediately we started running stocker cattle. That was our biggest money source was running stocker cattle, not the first year, but we built it up. We ran a thousand head of stocker calves for years and years, and split grazing out. All the calves that we could run during the winter, we   d graze out enough wheat acres and then harvest the rest of it after that.  Nykolaiszyn Would you hire any outside help, or would it just all be within the family?  Gammill In the early years, my brother was around off and on. He would usually come and help at harvest. I would do most all the plowing, but I needed some help at wheat sowing. We   d generally hire somebody. It   s a hard thing when you just need help part of the year and can   t get a full-time person because they need full-time work, too. It   s hard to find somebody that   s worth anything that doesn   t have a full-time job already. We run onto some good Mexican guys that would help, and they were good. It kind of fit their program because they   d go back to Mexico for a big part of the year, anyway. Sometimes we couldn   t find that, and I   d use some guys from the employment office at Lawton. Without exception, that was always a wreck. They   d tear up more than they could do any good for. That   s when I finally got my best hand, Debbie. She said,    I think I can run that, and I   ll be here every day.     I taught her to run the tractor. She was top-notch, tough, and she got it done, even to the point that she could take a tire off underneath a plow, a flat. It was in later years when the boys got up big enough, and the girl, my daughter. It was always required, once they were big enough to assume some responsibilities, they had to pitch in in some way or another. For my daughter, she was the oldest, so she hit it first, given the choice. Said,    You can cook meals for the rest of us that are working in the field and bring that, or you can run the tractor.    She said she wasn   t going to do nothing about that cooking. (Laughter) She was always a white-knuckle tractor driver. It bothered her; she really didn   t like it, either. She finally went back and said she   d rather cook. As the boys and kids got up big enough, then Debbie   . 14  She wouldn   t be in the summer fieldwork, but when the kids   d go back to school, then she helped me wheat sowing all the time, running the tractor.  Nykolaiszyn Did you also have to have a job outside of the farm, as well?  Gammill No. I say that, but there were things that I did. We tried going on harvest, before our harvest and after our harvest, and we went   . One year we got rained in, our harvest, and we couldn   t leave to go. We went on a milo harvest, and then we went on a wheat harvest. We didn   t end up making enough for what we were spending, so we quit doing that. I bought a truck that we used for wheat harvest, and I hauled for local farmers, hauled wheat during the winter from time to time. It was probably one of the jobs I hated the most. (Laughs) Finally, price of wheat went down, trucking pay went down, and I decided it wasn   t worth my time to do that, either. Then in    96, well, I got the idea to sell crop insurance on the side, and that   s what has made us the most money. I continued to farm big, even though I do a lot of crop insurance, until 2006. At that time I was offered an insurance agency in Grandfield to buy. The man was retiring. Did that, and I cut my farming down by a third. I still continue to farm a lot, quite a lot, but I did add in the insurance. It pays all the time, and farming pays sometimes.  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   m guessing you were a consumer of crop insurance before you started selling crop insurance, so you were pretty familiar. When you decided to make the move, was it easy, or was it challenging?  Gammill It was traumatic to give up the freedom out here on the farm, to do every day what you needed to do, to being obligated. Once I got in the insurance office, my personal priorities had to take a back seat because I was responsible for somebody else   s crops. I had to do that first, and then do the farming on mornings and nights and weekends. Giving up that being able to do what you   re supposed to do out here on a farm, and do it the very best that you could do, that was hard. Sitting in an office all day was hard. The way the guy that had it before, kind of to illustrate, he had his desk and office kind of in a little back hole in the building, and he couldn   t see out. (Laughs) That was a killer for me  Would   ve been, oh, like six months, I said,    We   ve got to change something here.    Debbie and I did the carpentry work, and we remodeled that office so I could have a window and be able to see out. It   s something that you   . It was hard to make that change over, but it was an opportunity, still, and worth the cost.     I guess it   s not true for everybody, but for me, certainly, I will always be a farmer at heart.  Nykolaiszyn Is it more challenging these days to make a living farming?  Gammill It is as of the last few years. This year   s going to be the worst in twenty years, probably. We had a period of time there where wheat prices were high, seven, eight dollars. We had drought years in there, too, but the crop 15  insurance was guaranteeing the wheat crop at the higher price. Even though the drought cut our crops tremendously, we still were able to get by pretty well because the crop insurance guarantees were good. For the last two years, the drought went away. We   ve had such excess rain, our crops have been poor here, but the prices have went down, down, down. This year the prices are really down, and again, we   ve had enough rain that it   s damaged our crops. The crops aren   t going to be that good down in this part of the state, anyway. It   s going to be a really tough year. Additionally, I don   t personally own any cattle. My son does, and all my customers run cattle and stocker calves. That market was sky high, and it   s went way down. That   s a big challenge for them, for the stocker calf guys because they had to pay a high price for them in the fall, and now the prices have went down. Cotton prices are down. It   s really going to be a tough year.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you have been very busy within the industry, especially in Cotton County. Could you talk a little bit about that?  Gammill I   ve always felt a responsibility to promote agriculture in all its different forms, and there   s a lot of guys that want somebody else to do it, want somebody else. I   d be in a meeting, and they   d elbow me and say,    Get up and talk about that.    Over time, I was the person   I was on the original board of the Cotton County Cattlemen   s Association when it was formed. Then I was asked to sit on the Walters Elevator board, and I was on it for twenty years. Those are all kind of local issues and mattered because we took our wheat there and bought our fertilizer there. Farm Bureau is the biggest voice for agriculture in the state. I pursued a position on the county board. I didn   t get on the first time I went, but the second time I did. I   ve been on the Farm Bureau board just as long and go to state conventions and such. I was in the very first class of the ag leadership program. It   s one of those deals, you go on a international tour, and you get a lot of training as far as being an ag spokesman. They train you to answer questions to TV reporters and write articles for papers and stuff like that.  When you finish ag leadership, (I think that was    82 or    3) boy, you are revved up, and you really want to be a spokesman. I went to the Wheat Growers Association meeting that year and got on the Wheat Grower board, and have been on it ever since. Oh, I think four or five years ago I got on the Wheat Commission for the state. I   m one of five men that represent wheat on the Wheat Commission. Every wheat farmer in the state has two cents taken out of each bushel and collected for promotion, and the Wheat Commission spends that money to promote wheat and research. A good chunk of it goes back to OSU. Part of it is dictated to go to OSU, and then we fund extra projects at OSU for research. Then we promote international sales of wheat. I   ve always felt that you need to try to help yourself, and I felt that I needed to do it. Somebody   s got to do it. Some people that attempt 16  to do it don   t know what they   re talking about, (Laughs) so I enjoy being there to try to keep the story straight.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you have deep roots in Cotton County. Can you talk a little bit about how the county, and even Walters, as well, has changed through the years?  Gammill Such a tremendous move out of the country. It takes so much less people to do the work, to work the land. Our machines, farm machines have gotten bigger, and I don   t know which drew the other. Farming never paid just great, and so you had, the cities had higher paying jobs. So many of the kids went away to a better life with higher paying jobs, and so that really left less people here working the land. They needed bigger equipment to do that, and so it made it possible. The elderly, as they have passed away, our neighbors and all out here, for the most part nobody moved into those houses. They just sat vacant, and they   ve fallen down now. A few of the really nice houses I guess are still occupied by somebody that has a job at town. They just wanted to live in the country in a house. They don   t have the acreage around it.  I think about it as a kid. There was almost a house on every quarter of land here. Now my family   s got several houses right here, but you go this way and they   re all gone, and that way they   re all gone. So few people out here, and all those older landlords that we had when I came back to the farm are all gone. In fact, some of their kids that got the land when they died, they   ve died now, too. It really is becoming a lot more disconnected. Those that have control of the land are far enough removed that they never lived on it, and a lot of them don   t remember their grandparent that owned it. They don   t have an appreciation for how hard it is for us out here to make a living on it. They just see it as,    That land   s worth a lot of money. You ought to be paying quite a bit for it.     That   s true in a way, but I can only pay what it   ll produce, not what it   s worth selling. I hate to see all the infrastructure out here run down like it has. Cotton County   s challenged because we don   t have a big town within the county as a tax base, sales tax. Our county commissioners really have a difficult time keeping the roads up, and schools, keeping the schools up, and keeping our schools. The attendance is fallen down in the smaller towns. Walters is still in pretty good shape because a lot of people live in Walters that work in Lawton, but Randlett and Temple are far enough removed, they   re really having a challenging time, paying expenses and keeping their schools.  Nykolaiszyn Do you find, as you   re working in this area, many OSU grads in this part of Oklahoma?  17  Gammill Oh, there really is. That   s one thing, agriculture. Cameron  University  has got a good ag department, too, but the guys that really wanted to get a good ag degree went to OSU. A lot of them came back here. OSU cultivates that notion, too, because of their outreach, both in teaching and research and the Extension people and all. We see a lot of OSU people and the professors in Extension all the time down here, so that helps everybody realize the importance that OSU has out in the country.  Nykolaiszyn How do you keep up with news about what   s going on at OSU these days?  Gammill I get a lot of emails and newsletters from different parts up there. The Wheat Commission, particularly, we have meetings up there every now and then, too. Every meeting we have, we   ll have OSU people there, updating us, too. Course, that   s primarily the ag issues that are brought to us.  Nykolaiszyn Pulling up to your house, I can always tell I   m in friendly territory (Laughter) by seeing the friendly sight of pistol Pete out front. How do you show your OSU pride?  Gammill Oh, we got OSU tags on both vehicles. (Laughs) Numerous things around the farm. I usually have a big OSU symbol up on the end of my shop down there, but it got damaged in a storm. I haven   t got it back up yet.  Nykolaiszyn When you look back at your time on campus, how did attending OSU impact your life?  Gammill It really, I guess, broadens your scope, and you see kids from all over the country with all different backgrounds and pulling something out of the school that they can have a better life, make a better life with. OSU is such a nurturing place, friendly people. My experience with the people in the ag department couldn   t have been better. They were so kind and helpful and promote you in every way.  McDougal Along the same line, OSU   s graduation is this weekend. If you had the chance to talk to any of the graduates, is there any advice you would give them, what to take away from their time at OSU, and what to look forward to?  Gammill Well, you would think that you could   you   d hope that you could say,    There   s something great  Go and open the door, and it   ll be there.    I   d say,    Have faith that you keep plugging along and you can use what you   ve gotten here, and it will take you someplace.     Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about your family.  18  Gammill Okay, my personal family? Wife, high school sweetheart, been married forty-two years. (Laughter) I   ve got three kids. The oldest girl, she   s in Moore, Oklahoma; got one son. She works as an auto financer. She finances car lots, not car dealers. The middle boy is a welder in Madill, a pipe fitter. Then the youngest son lives just over here a quarter mile. He runs cows on my grass. Then he does help me in the insurance agency, and he crawls on rocks. (Laughter) He   s got one of these great big vehicles with the great big tires, and they crawl up the mountains on them. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, it   s probably good to have family close by and also interested in helping with the land, as well.  Gammill Right, right. My brother lives over here just half a mile, and he never has been a farmer. He   s had one farm, and we did most of the work for him over the years. He had a job in town; his wife was a teacher.  Nykolaiszyn Well, we find that alums we talk to have strong loyalty to OSU. What do you think sparks such loyalty?  Gammill Well, one thing, it   s in the value of the school and the quality of people and services provided there, and the helpfulness that   s always like an outreach of people there. So many people have gone there from our area, whether they come back to this or not. So many of the kids went and attended school there from Walters, and I don   t see that   ll ever change. It   s such a good campus. It   s just a matter of quality and openness, and I think can   t beat it. I will say that my sister did go to OU. (Laughter) I have attended some training and some things at OU, and it   s just a whole different vibe. It   s not like home like OSU is. The people that go there, they   re loyal to their football team, but it   s not the same. The campus is just not the same.  Nykolaiszyn Well, what have we missed? Anything else you   d like to add before we close out today?  Gammill Not that I can think of.  Nykolaiszyn All right, David, thank you so much for taking time out of your schedule to talk with us a little bit about your time at OSU and your career, as well.  Gammill Thank you for the opportunity.  -------  -------  
