 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Friday, May 9, 2014, and I   m at the OSU Center for  Veterinary Health Sciences interviewing Dr. Gary Tran. Thank you so much  for joining us today.  Tran Thank you. You   re welcome.  Nykolaiszyn Well, if you could, let   s start by having you tell me your full name and the  year you were born.  Tran I was born Tran Quang Minh in 1938, July 18, 1938.  Nykolaiszyn And can you tell me a little bit about your parents?  Tran My parents, my father especially, was a poultry farmer. He raised chickens  in Vietnam. In fact, he became the biggest poultry farmer in Vietnam after I  came home and helped him develop his farming operations.  Nykolaiszyn So as a little boy in Vietnam, you probably spent a lot of time doing chores?  Tran Correct. I was able to help him in his poultry operation from day one, so I  pretty much know about poultry farming.  Nykolaiszyn So as a little boy, give me some examples of what you would have to do.  Tran Well, my main job was incubating these day-old baby chicks to keep them  warm and well-fed and watered because the first week of a chicken   s life is  very important. Whether they make it or not depends on the first few weeks  of life after they hatch out from the eggs, and that was my main job. And  then later I was also given the chore of feeding the chickens, the collection  of hen eggs; that   s my best, my preferred job. The thing I don   t like is the  dressing of the chicken, so it was done by other people. The raising of the  5  baby chicks and collecting eggs and feeding the chickens, those are my  favorite jobs.  Nykolaiszyn And what was your early schooling like?  Tran Here or in Vietnam?  Nykolaiszyn In Vietnam.  Tran In Vietnam. I went through the elementary and secondary years like  everybody else, but the problem was, in my elementary years, there was  World War II. My education was very disrupted because of the war between  the Allies and the Japanese. Later on, my secondary education  years  were  also interrupted now and then by the Vietnam War, which at that time was  intensifying. Then in 1958, I remember at the very end of 1958, I got a  scholarship to go to the United States to continue my college education. The  years in the United States were my best years because it was very peaceful,  very pleasant.  Nykolaiszyn Well, how did you end up in Oklahoma?  Tran You know, most of the Vietnamese high school graduates who were sent to  the United States were sent by the USAID  United States Agency for  Internal Development  in Vietnam, the agency that helped our country  develop different fields in the country. That year, 1958, they had what they  called the Leadership Training Program. They were going to train the  leaders, the future leaders of Vietnam, and I was selected in the first  leadership group of twelve boys and girls. In fact, I passed the exam given to  the five thousand high school graduates at that time. They narrowed down to  about two dozen. The final interview was the time that they picked out the  finalists, the twelve people that would be sent to the United States.  I remember very well the gentleman that interviewed me on that day who  said,    What are you going to study? What do you want to study over there if  we send you to the United States?    I said,    I   d like to study poultry science,     because my father was a poultry farmer, and I wanted to expand the business  and to make a living. The guy said,    You are supposed to be trained and  come back here and work for the government, not for your father, because  we pay for your schooling. You can help your father on your spare time, but  your main job here is to work to help your government and your people as a  poultry expert or something like that.    He asked me,    Where do you want to  be sent to?    Okay, he said,    All the Vietnamese or any foreign student in  any country likes to go to Harvard and MIT, places like that.    So I said,    I   d  like to go to Harvard.    Okay?  Nykolaiszyn Mm-hmm.  6  Tran The guy said,    They won   t have chicken there. The only chicken they have  is in their cafeteria. You want to study poultry farming. I have a better place  for you.    He must be an OSU graduate or something. I said,    Where do you  think is the best? I will take your advice.       You go to OSU to study poultry  science because they have a great poultry program there.    I said    Okay,     because I didn   t know any better and being selected in the final interview is  a very big deal because he   s the guy who decides who will be selected. Out  of the two dozen, they narrowed  down to  one last dozen kids to go. In fact,  I was the first to be selected because he said,    Man, all day long, they want  to study engineering and finance and business and MBA and everything.  You are the only one who chooses agriculture. You get it. You will be  selected.    I was so happy. I didn   t care where he sent me because I got  selected. You have to compete with other guys. So that   s how I ended up on  this campus in 1958.  Nykolaiszyn So what were some of your first impressions of Stillwater and OSU?  Tran I found out that the OSU campus and the students are very, very friendly.  That struck me the most. Everybody was so helpful. In fact, I was the first  Vietnamese to come to this university, believe me or not, in 1958. I was  roomed at Bennett Hall. A student there helped me carry my luggage up to  my fourth floor and offered to show me around and take me to the cafeteria,  show me everything. We had a ball at night when we gathered around and  ate popcorn and listened to Elvis Presley and all that good stuff in those  days. My stay in this town was a lengthy stay: six years. It was a very  pleasant experience for me because we had fun all the time, except when  you went to class and you had to sweat. In between and during vacation,  they offered to take me home to their houses and their farms, and on  weekends they  would  take me anywhere I wanted to  go , generally. It was  a very good experience.  Nykolaiszyn Are there any classes that stand out in your mind?  Tran The poultry science classes are what I liked the most and paid the most  attention to because I wanted to really learn poultry science, math and  poultry farming so that I could go home and revolutionize our poultry  industry over there. My father learned it on a trial-and-error kind of thing,  no science behind anything that he did. By learning these courses and  poultry science, I thought that I would be a great help to him when I went  back. That   s the thing I liked most. Also, I liked my math, my science  courses because I exceled on that. There   s nothing that I didn   t like really.  We studied in very pleasant surroundings with great professors, so  compared to what I was used to back home in a war-torn country it was very  conducive to learning. Everything I learned, I did well. In fact, I had straight  As, and I was able to get in the vet school in just two years    time. I got my  7  BS in two and a half years, I think. A lot of summers, I went through  summer school, so I was one of the few students who finished the BS degree  very fast before I got to be in veterinary training.  Nykolaiszyn And what was your BS in?  Tran Agriculture, because my advisor on the main campus told me,    Poultry  science is very narrow. You need to learn more than that to be able to go  home and help your country. You need to have a broad knowledge of the  agriculture field, and this university is very good for that.    So I also took  animal science and other courses besides the poultry science.  Nykolaiszyn Are there any professors that really stick out in your mind?  Tran I liked Professor  Vincent  Robison. He was a one-eyed doctor. He taught  me mathematics. I did so well in math that he always talked to me  about   choosing mathematics as a future career. He said,    Forget poultry science.  Forget animals. You   ve got to do mathematics because you   re so good and  gifted.    I said,    No. They sent me over here to study agriculture. I can   t  change that.    He said,    I   m going to write them. If you choose to do that,  I   m going to write letters and convince them because it   s a shame you don   t  develop it.    Maybe it was because every time he gave me some problem to  solve, I would come up with more than one solution. He would grab me in  class to go explain to others. (Laughs) I set the curve so high. All the math  courses I took, I was the only one who got an A. All the good students really  hated me because of that, especially the engineering guys because I wasn   t  in engineering. I was in agriculture.  I studied with everybody in general math the first two years of math. I  always outranked all the hot shot math majors because Professor Robinson  would give me more  points  than others because I would come up with two  or three solutions for a problem. They   d keep giving me more points for all  that. It ended up that when they curved it, I always trumped all the other  ones out. It was a shame, and I told him,    Don   t do that. They hate me.    He  said,    I   ve got to. This is the performance  I want to see , and I have to  respect that.    It   s funny, but that   s what happened. I liked him very much  because for the first couple of years, he kept making me  offers . He said,    I  will offer you money to join our department,    and things like that. Professor  Robison.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you had to diversify a little bit here at the vet med college, learning  more than poultry. Were there other animals you really enjoyed working  with as a student?  Tran I don   t like large animals because I got kicked pretty bad one time working  with a horse. Also with a cow, my feet got stepped on all the time by the  8  cow, working in the barn. I   m small. I probably weigh about a hundred, a  hundred and ten pounds, dripping wet. I cannot handle the big animals. One  time, I was holding the horse halter for a classmate of mine who was  working, and the horse took off. I got all the ropes tied up in my hand and  my body, and it dragged me into the paddock. I got scared to death. It scared  me to death, but the other classmate of mine was able to stop the horse. I  enjoyed the dogs and the cats and the chickens and the small animals.  Nykolaiszyn Well, do you   can you recall graduation day?  Tran Graduation was at the stadium then. It was really a big affair. In our country  they didn   t do like that. They didn   t give all the pomp and ceremony like  that. Here they had the hood and gowns and all these ribbons and all these  paraphernalia that came with the doctor degree, and it was so impressive to  me. It was quite an experience that I   ll never forget.  Nykolaiszyn After graduation, you returned home to Vietnam.  Tran Yes.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me what you did when you returned.  Tran When I went home, I immediately joined the College of Agriculture and  Veterinary Sciences as a faculty member there, as an assistant professor. I  taught anatomy, surgery, and histology, three courses, three different fields  because we didn   t have enough professors. There were only two American-trained  veterinarians joining the college: me and Dr. Hai. Each of us had to  teach three courses, and there we did the job of three professors, really. We  didn   t mind that because we were young and really upbeat and gung-ho  about everything. We didn   t mind hard work at all. We did that, and that   s  how we were able to change a lot in the teaching, higher teaching of  Vietnam because when you assume more responsibilities, you have more  votes in the faculty. One subject entitled to you one vote. Me and Dr. Hai,  we were six votes right then and there because we each taught three  subjects. We were able to dominate the working of the college. In fact, after  only two years I was able to move up to the head of the department. I was  the youngest head of the department of the college. At that time, I was in my  late twenties, twenty-six or something like that.  Nykolaiszyn In your spare time, were you able to help your father   s business?  Tran Yes, I formulated all his feed. I took care of the vaccination program and  imported all the vaccines and the stuff they didn   t have there. His operation,  it took off pretty quick because I introduced modern farming, and I also  introduced new highly productive chickens. Chickens over there took  several months to reach a market weight. Our chickens over here took only  9  eight weeks. Now it only takes them six weeks. It   s even faster. I was able to  do that. Vietnam chickens, maybe they laid three or four dozen eggs, and  they   d quit, they   d brood, and they   d hatch. American chickens produced  year-round, two or three hundred eggs, so you can see the growth was  exponential.  Nykolaiszyn Well, after your time at the university, you ended up working for the  government.  Tran Right. I was head of the department and taught three-year classes: first year,  second year, third year, actually the fourth year, too. Later, I even taught  poultry science, believe me or not. There was another guy teaching that, but  he didn   t do a very good job. I had to wait until he retired to teach his course  because I wanted them to know the modern technology. Anyway, by the  time I was professor, the dean of the college was nominated by the president  to head up the Ministry of Agriculture, which is like your USDA over here.  When he assumed that portfolio, there was some big animal program going  on called the Accelerated Protein Production Program to get the American  ones to develop quickly the meat production of the country because during  the war, the Communists did a lot of interdiction of food that had to be  transported to the cities to feed the urban folks. The Communists, they  dominated the countryside, so the Americans had to develop the kind of  meat that you can raise around the city where it   s safe. You don   t have to  raise it in the boonies anymore.  They have to use large-scale industrial operations to raise pigs and chickens  because these are the two things that can produce meat pretty quick. Beef  takes too long, and you need to have a lot of fields, grassland, and range,  and stuff like that. But poultry and pigs, you can concentrate in little  buildings around the city so that you can produce meat and eggs and pork to  feed the urban folks. I was in charge of that when the dean borrowed me  from the college. He wanted it to work, so he said,    Hey, there is a good  man there that could do that.    He was able to get the Ministry of  Education   actually they borrowed me to go there and help out. I got stuck  over there for twelve years. I couldn   t come back to the college full-time  anymore because one program after another program  kept  coming up and I  was in charge. I got stuck there at the end of the regime, which was in 1975,  but I   d still teach part-time. Class time, I   d still zip out there and spend an  hour, rush and rush, and go back.  Nykolaiszyn Wow.  Tran I   d still teach school, but I didn   t do all administrative or other work that  professors had to do. By then we had hired a younger instructor to help out,  like your graduate students over here, to help the professor. I had a few of  those who were my students, by the way, the most prominent ones, the  10  smartest ones, to continue my courses. In fact, I sent a few of them over here  to get their PhDs and do the teaching when they returned home.  Nykolaiszyn So it was a very tumultuous time in Vietnam while you were there     Tran Yeah.  Nykolaiszyn    with war in your country.  Tran Yes, war and destruction and killing and maiming were everywhere. It was  very difficult circumstances to do this development work. Agriculture  development, we called it. The biggest work I was involved in, I mean, two  biggest works I was involved in later were the Land to the Tiller Program, a  land reform program. It   s a revolutionary program to win the heart and mind  of the rural population because in Vietnam, in the whole country, land,  arable land, cultivable land was held by a minority, by a few land owners,  sometimes a few thousand. The government had to buy all this land and give  it back to the farmers who tilled this land so that they   d own their own land.  It was the kind of concept that was totally unknown in a third-world country  like that. It was a very revolutionary concept. The old system meant all these  uprisings and rebellion of the people against the government. To undermine  all these efforts, the government said,    Let   s give land to everybody who  tilled the land, period, free of charge.     You can imagine the magnitude of that program. You had to do it fast. You  had to do it in two years because you couldn   t drag it on for too long. The  country was at war, and you had to undercut the enemy. That was the  biggest beef. They said to the poor people,    You guys get exploited. You  work for nothing. You work for landowners. You have a miserable life,     and, in fact, they did until we changed all that. I was involved deeply in that  program for two years and a half after my chicken and pig program. That  was a very successful program. We broke the stranglehold of the  Communist on the food supply to the city, especially the protein part. There  was the rice part, too, but it was something that we had to deal with later. In  the beginning, in less than a couple of years we were able to break that. The  Mao Tse-tung concept of using the countryside to strangle the city didn   t  work anymore. We derailed and dismantled that in a hurry. Nobody in the  cities has starved to death or anything like that.  Then after the land reform, we provided all our peasants with land. Oh man,  and they produced. When they produced things for themselves for their own  benefit, then you see that agricultural production increased very fast. After  the land reform, the Minister put me in charge of the rice production. I   m  not the rice man or anything like that. I don   t know anything about rice  farming, but because of my managerial skill, my leadership, proactive kind  of leadership, I was able to carry  out  any program that the government  11  entrusted in me. When I was young, I was fearless. I was not reluctant to go  to the boonies to direct a program and to inspect the implementation of the  program and things like that. When you push hard at the grassroots level,  things happen very fast. If you   re sitting in the capital and send out memos  and directives, it   s not going to get done very quick. You know what I   m  saying?  Nykolaiszyn Uh-huh.  Tran You have to inspect all the time. We have forty-four provinces, just like you  have fifty states here. We have forty-four provinces and I traveled to every  single one of them. I hardly stayed home, to be honest with you. We were  everywhere. Anywhere I went, nobody knew beforehand so they could not  take me through places they wanted to show. I went by surprise all the time.  I worked with the Americans very closely. The Americans liked that kind of  leadership. They provided me with everything I needed to move around the  country. You could not travel by car because they   d ambush you. There  were mines in the road, it took too long.  They  used to give me an airplane  and helicopter, and I flew everywhere I wanted. I caught people by surprise  all the time. They were scared to death of my inspection. They constantly  had to work. They had to do things because they never knew where I would  end up. I ended up somewhere and if things were not done right, you would  lose your job. I would put another person, who could do something, in  charge, so they were pretty much scared of that. In my time, if you got fired,  you ended up in the army, and you would have to go fight the guerrillas.  When you did a good job in a civilian job you would get well paid and all  that. If you didn   t do that, then I would get someone else who could, and  then you would end up doing a fighting man   s job. It was a pretty strong  incentive (laughs) for them to work.  Nykolaiszyn I would think so, yes. (Laughter) Well, your work with the national food  administration     Tran That   s my last job.  Nykolaiszyn    yeah, tell us a little bit about that one.  Tran After I finished, the rice   they call it the Miracle Rice Production Program  because that rice produces four or five times more than the native rice...  Nykolaiszyn Wow.  Tran    a high yield, hybrid rice variety that the American scientists produced in  IRRI in the Philippines. In the Philippines, there is the Rockefeller and Ford  Foundations that put money to build a rice research institute. It   s called the  International Rice Research Institute, IRRI, and that produced the wonderful  12  rice. We call them miracle rice because you have something that produces  four, five, six times more than   .  Nykolaiszyn And that   s a game changer.  Tran Oh, yeah, big game changer. So we forgot all these insecure lands that the  Communists control. We secured the lands near the cities where we could  have farmers plant these new varieties of rice. The production is still very  high. You don   t need all the fourteen million acres of arable rice land in  Vietnam. You can do a third of that and produce all the rice we need.  Actually, when I was there, in less than two years Vietnam just about  resumed rice exporting again. We used to import American rice to survive  during the war years. Then after the land reform and that rice production  program, we were self-sufficient. Not only that, we had excess, and we  planned to export for foreign currency again.  The big problem in Vietnam at that time was all of a sudden we had an  influx of a lot of rice produced, and we had a lousy marketing structure. It  created a lot of problems, especially when we depended on merchant  middlemen who were mainly Chinese and did a lot of hanky-panky stuff.  They created black marketing, and they created a shortage, not a real  shortage. It was a man-made shortage. They got the farmers very mad  because they could not sell their rice at the good price. The farmers quit  selling rice, and the city had a problem with the rice supply. It lasted for  about a year, and man, the Ministry of Trade and Industry was in charge of  the marketing of rice, not the Ministry of Agriculture. We were in charge of  producing, and the other guy was in charge of marketing, and they did a  lousy job of breaking the stranglehold of those rice merchants. Of course,  you know, I think there was a lot of corruption involved, too, because when  you are able to buy high officials to do this or to do that, you never will be  able to solve anything very fast.  At that time, the president transferred me to the Ministry of Economy  Trade  and Industry  (laughter) to be in charge of this mess. In fact, he called me to  the palace at the meeting with the prime minister to order a quick solution to  that. He ordered the prime minister to create a new autonomous agency  called the National Food Administration, with sweeping power. If I were  now here, they would have called me a czar. I had very big power at that  time. Not only that, I had a lot of money, you see. Our agency was given  tons of money to solve the problem in a hurry. Rice was the biggest  production of the country, as you can imagine, and you had to do it fast  because the war effort was being hampered by the mess, by the chaos. They  call it the Food Crisis of 1973. It had been dragging on too long, so I was  put in charge of that. Sure enough, I was able to solve the problem in two  months.  13  Nykolaiszyn That wasn   t long, two months.  Tran Two months, because rice   s everywhere. All you need to do is buy it and  stock it and process it and distribute it, and they didn   t have a very good way  of doing it. When I went there, I did many things that nobody dreamed of  doing. Like for example, I computerized the operation to speed up the  process. Also, years ago when the government would buy something, they  would have all these bids. The lowest bid got it. I didn   t do that anymore. I  got the money, and I went to the farmers, and we haggled until we had an  agreement between the two parties, no middleman, no nothing. I used to  send my students because everywhere I went, anything I did, I had a bunch  of my students at the college who are graduated every year. I had twelve  classes, in fact. I taught twelve classes, so you can see how many thousands  of people that I knew or I could grab to help out. These kids were very  idealistic. They were young. They were fearless.  Nykolaiszyn Like you were.  Tran Like me. I gave money.    You go buy rice.    I don   t need to go to any rice  merchant, and I don   t need to do any bidding because bidding takes months.  You have to have all these committees to check the bids. I said,    No, I   m the  biggest rice merchant here in town. I don   t need any.    (Laughs) I got all my  students, and they carried the luggage of cash because the farmers, they  don   t like anything but cash.  Nykolaiszyn Right.  Tran    You pay me cash.    The government doesn   t like that because you never  know anything, hanky-panky between the two parties. I told my students to  be careful, not to do that because if I caught any one of them, they   d end up  in the military service. (Laughter) These young men, they love their  professor, like me, and then you trust them to do a good job, and they did.  So I solved that rice problem very quickly. Of course, a lot of that was due  to the students who worked day and night. Years ago, usually officials had a  nine to five work habit. My students were not like that. They could work  twelve hours. They could work sixteen hours a day. They didn   t want to  quit. I told them,    All I   m interested in is rice. I   m not interested in how  many hours you put in or what you need to do. You will be well paid.    I  paid them three times more than the government paid people.  Nykolaiszyn Wow.  Tran Because I ran an autonomous agency, I could do anything I wanted. In fact,  I paid me more than the government paid the president, to be honest with  you. My salary, I decided that, because when you got that much money,  nobody could bribe you anymore.  14  Nykolaiszyn And you   re able to fix big problems quickly.  Tran Yeah, you have to use these experiences. None of these things I did was in  the book, believe me or not.  Nykolaiszyn Well, things starting escalating in Vietnam.  Tran Yes. By 1975, the military debacle put an end to all the good work we did.  Because the Communists, by that time, they sent all their divisions down the  Ho Chi Minh Trail to invade Vietnam with tanks, big tanks. At that time, the  US was already disengaged. We had terrible problems supplying our troops  because Congress cut all the aid. Because of the war, sentiment in this  country at that time was with the war movement. We lost the war in late  April 1975 because of the military setback and the military debacle, so I had  to flee the country. I came here and resumed my life, second life, in this  country.  Nykolaiszyn Was that hard for you, having to flee?  Tran Oh, yeah, it was heartrending. You left all your loved ones, families, friends,  co-workers, people who trusted you, who worked with you and who knew  you and who loved you. It was very, very upsetting to say the least. In fact,  the first few years when I came here, I was so depressed. I was so  disheartened because of that.  Nykolaiszyn When you were airlifted out of Vietnam, where was your first stop?  Tran I was brought to the Philippines Clark Airfield  Base  for refueling and  change of airplane. I was flown to Guam, and then Wake Islands, and then  on to Travis Air Force Base in California. Then back here to Oklahoma, to  Stillwater.  Nykolaiszyn Why did you decide to come back to Stillwater?  Tran Because I figured that I needed to go back to veterinary medicine for a  living. You had to pass the state board and national board and all that, and I  didn   t have a penny with me. I went to see Dean  William  Brock, one of  my clinical professors years ago. He was sorry for me, (laughs) so he got me  an internship job because you needed to do something. Being a bureaucrat  for twelve years, I forgot a lot of current medicine. I was able to spend a  year, boned up on it. I passed the state board and then the national board and  then the Kentucky board. One of my classmate offered me a job to go there  after I finished my internship.  Nykolaiszyn And you   re still in Kentucky, aren   t you?  15  Tran Right now?  Nykolaiszyn Yeah.  Tran I am in Louisville, Kentucky, and have been for the past thirty-eight years.  Nykolaiszyn Okay.  Tran I came here only for one year for my retraining, refreshing.  Nykolaiszyn So tell me about your practices in Kentucky.  Tran I went there to work for  Ken  Sims for ten years, for my classmate. But  then I had five kids. With the salary I had, I was not able to do well there. In  town at the time, there was a group of veterinarians who owned an  emergency clinic that took care of their patient at night, for them to sleep.  Otherwise they had to come there and take turns working at night, to take  care of night emergency. I worked for them, and the pay was pretty good  because it was paid on commission. The more I generated income, the  higher my pay was going to be, so I was having a better income. Then after  a while, I saved enough money. I wanted to split out and build my own  clinic, but the colleagues who owned that place told me,    Why don   t you  buy this place and operate it, keep operating it for us, to take care of our  night emergencies, and you reap the whole profit.     That sounded  pretty  good to me because they offered to sell me that place pretty cheap. I  remember  it costing  only  50,000, and the down payment being only   10,000. You cannot beat that, so I own and worked all these years as an  emergency doctor.  Nykolaiszyn And you still own that facility today?  Tran Yes. I   m still working. At seventy-six years of age, I still work. The work,  by now is routine, and also I cut down the hours a little bit. Years ago I  worked too many long hours, and my wife complained about it, so I cut  down. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   ve done more than veterinary medicine. You started a math  school.  Tran Right. About twenty-four years ago, I started what they call the Kumon  Math and Reading Center. It   s a franchise from Japan that teaches kids math  and English reading. They have a very neat concept of teaching math and  reading. If you have kids, you should send them to one of the Kumon  centers. They have two thousand Kumon centers in America. It   s a  wonderful learning system. Math is my first love, anyway, so I am doing  16  that, and I help a lot of students. I bet I trained, over the years, some five  thousand super good kids in Kentucky, especially in that city. In fact, I  created a lot of good will and renown. There are five more Kumon centers in  Louisville right now. For the first fifteen years, I was the only one, and I was  famous for creating all the good student in town. Probably that   s why the  governor gave me the Kentucky Colonel Award actually.  Nykolaiszyn Yeah, that   s quite an honor.  Tran Yes     Nykolaiszyn You could say     Tran    it is.  Nykolaiszyn       I   m a Kentucky Colonel.     Tran Yeah. I told him,    You need to call it the Kentucky General because in  Nebraska they have an Admiral. Why do you stick with Kentucky Colonel?  You could change.    (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, looking back on your career and your accomplishments, how would  you like to be remembered?  Tran I would like to be remembered as someone who loved working in  agricultural development  in addition to  veterinarian medicine. I also would  like to be remembered as someone who wants to help the next generation of  Americans to be good in math and reading so that they can do well in  college and become well-trained, thinking people who contribute greatly to  this country. I would like to be remembered like that.  Nykolaiszyn And you have five children?  Tran I have five children: four boys and one girl. All my children are engineers.  The last one, an engineer, but he had a law degree on top of that. Right now  he   s working for the federal government in legal matters set up in  biomedical engineering. But all my other four children are engineers. None  of them wanted to become a veterinarian for some odd reason. They said,     Too long hours, too much work.    They don   t like it. Do you have children,  yourself?  Nykolaiszyn I do. I have one son. Well, as we round everything out today, we noticed  when we talk to graduates of Oklahoma State University, that they are very  loyal. Why do you think this is?  17  Tran The Americans sent, I bet you, ten thousand Vietnamese kids to do different  kinds of fields. They have all kinds of fields of study. All human endeavors  were trained in America that you can think of. Two OSU graduates, there   s  another guy named Hoang Duc Nha and I, myself, were the two top officials  in the government. H.D. Nha was the special assistant to the president. I am  the guy that I was telling you all these stories. In fact, I am one of the  highest ranking of the group, the thousands of people who were trained by  the Americans. Most of them are trained at Ivy League universities and  places like that because they only want to go there.  I have to admit (and if you don   t believe me, ask other people, they   ll tell  you) the two OSU Cowboys were the best trained officials in Vietnam and  the highest trained, too, and also are the super achievers, to be honest with  you. We have done things that nobody else had done. Nha   s going to write a  book about it. I   m not going to write anything, but Nha, he   s working on his  memoir to write about the years that President  Nguyen Van  Thieu, who  was the last president of Vietnam during the thick of the war, what we had  done and what he had done. It could be a very good reading for people who  want to know what the two Cowboys had done.  Oh, the thing that I told you, Dr. Taylor, Keith Taylor at Cornell University,  asked me to write because he said there   s a void in the history of Vietnam.  Everybody talked about the war, and the military this and that, and the  political reason, but nobody said anything about the development of  agriculture or the revolutionary aspect of the countryside that was so  important in changing everything. When the Communists came they  changed that. They reversed all that, and they threw Vietnam to the deepest  recession for twelve years. People were starving to death, to be honest with  you. Then afterwards, they have to reverse back to what we were doing.  That   s why Vietnam right now is the number one rice exporter in the world.  Do you know that?  Nykolaiszyn I did not.  Tran The number one rice exporter in the world, for a small country. They export  more rice than anybody because of the foundation that we laid out during  the years that I was working on the social revolution foundation, the  technical foundation of agricultural production. All these things, all these  schemes of modern agriculture that we laid out, are perpetuating to this day.  That   s why the Communists could not do otherwise. They had to really go  back to that point. That   s why it took off. Not only that, their agrarian  reform they did in North Vietnam, where they killed all the landowners and  they put the people in communes to work, didn   t work either. They didn   t  have food to eat for so many years, and they had to rely on the Chinese. The  thing we did in the south also dismantled that, that scheme up north.  18  Nykolaiszyn The impact     Tran Impact, yeah, the impact is very wide     Nykolaiszyn Oh my goodness.  Tran    to the point that the northern famers said,    We   re not going to do this  anymore.    It caused such a problem for them up there that they wanted to do  exactly like we did in the south. It unshackled the farmers in the north. It  completely dismantled and destroyed their system, something that took  twenty years to build.  Nykolaiszyn I have just two more questions. What happened to your father   s poultry  farm?  Tran When the Communists took over, they nationalized everything. They stole  all his properties, his farming operation.  Before that  he was the richest man  in Vietnam in agriculture production. He became, in our money, a billionaire  because of his feed mill operation, chicken operation, hatching operation,  poultry processing operation. In fact, he diversified into sugar production  operation. All that was lost because of the Communists. They didn   t let the  private enterprises persist in their system, so he lost everything. But after  twelve years, they had to go back and let the system work again. Otherwise  the country could not be developed. Right now you can do anything over  there you want, like any capitalistic system. There   s nothing Communist  anymore in the economic field in Vietnam.  Nykolaiszyn After twelve years, did he start the operation again?  Tran No. At that time, he was sick in the heart. He came to this  country . I  brought him here. He died in Houston in 1987. He was an old man. He was  disheartened. He was not treated right. He lost the things he liked to do all  his life. He and my mom were disheartened.  Nykolaiszyn Have you ever been back since?  Tran I went back there one time in 2005 when my mother was dying. After my  father died in this country, she went back home because I have a couple of  siblings still living over there. My mother wanted to stay with them so that  they didn   t feel left out in the cold or something. She spent her dying days  over there. When she was dying, I went back there to see her for the last  time. She was still bitter, after all these years. She told me,    I told you not to  come back.    She was still very difficult. In fact, she would not let herself be  buried in Vietnam.  Nykolaiszyn Really?  19  Tran She said,    You cremate me, and you scatter my ashes in the river.     The  river was near  where she was born. She said,    I don   t want no address in  this land under Communism     Nykolaiszyn Wow.  Tran    so that you guys don   t come back here ever.    My mother was very bitter.  Nykolaiszyn Well, what   s next on the agenda for you, Dr. Tran? You   re still working.  Tran I   m still working. I will work until I drop dead. I told my wife she   d better  get used to that. I   m not going to travel anywhere, see anything like my  classmates. I said,    If I want to see anything, all I need do is go to the  internet and I see everything I want. I don   t have to walk anywhere or fly  anywhere and eat any food that could give me food poisoning, put up with  all these hardship and expenses.    Really, you live in America, what do you  want to go to Egypt for? That   s going to kill you. They   re going to feed you  things full of germs, flies everywhere. Why do you do that? You can go to  the internet and see anything. If you want to see the pyramids, I bet you  have a better view of the pyramids from a computer than you do by walking  out there in the sun, hundred and ten degrees. Are you kidding me? I told  my wife,    Forget it.     Nykolaiszyn So no retirement anytime soon?  Tran Doesn   t look like it. (Laughter) Besides, these kids that need me, the parents   of the kids  I teach, they said,    You better not retire, understand, because  my kid is not finished yet, and I have two more reaching kindergarten age. I  want you to teach them.    How can you turn people down like that? They  trust you.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   ve definitely made an impact in your home country and also here  in the US. Is there anything else you   d like to add before we close out today?  Tran No. Anything else you want to ask me, I will dig up from my memory to tell  you before Alzheimer   s hits me or something. Right now, I   m still pretty  decent and remembering facts and numbers and such. I still can teach  calculus very well at my age.  Nykolaiszyn Just a tremendous career, and I   m so happy you   re able to come back here  to OSU for your fiftieth reunion here at the Center for     Tran Yeah     Nykolaiszyn    Veterinary Sciences.  20  Tran I could be back for the sixtieth reunion, hopefully.  Nykolaiszyn Well, good.  Tran I remember, across the hall down there, I checked in   . When I first came to  this college,  Dean Holm  said,    Young man, you know how hard I had to  go through to get you in this college?    I was a Vietnamese and they don   t  accept Vietnamese to veterinary school. He had to present it to the board, he  had to intervene with the president of the university, and he had to ask the  support of the US State Department for all these exceptions. Finally they  gave me the honor to study here. He said,    You   d better not flunk out of this  place, (laughter) all the trouble I had to go through to get you here.     Nykolaiszyn Well, it was well worth it.  Tran Yeah.  Nykolaiszyn It really was.  Tran I think so.  Nykolaiszyn It really was. Well, thank you so much for joining us today. It   s been a  pleasure.  Tran Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
