 Wilson. Today is April 6, 2009 and I am here at The  Hideaway in Stillwater, Oklahoma interviewing Richard Dermer, owner  of the historic Hideaway Restaurant. This interview is being conducted  as part of O-STATE Stories, a project of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program through the OSU library. Richard, thank you so  much for talking with me today.  No problem, Latasha.  First off, I   d like you to tell me about your personal background. About  your family and about where you grew up.  Okay. I am very much a child of OSU. I was born two blocks down the  street from where we are now, at The Hideaway, at basically the corner  of Ramsey and University, across the street south from the Student  Union. In    39, Stillwater was building a new municipal hospital and it  was under construction. I was born at home, a hundred feet south of the  campus. My dad was a long-time chemistry professor, served as the  department head I think for maybe 20 or 25 years. I lived my entire life  in Stillwater, the first 25 years within two or three blocks of campus in a  variety of locations. Since then I   ve never lived more than a half mile  from campus ever.  Always within walking distance?  Always within walking distance. Actually, the first 25 years within three  blocks of where we are now, at The Hideaway. As I say I was born at  Ramsey and University and lived down a block east from Eskimo Joe   s  at Duck and Maple as an infant, which I don   t remember. Grew up in the  500 block of south Hester, got married as a sophomore and lived down  here at the corner of University and Hester where the new alumni center  parking lot is and then down at the corner of Duck and Miller where  5  Wilson  Dermer   Casa Mia apartments are .  What   s your first recollection of attending OSU or OAMC?  Well, that would be back in 1943 when I was about four years old. OSU  or OAMC at the time was the second university in the nation to offer a  degree program in preschool child development and they had a nursery  school. We called it the preschool lab, I think, at the time; it   s now  called the CDL   Child Development Lab. But a nursery school on  campus for the benefit of faculty members and kids, other Stillwater  kids, but as a lab for the students studying preschool child development  to study the behavior of children. Iowa State was the first university to  offer such a program, OSU was the second, or OAMC, and I was one of  the earliest kids in the program back in the early forties. The nursery  school at the time was behind the Classroom Building, between the  Classroom Building and what is now gone, the old Home Ec Building,  later known as Home Ec East. It had a playground right out back.  I remember going to that nursery school as a youngster, I don   t  remember much about it but I had some illustrious classmates named  Gallagher and Iba. (Laughs) Kenny Gallagher   s grandpa was the  legendary wrestling coach and Moe Iba   s dad was the legendary  basketball coach, they were both in class with me. I remember we had a  combination storage building/jungle gym out in that playground that was  a frame structure about six feet high and you could climb up a ladder  and be on the lookout post on the top of it or you could open a door on  the side where the tricycles and wagons and other play equipment were  stored. Administration was having a terrible time for awhile because  they had a hasp and padlock on that door and every time they   d open it  up to get the tricycles out, they   d hang the padlock on the hasp and at the  end of the play period when they were ready to lock everything back up,  the padlock would be missing. My friend, Baumgartner, was stealing the  padlocks. When they finally caught him, he had eight or ten of them.  (Laughter) I don   t know what he was doing with them. He was another  faculty kid, his parents were ornithologists; both of them taught  ornithology on campus. There were a lot of kids in that preschool lab  who I went to school with in kindergarten and then through grade school  and high school and college at OSU. We were classmates for 20 years  and some are still in town. That was the real early recollection.  As I say, my dad was a chemistry professor and then department head.  The Chemistry Building is what you now know as the Journalism  Building and I was living three blocks south on the 500 block of Hester.  So at a pretty early age, maybe first, second, third grade, I was walking  to and from campus to go up and see my dad at work. And that put me  within range of a lot of campus attractions like Theta Pond. I remember,  6  Wilson  Dermer  I   m guessing that I probably didn   t have access to Theta Pond until  maybe ten years old when I got a bicycle. I doubt that I was allowed to  go across Washington Street on foot. Washington in those days went  through campus north-south   this is pre-Student Union, before the  Student Union, before the Library was built.  Which brings up one of my notes, I don   t know that you   ll know  anything about it, if anybody can remember this, but before the Union  was built, the Chemistry Building was the first building on campus east  of Washington Street. Between the Chemistry Building and Washington  Street there was a grove of trees, might better be described as a thicket,  either real big bushes or real small trees, probably no more than 15 or 20  feet high of wild citrus trees. I don   t know whether they were oranges or  kumquats; they had little fruits about the size of a ping pong ball. They  were noticeably citrus, if you peeled one or broke one open it would  smell like citrus and had seeds and pulp in it, but it was totally inedible.  These wild oranges were useless as far as I know. Some of them held on  into the sixties or seventies right down here by Old Central at the corner  of Hester and University. Landscaping finally got rid of them. But the  neat thing about this thicket was that it was a popular lover   s lane. It was  probably about half a block square, a good sized area and it wasn   t like a  maze or a labyrinth but it had tunnels into it, alcoves into it, dead end  tunnels going in 10, 15, 20 feet, not very far and ending in benches. You  could walk around the thing and just go in and out, in and out, in and  out, and it was a real popular place for students, couples to hang out.  Students didn   t have any place to go make out in those days. They lived  in the dorms, they didn   t have cars   I mean everybody was on foot and  it was right in the middle of campus and     Convenient?     it was convenient. I used to explore down in there a lot as a kid and  then later on, a few years later when I got access as I say by bike, I  probably spent a lot of time at Theta Pond fishing. I never caught  anything and I didn   t know what I was doing but I had a fishing rod and  I   d go up and try. It was at that time, probably in the late    40s, maybe  early    50s as I understand it, a student who had been living in Bennett  Hall was given a baby alligator as a present. He kept this little alligator  in Bennett Hall until it got to be a foot or eighteen inches long and too  big to keep in the dorm as a pet, so he put it in Theta Pond where it  thrived. It stayed in Theta, it lived in Theta Pond for several years  getting bigger and bigger, and I saw it a lot swimming around. I  remember one time I was sitting on the bank fishing and I saw the V-shaped  ripples of the alligator coming across the pond towards me, so I  lay down on the bank and laid real still until I heard it splashing around  on the rocks underneath me and then I stuck my head out over the edge  7  Wilson  Dermer  and I was like 18 inches from it and it just opened its mouth and went     haaaaa,    scared the bejeesus out of me  I don   t think it scared anybody  in terms of people being scared of being thrown in the pond or anything,  it wasn   t that big, but I do remember that ducks started disappearing.  People would be watching the ducks swimming across the pond, one of  them suddenly would dive feet first with a squawk, never to be seen  again except for a few feathers coming up to the top. (Laughter) That   s  when landscaping decided that they just couldn   t tolerate this anymore  and they got a rowboat and dropped it in Theta and went out and  somehow netted or trapped the alligator and captured it and donated it to  the Oklahoma City Zoo. I think it was the only one of its kind.  Did your parents attend OAMC?  They did. My father got his bachelor   s at Ohio State, master   s at  Bowling Green, or maybe vice versa, but he got his PhD here in  Chemistry and stayed on as a member of the chemistry faculty. My mom  has a master   s in Chemistry, they met while grad students here and  married. I asked my mom the other day when she came to Stillwater,  she   s 97 now and still with it. Her mind has slowed down a lot but she  thought about it and she thought maybe    31, early thirties when she  came to Stillwater. She said,    Stillwater was maybe 7,000 people in  those days and that was townspeople and student body combined. The  whole of Stillwater, everybody was 7,000 people or so. And the west  edge of town was Walnut Street.    She was primarily a housewife all her  life, but she did teach during World War II when lots of faculty were off  in the war and there was a teaching shortage. She taught freshman  chemistry and taught chemistry on campus maybe into    46 or    47. I  know she got the batch of returning veterans after World War II she  taught. She said,    They didn   t want to be taught anything, they wanted  to be learned.    (Laughter) Now, I don   t remember much of that as a  child. I was born in    39, so World War II ended in    45 when I was six,  just about exactly the time I turned 6. I don   t remember much of World  War II or the training activities that went on on campus. I do remember  Vet Village after World War II. OSU was just inundated with a flood of  returning veterans who were being sent to college by the GI Bill.  Where is the book that I brought in that I was showing off? This book of  the first 100 years history of OSU talks about Vet Village. The  government had tons of army surplus, war surplus housing units, pre-fab  housing units which they either sold dirt cheap or gave to the colleges to  house veterans. They were pretty run-down but there were a batch of  them. On Sixth Street where the hospital is now was one big complex  and north of campus where the married student apartments are now,  between the Colvin Center and McElroy was another big unit. This book  talks about the fact that in a couple of years Vet Village grew to over  8  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  1200 housing units housing over 5,000 people, married veteran students  and their families. The complex north of campus was all given French  names, I remember those well   Le Rue Midi, Le Rue du Sud, Le Rue  Grande, Le Rue Petit. They had a mayor, I didn   t know that. They had a  mayor, a post office, a grocery store.  We talk today about non-traditional students being on campus   students  that aren   t coming straight from high school but have worked a few  years and are coming back   but those guys were really non-traditional  students. They had been out there shooting and killing people in the war  and some of them were in their late twenties and they were a rowdy  bunch of students in    45 to    50, those veterans. I don   t know, I   ve never  seen the graph of what enrollment looked like, but I can imagine what it  shot up like. There were all kinds of stories at the time about a group of  them decided to enroll a dog. Somebody had a dog they decided should  go to college and they chipped in and paid his tuition, sat in his classes,  took his tests, and got this dog over 100 credit hours. They would   ve  graduated it but they couldn   t get a social security number for it and they  couldn   t get it through ROTC. (Laughter)  You had to take ROTC in those days, it was mandatory. It was  mandatory when I went to school starting in    57 into the early sixties.  All able-bodied males coming to Oklahoma A M had to have two years  of basic ROTC. Tuesdays and Thursdays half the campus was wearing  Army green or Air Force blue. Because those were the days you had two  hours a semester for your first four semesters, you had to have eight  hours of ROTC to graduate. If you wanted to and qualified, you could go  advanced ROTC and continue your junior and senior years getting a  commission upon graduation. So that was very much a part of college in  the late fifties, early sixties.  And you graduated high school in Stillwater?  I graduated high school in Stillwater in    57 and immediately came to  school here. It was never a conscious decision on my part to go to  college. From day one I knew I was going to go to college. I think that  was pretty common. Students from non-university towns maybe thought  about it differently, but I suspect that 90  of my high school class went  to college. I certainly never gave it a second thought, it was just a given.  What did you major in when you came to OSU?  Well, initially my first year I was a journalism major because I had been  editor of the school paper at Stillwater High and had gotten a Sigma  Delta Chi honorary journalism fraternity scholarship for my freshman  year. But after that scholarship ran out I changed majors to English and  9  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  graduated with a B.A. in English. I would   ve graduated in    61 or so  except I made the mistake of buying The Hideaway between my junior  and senior years and it took me three years to finish up my senior year, I  think I graduated    62 or    63. Then, after taking a hiatus of four years  while shoveling pizzas, I decided that my English degree wasn   t helping  me that much in the world of business, so I went back to grad school and  spent three years in the MBA program, didn   t get the MBA. I got 62 of  the 65 credit hours I needed, decided that was enough, I didn   t need  those last three hours because I knew I was going to stay self-employed  by that time.  Do you remember some of the buildings you had classes in on campus?  I never had classes in Old Central, but I had classes in Williams Hall.  Williams Hall was the castle due east of Old Central and that was the  English department when I was an English major, so I had tons of  classes in that drafty old place. It was, I don   t want to say a mausoleum,  but it was a really ancient creaky old building, and the fire trap like you  wouldn   t believe. It had a hollow interior, it was built like a square donut  with an open-air courtyard in the middle surrounded by building but  open to the sky at the top. It was 40 or 50 feet from the campus fire  station and friends in the fire department told me that if it ever caught  fire they couldn   t put it out. It was built like a chimney and if it ever  caught fire it would go up in a twinkling and they didn   t have enough  water pressure to be able to think about putting it out. A lot of people  were sad when it was torn down because it was such an unusual looking  structure, but believe me, it was not a very well planned structure.  Are there many faculty members that had much of an influence on your  life or professors you remember?  Oh, wow. Dr. Daniel Kroll was my advisor in the English department. I  had a problem when I bought The Hideaway; I was on track to graduate,  but in those days Vietnam was starting up and you got drafted  immediately the moment you were out. If you were out of college you  were going on active duty. I had a student deferment and I didn   t want to  graduate, because if I graduated I was going to be off on active duty in  the military and I didn   t know what would happen to my business. So  lacking only a course or two in English to graduate, I started taking  courses other than English. I was a History major for a year and a  Philosophy major for a semester and every time I   d go in during  enrollment time to have my course schedule approved, Dr. Kroll would  look at it and shake his head and tell me,    Every time I talk to you,  Dermer, I feel like I   m consorting with a reprobate.    (Laughter)  I remember when I finally did graduate, got married, Marti was pregnant  10  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  and they weren   t drafting daddies in those days so it was okay to go  ahead and graduate. I graduated and I decided I   d go by and see my  advisor and I knew he liked to smoke pipes. Don   t all English professors  smoke pipes? I went downtown and bought him some of the finest pipe  tobacco I could find and went by his house and he was home. I told him  that I thought he deserved a graduation present from me since I was  finally graduating and he damn near broke down and cried. He said I  was the first student he   d ever been an advisor to that had remembered  his advisor upon graduation, took me into his study and gave me a long  father-son type work hard talk. It was fun.  I don   t really remember any professors as having a profound influence  on me. I pretty much knew what I wanted to do in those days. English  was an easy major for me because I had been brought up reading and  writing, speaking the King   s English and had perfect grammar from the  get-go, so it was really quite easy.  What was life like on campus at that time?  Life was a ball. (Laughter) It was really a good time. I was dating my  high school sweetheart, we had started going steady in high school and  wound up getting married in the middle of my junior year at Christmas  time. She dropped out of school after I guess about two years of credits,  but we lived right down here as I say on the corner of Hester and  University. I loved that location. I had been in track and cross country in  high school and run intramural cross country or intramural track for the  fraternity in college, and I could make it from out of bed, jump into my  pants, throw on a shirt and shoes, and get from my bedroom to class in  my seat in the Classroom Building in less than ten minutes. Just a  straight shot up the street. (Laughter)  That   s impressive.  Wasn   t as good as the Hideaway employee that we had living across the  alley here in that house just across from the dumpster, he lived in the  north apartment back there. He used to claim he could get from his  house to the time clock in less than 30 seconds. (Laughter)  But when Marti and I got married, we got married on the Friday before  Christmas vacation started and I had a one o   clock class. I went to the  instructor at the start of class just before one o   clock in my tux and  asked him if I could leave class a little bit early, like at 1:40 instead of 2  o   clock and he said,    Why?    And I said,    Well, I am getting married at 2  o   clock at Bennett Chapel.    (Laughs) I had to do that for the brownie  points. He was amused and he let me go at 1:30 and I made it to the  wedding in plenty of time. We were one of the first couples married at  11  Wilson  Dermer  Bennett Chapel, it was right across the street from our house and I think  it had been dedicated the year before. We weren   t the first, but we were  some of the first to be married there.  Let   s see, I brought a sticky note with me, there it is. Things I was going  to talk about. I mentioned the CDL and the orange grove, the Student  Union. You wanted to know what things were like when I was going to  school here. The Student Union has gone through a number of changes  and metamorphoses over the years. I remember when it was built,  watched it going up as a youngster, I was ten or eleven when it was  finished. Of course, it was right behind my dad   s Chemistry Building so  I saw it going up, and by six or seven years later I was hanging out there.  I started working there, got my start in the restaurant business there. In  the mid-fifties, the Student Union was the largest employer of high  school teenagers in Stillwater by a huge margin. They had lots of  banquets and the Student Union banquet facilities hired high school girls  as servers. Hundreds of Stillwater high girls worked as banquet  waitresses. That was a real common part-time occupation. Guys were  busboys. I got a job as a busboy in the Student Union coffee shop and  then progressed from that to salad boy and fry cook and wound up doing  all kinds of kitchen duties in the Union. But food facilities were much  different then than they are now. Now there are a lot of outside  caterers   I won   t say caterers, a lot of outside businesses that have  operations within the Student Union. In those days it was all run by the  Student Union. It had a central kitchen on the first floor that handled  both the coffee shop and the cafeteria on the first floor, the banquet  facilities on the second floor, and the snack bar on the fourth floor.  The fourth floor snack bar was the center of operations for a wealth of  activities. There was the north-south corridor, the north-south hallway  was filled with card players, chess players, and game players all day  long. The Starlight Terrace, later covered over, it was an open-air  facility east of that hallway that was filled with students eating and  drinking, burgers, fries, malts, soft drinks, from the snack bar. On the  west side of the hallway was a large dance area, with a dance floor in the  center surrounded by booths on all four sides. It was filled with students  all day long from 9 or 10 am    til the building closed at night. Students  would go to class, go over to the Union, dance for an hour, go to another  class, go back to the Union and dance for an hour. It was just a major  center of social activity all day long. It   s gotten away from that, it   s not  as much fun, I don   t think.  Were there other places on campus to go dancing?  No, that was it. There had been prior to the Student Union. Peck   s Lodge  across the street here from The Hideaway was a popular student hangout  12  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  before my time. It was already on the downside. Swim   s, which is now  Cowboy Book up by Eskimo Joe   s, was a hangout. There were some  down on Washington Street. But the Union, the Union has changed.  Students today are astonished to learn that it used to have an eight-lane  bowling alley in the basement and a pool hall in the basement. I set pins  in that bowling alley for awhile as a teenager. When nobody wanted to  bowl, pin boys got to play pool for free.  Were you involved in a fraternity?  I was. I was a member of TKE  Tau Kappa Epsilon , which is now back  on campus after a 20 or 30 year absence. I pledged TKE, went through  Rush and was impressed by the TKE house. It was a small house but it  had a strong national   more active chapters nationally than any other  fraternity and it was pretty high academically. The year before I pledged  we were fourth on campus in overall grade point among fraternities;  fourth out of 20 wasn   t bad. I was never as active as the guys that lived  in the house because I lived at home with my parents and then got  married. I never spent any time living in the fraternity and as such I  consider myself an associate member.  Did you attend many athletic events while you were a student?  I did not attend many athletic events, mostly because I was working a  lot. I worked throughout college and as I say, I started at the Student  Union in high school   I   ll backtrack a little on this. While I was  working at the Student Union, OSU decided to open a restaurant at Lake  Carl Blackwell as part of the School of Hotel and Restaurant  Administration. It is now the OSU Sailing Club Boathouse out there on  the loop. But they built a brand new building out at the lake, decided to  staff it with Student Union employees. The cook that I had worked with  in the coffee shop of the Union was picked to be the manager of the  Lake Restaurant and he asked me if I   d like to go out and work for him  at the Lake Blackwell restaurant. I jumped at the chance and worked out  there my junior and senior years in high school, mostly the summers  because that   s when the action was at the lake.  It was a really unusual operation. They put it in as a training facility, I  think, for student Hotel and Restaurant majors, as kind of a working lab  for restaurant majors. I don   t remember that many college students  working out there, but it was a great training ground for a future  restaurant owner because we had all kinds of different customers. We  would open at 5:30 in the morning before sun up. We   d have to get there  in the dark, fire up the grill and coffee pots because the parking lot  would be filled with fishermen in their vehicles waiting to fill up their  thermoses with hot coffee before going out on the lake in their boats. We  13  Wilson  Dermer  would open the doors and start filling thermoses with coffee and serving  short order breakfast and have an hour or two breakfast run.  Then, things would slow up and we   d start serving hamburgers and fries,  short order stuff. There was a soda fountain right inside the door, soft  drinks and ice cream. At noon, maybe 11:30, we   d shut down the short  orders and open the short cafeteria line where we had two or three  entrees and veggies and a 20-foot abbreviated cafeteria line for serving  large numbers of people in a hurry and run that for a couple of hours at  lunch, go back to short order operations. At 5 o   clock we   d shut down  the short order operations, break out the tablecloths, cover the tables  with tablecloths, put the candles on and start serving steakhouse fine  dining, full menu, higher dollar stuff for three or four hours of supper  business. Then we   d shut down the kitchen completely, run all the food  customers out, start charging a cover charge at the door and serving  setups at the soda fountain for students who wanted to dance and drink.  This was in the dry days, it was liquor by the wink, but students would  bring their own bottles and mix their drinks out on the porch and then  I   d work the soda fountain, selling lots of limeades. We   d be open    til  midnight or maybe 1AM; we   d shut it down, students would leave. We  high school kids would race around out on the porch seeing if anybody  had left partial bottles of booze. And four hours later we were open  again for the fishermen. It was just crazy. We had all these different  clienteles in the course of the day.  So would you stay out there ever?  No, we   d drive back and forth. But I worked two summers out there and  got great training for all different phases of the restaurant business. Then  my freshman year   well, my senior year in high school, in February of     57, The Hideaway opened up. It was called The Campus Hideaway,  519 West Third, Stillwater   s very first pizza restaurant. I was going  steady with Marti at the time and I said,    Hey this new restaurant opened  just a couple blocks from my house and they   re serving this stuff called  pizza.    I had never eaten a pizza, she had never eaten a pizza. Nobody in  Stillwater had ever eaten pizza. It was unheard of.    Let   s go try it out.     So we walked into this place and it was pretty   I   m trying to think of  exactly the right word   it was a hole-in-the-wall and a storefront  operation had been put in with very little expense. Bare tables, 12 tables,  48 chairs, Formica tabletops, hard floor, very little attempt at any kind of  decoration or d  cor, menu on the wall. Cheapest thing on the menu was  a small cheese pizza for 90 cents. I thought that was pretty outrageous  because you could buy three hamburgers for 90 cents in those days and I  thought that was awfully high. I was making 50 cents an hour at the  Student Union or over at the Lake Restaurant.  14  So we ordered   a guy came out and asked us what we wanted, and we  told him a small cheese pizza and he disappeared into the back. After ten  or twelve minutes he came out with this thing on a metal paddle and set  it down in front of us, a couple of cokes, bottles of coke with straws in  the top, turned around and disappeared in the back again. We sat there  and looked at this thing. I tried to pick up a slice and it just kind of  drooped like that. No plates, no forks, there were napkins stuck in a  water glass, just rolled up and stuck in a water glass on the table. I  couldn   t figure out how to eat the damn thing. So I walked back looking  for this guy who had brought it to us; I couldn   t find him. We were the  only customers in the place. I did find a drink station with a coffee pot  and cups and saucers and spoons. So I snagged a couple coffee saucers  and spoons and brought them back out and we ate our first pizza with  spoons and coffee saucers. (Laughter) I wasn   t real impressed. You  know, we were the only customers in there, we didn   t know how to eat  this thing. It tasted pretty good, but I think maybe we went back once or  twice in the next few months.  But that fall, I was a freshman at OSU and the Lake Restaurant was  closing for the winter and I needed to find a new place to work. I could  go back to the Student Union, but I noticed this Campus Hideaway was  advertising for delivery people. I had a car, I knew the town, I went in  and applied. He said they   d pay me .75 cents an hour. Whoa, that was  better than I was getting at the Union, so I started delivering for The  Hideaway and wound up working there my freshman year.  I worked at   another place, a second pizza place that opened on Washington Street  my sophomore year, back into Hideaway my junior year.  Then the guy, an out-of-state owner that had put in this Campus  Hideaway in Stillwater, it was his fifth store, he had a chain of small  chain of Campus Hideaways that he had started in Lawrence at KU, and  then gone from KU to Kansas City to Columbia, Missouri to Chapel  Hill, North Carolina, to Stillwater. He decided the Stillwater  location   was just never going to make him any money. It had never caught on, it  hadn   t made any sales at all to speak of and he wanted to bail. He  decided to just sell the store.  His manager, my boss in Stillwater, didn   t want to buy it. It hadn   t made  any money in three years; it didn   t look good on paper. I thought I could  do a lot better job than this yo-yo that I was working for. I said,    I   d buy  it if you   d sell it to me on credit.    He didn   t think much of that idea at all  but he didn   t have any other buyers, so after a few months of pondering  he decided okay and I wound up buying this pizza restaurant for  10,000  between my junior and senior year.  Well, Latasha, you   ve worked here, you know what sales are like now.  15  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  It   s unfathomable to think about how little business we had those early  years. As I say, pizza was an unknown food, it was unheard of, it was  some odd weird foreign food that maybe people on the east coast were  familiar with, but nobody in the Midwest was familiar with. Pizza Hut  had just started a few years before in Kansas and it was unknown. There  was no Chef Boyardee; there were no mixes; there were no frozen pizzas  in the supermarket. People did not know what pizza was. Pizza in the  mid fifties occupied the same market niche that sushi maybe did here 20  years ago; people had heard of it but they didn   t know what it was. It did  not take off immediately. The first three years that The Hideaway was  open, we averaged less than  90 a day in sales and that was dining room  and delivery combined. (Laughter) It was a two or three man operation  most of the time, dining room and delivery.  I   d have gone broke in a hurry after buying it if sales hadn   t just  immediately skyrocketed. I had a brother-in-law who had made up most  of the small down payment. Of  10,000 we paid for the business,  4,000  down and  6,000 on credit. Of the  4,000 down, my brother-in-law put  up  3,000 and I put up  1,000. But within two or three months, we were  averaging  300 a day in sales just because we started making a better  product. We started putting on lots of toppings and treating people  courteously and having a good time, trying to attract customers to come  back rather than trying to run them off.  How old were you when you bought it?  Twenty. (Laughter) I had to wait a week to turn 21 to apply for my  Oklahoma beer license.  Did you advertise in the early days?  Just a little bit, we didn   t advertise much. But we worked at it night and  day. We didn   t have enough money to be able to pay much help so my  brother-in-law and I were both putting in 70, 80, 90 hour weeks. After  two years of this he decided he   d had enough and he wanted to get out. I  offered to pay him  10,000 for his half of the business, on credit. He  said,    Sure.    So I found myself sole owner at 22. (Laughter) And debt-free  at 24. Paid him off pretty quickly. Been at it ever since. It   s been a  good life, but I was just in the right place at the right time. I remember  my parents being really concerned about wondering if this pizza was just  a fad, if it was really going to stick around or if it   s something that  would come and go. I told them I thought it would stick. I think I   ve  convinced them.  So has the menu changed very much in the past 50 years?  16  Dermer  It hasn   t changed that much. It   s expanded, of course. The original menu  was very very much bare bones. Eight or ten toppings and two or three  sandwiches. We had a cheese sandwich, a submarine sandwich, a ham  and cheese I think and one small salad. And that was it because we had a  very small operation. The back half of the original building was a frame  building that we couldn   t put any cooking equipment in, so we didn   t  have any hot sandwiches at all; no grill, no fryer, no griddle, anything  like that, it had to be cold cuts. The business has gone through a number  of metamorphoses over the years, just like the Student Union has. In the  early years, in the beginning, The Hideaway didn   t open until 4 PM  every day. We were open until 2 AM, 3 AM on Fridays and Saturdays.  We were very much strictly a night time business. Only a night time  business. We were 98  student clientele, almost no townspeople,  virtually no faculty. Townspeople were pretty suspicious of us. They  didn   t know what the product was, they knew we were open late at night  and we sold beer and we were full of students and only students and it  was kind of a marginal reputation business. This was not some place that  respectable people were comfortable going to. Had a lot of those long-haired  hippies working there.  The pizza became more and more popular. More and more people came  to like it and business was doing much much better 20 years later. But it  didn   t make the big break until we got kicked out of the building.  Hideaway had opened in    57, I bought it from my brother-in-law in    62,  and    80   well, starting about    70 I was trying to buy the rented building  from my landlady. She was in her nineties and lived next door. I could  not talk her into selling me the building; I tried and tried and tried. She  was over 100 and still living next door when I was asked to attend a  board meeting for the University Heights Baptist church right behind  me. I went to their board meeting and the church members informed me  that they were my new landlords. They had bought the property from  Mrs. Johnson. They would like for me to stay on as a tenant, but they  were going to have to triple my rent and I would have to stop selling  beer because they were after all a Baptist church. I told them I would  stay on for a little bit, but I would have to find someplace else.  Fortunately, this building across the street that I had known growing up  as the College Drug had been vacant for 6 months or a year and housed  three or four short-lived bars in the five years prior, was between bars  and the out-of-state owners wanted to sell it. I bought this building and  jumped over here 3 months after I got the bad word from the Baptists. I  had doubled in size; it was the new location and I was a quarter million  dollars in debt, a SBA  Small Business Administration  loan. But it was  the best thing that ever happened to me because by doubling in size and  coming to an all-masonry building I was able to add and design a  kitchen that was much more efficient than what I had in the rented  17  Wilson  Dermer  building. I added a deep fat fryer and a grill and could add hot  sandwiches and spaghetti, lasagna, and things like that. Twice the dining  room  size , twice the seating capacity, and closer to campus, a block  closer to campus. Suddenly, I had a lunch trade and suddenly it was a  respectable place to go to and the townspeople and the faculty started  coming in and sales just blossomed. My delivery sales stayed the same;  the dining room sales doubled. Prior to the move, dining room and  delivery had been about 50-50 as far as sales went. So when I doubled  the dining room size, it suddenly went from 50-50 to 65-35. That was in  1980. Thirty years later now, delivery   s about 15 percent, dining room   s  85 percent. Delivery has never declined, it   s just dining room sales have  improved that much.  Another, a third increase happened in and around 2000. We bought the  old campus theatre, the vacant building next door to the Hideaway on  the corner in the early nineties and sat on the empty building for almost  a decade wondering what to do with it. It was a monstrosity that was  impossible to heat or cool and do anything with really. I didn   t want to  rent it for any kind of business that would compete for the Hideaway for  precious parking spaces and I couldn   t come up with anything to do that  didn   t require much parking. So finally we tore the building down and  built this addition. The original Hideaway over on Third Street was  under 2,000 square feet. When we moved in 1980, the new building was  4,500 square feet and we built 4,100 square feet of new construction on  to it in 2000, bringing us up to almost 9,000 square feet and bringing the  seating up to 350. Now, we   ve got a really nice big pizza place.  I was watching a TV program I think on the Travel Channel a couple of  years ago on the top pizza places in the nation. Some place in New York  City was claiming to be the biggest pizzeria in the country at 10,000  square feet and I was kind of stunned by that. I thought,    Well, damn,  I   ve got 9,000, I   m almost that big right here in this little town.    I can   t  believe that   s true. I think there   ve got to be some bigger ones out there,  but I don   t know where they are.  And this is the original wall behind us?  This is the wall of the south wall of the theatre. Well, no no, this is the  wall of the drug store. There was a little space in between the theatre and  the drug store originally. But I   ve been asked many, many times, I   m  going to fall into a canned spiel that I   ve given many times before. I   ve  been asked umpteen times how The Hideaway   s managed to survive and  succeed as an independent restaurant 52 years in business as a one  location restaurant,  which  is just unheard of. A fraction of one percent  of restaurants have that kind of longevity.  18  What is the reason for the success? I have a surprising answer for that.  When I went back to grad school on campus in the mid-   60s to work on  that MBA program, I started out in a basic marketing class and the  instructor was one of those SOB   s who thought that grad students in a  junior level class should do more work than the rest of the students, so  he assigned a handful of us grad students in the class a term paper on  any aspect of marketing. The rest of the class didn   t have to do it, but we  did. One of the other grad students asked him how long, he said,    Oh,  minimum 50 pages.    We go,    Oh, fine.    (Laughter) So faced with a 50-  page term paper on any aspect of marketing, I went home and  immediately sped-read through my basic marketing textbook that had a  chapter on marketing research. That looked pretty good. I said,     Marketing research I could get a whole lot of data and use that to pad  the term paper. Besides it would be interesting.     I went back to the instructor and asked him if I could do a research  project, an analysis of student body attitudes and opinions toward eating  and drinking places in Stillwater. He said,    Sure.    I said,    Well, I don   t  want them to know that The Hideaway is doing it. Can I do it  anonymously and use your office as the mail drop to get completed  questionnaires?    And he said,    Sure.    So he loaned me a couple of  marketing research texts, which I read and studied, and designed a  questionnaire to try and find out all kinds of things that I wanted to  know about how students felt about The Hideaway.  I broke some cardinal rules of marketing research: the questionnaire was  too long and took too long to complete, but I preceded it with a tear-jerking  letter saying,    Hey, fellow student, I   m a struggling grad student  and I need this research for a term paper, can you help me out by telling  me what you think about Stillwater restaurants and drinking places?    I  got a 25  response, a really good response rate. And some of it I had an  intuitive feel from the beginning. At the time, mind you this was mid-     60s, I was the fourth most popular student hangout at the time. Three  places on the strip were more popular. A lot of stuff I thought I knew the  answer to but I didn   t care anyway. People liked booths rather than  tables and chairs, but I   ve stuck with tables and chairs anyway because  they   re more versatile and cheaper. But one question blew me away. I  asked,    Which of the following factors is most important in your  selection of a restaurant? Pick one. Is it quality of food, type of food,  price, atmosphere, service, location, quantity of food,    I   ve forgot, I  think I missed a couple but I think I had ten factors.  This was in the early days of computers when I did this study in    65. We  had to type all the responses on to punch cards and then run and write a  program to sort the punch cards so that I could analyze my results by  guys versus gals, by freshman, sophomores, juniors, Greeks versus  19  independents, on-campus residents, off-campus residents, et cetera. Boy,  I had lots of data for that term paper, no problem. But the results to this  one question just blew me away: price was most important to like 1  of  the respondents, quality of food was 2 , type of food was half of a  percent, location was a quarter of a percent, atmosphere 93 percent. It  just blew everything else out of the water. Atmosphere was the only  thing that mattered across all of the respondents. I go,    Holy moly      That just really was an eye opener.  But what do they mean by atmosphere? I had the next two semesters  marketing research projects lined up by the time that first semester was  over. I was doing marketing research with a vengeance trying to  determine what students meant by atmosphere. Is it color scheme? Is it  d  cor? Is it music? Is it lighting? Is it colors? You know all kinds of  different factors enter into atmosphere. After two more studies I really  think I boiled it down to a good response and I got another 90  on the  most important component of atmosphere is employee attitude. If you   ve  got happy employees, if you   ve got employees who enjoy their job and  like their work, are having a good time, it rubs off on the customers. If  the employees are having a good time, customers are going to have a  good time; it   s that simple. It may not be that simple to make sure your  employees are having a good time all the time, but if you can do that,  you   re going to have happy customers. I really think that   s the long-time  reason for the success of The Hideaway.  First, I   ve had a great labor pool to work from   OSU student body. I  don   t have to hire high school students. I don   t have to hire drop-outs.  Although, sometimes I hire students that have dropped out, they may  have been students when I hired them and now they   re not. But hiring  quality young people in the first place who are the cream of the crop  because they are students. I learned early on not to hire freshman  because they tend to flunk out and I want to know that a student is  serious about it and can handle college before I hire them. If I had my  druthers, I   d hire only juniors   sophomores and juniors. Seniors are  good employees if they stay on to go to grad school, otherwise it   s a  waste of effort to train them for six months and then lose them.  But I   ve had quality help to start with. Then I   ve broken a lot of  management rules keeping them happy. For 25 years I let employees  drink on the job. I finally decided I just couldn   t do that, particularly  with the delivery drivers. (Laughter) But I bend over backwards to try  and keep employees happy and the amount of hours they   re working     lots of restaurants tell their employees week to week or month to month  what their schedule is going to be. I try to give them a fixed schedule for  an entire semester so they can count on the hours and they get the  number of hours they want. If they only want to work 20 hours, that   s  20  Wilson  Dermer  fine. If they want to work 32 hours, we can do that too. I want to tailor  their job to their needs, work it around their class schedule as much as  possible, allow substitutions between employees. This can lead to  terrible problems sometimes if you have three wait people who get  delivery people to substitute for them or vice versa, you find you   ve got  a crew of all delivery guys or all waitresses. But letting people eat on the  job, liberal food allowances, lots of restaurants try to charge their  employees for food and I think it   s just not very productive to try and  expect people to work around food all the time and not let them eat it.  But letting them listen to the music that they want to listen to, this one  kills me. I really dislike a lot of the music I have to live my life to in the  restaurant; every decade it   s a new kind of music. Sometimes I like it,  most of the times I don   t. But letting the employees pick the music,  letting them pick their schedules, doing all of these things possible and  paying them well, it keeps my crew real happy. I have very low  turnover.  One of my students ran a study just before we opened the new part in  2000, so I had a real stable crew in    99 and she ran a study to analyze the  tenure of my employees. At that time before we expanded and added a  whole bunch of new employees, my average employee had been with  me for 31 months. The average employee nationally in the restaurant  business has been on the job less than 6 months. Real fast turnover  nationally and we   re just a tiny fraction of that and this leads to really  good, well-trained quality of employees. That   s the primary reason for  the success of the business. Quality food is important, yes. We   ve  always turned out the best product that we possibly can. Price we don   t  worry about really. I know for a lot of people within the pizza industry  price is really important and a lot of places, a lot of national chains focus  primarily on price. They   re the ones that have the high turnover too and  the mediocre service and the not-so-happy employees. So I think it   s  worked out well.  As a child growing up in Stillwater in the 1980s, I remember entering  coloring contests and coloring Volkswagen Beetles with the hopes of my  design being painted on an actual car. Can you tell us a little about the  Volkswagen Beetles?  Well, sure. When I started out as a delivery guy, I was using my own car  and I was paid mileage. When I became an owner and started hiring  drivers to use their own cars, I discovered it was harder to find  employees with cars than just run of the mill employees without.  Nowadays, a larger number of students own cars than they did in the     60s. Back then, the majority of students didn   t have cars and those that  did didn   t necessarily want to use them on delivery because it   s hard,  21  stop and go. It   s hard on the vehicles and it made it hard to hire  employees, so I gingerly decided to dip the toe in the water of trying  company owned vehicles and bought a new    65 VW first to try out as a  delivery car and it worked well. So I bought a used VW and another and  another and turned out that this seemed to be a pretty good plan because  parts were interchangeable if I stuck with VW   s in the sixties, I could  swap engines and transmissions and parts. Used vehicles started getting  cheaper and cheaper and more and more on the market. By the time I  was really in full swing, buying a typical delivery car would cost me  about  500 and it would last me a year or two before it was junk and  then part of it I could use in the next one.  The first few that I had, I very carefully painted neat looking racing  stripes on them front to back and those stood out in the crowd, but you  know, nice decals, nice company logos on the doors. But then we started  changing it up and, as you say, having kids coloring contests and letting  the winning child help employees paint their car and their design with 4-  inch brushes and house paint, slathering it on. This was not quality body  work by any means, but we had polka-dot Volkswagens and striped  Volkswagens and zebra stripes and tiger stripes, plaids and paisleys and  every kind of Volkswagen imaginable, and they were a tremendous  marketing device. They were hard to keep running. I hired a succession  of part-time mechanics and eventually a full-time mechanic on staff just  to keep the delivery fleet running. I had a huge stockpile of broken down  junkers stored in a field outside of town where we could go out and  pirate parts to keep trying to patch the fleet together. At one point, I  think the most I ever had insured at one time was a dozen of which no  more than nine were ever running at one time. But when I finally  decided it was just too expensive to keep them running and started  phasing them out and eventually phased them all out in the mid-nineties,  I had old titles for over 75 Beetles that I had owned. I think probably the  total count might have approached 80 or 90.  I still wonder if I was right to phase them out, maybe I should go back  into it and go after the delivery market with a vengeance. But it   s one of  those 80-20 rules; deliveries are 20  of the profit and 80  of the  headaches. It   s the only time I   ve got employees out there away from the  business out from under immediate supervision and you don   t have any  direct control over those delivery employees out there and things have  gotten better in many ways. The advent of cell phones has been a huge  blessing so the drivers in trouble can report in and ask directions or if  their car breaks down they can get help. But still, deliveries are not an  area that I really want to push. We do it. Over the years our market share  in delivery sales has declined to the Domino   s and Domino   s clones. We  have very few dorm deliveries compared to what we had 30 years ago.  Its only saving grace is the deliveries we do have now are great big ones;  22  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  our average delivery sale is four or five times what it was 30 years ago.  So it   s still profitable, but it   s not the sort of thing I want to push hard.  I   ve heard you have the nickname the Big Kahuna?  (Laughter) Well, the nickname the Big Kahuna came from the    Little  Annie Fannie    cartoon strip in Playboy magazine. There was the collage  on the dining room wall of pictures from all kinds of different magazine  sources at the old Hideaway. There was a little    Annie Fannie    cartoon  strip as part of the collage that showed little Annie Fannie having a  Hawaiian adventure. She had come upon the Hawaiian witch doctor, and  I believe the sound balloon was,    Leaping lizards, Sandy, it   s the Big  Kahuna     The employees picked up on that from the collage and started  calling me the Big Kahuna over at the store on Third Street and it   s been  there ever since. Of course, now we have our 30-inch pizza named the  Big Kahuna.  When did that come about?  Oh, gosh, 15 years ago maybe and that   s been a pain in the butt. Seemed  like a neat thing to do,    Let   s order some of these 30-inch pans and  boxes to go with them and have a  42 pizza.    It went over well for two  or three years and suddenly the company making the boxes went out of  business and we had the pans but no boxes. And they   re much more  popular away from the business than they are here. So we couldn   t  deliver them or couldn   t sell them for pick-ups and then we found  another source for the boxes and we started them up again and that box  company went out of business. I think we   re currently not delivering Big  Kahunas and we   re looking for a fourth box company that we haven   t  found yet.  Looking around the restaurant, it   s obvious that you have a passion for  kites.  Yeah.  Can you tell me how that started?  Well, the kites are just one of those hobbies that I kind of stumbled into.  I   ve had three passionate hobbies in my life. The first one was  tournament chess, I was a tournament chess player and then a  tournament chess organizer and director for a number of years in the  sixties. My wife didn   t share that interest at all. In the seventies and  eighties we got into sailing, which she enjoyed as much as I did but it   s  kind of a solitary sport. We got a big sailboat and discovered that it was  okay, but it   s most fun if you   re the driver; other people are just along  23  Wilson  Dermer  for the ride. We all wanted to drive so we got away from the big sailboat  and had four little sailboats, one for each member of the family. When  our kids were growing up we could have family regattas out at the lake,  but that   s kind of a solitary sport.  Then, we discovered another wind-related hobby of kites and kite-flying  and kite-building and discovered it   s really a much deeper subject than  anybody realizes. Kites are common to virtually all cultures around the  world. There are hundreds of types of kites and designs. There   s  something in kite flying to appeal to just about everybody. It can be a  very peaceful, relaxing sport if you just want to lay back on a nice day  and decorate the sky. Or it can be a really invigorating athletic endeavor  if you want to try competitive kite-flying with multi-line kites where you  have to do patterns in the sky for panels of judges, doing compulsory  figures like an ice skater or choreographing moves of your kite to music  being pumped over a PA system and being judged on how well you can  choreograph your controllable kite to the music. Or you can get tiny  little miniature kites like these. Or great big kites the size of this dining  room. Or aerial photography using kites as camera lifters. Traction  kiting with using kites as aerial sales to pull yourself on little 3-wheel  kite buggies that   ll go 60 miles an hour. Or kite boards with foot straps  on them like windsurfers but with a kite a 100 feet up instead of a mast  and sail. Or skis or ice skates. It   s just a really broad field and I enjoy all  of it.  I got into it and we started going to kite festivals and wound up my wife  and I have been to kite festivals overseas in China, Japan, India, New  Zealand, all over Europe, South America, Canada, all over the U.S. I  served 9 years as a board of directors member, southwestern director for  the American Kitefliers Association and then wound up 3 years as  president in    97,    98 ,   99. That resulted in a lot of those overseas trips;  some of them were paid for by overseas organizers, particularly Japan.  Now I   m a happily retired, almost retired, past president. Marti and I do  lots of school programs for children, going to grade schools, teaching  kids about kites and different countries and kite history and then  teaching them all how to build simple kites. But it also provides a nice  theme for d  cor in the restaurant, decorating the wall and ceilings with  kites from around the world. It   s much better to show them off down  here than just to have them all stacked in the corner of the garage.  On your around the world travels, have you often tried pizza in different  countries?  Oh, I have. And it   s terrible. (Laughter) Maybe, the worst pizza I   ve  ever had was a seafood pizza in Japan. I just can   t see putting mussels on  a pizza without taking the mussels out of the shells. Having to pick the  24  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  shells out of the pizza just doesn   t make any sense to me at all   And you   ve also been very active in the United Way in Stillwater.  I have been quite active in the United Way, just in the last few years.  That   s been an eye-opener to me. The more I work with the United Way,  the more I want to do and the more I want to give. The Stillwater United  Way agency has, I think we have 25 different agencies now that we help  support. Some of them could get by without us, like the Girl Scouts get  one half of one percent of their funding from United Way. The Girl  Scouts are a good organization, but they don   t need the United Way.  They could get by fine without that one half of one percent. But there are  other agencies like the Domestic Violence Center or the Community  Health Center or the Mission of Hope Homeless Center that are just  absolutely dependent on the United Way for their existence and they   re  fulfilling vital missions in the community. I   ve been racking my brain  for the last several years trying to figure out how to get more income for  the United Way because there   s never enough.  I know you   ve had a lot of famous people dine in your restaurant. Are  you aware of very many of them? Or do you have any favorites?  Not really. For a long time in the sixties and seventies we had a good  working relationship with the manager of the university auditorium and  it was just a block away. And every time famous musicians and  performers would come to campus to do Allied Arts performances, if it  was a big group like the Boston Pops there was no way we were going to  be able to feed them all and have room for any customers, but smaller  groups always got invites to come over to the Hideaway after their  performances and we   ve had a lot of top musicians and performers.  Been a little hurt, we   ve had two U.S. presidents come and deliver  commencement addresses but neither of them came to The Hideaway.  Dang. (Laughter) But none really jump out.  What I   m more impressed by is the number of ex-employees that I   ve  had that have gone on to fame and fortune and various endeavors,  doctors and lawyers and teachers and PhD   s and whatnot. I feel, you  know   when I was growing up in high school, my father was a teacher,  my mother was a teacher, relatives were teachers. I figured I was  probably going to be a teacher. I was vice president of the Future  Teachers of Stillwater High School. I certainly didn   t expect to wind up  in the restaurant industry. But doing so, it   s pretty much a teaching  profession. A cross between teaching and coaching; I find a lot of  similarities between my job and that of an athletic coach. When I read  Sports Illustrated, I   ve been a charter subscriber, I tend to zero in on the  articles and stories about coaches more than the articles about the  25  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  athletes because I want to be a motivator. I want to know how they  motivate their athletes and their teams. There   s a real feeling of success  in knowing that I   ve been responsible for lots and lots of students  who   ve gone out there and done well in the world partly as a result of  my coaching.  Well, I certainly think you are a wonderful motivator. And a great  coach.  (Laughter) Well, I   and sometimes it has absolutely nothing to do with  my skills. I   ve learned and you probably haven   t heard this one, I just  heard this one a week or two ago, an ex-employee  Phil Kiner  from the  Hideaway worked for me in    70 and    71. I had not heard from him since     71 until last month when I discovered that since he left here he has gone  onto fame as a trap shooting celebrity, shooting clay pigeons with a shot  gun.  Really?  He   s a 44 time Wyoming State Champion, he   s a 25 time All-American,  he   s a member of the Trap Shooting Hall of Fame and the only  competitive trap shooter ever to break 400 clay pigeons out of 400 tries  in competition, which he   s done not once but twice. (Laughter)  Good grief.  Way to go, Phil. I mean, now I don   t think that had anything to do with  my coaching because I   ve never held a shotgun in my life but it   s nice to  hear about ex-employees who have accomplished things like that.  Yeah. And one of your ex-employees bought The Hideaway name in  1993 and turned it into another business?  In    91 I gave permission to an ex-employee, an ex-manager actually, to  utilize the Hideaway name, recipes, logo, to open an expansion store and  eventually a chain started in Tulsa. I won   t call it a franchise because to  me a franchise denotes continuing royalties and an ongoing percentage  of sales, which I wish. But then also a franchise implies continuing  support, assistance, coaching on the part of the franchisee, franchisor. I  didn   t want to work that hard. So rather than calling it a franchise, we  worked out a licensing agreement where he agreed to pay me a one-time  licensing fee for the use of the name each time he opened a store. He has  to open stores at a certain minimum pace, three every five years for the  deal to stay in effect. He started the corporation Hideaway 2, which  started out with a couple dozen investors; almost all of them were ex-employees  and grew to about 55 stockholders of whom 48 were ex-  26  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Hideaway employees, and Marti and I were two of those 58  stockholders, we had not a huge amount of stock, but a substantial  amount of stock in Hideaway 2. The chain had grown to 8 stores and  three or four years ago a couple of high rollers from Tulsa with  experience in the restaurant business bought us all out, offered us more  money than we could turn down.  All 58 of us sold all of our stock to these two individuals who are now  the sole owners of Hideaway 2. They   ve opened two more stores since  then and opening another one next week and another one next year. And  they   re stepping up the pace of opening new Hideaways and the  licensing agreement is still in effect, so we make money each time they  open a new store. I   m happy with the deal and they   re happy with the  deal. They have the financial resources to go national, and I   m hoping in  a few years they will be going national, in which case I   ll be high hog in  the trough. (Laughter) While there   s no direct connection other than a  licensing fee between us, they have their top two employees, not the  owners but their top two employees below the owners are veterans of the  Stillwater Hideaway with eight and nine years experience here. They  have another at least two or three dozen Stillwater alumni employees  working for them. We have a number of their employees that they  trained in Oklahoma City or Tulsa, mostly Tulsa, working here now.  We   ve got some common suppliers that we buy pizza boxes and T-shirts,  advertising, things like this from. They have contributed some  good ideas to our menu, some of our specialty pizzas were developed at  the Hideaway 2 locations in Tulsa and the City. Their success brings us  more business here and our success here brings them more business. It   s  a win-win situation I   m quite happy with. For years people told me I  should expand and for years I resisted because I didn   t want to work that  hard. Finally, found somebody to do it for me.  And you said you sold them some of your recipes?  All the recipes. They   ve supplied some, we   ve worked up some new  ones between us. They want to saturate Oklahoma before going outside  the state, but the new one should be opening within a few days in  Broken Arrow out at the Broken Arrow Expressway and Lynn Lane on  the east side of Tulsa. Next year, the intersection somewhere near the  north end of the Hefner Parkway and Memorial in Oklahoma City. Then  Owasso is the next target location. So I   m happy with what they   re  doing.  When did you start naming some of the specialty pizzas or coming up  with them?  Oh, almost from the beginning way back when. We had pizza in the  27  Wilson  Dermer  early sixties with names that have gone by the wayside like the Williams  Special and the Idiot   s Delight. But I think probably Hideaway 2 came  up with more of the names than we have. One that I like to tell the story  about is the Big Country. They came up with a pizza called the Big  Country over at Tulsa named for OSU basketball star Bryant    Big  Country    Reeves and I call it the Cholesterol Bomb. It   s got every meat  on the menu, sausage, pepperoni, hamburger, Canadian bacon, cheddar  cheese, mozzarella cheese; it   s a good pie. But they put it on their menu  and we did not because they have a large menu, physically a large menu  with more stuff on it than we do and we had all the ingredients to make a  Big Country, we just didn   t have it listed.  Several years ago, prior to the OSU-OU football game, the Bedlam  football game in Stillwater, the Daily Oklahoman wrote a story, did a  Bedlam special edition. They had a whole page of the Oklahoman sports  page devoted to the comparison of the strengths of the two teams.  Coaching: OU had the edge. Quarterback: OU had the edge.  Linebackers: OSU had the edge. Offensive line: OU had the edge.  Defensive line: Even up. They had the strengths of both teams listed  side-by-side and OU was given the edge in maybe eight out of twelve  categories. But the 13th category was pizza and the Oklahoman said  Stillwater   s got the definite edge here.    When you go to Stillwater for  the game, you   ve got to go by The Hideaway and try the Big Country     nothing in Norman can compare to this.    This was before the Norman  Hideaway had opened. Our waitresses didn   t know what a Big Country  was because it wasn   t on our menu. That day that game rolled around,  we must have had 200 orders for Big Countrys in the dining room. Of  course, Bedlam football game, we   re wall-to-wall customers all day  long, but they just absolutely overwhelmed us. (Laughter) That   s when  we decided we better put it on the menu here.  Do you have a favorite pizza?  That   s one of them, the Big Country; I eat them pretty regularly. I tend  to like meat pizzas with pineapple, bacon and pineapple   s a favorite. But  I   ve got another one that I order, I make myself once or twice a year  when the moon is right. I invented this one back in the old Hideaway  probably in the seventies when I got tired of making a pizza for myself  and having the help all help themselves to it and not having enough for  me. I   d make a pie, pull it out of the oven and cut it, by the time I got  ready to eat it there might be one slice left or none. It had happened two  or three times in a row and I decided that damn it, I was going to make a  pizza that would have something on it to offend everybody but me so  that I would get enough of it. So I made an anchovy, smoked oyster,  onion, and jalapeno pizza. (Laughter)  28  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  And no one else touches that, huh?  No one else touched it. And the strangest thing, I discovered after three  or four slices, that particular combination has a hallucinogenic effect.  (Laughter)  (Laughs) Maybe you should start advertising it like that.  It is funny though, I think most pizza places today have dropped the  anchovies because they   re so universally unpopular. 99  of the people  don   t like anchovies and they used to be real common on pizza because  it was a traditional Italian topping. But the chains I suspect have all  dropped them now. We have customers who are just delighted to  discover that we still have anchovy pizza.  My dad is one of them.  Well, good.  And over the years working here, I   ve noticed that you seem to be keen  on doing dishes.  Well, I like doing dishes. I   ve done all the other jobs in the restaurant, as  I say I started out as a delivery guy, I   ve waited tables, cashiered, hosted,  probably spent more time making and cooking pizzas than anything else.  But as I   ve gotten older and fatter, cooking pizzas is harder for me  because there is a lot of bending over involved in using the bottom oven.  More importantly, if I   m doing something really critical like making  pizzas or cashiering or even hosting, hosting would be good, it   s good  PR for the owner to be out there meeting and greeting people, I know it  would be good for business. But when the crisis of the day happens,  whatever that may be, if it   s an injured employee, a pissed off customer,  a broken down piece of equipment, an instant plumbing leak in the  kitchen, whatever the crisis is and there will be one every day, if I have  to leave one of those critical positions like cooking or cashiering or  hosting to attend the crisis, things go to hell in a hand basket in a hurry.  If I   m washing dishes, no problem. The pile of dirty dishes just gets  higher. I can leave the dish pit any time for five minutes, ten minutes  and catch it up when I get back. It   s not a critical thing. I have really  good air conditioning back in the dish pit. I have separate volume  control on the stereo so I can make it much quieter than the rest of the  kitchen. There are a lot of fringes to washing dishes and no pressures.  No customer contact, no irritated people, just me and the dishes. I can  see if there are any problems with the product. If the cooks are burning  pizzas I   m going to see the burned crust, if they   re putting too much  29  Wilson  Dermer  salad dressing on the salad I   m doing to see the bowl floating in  dressing. I can correct those things instantly if something is coming back  uneaten,    Hey, what   s wrong with today   s soup? I   ve gotten four bowls  all barely touched. Did we over salt it or what?    It   s a good spot from  which to observe everything that   s going on in the kitchen.  A co-worker at the library has asked if we would ask about the dragon  kite at Halloween. Is there a story about that?  No. It   s close, it   s close. It   s not a dragon kite, it   s a dragon costume.  Some years back my wife and I and several friends decided to make a  group costume for Halloween. You know how you see pictures of  dragon dancers in Chinese parades where somebody   s got a big head and  a whole bunch of people out behind? We made one. I built the head in  the backyard out of lathe and chicken wire and papier-m  ch  . Made a 30  pound head that was about yea big with two blinking yellow traffic  lights for lights, those traffic flashers for eyes. We had a CO2 fire  extinguisher inside so I could blow smoke out his mouth and a  megaphone, battery powered megaphone so I could roar. Then Marti  sewed together a couple long chenille red bedspreads end to end and put  tassels on the sides so that we could drape that over a whole lot of  people back behind the head and made tunics and leggings so all the legs  would be matching underneath. We actually practiced the night before  Halloween, we had several routines you know, like the Rockettes, so  we   d all be in step.  The bars down at Washington Street were offering prizes for the best  Halloween costumes so we went trooping down on the Strip for  Halloween with about a dozen of us in this dragon costume and  discovered we had not planned well. The head wouldn   t fit in the doors  of the bars so we couldn   t get inside and they refused to let us enter their  contest if we couldn   t come inside and march around on the bar and be  judged. So all we could do is stand at the door and blow smoke and roar  at them. But we did have a pretty good time. A policeman stopped traffic  on Fourth Street so we could weave through the intersection.  One of our better step routines involved a pumpkin. We would do a  wave starting with the head of the dragon and the dragon would roar  continuously and the person behind the dragon would step down and  then stand back up, the next person down and up, down and up, so this  ripple passed from the head all the way to the back of the dragon. When  it got to the last person, pumpkin came rolling out the back ass-end of  the dragon. (Laughter) That went well a couple of times but the biggest  mistake was going down the middle of the street on the Strip and we had  a lot of drunks decided to join us and we went from a 24-legged dragon  to about a 48-legged dragon and they didn   t know the steps so most of  30  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  our choreography was shot. But it was a good Halloween.  When was that?  Gosh, I have no idea. Sometime in the eighties I think. Seventies or  eighties, could   ve been in the seveties.  Do you remember some of the events in Stillwater that got Washington  Street the name the Strip?  Well, I was talking to Marti about this earlier, I said some of the OSU  history that you   d like to hear from me I missed completely. Like  streaker night. Streaker night, I knew it was going on, I heard about  them, but I was busy cooking. I was working. I just heard about it from  employees that were down there. Same thing about athletic events. You  asked about, I don   t go to many athletic events because those are the  busiest days for the restaurant; I   m nose to the grindstone working. I   ll  listen to them when they   re going on, but our home football games   a  football game day is somewhere between triple and quintuple normal  Saturday business. It   s just so insanely busy that I can   t even think about  attending a game.  How did you feel about the name change from OAMC to OSU? Do you  have any strong feelings on that?  Nah. Well, I   it was A M, it wasn   t OAMC to us. It was officially  OAMC but nobody used OAMC. Maybe the school song O-A-M-C, but  it was just A M in college. Of course, I called the street out here  College Avenue for 10 years after the change until finally I called it  University.  Do you remember when Pistol Pete became the mascot?  He was always the mascot as far as I knew. I haven   t heard anything  recently, haven   t read anything about Pistol Pete blowing a hole in the  ceiling in the Student Union with a live round, but he did once.  We   ve had some people tell us about that in interviews.  Anybody ever tell you about the bull in the Student Union?  I don   t believe so.  Some Ag majors got a Brahma bull in the elevator of the Student Union  and got it up to the 5th floor once. (Laughter)  31  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Just for the fun of it?  Just for the fun of it. They didn   t ride the elevator up with him. I don   t  know what the people on five thought or four thought when the doors  opened and the bull came out.  (Laughter) That   s pretty newsworthy I would say.  Let   s see, did anybody ever talk to you about the Y Hut?  We   ve heard a few stories about the Y Hut.  Because I didn   t know much about the Y Hut, but as I understood it at  the time, this Ralph somebody or other had been an OSU employee and  was injured in some kind of industrial accident on campus working for  the university and lost his eye sight. As part of the settlement, OSU gave  him the use of the building just east of the Classroom Building in  perpetuity for the rest of his life where he could sell sodas and coffee  and blue books and school supplies to the student body and cigarettes. I  remember reading an O   Colly story where some freshman journalism  student had been assigned to go interview him and write a story about  the Y Hut. And if you went in and ordered a pack of cigarettes from him,  he had a rack of 30 brands of smokes over his head and you   d say,    I   d  like some Camel Whites.    He   d go  motions  and grab a pack of Camel  Whites and then you   d give him a bill and he   d say,    What is it?    You   d  say,    That   s a five,    and he   d make change from a register and give you  your change. And the journalism student asked him if he ever had  trouble with people giving him ones and saying they were fives and he  said,    Nope, it   s the other way around.    (Laughter) I thought that was a  nice story. And he ran that store for many, many years. Saved my ass on  a number of occasions when I   d be on my way to Classroom Building  for an exam and forgotten a blue book and go screaming   do they have  blue books any more on campus?  Yes.  They do?  Yeah.  Oh, good. I haven   t seen any around for a long time and I was  wondering. God, I couldn   t imagine going to school without blue books.  Not all classes use them, but they still do.  I haven   t told you one of my favorite stories about the time I had the  32  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  dream schedule of, I got three classes scheduled at 9, 10 and 11 AM in  the Classroom Building in the same classroom. So I could go in there at  9 AM and go to sleep and sleep    til noon and be present all three classes.  (Laughter)  Did you frequent the library very much?  I did frequent the library. Now my dad, my dad was king of the library.  As a chemistry professor, he lived in the library and library research was  real high on his list of priorities. He was editor of the American  Chemical Society Abstracts for some 20 years. He taught a course in  library science for chemistry majors that was required of all chemistry  graduates and all chemistry grad students who came from other  universities with a bachelor   s in chemistry from elsewhere had to take  his undergraduate Library Science for Chemistry Majors course. I went  up and sat in on his course a time or two during his classes. They met on  the fifth floor of the library and he   s the only professor that I ever heard  of who made up separate tests, different tests for each student in the  class. He would go up to his Chemistry Library Science class for an  exam and he   d pass out 20 different tests to 20 different students saying,     Okay, this is an open library test. Not an open book test, but an open  library test. You have to be back here in 50 minutes with your exam.  Go     Everybody would haul ass for the stairs, they were faster than the  elevators with questions like,    There are seven sources in this library for  the chemical makeup of peanut butter. List them.    Or an article   my  roommate in college was a chemistry major, he had to take the course  and he got the question that said,    An article on such and such chemical  reaction was published by an author named Snagelfritz. Name the  publication.     And this was in the days of card catalogs?  This was in the day of card catalogs, you got it. And Tom said he turned  the library upside down looking for that article by Snagelfritz and  couldn   t find it. He bombed the test, went to my dad afterwards and  complained and my dad looked at it and said,    Shit     Said the secretary  had mistyped the name as Fragelsnitz instead of Snagelfritz, had it  misspelled, so he gave Tom credit for it. But he was on a first-name  basis with all the librarians and spent probably 10 to 20 hours a week in  the library. Now, I discovered that the 5th floor of the library is a great  place to study if you want a quiet, relaxing place up on the   it   s all the  documents on 5, there   s hardly anybody ever up there and there are  study desks here and there scattered at wide intervals. You could go up  and find an empty study desk and study for hours seeing nobody around.  At the west end of the library there was a men   s room with one toilet  stall, one urinal and one toilet stall. And you could smoke, you could  33  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  open the window and smoke in the 5th floor restroom and read and study.  It was great, great hiding place. But have either of you ever read any  novels by Ayn Rand?  No.  No? Oh, crap. Ruins the story, it ruins the story. Her magnum opus is a  novel called Atlas Shrugged and there   s a character in Atlas Shrugged  named John Galt who you hear about through the first 900 pages of the  novel. Every 100 pages or so somebody mentions John Galt and he   s a  mystery figure that you don   t know anything about until finally you get  to the end of the damn book and John Galt delivers a 30-page speech.  Which Ayn Rand says this is the way the world ought to be, this is her  magnum opus. But in this toilet stall on the 5th floor of the library was  one piece of graffiti very neatly printed right in the center of the door, no  other graffiti in the stall. Just one line that said,    John Galt is dead.     (Laughter) That   s I think my favorite graffiti of all time, I loved it.  Earlier when we weren   t recording, we talked a little bit about the  character that represents the Hideaway, which some people refer to as  Shmoo.  Shmoo, right.  Could you tell us the story about that?  Well, the little Hideaway character was designed apparently by an art  major at KU for the original Campus Hideaway in Lawrence. I bought  him with the name Campus Hideaway and the recipes and everything  else. He   s frequently been called a shmoo because a shmoo was a  character in Li   l Abner, Al Capp   s cartoon strip in the forties and fifties.  There was a wonderful book out, a collection of all the Al Capp Li   l  Abner strips that involved the shmoo. The story ran for a couple of years  and it started out when an earthquake opened up a previously hidden  valley in Dog Patch, U.S.A. releasing these little creatures that had been  bottled up since the beginning of time. They were funny little pear-shaped  critters with whiskers and silly grins and they were going to be  the salvation of man-kind. If you looked at one hungrily, they would  instantly flop over and turn into a platter with a sizzling steak or if you  needed groceries, they would transform themselves into a quart of milk  and a dozen eggs or a baked ham or whatever, cherry pie, whatever you  wanted they could become it. Their only desire in life was to please  mankind.  When the valley of the shmoo opened up, everybody in Dog Patch and  the rest of the world thought that it was the greatest thing ever except  34  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Mami Yokum. Mami realized that shmoos were going to be the ruin of  humankind because nobody would have any incentive to do anything  anymore. Mami managed to wipe out this scourge of shmoos but it was  a long-running episode. So when The Hideaway came up with this little  character, people started calling him a shmoo. We inquired of the Al  Capp estate if we could call the Hideaway pizza guy a shmoo. They  were very short with us. They said they didn   t even want to talk about it  for less than a half a million dollars licensing fees. So we decided very  quickly, the creature is not a shmoo. Al Capp   s shmoos have whiskers  and bald heads. Hideaway creatures have long hair and are clean-shaven.  Hideaway   s creature has arms and stubby little legs, Al Capp   s did not.  There are enough differences that he   s not a shmoo but we don   t quite  know what he is, he   s the little Hideaway pizza guy. Now, Hideaway 2,  the expansion chain in Tulsa and the City has decided to call him  Kahuna. That   s not bad, it   s been my nickname and I   m getting kind of  pear-shaped. (Laughter) But that hasn   t caught on completely.  So having raised your family in the restaurant business, do they still like  Hideaway pizza?  Oh yeah. Constantly. My son and his wife that live in Portland, Oregon  gorge on Hideaway pizza on the rare occasions they come to Stillwater.  My son that lives here in town and his wife and my two granddaughters  eat it constantly. When the son here in town was working 20 years ago  or thereabouts in Illinois, when he came home he would snag several  bottles of Hideaway pizza sauce and pounds of cheese and pepperoni  and everything but the crust, which doesn   t keep or travel well. He   d  take them home to Illinois and he   d go into the local Domino   s up there  and ask them if he could buy crusts and the employee would always go,     I don   t know if we sell crusts.    He   d say,    Oh, you   ve sold them to me  before lots of times.       Oh, we have? Okay, how much did we charge  you?    (Laughter) He   d say,    Fifty cents or a dollar,    or whatnot. He   d  buy crusts and he   d take them home and he   d put sauce and cheese and  toppings on them and make Hideaway pizza with a Domino   s crust.  Did either of your sons attend OSU?  No. Well, the older son did, but he didn   t graduate. The younger son  decided he didn   t want to go to OSU. He went to Boulder first for a  Bachelor   s of English at Boulder and then Master   s of English in  Lawrence at KU and finally a second Master   s in Speech Pathology at  the University of Portland. He   s a speech pathology teacher for the  Portland School System now.  Do you think your grandchildren will attend OSU?  35  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Oh, I hope so. I wouldn   t be a bit surprised if the granddaughters here in  town come to OSU. The older granddaughter is the oldest of my  grandchildren, she   s 13 now and a straight A student and I wouldn   t be a  bit surprised if she winds up working at the Hideaway here. She   s got to  get to college first though, I won   t hire her as a high school student. I  like to tell a story about a Stillwater girl named Jeannie Devlin who  came and applied for a job as a high school student and I told her I  didn   t hire high school students. She wouldn   t take no for an answer, she  kept coming in and applying for a waitress job throughout her senior  year at SHS and I kept turning her down. And finally she came in as a  freshman and said,    Okay, I   m a freshman.    I said.    Well, Jeannie I  don   t hire freshman much either. I want to know how you   re going to do  in college.    Well, this ticked her off but she stayed with it, she kept  coming in. After her first semester she came in with her 4.0 grade slip,  she said,    Okay, now I   ve done a semester, I   ve got a 4.0, I   m ready for  my job.    I finally hired her and she was a good employee for three and a  half years. She went on to be editor of Oklahoma Today magazine, the  state magazine for the state tourism bureau.  Do you keep in touch with many past employees, you mentioned the  one     I keep in touch with lots and lots of past employees. They check in  constantly. The problem is now I   m not here, I   ll be 70 in two months  and I   m not working 40 hour weeks any more. I come in and work when  I know they   re going to be busy, when I know it   s a ball game or  graduation or the town is a swarm with high school students, whatever  the case may be. If I know we   re going to be slammed down here, I like  to drop in and help out but I don   t have a fixed work schedule. And lots  of past employees drop in to see if I   m here and miss me because I   m  not here as much anymore. Two years ago when the restaurant  celebrated its 50th anniversary we had a reunion for past employees; I  had about 260 employees from the sixties, seventies, eighties come back  to Stillwater for a weekend of festivities. It was a lot of fun seeing all  those employees, most of them from Tulsa and Oklahoma City and  nearby but we had students, we had alumni employees from both east  and west coast and one from Switzerland who came back for the  reunion. The flip side of that is I don   t have email addresses for all those  employees. And for the last two years I   ve been getting bitches from  employees who didn   t hear about the reunion until after it was over,  didn   t get their invitation and they wanted to come.  Maybe you should have a 55 year reunion.  We talked about that. I think if we do, maybe we should make it a  cruise, just rent a cruise ship and have a Caribbean cruise for a week for  36  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  ex-employees.  Sounds like a good idea.  That   d get the word spread in the hurry. I   m afraid that we   d have a boat  full. But it   s really heartwarming to hear from lots and lots of ex-employees  that tell me it   s the best job they ever had. They talk about  hating having to leave here and go out in the real world.  Well, is there any advice you would give to OSU students or aspiring  OSU students?  Oh, I   m not much for giving advice. There   s a new Japanese restaurant  here in town, have you been out to Nagoya?  I have not.  Oh, I like it a lot. A young   it   s actually run by Chinese, it   s a Japanese  restaurant with steak and sushi but a Chinese owner studied in Japan for  10 years, he   s a nice young man. Asked me for advice last time I   I   ve  been out there a dozen times in the last 3 months since they opened, I  love the food. He asked me if I had any advice for him starting out in the  restaurant business. I told him it was easy, no problem, it was very easy  to be a success in the restaurant business. All you have to do is work 80  hour weeks. (Laughter)  Is that what he was looking for?  I don   t think that   s what he was looking for. (Laughter)  Well, is there anything else that you   d like to talk about today that I have  not asked or that we haven   t already talked about? I know you have lots  of good stories.  I could do this for days. Nothing that really jumps out right now. You  know, I could flip through here and I did flip through here before  starting out today, it   s really great, back here at the back they   ve got year  by year by year highlights of each year.    54,    58, it   d be nice if    57 had  said something about the Hideaway opening here.  It doesn   t? I   m surprised.  It doesn   t.  Well, it certainly has grown to be an Oklahoma landmark. I   m sure in  Oklahoma   s history it   s listed in 1957.  37  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  Wilson  Dermer  But it   s   you know I can go through here and just about pull out a story  from every year. 1960 total enrollment was 12,000   what surprised me  was when enrollment hit 25,000 or 26,000 in Stillwater in one of these  years in here at the peak of the Baby Boomers coming through and  we   re not anywhere close to that now are we?  What are we now?  22,000, I think.  I think so.  We have been 25,000 or 26,000.  Wow.  But a lot of people ask me if my sons were ever interested in taking over  The Hideaway and neither one was remotely interested. Craig, the  younger one, did work here some. He met his wife here,  she  was a  waitress here. So I   ve got a daughter-in-law who   s an ex-employee. But  I think maybe I set a bad example, they saw me working those 80 hour  weeks as kids, decided they didn   t want to put in hours like that. And  they   re both quite happy with what they   re doing right now.  A question we generally like to end on is about what kind of legacy you  would like to leave behind. In the future when people think back on  Richard Dermer, what would you most like them to remember?  The fact that I helped so many students get their educations. That   s as  good as any. I think that   s what teachers think.  And you   ve served as a tremendous example. You   re certainly one of the  hardest workers I   ve known and I think a lot of students will carry that  lesson on forever.  I don   t know. I was enough of a bad example for many years too. I was a  heavy drinker, was an alcoholic, a functional alcoholic but an alcoholic  for decades. Drank way too much beer on the job   that   s one way to  handle the heat from that pizza oven. I   m not proud of that example. But  I sobered up, got away with it. That   s all I can think of.  Okay, well I really appreciate you talking with me today.  No problem.  -------  -------   
