Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  My name is Jerry Gill. Today is September 14, 2009. I   m visiting with Gail Gates on the Oklahoma State University campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Gail, thank you for taking time to visit with me today.  You   re welcome.  I know your schedule is very full. How I   d like to start off, if it   s okay with you, is at the beginning. Can you tell me a little bit about where you grew up and about your family and your early life?  Oh, sure. I grew up in an academic family. Actually, my father was a professor at University of Minnesota when I was a little girl and moved when I was ten years old to Texas A M. So, I grew up in College Station, went to Texas Tech for my bachelor   s and master   s and then taught for a few years at South Dakota State and then went to Penn State for my PhD.  So, were there some things about your life, some values that you learned from your family that have stuck with you and been important to your life?  Well, absolutely. I mean, education was absolutely critical. Actually a third generation, my mother   s father had been a faculty member at Iowa State, so I knew that higher education was something that was very important. Also, I think that the values of working hard and being persistent in what you want to try to accomplish were also really important.  What year did you come to Oklahoma State? 5  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Nineteen ninety-five.  Is there a story about how you got to Oklahoma State University?  Yes. I was actually, after my doctorate, I was teaching at the University of Missouri for a number of years and discovered while I was there that I really enjoyed working with graduate students. That wasn   t anything that I   d really thought about. We had a pretty small graduate program, and so Barbara Stoecker, who was my master   s advisor, was here on campus in the nutritional sciences department, which is my home department. She was the department head so she recruited me to come here, and I was able to work more with graduate students when I came here.  Had you been to Stillwater before, on the campus?  Actually I   d been once. One of my college friends was a Stillwater friend. And my aunt and uncle taught at OU for many, many, many, many years, so I   d been in Oklahoma a lot, but I had only been to Stillwater once before my interview. Stillwater   s a great town, a great place to raise a family.  What were your personal impressions of OSU and the Stillwater community? Do you remember?  Well, I just remember campus was really great. People were very welcoming, and it seemed like it would be a very supportive place to come. It was smaller than Columbia and College Station, but it   s truly a college town so that was very attractive. I knew there would be more than enough to keep you entertained. (Laughs)  Let   s see, Patricia Knaub was dean at that time?  Yes, Patricia Knaub was dean.  You talked about working at the graduate level, that you were interested in that, did you have an opportunity to work directly with students when you first came to Oklahoma State?  Oh yes, yes. I worked with undergraduate and graduate students when I was here, and I was a faculty member in nutritional sciences, I think, until about 2000. Then I was asked to be associate dean, part-time interim, and got to know Jack Vitek, who was in my position at the time. And then when he became provost when Dr. Keener stepped down, he asked me to consider serving in this position in interim basis. But yes, I taught for a number of years. 6  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  And how has that been different for you, Gail, from a faculty teaching position to a more administrative position? Did you enjoy that transition?  I miss having the daily contact with students and really being able to watch their development. It has been something that I miss. I do not miss grading papers. (Laughter) For several years I was active with some graduate students in the department, and then I   ve taught an undergraduate research scholars class for a time when we decided that that would be a good thing to have at the time. So, I   ve had some opportunities to keep teaching, but I miss having the relationship with the student, which is actually one of the good things about working with scholar development. I get to know some of our outstanding students through their interaction with that.  You had an opportunity to work with some academically gifted students before you got into the scholar program.  Yes.  Did it help prepare you for that?  Yes. In fact, one of the students who worked with me as an undergraduate researcher became a Truman Scholar: Kim Sasser Bandelier. So, I got to know and worked on some Wentz projects with her and got to know about the program actually through the student involvement side. She is an amazing person.  Gail, you mentioned the Scholar Development and Recognition Program here at the university. How did you first come into contact with it? What do you first recall about the program?  The Wentz Program was really probably the first thing that I remember, something that I was involved with, and actually Freshman Researchers because I remember I had a freshman   well, Scholar Development may not have been involved with Freshman Research at that time, probably not. So, probably the Wentz Program, which was a great opportunity as a faculty member to be able to offer undergraduate students the opportunity to get involved in research, which was something that I saw was very valuable as a faculty member, trying to recruit future grad students. It was a great way to get them involved in research early. And then, as I mentioned, because Kim applied for the Truman was probably the other connection, which was an amazing experience for her.  Do you remember when we formally initiated the Scholar Recognition Program? 7  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  No, because I came in after it had been established. So, I don   t think I was around or at least not aware of it at the time.  Do you remember some of the conversations early on about the program, what the initial goals and aspirations for the Scholar Program were?  Well, as long as I   ve been involved, I think the goals have been to provide assistance for some of our best students, and I think the other goal really is through those efforts to communicate to prospective students, to offer the opportunities for prospective students that they   re going to be able to compete with anyone else in the country. And I think that   s been really important for trying to attract talented students here. I remember (well, it   s probably been four or five years ago now) trying to recruit students who were thinking about Ivy League schools, and I think it   s been really important to have some of those opportunities available for students, to be able to recruit them.  From some other interviews, I   ve picked up that there were perhaps some concerns about the program and siphoning away resources needed in other places. Do you recall some faculty having concerns or issues with the program?  You know, not that I   ve really had direct knowledge about. I do hear, periodically, concerns about that. That is it fair to spend this money on a handful of students? But since I   ve been involved, I really don   t hear much about that.  Again, Gail, you might have told me, but what year did you first become involved in this? I mean, you talked about working with Kim, but with Bob and with the program, when did you start working?  It was probably 2002 or 2003.  Can you describe what your participation has been and things you   ve done, your involvement in the program?  Well, I serve on the Wentz Research Program Review Board. Bob Graalman reports to me directly is probably the most important thing. I meet once a month with Bob Spurrier and Bob Graalman, and we work together and talk about issues related to some of our top students, different kinds of top students, but some of our top students. I was able to go to the Cambridge class a few years ago to observe that opportunity, which I think is a really great opportunity for some of our best students to have a chance to see what going to another country to study would be like and having some of the best faculty that we have present there. 8  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  In light of your many administrative responsibilities, what motivates you to give your time and efforts to the program? I   m sure there   s a lot of demand for your time.  Oh, yes. (Laughter)  But my understanding is in addition to reporting administratively, you have personally been really engaged and involved in the program. What   s the motivation there?  Well, for one thing it   s very rewarding to work with some of these top students and to give them opportunities to reach their potential, really. Having worked with undergraduate research students, to be able to see the excitement when a student gets involved in undergraduate research and then going to the presentations at the end of the year of all that they   ve accomplished is really rewarding, to see that they   re able to challenge themselves and do maybe more than they thought that they could. And it   s just so interesting to see how we   ve allowed students to explore different interests that they have, maybe not necessarily something related to their careers, but some of our top students that come   I was just talking to a student the other day that   s majoring in engineering and Spanish but has wide-ranging interests. I think to allow such talent and students to be able to explore music and literature as well as engineering is really a lot of fun, to be able to help students achieve that.  In addition to yourself and, of course, Bob Graalman, Bob Spurrier, who are others who have been champions for the program across the university? Can you list some people who   ve been really emotionally engaged and involved in the program?  Well, of course, Edward Jones. I think you   ve talked with Edward about that program. We have had a number of faculty who have been involved, and I can   t come up with a name at the moment, but I know that there have been several faculty, for example in engineering, who have worked with Wentz students for a long time. Some of the students with the Truman Program, particularly some of the faculty in agriculture, particularly agricultural economics, have been very involved in working with high talent students, encouraging them. Those are probably the ones that come to mind the most.  Gail, how supportive has the provost office been of the program?  This current provost  Marlene Strathe  and Jack Vitek, who was the acting provost when I first came on, have been very supportive of the program. I think it   s always a challenge when we have limited resources. 9  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  You know, all the directors always would like to have more resources available, so she   s certainly been very supportive of whenever Bob thinks that he needs some additional equipment. Obviously I think he would probably like to have even more resources, but so does everybody. (Laughter)  Absolutely.  And she   s been very involved in discussions about what appropriate fundraising activities would be for the office because it certainly seems like the Office of Scholar Development has a lot of potential. We have a number of alums and people who have given to the office through the years, which also would be very interesting to talk with some of those donors about their motivation for giving to the office.  Can you discuss the process for identifying them? Like as freshmen, you identify top students? Can you talk about how you identify those kids to get involved in the Scholar Program?  Well, I think some of the key groups of people are the recruiters that are out in the high schools working with the students. I know that through the years they have been critical in helping us to identify some potential students that would benefit from working with the Scholar Development Office, that have a number of interests, or that they would like to be challenged. They   ve been leaders in high school, and they   d like to continue to be leaders. So, they   ve been very active. Also we rely a lot on the advisors and the associate deans to help us identify students. I think maybe all of the colleges have some type of activity, scholars, or some group of students that are outstanding students that they encourage, that they   re able to identify early on and to encourage them to participate.  Once they   re identified, how do you engage students in the program? What are the components of the program and ways you get students involved?  Well, one of the ways, relatively new in terms of scholar development, is to get the students involved in the Freshman Research Program. All of the colleges have been willing to participate with us in the Freshman Research Scholars Program, which is just to get their toes wet, to be thinking about if they would like to be active in Freshman Research. And then they also get involved in the class. Bob Graalman teaches a class, Windows to the World, that   s very helpful in identifying students that might be particularly high-talent students from the beginning. And, of course, his relationship with Bob Spurrier, the students who are interested in doing the honors program also. So, those are probably some 10  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  of the ways to get them involved from the beginning, and then encouraging students to apply to go on the Cambridge Program and participate in the Wentz research programs as they go on.  Gail, you   ve mentioned the Wentz Program and I know it   s changed from a work-study scholarship years ago to Freshman Research. I   ve heard from Bob and others that it   s been one of the factors that was really important in developing scholars in the program and engaging them. Can you talk a little bit about the Freshman Research Program, Wentz Scholars, support for that?   We   ll start with  the Freshman Research Scholars. The students apply before they come, and they submit a really brief summary of what they might be interested in studying. And then for most of the colleges there   s a class that we set up that they get together with the dean or associate dean or research director or some individual in their college who teaches them about the basics of research and introduces them to different research opportunities on campus. And then they have the opportunity to participate in a limited research project their first year. It kind of varies depending on the program. Then many of those students, plus other students, are recruited to participate in the Wentz Research Program where students write up a one-page proposal. They work on it usually with a mentor. They identify a mentor who   s going to help them work on the project, and we put together a proposal, and that gets reviewed by a committee of faculty members who review the proposals. Then we   re able to fund about forty to fifty of those proposals a year, and it gives students some funds to be able to conduct more extensive research.  How much would a typical grant be?  The undergraduates, let   s see. Freshman Research Scholars, I think their scholarship is about  800 now. The Wentz, it   s  4,000 that they   re able to get. And if they   re doing lab work, then they can use part of that to pay for some of their lab expenses, but most of it is just support for the student.  I think it was Ed Miller that I interviewed that mentioned that even there in the College of Agriculture sometimes, as you talked about earlier, some of the faculty will actually work with them and they   ll actually publish a paper.  Right. We have had a number of students who have been able to complete their work and get it published in professional journals, which is really important and rewarding for the students to be able to do that and helpful to the faculty to be able to get the work done.  11  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  And how important is that to building a portfolio for students who want to go on for competition in the national scholarships?  Oh, absolutely. It depends on the scholarship, but certainly if they   re looking to apply for Goldwater or some of the other more research-oriented, perhaps the Gate to Cambridge or some of the international competitions, it   s really important for them to be able to show that they   ve been able to carry through with the entire process of research and getting it published.  Gail, as you   re preparing students, students are sort of self-selecting themselves through the process, but as you get to that group that look like they   ll be good prospects for having success and interviewing for the national and international scholarship competitions, what kinds of things does OSU do to prepare them for the competition?  Well, there   s certainly the mock interviews that I think are really important, to get a group of faculty together to interview the student as though when they will be going into the interview process. Of course, the work that Bob and Gail do in terms of reviewing and assisting the students with their applications. I know Bob really challenges the students to go beyond trite answers and to really think about the responses. And I think that   s really critical. He tells them that it takes a lot of work to apply, just even to submit the application, that they   ll learn a lot about themselves when they   re doing that. So, he and Gail work very closely with the students getting their materials ready and thinking about which students would be a good fit for what.  There are some of the competitions, for example, if a student might be interested in a Goldwater scholarship, it   s really working with them from the beginning or from very early to get involved as a Freshman Research Scholar and Wentz projects and other ways to get involved with research. Or if they   re thinking about the Truman, which is service, working with the students to think about how have they demonstrated that they   ve been involved in leadership and service activities, to be able to show a record. So, it   s really more than just finishing up that application at the end, but just working with them to, you know, do they need to take more humanities courses or would it be helpful for them to do a study abroad program. You know, looking at the student as a total package, and Bob with his knowledge of all of the awards programs and everything that they have, what are the things that the different programs are looking for and trying to match the student with that and help them to develop their portfolio so that they   ll be a good candidate is really important.  Something I hadn   t picked up on, and see if I understood it correctly. As 12  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  someone gets further along in that process and begins to perhaps move towards a Gates Cambridge research scholarship or maybe a Truman service scholarship and see where their interests and strengths are, they start beginning to sort themselves out into different competitions.  Yes, definitely. Because typically, say if you have a student who has been very focused on the hard sciences, they   re not going to be someone who   s going to be competing for Rhodes unless they   ve also been doing humanities work and been a really well-rounded person throughout the years. So, yes, he definitely works with them and has identified them by their interests pretty early on.  Gail, you mentioned something that I picked up from a couple other people that I visited with about broadening themselves in other areas. Ed Miller, particularly, was talking about some of the agriculture students that were a little more focused. Could you explain that a little better, how we try to get students to expand their horizons to be more well-rounded students and not just for competition, but just as outstanding students?  Individuals, yes. It   s a real challenge to get students to think about going beyond focusing on just their degree and their career and to think perhaps more long-term what their thoughts might be. My son graduated from OSU last year and he   s talking to his company about taking a position overseas. He didn   t ever take advantage of an opportunity to go overseas other than when we traveled, but not for academic work. I encouraged him to, but I think it would   ve really helped his career to be able to have had that experience, to have gone overseas and just for example to get that, what it might be like to live overseas and work.  And, of course, part of what you   re talking about is getting out of their comfort zone, taking classes they   re not used to, perhaps even taking extra coursework that takes another semester to graduate, maybe study abroad. A lot of them are focused on four years.    I want out. I want to go to graduate school.    So, it   s a little tough sometimes, isn   t it?  Yes, it is difficult, and work experience is also something that can be very important, either a formal internship or work experience related to what they think they might want to do.  What would be a typical profile for a student who   s likely to be successful in our Scholar Development Program? What would be some characteristics you would think about?  Well, I would think that they would need to be pretty self-motivated because they   re usually not going to be very successful if they have to be 13  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  told everything that they need to do. I think they need to be able eventually to have confidence in themselves. I remember one of our current state legislators talking about how his friend applied for the Truman, I think it was, but he didn   t take the risk of doing it and regrets that he didn   t follow through with that. So, I think they have to be, to some extent, willing to put themselves out there, to be risk takers. I think they need to be willing to try new things and to find out, maybe have the opportunity to explore what they   re good at. So, that requires trying different things to find out what they   re good at. And persistence. They need to do well in school, but they need to be able to stick with their interests and work on figuring out what their interests and strengths are and work on strengthening those things throughout the years.  And by any measure OSU students have been very successful, and we   re all proud of how Oklahoma State University in recent years at the national scholarship competition  has done . In addition to their preparation through the Scholar Development Program, are there other factors that account for the remarkable success we   ve had? I mean, give credit certainly to Bob Graalman of the program, and to the professors, part of it. Where I picked up on this was with Louis  Blair , when he talked about the OSU student. Could you speak to that and about what qualities and characteristics do our students have that you think appeal to committee members?  I think in general that they   re very genuine. They don   t have so much the sense of entitlement that maybe a student from an Ivy League or some other institution may have. And so I would think that that would probably be a big part of it, but you know they   re just very honest and open people and hard-working students.  Louis alluded to, and I hadn   t thought about it before, but our land-grant background, the types of students that we attracted.  Yes, the service-oriented students.  Service oriented and leadership development through 4-H and FFA, for example. Are there any thoughts you have on that?  Well, and I think it varies depending on the competition. I think that   s certainly true for the Truman, but I don   t know that that is quite so true for the Goldwater so much. But certainly we have the history, being a land-grand institution, the history of being involved in service and serving others.  Speaking of students that have been successful, can you share some success stories? Students who   ve been successful in the leadership 14  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  competition as students and later on in life, and to some extent in your mind some special stories?  (Laughs) Well, certainly. Kim Sasser is probably the student that I know the most. She finished her degree in nutrition and was a Truman Scholar, and she used that to get her degree in public health and went on to work for the Texas State Department of Public Health, trying to address the issue of childhood obesity, which is clearly a major concern in this country. And then they moved, and she   s working as a manager of a food service in a large hospital. Let   s see. Of course, Shannon Ferrell with his experiences getting a Truman and going to law school and coming back and working with outreach here. And, of course, Blaine Greteman with his getting a Rhodes, and I know that it   s been difficult for some of the faculty that he chose to go to Iowa, but to have the opportunity to go to the Iowa Writers Project is really quite an amazing accomplishment, and I   m very proud of him for accomplishing that.  I sensed in an interview with him that Iowa is maybe not going to be his last stop, (Laughter) and somewhere in the future he could be at Oklahoma State, which would be great. Speaking of Blaine, can you talk about what Blaine Greteman being OSU   s first Rhodes scholar, and I guess only Rhodes Scholar, has meant to OSU generally and specifically to our Scholar Development Program?  Well, I think to give students the sense that even though we   re a land-grant institution, that doesn   t mean you don   t have a great background in the humanities and to be able to be an outstanding candidate for such an amazing program. It was really important too because it was one of the first. I guess we   ve had a few Trumans before that, but it was really one of the first high profile to be able to say that yes, Oklahoma State can compete with the Ivies and some of the other programs in having outstanding students that can go and do really well when they go off.  Did it speak to our students who come from small schools, too?  Oh yes, indeed. (Laughter) Yes, we have had many students from tiny places who have done very well, that   s right. In fact, some of the smaller schools may even offer more opportunities for students because everybody has to be involved. (Laughter)  That   s right. If you   re going to have a science club, everybody   s got to be in it with you, science major or not.  Yes.  But I think Blaine   s was something like forty kids or something. 15  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Oh, if that.  Thirty-something-odd kids in his senior class, which must be a shot in the arm somewhere to a kid who said,    Hey, I can do it, too.     Yes.  We   re talking about some success stories. In what ways has the program enriched and influenced the lives of Scholar Program participants, scholarship winners and non-winners both?  Well, it   s really been interesting to be able to watch some of the students who haven   t received funding and yet have still been able to achieve their goals and their dreams. I can think of a couple of students who weren   t selected for some of the British scholarships, but they were able to find other ways to do that because they opened themselves up to the possibility that that might be something they could achieve. Then they got to Cambridge or Oxford or wherever and were able to be very successful students when they went. It   s tough for the students when they don   t   sometimes   particularly ones that get into the finals and then they   re not selected. It can be very difficult for them, but they   ve learned a lot about themselves and they   ve grown as individuals in taking the risk. As I mentioned, that   s one of the things that I think is important, is to be able to take the risk.  ------- End of September 14, 2009 interview -------  My name is Jerry Gill, and today is September 17, 2009. I   m visiting with Gail Gates on the Oklahoma State University campus in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project, which is part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. We   re completing an interview that we started a little bit earlier. I appreciate you taking time for a second time to be with us, and we   ll try to make it brief. Gail, we were talking about the Scholar Development Program here at Oklahoma State University. I think we had just asked you about participants that were engaged in the program, how it impacted their lives. My initial question is in addition to scholarship opportunities. What do students receive for participating in the program, because a very small percentage actually successfully competes for the scholarships? So, what   s the benefit to the rest of the participants in the program?  I think they have the opportunity to try new things and to be challenged in a way that they wouldn   t normally be challenged. It gives them the opportunity to dream and to think about accomplishing some things that 16  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  maybe they weren   t sure that they could do. I think it really offers them a lot of opportunity if they   re willing to take on the challenge of trying.  Could I probe a little bit, Gail?  Yes, sure.  What would be some of those benefits you   re thinking about specifically? How would they be benefited by the program?  Well, for example, Josh Ward. I was thinking about Josh Ward the other day. He   s a student who   s studying now in Cambridge. He was not successful in earning a scholarship to study in Cambridge, but he attended the Cambridge class and saw    this is something I could do, and this is something I would enjoy doing.    And so it allowed him to   well for one thing, he was also part of the Student Foundation, helped get the Student Foundation started. And I   m not sure. I mean, I didn   t know him in high school before he came here, but I think that may have been something that I   m not sure he would have taken on if he wasn   t trying to prepare to be competitive on the national level.  It gave him a lot of confidence, and I   m not sure that he would   ve been involved in an opportunity such as that if it hadn   t been for what he was trying to accomplish with Scholar Development. He was also involved in research. Now, he was a microbiology major, so just because of his major he may have been interested in doing some research. So, I think it gave him a lot of different opportunities and challenged him to try different things that he wouldn   t necessarily have tried. And I think that   s true for many of the students.  Some of the individuals that I   ve interviewed before have indicated some of the things you   ve said and two or three things about their research skills, their leadership, and engaged in some activities, service and leadership things that they might not have otherwise, that their writing skills, presentation skills, these sorts of things developed and grew.  Oh, absolutely.  I think Ed Miller referred to some of them particularly over in ag econ, his area, that he   d expanded into some liberal arts and social sciences kinds of things to broaden their perspectives.  Oh yes, absolutely. Yes, absolutely. Just the Cambridge class itself is usually something that   I mean, there are some humanities students who take it, but many of the other students are engineers or science majors. They wouldn   t necessarily be studying eighteenth century news 17  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  magazines or James Joyce or a lot of different opportunities that they wouldn   t have necessarily have even thought about. So, yes, it really encourages them to be exposed to different ideas.  You   ve referred to the Cambridge class. So, this would be a group of individuals who are studying with the intention of competing for the summer program in Cambridge. Is that what you alluded to?  The summer program in Cambridge, yes. Although, it   s different every year, but I think of it as the Cambridge class because they go to the same place.  What do you say to students who compete unsuccessfully for one of the prestigious scholarships? I mean, did they waste their time in the program? I think maybe that   s not the case, but could you share what you tell a student that isn   t successful for one of the competitive scholarships?  Well, and I know that this is something that Bob works with them on from the beginning. I mean, he talks about it a lot that what we want students to do is to give them the opportunity to learn about themselves and to grow and to try new things. And while getting the scholarship is important, it   s also going to be helpful in your future career and applying to graduate school. Josh has just started a doctoral program in, I believe it   s medical anthropology, which is certainly something different than what he was doing before. And, so, I just congratulate them on their efforts and encourage them to focus on what they have learned about themselves in the process.  So, everybody   s winners out of the program, right?  Yes.  And you mentioned Bob Graalman. He then prepares them when they first come into the program, talks about realistically what the chances are.  Right.  It   s kind of like getting struck by lightning, isn   t it, to win?  Right. (Laughter) And then it   s interesting because there are some particular opportunities, like the office has set aside money for the students who compete and aren   t selected for the program to participate in activities like study abroad in the summer or a special internship that   s not paid. So, they are provided with the opportunity to have some 18  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  reward to do something special even if they aren   t selected.  And Josh, the young man you were referring to earlier, didn   t the university provide money for a scholarship to Cambridge for him?  That was actually a student in agricultural sciences.  He got to the finals in two or three different scholarship competitions and didn   t quite make it?  Right. And then ag and Bob   s office and some others and Scholar Development were able to put together a package so he was able to go. Josh actually was able to go with family support.  Well, Gail, talking about the money that you have to help with different programs, summer abroad, international travel, etc., could you talk a little bit about the fundraising? Not details, but just generally fundraising dollars that Bob and others in the program have been able to attract to the Scholars Program?  Well, actually probably one of the largest sources of funds isn   t the result of fundraising, at least not for a long time, but the Wentz money, of course, is money that was left to us by an oil man many, many years ago and has changed and evolved over the years. So, that   s certainly a source of fundraising, but a lot of it has been because Bob has been so effective. He tells such a great story about the program and is so familiar and passionate about the students and providing opportunities for the students. He   s really been focusing the last couple of years on trying to raise some funds to endow the office so that it will continue to have a source of foundation money that   s so important for allowing students to have these opportunities. He   s worked a lot with people that he knows, people that have contacts with Scholar Development in a variety of ways. The program hasn   t been around that long, that there are a lot of people who have graduated and gone on to professional careers. So, that kind of limits you, you know. Until your alumni get to be a certain age and at a certain stage in their careers, it   s difficult, but there, fortunately, have been some very great supporters of the program.  Jim Cariker comes to mind. Are there some other individuals you think that have been significant in the program?  Whiteneck, Carol and Jim. The Whitenecks have also been very effective. And I know Louis Blair has donated some to the program.  Following up on that question, what do you think should be the goals and desired outcomes for the Scholar Program? First of all, let   s talk 19  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  about for students. What should be the goals and desired outcomes for students?  Well, it   s hard to say because I think the goals are different for different students. We want them to challenge themselves and to achieve their own goals, but part of that is going to vary somewhat depending on what their interests are and what their backgrounds are. And the competitions are so different. You know, for example, the Truman Foundation is much more service-oriented, and then the Gates Cambridge and the Rhodes are much more, well, they   re just very different. So, I think for the student, it   s figuring out which of the competitions or undergraduate research opportunities would be the best fit for them. I think learning about themselves and figuring out if this is something that they want to compete for. To me, the main emphasis is on helping the students to achieve their individual goals.  Flipside of that, what would you think would be the long-term goals and general outcomes that you   d want for the university through the program? With that investment of resources that we put into it, what would be our expectations for outcomes?  I would think that we would provide the support to help the students identify their goals. I mean, that is critical to know about the different opportunities that are available and to help guide the students to best prepare them to meet their goals, whatever their goals might be, and to challenge students to consider taking the risk to participate in those opportunities. I know some may have a particular goal that we need to have x number of national or international award winners a year, and that   s great when we do get that recognition on a national and international stage, but to me the more important goal is offering the opportunities for the students and helping them to achieve those goals, and sometimes it   s being more competitive in graduate school or a job.  I   m not trying to put words in your mouth; I   m just asking. Would those goals include perhaps more recognition of Oklahoma State University, regionally and nationally, for excellence in students? Would that be one outcome we   d be thinking about?  Absolutely, yes. And I think one of the goals would be, as well as recognition within the state of prospective students (they   re certainly another very important audience), that they know that they can get a great educational experience here.  I was talking to Bob Spurrier, who heads up our Honors College, and Bob alluded to the fact that a lot of times when he and Bob Graalman went to high schools and visited, there was already sort of a buzz about 20  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  our Scholars Program out there, that there are many students that are aware of the program and it   s attractive to them.  Yes. Oh, absolutely, and I think that   s really a critical part of the reason that we have that office, and it   s interesting. I know I wasn   t around at the time that it was an outgrowth of being in the Scholarships and Financial Aid Office, which clearly it   s different than that, but it   s certainly connected. Since we have these opportunities, we can attract some really talented students to come because they   re going to get the support that they need to be able to compete.  Well, Gail, the Scholars Development Program Office reports to you, and so you   re in a perhaps unique perspective in the program. How would you respond to individuals who might have concerns about the financial resources, time we   re putting into the Scholars Program on such a small number of students, and could these resources be better expended to other academic programs across the campus?  Well, for one thing, really when you think about the budget of the institution, it   s a very small investment frankly that we   re, yes, really, really small investment that we   re making. You know, in tough economic times, as we have now, there may be some who question,    Do we really need to be providing those resources?    I think that we expend a lot of resources on our least prepared students, a lot more resources than we do on some of our high talent students. I think that there clearly needs to be a balance. We need to offer opportunities for both types of students. So, I think for the reasons we talked about a minute ago, the reasons why we have such an office, I think it   s really important to have it.  Gail, that   s interesting. You make a comparison to how much we invest in trying to keep students academically eligible, to give them basic tools and skills they need to graduate and to be effective, and that   s probably, you   re saying, a lot more than what we   re spending on our Scholars Program.  Right, yes. Exactly.  That   s interesting.  Yes. And even if you combine the Scholars Program and the Honors College together, even the amount that we   re spending on those, I mean, we still spend an awful lot more on the underprepared students.  You were talking about some of the recognition we   ve received from our successful scholarship winners. How important to the Scholar 21  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Development Program and to the university in general was Blaine Greteman   s success in competing for the first Rhodes Scholar from Oklahoma State University?  Oh my goodness. (Laughs) That was really   now, I   m not even sure that I was here at the time. Do you know what year that was? Maybe it was about the time that I came.  I was going to say late    90s.  Mid-   90s? Late    90s? Okay. But it certainly generated a lot of interest, I mean, having the article in the Chronicle of Higher Education that talked about Oklahoma State University and the Office of Scholar Development, and it just meant so much, I think, to prospective students and to alums as well as current students to know that a student from a tiny town in Oklahoma could compete for a huge international scholarship in humanities with a strong humanities background and win and go on to be so successful. We   d had a few Truman award winners through the years before that, but I think that was really a defining moment when Blaine received that recognition.  Kind of like a National Championship.  Exactly. (Laughs) Definitely.  A high moment, but even more so.  Yes, definitely.  You mentioned the Truman Scholarship Program, and, of course, I think we talked about earlier by any measure we   ve been very, very successful and designated as a Truman Scholar Institution. How has that impacted and influenced OSU   s academic reputation, do you think?  I think the Truman Scholarship in particular fits really well with our land-grant mission. You know, from the beginning of OSU, there   s been an expectation of service and outreach to others, and, of course, that just matches really well with the Truman. But to have the institution known for identifying so many outstanding students in that area, I think, brought a lot of recognition again that we could compete nationally with other top schools. We have some outstanding students here as well as everywhere else.  Maybe you can help me. When was it we received that award, about five, six years ago or so?  22  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  It was before my time, so it was seven, eight, nine, ten years ago.  The year we received it, there was just a handful of schools, I mean, amongst hundreds of schools. It seemed like we were maybe only two non-Ivy League schools. Is that correct?  Yes, right.  So, fairly significant.  Yes, absolutely. Very important recognition.  And going back to our conversation just briefly, have these kinds of awards and recognition, Truman Scholar Institution Recognition, Blaine Greteman   s Rhode Scholarship, have these helped us recruit academically gifted students, do you think?  Absolutely. I know that there have been times when students were considering different opportunities, whether they wanted to go off to Ivy League schools or stay here, and because of the opportunities they were able to offer them   because I think it really does let them know that this is not necessarily just a big public institution but this is a big public institution that has a lot of different opportunities for students. And they had the opportunity to work very closely with the Office of Scholar Development and have lots of   we don   t have a gigantic endowment like some of the Ivy League schools used to anyway, (Laughs) but they will be given opportunities, and I know we   ve been able to attract some students to come here.  Gail, in the years that you   ve been working with the program, in your opinion, how has the Scholar Program evolved over the years? Has it become more sophisticated? Has it branched out in different areas?  Oh yes, it   s definitely branched out in different areas. We keep encouraging Bob to take on more challenges. He took on the Freshman Research Scholars Program, which I think is a great complement to the Wentz Research Program, which allows us, again, to identify maybe a little different group of students. But those that are coming out of high school think that they may want to be involved in research. That used to be managed by the grad college. I think we can really use that as an important recruiting tool as well as the other opportunities that we have. The Cambridge class is something that Bob   s taken on, and I think it   s been a very important way to expose students typically to humanities work and studying abroad, and that   s been important. The Wentz Research Program has been going on for a few years, but that continues to mature and improve throughout the years and is looked on as a 23  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  national model for undergraduate research. What else has Bob taken on? I   m sure I   m forgetting some things, but those are some of the recent changes.  You mentioned the Cambridge class. Could you share a little bit of information about the class?  Bob gets a faculty member or two to put together a class that   s two or three weeks long that the students will go to one of the colleges at Cambridge University and stay on the campus and study in-depth on a particular topic, and the topics vary each year. It   s a great way to expose students, and they have some of the best faculty at OSU take on the responsibility for teaching the class. And while they   re in Cambridge, sometimes they may go to other sites; they may go to Oxford. For example, I think this summer that Blaine and Edward Jones took the class to Oxford. The year before, after they spent some time in Cambridge studying James Joyce, then they went to Dublin and were able to actually visit some of the places where he   d been. When President  David  Schmidly was here they did a class on evolution and went to the home of Darwin and looked at some of the original papers. So, it   s a tutorial setting, more like the British, in that it   s a small group of students that are working with a couple faculty members.  Are those hours OSU hours?  Yes, those are OSU courses that we just happen to physically go there and then invite speakers from Cambridge to come, depending on the topic.  Great experience. Typically about how many students and faculty would be on one of those trips?  Typically usually about two faculty, and I think it   s about twenty students.  We   ve talked about the program, and I think we   ve answered this in some ways, but in case we left something out I want to ask you anyway. In your mind, what have been key milestones, significant achievements in the program through the years, events you can look at?  I think one of the defining times (and this was long before I started) was when they decided to convert the Wentz from the work-study program to the research program. I think that was a brilliant, brilliant decision to be made at that time.  Do you know who was involved in that decision? 24  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  You know, I   m not really sure.  Of course, the Foundation had to change it, but from our perspective at the University, who was pushing for that?  I don   t know. It might have been Jack Vitek and Marvin Keener who maybe were involved at the time.  Bob Spurrier might have been part of it as well. I don   t know.  I don   t know. Anyway, I think that was really great. I think starting the Cambridge program was a great idea that has really had a lot of benefits for students as well as the faculty who get to work with the students.  Have you got a chance to make the trip for yourself?  I   ve been able to go and visit one of the classes, and I   m thinking I may try to go this summer. The topic that   s being discussed is going to be on food policy, which is related to my area, so I think it would be really interesting to try to go along for that.  Who was it, a famous French general leader that said,    An army crawls on its stomach   ? Food policy   s pretty important.  Exactly. (Laughter)  Well, competition for national scholarships as we   ve talked about has become tougher and tougher, and particularly other institutions that have developed programs similar to ours, scholar programs. Are there components of the program that may need to be changed or enhanced, going forward to remain competitive? If you fast forward five or ten years down the road, are there things you see we need to do better or differently?  Actually, before I answer that, let me go back to the previous question because that reminded me of another milestone of Bob Graalman   s involvement. Establishing the national organization for people in positions such as him, I think, was very important. Of course, it led to the part of your question that you allude to, which is that led to challenges of having a bunch of other people who are competing with us more.  We shared our success story and our information with them.  And darn it, then they started competing. (Laughs) 25  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Should   ve copyrighted that.  (Laughs) Yes, that   s right. Obviously, technology   I mean, there   s changes. We   re going to have to keep up with putting more and more information available on the web because students expect us to have electronic access to a lot of information, but I really think that the basic components of the program would need to stay, the support of undergraduate research and various opportunities. There have been some who have suggested that perhaps we need to provide a stipend for faculty to encourage more faculty participation. I   m not convinced that that   s necessary, but there are some who think that may be something we   ll need to look at eventually. But I think that the basic part of helping to recruit and identify the students who have potential and then working with them in a personal relationship and helping them, encouraging them to develop in the areas that they need, if they need more leadership opportunities, then encouraging them to participate in that. I think that really comes down to a basic personal relationship. That   s going to continue to be important.  Assuming you   re more successful in getting additional faculty involved and engaged, will there be a need, in your mind, for additional staffing perhaps to help as the program grows and bring more valuable students in to it?  Oh certainly, yes.  You mentioned earlier, too, about efforts to endow portions of the program. I heard a couple people that may want to be in a strong enough position, if you will, to survive the transition of the initial director, Bob Graalman, the next and to have a strong financial base would be important to that. Do you think that   s important?  Oh, yes. I guess I don   t see that particularly as a change. It   s certainly something that   s going to need to continue, but yes, it would be very difficult for this program to be as successful as it is without the external support to be able to provide the opportunity for the students to travel and the additional scholarship opportunities. Yes, absolutely, that   s going to be critical.  I think I hear you saying that perhaps to enhance some of the things as opposed to doing things differently, the travel abroad programs, the Cambridge study program, some of those things, that perhaps we might need additional financial resources to expand those.  Right. For example, it   d be great to be able to offer a couple of classes in 26  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  the summer so that students had a choice, or maybe do one in the summer and one over Christmas break or winter break. So, that obviously would require a lot more resources to be able to do that.  Gail, you put a lot of passion and a lot of time in this program in addition to your many other responsibilities. What   s given you the most personal and professional satisfaction from being involved in the Scholar Program?  I think the main thing has been the reward of watching the students grow and mature and become more confident and be able to achieve things that they didn   t even dream about when they came. That   s really rewarding.  The students? Helping students?  The students, yes.  We   ve talked about faculty quite a bit. What do you do to encourage faculty to get involved? What do you say to them?  Well, I think a lot of times it really kind of sells itself because these are typically great, very self-motivated students. And a lot of faculty are very happy to have students that are self-motivated and they want to work. Most faculty get a lot of enjoyment out of seeing the students grow and be able to challenge them and they   re willing to take on the challenge. So, it really helps counteract that there are sometimes students who are less motivated and it can kind of get frustrating. Actually one of the things that we also do is encourage. It   s a great way for new faculty members to get started, to get some assistance in trying to do what they want, to get their research program going. It   s relatively inexpensive compared to graduate students, and then they can have a lot of control over it, and then they can use that to recruit the students to become graduate students with them, which     Follow them into graduate programs.  Right. Which a lot of the faculty use it for that opportunity, so it   s usually not too much of a challenge. There are some faculty who don   t believe that undergraduates really know enough to do anything helpful, but they   re pretty rare.  We   ve asked a lot of questions and covered a lot of things in the program. I   m sure there   s something we   ve probably left out. Are there some comments you   d like to make or some things we haven   t brought up you   d like to share at this time? 27  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Gill  Gates  Well, I think you alluded to the one concern, which is figuring out the transition. Unfortunately, Bob is going to retire one day, much as we   d like him to stay on. (Laughs)  We   re going to let him retire? (Laughter)  Maybe, and it is going to be a challenge. I mean, he   s such a unique, gifted person that it is going to be a challenge to find someone who has the right combination of skills and interests to work effectively with these students.  Gail, you mentioned it   d be interesting to think about if perhaps one of the former participants in the program would come back. You alluded to that earlier in conversation about some of them perhaps then giving back, and perhaps some of them will come back as Blaine did, as a faculty member on campus, maybe be involved in the program.  Yes, I think it would be great to be able to get because we   ve had some really outstanding students through the years who I think would be great.  Well, we appreciate very much you agreeing two different times to interview with us, Gail.  Certainly. Sorry for the interruption the first time. (Laughs)  Oh that   s okay. Thank you.  Thank you.  ------- End of September 17, 2009 interview -------   
