 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, September   17, 2015 , and I   m interviewing Wendy Tatroult for the Cowboys in Every  County interview series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Wendy, you pursued a degree in  mechanical design technology at OSU and eventually moved over into the  area of design. You are the only woman member of OSU   S Institute for  Design and Drafting, as I understand it.  Tatroult Well, I might   ve been back in the day. (Laughs) I don   t know about it now.  (Laughs)  Little Thunder Besides having your own design business, you   ve helped with some historic  home restoration, including your own home here, and I look forward to  hearing more about your life and work.  Tatroult Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Tatroult I was born here in Lawton, and I grew up two doors down from where my  office and home is right now.  Little Thunder What did your parents do for a living?  Tatroult My father was a local businessman. He started off with a vending machine  company selling pool tables, jukeboxes, cigarette machines, that type of  thing, and the name of his company was Sleepy   s Music Company. It   s now  called Sleepy   s Amusement Company, and anyway, he was just a local  businessman doing a lot different things.  Little Thunder Your mother, was she at home?  Tatroult Yes. My mother stayed at home and was a wonderful mother to all of us.  There was four of us. She chose to send us to parochial school. She drove us  5  back and forth to school every day, and she was really involved in the  school and the church and just was a great stay-at-home mom.  Little Thunder You mentioned she lives just a block away?  Tatroult She lives two doors down. She   s ninety-two, and she still lives on her own.  It   s great that I   m right here close by.  Little Thunder In the house you grew up in, she lives in?  Tatroult Yes, she lives in the house I grew up in. That   s correct, yeah, and my kids,  Kyle and Lacy, grew up in this house. They were just two doors down from  Grandma or Nannaw. They could go back and forth at will. When they were  mad at me, they could go see Nannaw. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Describe Lawton when you were growing up.  Tatroult I just remember that the neighborhood was full of kids. It was a young  neighborhood with a lot of young families. We played outside in the  summertime, all summer long, often barefooted or riding our bikes. We  developed really good, close friendships with all the neighborhood kids, and  things were, it was an innocent kind of a town back then.  Little Thunder What activities did you do for fun?  Tatroult You mean when we were little, when we were growing up? We played  marbles and rode our bikes and played Cowboys and Indians. (Laughs) I did  have a few dolls that I played with, but I was very much hanging around  with my brothers and doing what, the things that they did. We   d play  football in the middle of the street. I see that some, with some of the kids in  the neighborhood now, but for the most part, kids aren   t out all day long in  the summertime like they used to be. Everyone wants to stay in under the air  conditioning.  Little Thunder You had how many brothers?  Tatroult I had two brothers and a sister.  Little Thunder What schools did you attend here in town?  Tatroult In grade school, we went to Saint Mary   s Catholic School, and then in junior  high, Central Junior High. Then onto high school at Lawton High School.  Little Thunder What was your favorite subject?  6  Tatroult Math. I did take art in junior high, but in high school, I would say my  favorite subjects, favorite classes were math classes.  Little Thunder What   s one important school experience that might   ve foreshadowed what  you were going to end up doing?  Tatroult I don   t think there was one. At that time, the boys could take drafting in high  school, but I remember walking by that classroom and not even having a  clue, really, what went on in there and not having any desire. I didn   t feel  badly that I couldn   t be in it. It wasn   t really until I got to OSU, and my  advisor swayed me in that direction because he looked at my aptitude test  and could see that I had a good art background and good math skills. He  suggested that I take a class in the School of Technology.  Little Thunder You took your art pretty seriously, too, then in, starting around high school?  Tatroult No, actually, it was more in junior high. When I got to high school, I  concentrated more on, more academic-type stuff. Art has always been a  hobby but not a passion to pursue professionally. I wasn   t that talented.  (Laughs) My ninth grade art teacher on parent-teacher day told my mother  that I wasn   t the most talented art student that she   d ever had but I had the  best attitude of everyone, anyone that she had ever had.  Little Thunder (Laughs) That was a compliment.  Tatroult Yeah. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What led you to attend OSU after high school?  Tatroult My very best friend from first grade through high school was Tina Seibold,  and she had known from the time she was a little bitty kid that she wanted to  be a veterinarian. Logically, her choice was to go to OSU, and I didn   t have  a strong feeling of what I was going to do with my life. I just knew I needed  to and wanted to continue my education, and we both liked the atmosphere  at OSU. Since my best friend was going there, that was the logical choice  for me, because we wanted to room together. I went to OSU. Then I figured  out what I wanted to do, but it   s a good thing that I ended up there because it  turns out that technology and engineering and architectural-type things is  what I enjoy and what I   m good at.  Little Thunder It was your advisor who really pointed you in that direction?  Tatroult Yes. I was at OSU for three semesters taking basic requirements and  thinking that I might want to go into psychology, but I wasn   t really  passionate about any particular thing. I had a conference with my advisor,  and he noticed that I had a good art background and was strong in math. He  7  said,    You might really do well taking a drafting class because that melds  both of those two qualities together,    and I took his advice. I took that class,  and I was in love with it  From that point on, it was like,    Yes  This is what  I want to do.    Then I knew what my focus was.  Little Thunder What was a professor that really stood out for you?  Tatroult In the School of Technology, Gerald McClain, and Ralph Brumfield, I think,  was the head of the department at that time. Gerald McClain was a young  professor, had not been there at OSU for very many years when I started  taking classes, but he was such a nice guy and took me into the fold with all  these guys that were in the class and made me feel comfortable and  welcomed, and Mr. Brumfield encouraged me to do some outside work for  people that were wanting some of the students to draw patent drawings and  things like that. Then they recruited me to teach one of the labs, Static and  Strengths of Materials lab.  Little Thunder Oh   Tatroult They encouraged me, and to this day, I still have contact with Gerald  McClain. He   s still a nice guy. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Neat, and you were the only woman student? Is that right?  Tatroult At the time when I started taking drafting classes, I was the only female in  those classes, and there was one other girl that entered the program, I think,  just before I got out.  Little Thunder How cool to have an advisor who   s on the ball.  Tatroult I wish I remembered the name of the advisor because if he hadn   t suggested  that to me, it wouldn   t have occurred to me to go to the School of  Technology.  Little Thunder What buildings did you have your classes in?  Tatroult Building? I don   t remember. Those buildings may not even be in use today.  It   s whatever in the    70s the School of Technology, but I don   t remember  the name of the building.  Little Thunder No problem. What about the rest of the learning environment on campus?  Tatroult I remember very large classes, like for history. I guess there was a lot of  partying going on, but I didn   t participate in much of that. Should have, but I  didn   t.  8  Little Thunder (Laughs) Where did you live?  Tatroult The first year, we lived in Drummond Hall, and the next year, we moved off  campus to a little apartment that was just north of the stadium. It   s no longer  there. It   s been demolished, and that was in the days when streaking was the  thing. I remember one evening we were at home, and we looked out our  apartment windows. There were students streaking down the street in front  of the stadium. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Oh goodness. Aw, that   s just crazy. (Laughter)  Tatroult The learning environment was, it was conducive to learning. I studied a lot.  Some of the classes were difficult, but I managed to do well in all my  classes.  Little Thunder What was your favorite place on campus?  Tatroult Hmm. I guess Theta Pond. Oh, well, I kind of liked the Cookie Station at the  Union, too. (Laughs) They used to make these great, big, huge cookies. It  was on the lower floor, and everybody could, you could just walk through  and buy a handful of cookies. That may have been my favorite. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Was your tuition and room and board covered? Did you have a job?  Tatroult I did not have a job, and fortunately, my room and board and tuition was  covered by my parents. (Laughs) I was extremely fortunate that they were  willing and anxious for me to go on to college and were able to pay for it. I  did not have any of those kinds of concerns.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. What types of activities were you involved in or on  campus organizations?  Tatroult Not a lot. Once I got into the School of Technology, I entered the American  Institute of Drafting and Design Organization and got involved with that, but  for the most part, I was spending most of my time studying.  Little Thunder Were there other women in that organization?  Tatroult No, I was the only one at the time.  Little Thunder Did you attend sporting events?  Tatroult Yes. Went to football games. I   m sure we went to a few basketball games,  but I don   t remember being actively involved in attending other sports.  Although I do recall, we had a residence hall flag football game for the girls,  and I participated in that.  9  Little Thunder What do you think was the hub of student activity or interest?  Tatroult In general? Hmm. I don   t know. There   s such a wide variety of degrees and  activities and people on campus. It   s like its own little city. Everyone had  their own thing going, and what other people were involved in escapes me. I  kind of only remember and only remember parts of my own little world  there at OSU.  Little Thunder How about dating?  Tatroult Well, I didn   t date at OSU because I had dated someone in high school, and  we were in a relationship and were planning on getting married. That   s one  of the reasons I spent all my time studying and not doing a lot of socializing  because I wasn   t out looking. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Right, right. Did you have some favorite places off campus?  Tatroult The Hideaway Pizza. I can   t really think of anything, any others at this  point.  Little Thunder Did your parents visit you while you were in school, or could you go home  fairly often? How did that work?  Tatroult I think my parents came up for Parents    Day at some point, maybe even  when we were first moving into the dorms, but other than that, then I would  make it either back down to Oklahoma City where my sister lived or come  on down back to Lawton for the weekend, occasionally. Enough that we  were both satisfied, but not every weekend.  Little Thunder What are your memories of the town of Stillwater?  Tatroult My memories of it is it being not a lot different than it is now, except of  course it has spread, and there   s more businesses. Back then, it was more  mom-and-pop businesses. Now there   s more chains and big box stores and  that type of thing. It was a little quieter and a little more homegrown at that  point.  Little Thunder Do you have any memories of the Library or the Student Union?  Tatroult Yes. That was back before internet. You actually went to the Library to  research and study. Yeah, I spent a lot of time in the Library. I remember, in  particular, looking at books that Tolstoy wrote, for a sociology class, and the  Student Union, mainly stopped by there for those cookies. (Laughter)  Little Thunder How about Gallagher?  10  Tatroult I don   t remember a lot about Gallagher. Of course that was before they  expanded it, but no, I don   t have a lot of vivid memories of that area.  Little Thunder What was graduation day like?  Tatroult For me, I graduated with an associate degree, but it was in December. It was  in the middle of the year, and I would   ve had to have gone back for the  actual graduation. I graduated in December, got married in January, and by  the following May when graduation was, I was in Lawton, married, and  working. It really wasn   t that much of a priority to me to go back to walk  across the stage. I didn   t go through an actual graduation ceremony at OSU.  Little Thunder Did you immediately start working with your degree, or what happened  after?  Tatroult I did. A large part of the emphasis in the mechanical design technology  degree at that time was tool drafting. I was really skilled in designing or  drawing, drafting out tool parts and things like that. There was no industry  in Lawton for that type of drafting, but there were some young mechanical  engineers in town who were looking for a draftsperson. I didn   t really, at the  time, understand the difference between mechanical engineering and  mechanical drafting. I applied for that job, and fortunately, they hired me,  even though I didn   t know heating and air design and plumbing design and  pipe drafting, which is what they did. They taught me. The education I got at  OSU gave me the background knowledge and the tools, and I knew how to  draw anything or I could draw anything if I understood it. They taught me  what I needed to know. With the degree and the background knowledge that  I had, I went to work for them and learned how to do HVAC  heating,  ventilation, and air conditioning  and plumbing design in drafting.  Little Thunder That   s a great background to have. What was the next step in your career?  Tatroult Unfortunately, Miller and Boyer Engineers, who I had gone to work for,  were great guys and good engineers, but they couldn   t make a go of it in  Lawton, Oklahoma, with their HVAC and plumbing design firm. They  folded their business, and I went to work for the local steel fabricating  business called Lawrence Tank. I worked for them for about six months,  learning and doing steel detailing, which was a whole different type of  drafting than I had been involved in, but again, they taught me what I  needed to know. I caught on quickly and then was able to produce a lot of  work for them. I left that job after six months because I didn   t see a lot of  future in moving up the ladder and making more money. I enjoyed the work,  but I just didn   t think there was a lot of future at the company.  11  A local architect, Ted Horton, whom the mechanical engineers had worked  for, was needing a draftsman, and they knew me from working with Miller  and Boyer. They contacted me to see if I   d be willing to come to work for  them. Had not done any architectural work at that time, but I went to work  for Ted Horton. That   s what kind of launched me into building design and  architectural drafting.  Little Thunder What did your work in building design, how did it differ then? What kind of  a shift was there?  Tatroult How did it differ from what?  Little Thunder From what you   d been doing previously. Were you drawing upon all of  those areas to do building design?  Tatroult You mean now?  Little Thunder Right, right.  Tatroult It   s kind of interesting because I got the heating and air and plumbing  background and the steel detailing structural background and worked five,  five and a half years, for the architect with the architectural, learning the  architectural side of it. During all this time, my husband and I built a house,  and the 1979 tornado destroyed it, blew it away. It was under construction at  the time, and we had done everything ourselves, except for the foundation.  We had someone come in, pour the foundation, and then we did the framing,  the wiring, the plumbing, the insulating, roofing, everything.  After the tornado blew it away, we were still determined to say we had built  the whole house ourselves. (Laughs) We hired people to put it back to the  point where it was when it blew away, and then we finished it from there. At  the same time that in my job I was learning all these different skills in the  different facets of construction, I was learning on-the-job training of actually  framing and building and doing it myself. Four years after the tornado,  lightning struck the house that we were living in by then and burned it to the  ground, and we were homeless again.  Little Thunder Oh my gosh.  Tatroult We were kind of, I guess a little bit shell-shocked from losing a house again,  twice in four years. We decided to build an earth sheltered home, and that  was during the time, the mid-   80s, when earth sheltered homes were kind of  coming in vogue. OSU had done a lot of research on them, and I got a lot of  information from OSU on that. I designed an earth sheltered home that we  then built. Just had a wide variety of construction and building experience  along with what my job was at the time. Here   s the way I put it. (Laughs)  12  Nineteen seventy-nine, the tornado struck. Nineteen eighty-three, lightning  struck and burned it down, and in 1985, divorce struck. (Laughs) In 1985, I  found myself needing to figure out what I was going to do to be mother to  two little children and breadwinner.  Little Thunder How old were your children?  Tatroult Lacy was three months, and Kyle was about three and a half. There was lots  of reasons to be sad, but one of the main reasons that I was stressed and sad  is because I didn   t want my kids to be in a daycare eight hours a day being  raised by somebody else. I was trying to figure out,    What I am going to do?  How am I going to go to work and have a job and raise the kids?    because at  that time, by that time, I had quit working. I was a stay-at-home mom. I was  doing, designing houses for friends and family on the side. I had my little  drafting room at home, but I wasn   t planning on doing it fulltime. I was  planning on being a mother fulltime.  I decided,    Well, I think I   ll just try to get enough jobs to keep me afloat and  just do this on my own, work at home.    A really good friend of mine, who  was the brother of my roommate in college, Max Seibold, he was in the  construction industry in Lawton, and he brought one of the local builders to  me. That builder gave me my first contract job as my own little drafting and  design business, and that was thirty years ago. I   ve been doing it ever since.  I   ve been working out of my home doing drafting and design work, and it  gave me the flexibility in my time that I needed to be a mother and a  breadwinner.  Little Thunder You   ve won several drafting awards, I think, in the    90s, a couple of  national design competitions.  Tatroult Yes. The American Institute of Building Design holds annual competition,  and in the mid-   90s, I entered a set of plans in their working drawing  category. Those plans were judged on their completeness and accuracy and,  well, I don   t guess they could judge the accuracy. They wouldn   t know  unless they built the building. Just the quality of the set of working  drawings, the construction drawings, and I won first place nationally. I  entered again the next year, and I won first place again the next year. Then I  entered the next year, and I didn   t place  (Laughter) I decided that was the  end of my competition career. I was just going to get back to concentrating  on working. Anyway, it was kind of nice to have those two awards under my  belt and to have my work recognized.  Little Thunder Absolutely. Were you still living in the earth house, or had you   ?  Tatroult No. After the divorce, the kids and I had to move out of that home, and my  husband kept it. We moved into town, and we lived in my brother   s rent  13  house, where I set up my drafting table, much like this, in a big living room  area. A couple of years later, this house became available. Of course it was  the neighborhood I grew up in. It was two doors down from my mother, and  raising two little kids on your own, I realized what value that would be to  live that closely to family. As you can see, this room is separated from the  rest of the house. This was an add-on in the 1950s, and I could see that it  would work perfectly for my drafting office. All those factors combined led  me to make that decision to buy this house and move back to the old  neighborhood and set up shop here, and that was twenty-eight years ago.  Little Thunder How did attending OSU and earning your degree impact your life?  Tatroult Had I not gotten the education and the skills through the program there to  learn how to draft   you don   t just hire someone off the street and teach  them how to be a draftsman. You go out looking for people. If you   re an  employer, you go out looking for people who have learned how to draft, and  then you teach them how you need them to do your drafting. That degree,  that education tells a potential employer that you have the stick-to-it-ness to  get a degree and you are at least intelligent enough to be able to learn what  they need to teach you, and maybe it   s not intelligence. Maybe it   s just the  background knowledge and skills and ability to learn what they need you to  know. I certainly couldn   t have had this career if I had a degree in  psychology. I would   ve ventured off doing something else. I thank that  advisor who recognized some of the background skills I had and suggested  that I would be good at this, because I think he was right. (Laughter) I think  I   ve done pretty well at it.  Little Thunder Are people you know aware of your OSU connection?  Tatroult Yeah  I wear a lot of orange. (Laughter) I drink from an OSU cup every day.  Little Thunder Is that an OSU towel?  Tatroult Oh yeah, yeah, there   s OSU towel in the bathroom. When my kids were  graduating from high school, I didn   t force them or strongly encourage them  to go to OSU. I just said,    You do whatever you want to do. Wherever you  want to go, you can go,    and my son, Kyle, the oldest, went to visit the OSU  campus and then went to visit the OU campus. I think he really liked the  atmosphere and the feel and the friendliness of the people at OSU, but  probably what really sealed the deal is he got a ten-thousand-dollar  scholarship from the Wentz Foundation. That was kind of the spur that  caused him to make his final decision to go to OSU, which, of course,  pleased me to no end.  Then Lacy learned to love OSU from visiting there while her brother was up  there. At heart, our personalities, we   re all just, we   re just good, old, down-  14  to-earth, cowboy-type people, and we   re comfortable at OSU. Of course  Kyle and Lacy both have taken jobs there and have, both live in Stillwater  and work there. That   s where their everyday life is now permanently, I  guess, for now.  Little Thunder Have you remained engaged with OSU through the years?  Tatroult There was a long period when I did not have a lot of contact at OSU. I was  busy being a single mom and working. That relationship kind of got  renewed when my kids started going to OSU.  Little Thunder You would go down and visit them?  Tatroult Go up and visit them, yes. (Laughter) Occasionally, yeah. Went to a few  games with them. It was always fun to help them get moved into their new  apartment or wherever or go up and do a little renovation work on some  dump that they had decided was the perfect place to live. (Laughter) No, I  shouldn   t call it a dump, but you know what I mean, a few things that are a  little less than the up-to-snuff standard. Now we have a strong presence with  OSU because Lacy works for the OSU Alumni Association, and until just  recently, Kyle worked for the athletic department in the academics for the  athletics.  Little Thunder Have you attended Homecoming events through the years or not?  Tatroult On game day, yes. Went to Walkaround for the floats and attended OSU  Homecoming ballgame. There   s so much action going on up there on  Homecoming Day. It   s a fun atmosphere to be in.  Little Thunder What are the differences between going back to Homecoming and your  memories of it when you were on campus?  Tatroult It   s all about the same, really. That   s one of the things that seems to just stay  the same. Theta Pond   s still there, and the sorority and fraternity houses still  have all of the displays. Very much the same. That   s part of why we all  probably like coming back at Homecoming because it brings back a lot of  good memories, and it just feels like home in Stillwater at OSU.  Little Thunder What advice would you give to students today or to faculty or  administrators?  Tatroult Well, let me say this. (Laughs) I should have gone on for a four-year degree.  It probably would have made my income-producing abilities easier and  greater, and when I decided to leave school after two years, my ambition  was to be a really good mom. I didn   t have career-oriented aspirations at that  time, but because of life   s, things that happen in life, I ended up needing the  15  education that I had. It served me well for the career that I ended up having.  When my kids were in school, I just encouraged them to just get that piece  of paper because it opens so many doors for you, and I remember telling  Lacy,    I don   t care if you get a degree in tiddlywinks. Just get a degree,     because a lot of jobs that you might interview for, they don   t care what your  degree is. They just want to know that you are capable of earning a degree  and that you might be a good employee for them.  No, college is not for everyone. I think there   s a lot of people that can do  wonders with their life and their career with vocational, technical kind of  schooling and education or apprenticeship programs. Electricians and  plumbers and carpenters are, good ones are hard to find these days. Really  what any education system needs to be teaching these days is work ethic,  being the best you can be at whatever you decide to do. If it   s being a  sanitation engineer, great  Just be the best sanitation engineer you can be  because what I hear from contractors, building contractors, no matter what  field of construction it is, they cannot find people that want to work and that  will take pride in their work. We   re losing the craftsmanship that we used to  have and the pride in our work. Integrity in craftsmanship and pride in what  you do and doing the best that you can do.  Little Thunder Do you think your time at OSU has impacted your community? I know  you   ve done some community work with restoration.  Tatroult Yes. About twenty years ago the city of Lawton, or the schoolboard formed  a citizens    committee to evaluate what to do with a building downtown. The  old, historic Lawton High School was then, at that time, a junior high. They  were needing to expand, but half of the city of Lawton wanted them to build  a new school and tear down the old one. The other people in Lawton wanted  them to preserve this old, historic building and continue to use it as a school.  They got input from all different facets of people in Lawton, and at the time,  I was a parent of a student at Central Junior High School, and I was in the  building design industry. They put me on that committee, citizens     committee to help evaluate what to do with that old historic building, and  through those associations, I got acquainted with the people from the  Lawton Heritage Association who were maintaining the historic Mattie Beal  Home. It was starting to be in disrepair again, and they were needing help to  get plans, to get government funding, to fix the roof and fix a lot of things  that were in disrepair.  They put me on the board of the Lawton Heritage Association, and I started  working and donating my time to help make stopgap repairs, to stop the  deterioration that was going on again. That was about 1995 when I started  with that, and I   m still heavily involved in the maintenance and  rehabilitation work at the Mattie Beal Home. About ten years ago, we got  16  360 thousand dollars in funding from McMahon Foundation and a federal  grant to completely rehabilitate the home and put it back to its 1923  condition.  I resigned from the board, and they hired me as the project manager to be  the owner   s representative between the architect and the construction people  and all that, to get the project done correctly and spend the money wisely.  That   s been a great project and interest, and historic preservation is really a  passion of mine. Doing my own home here, it was built in the    40s. It   s now  older than fifty years. It doesn   t have the historic value, but it has  architectural value. I just really enjoy saving that old architectural detail that  most people can   t afford to build in new homes and buildings today.  Little Thunder It   s lovely what you   ve done here. Are there other cowboys in the town or  the county that you   re connected to, and how?  Tatroult Yes, we have a local OSU alumni chapter here. I   m not real active in the  chapter, but I know a lot of those people. They do a lot for the community in  the name of OSU. Joe Abshir, I think, is still the president of the chapter.  One of my good friends, that I designed a pharmacy for, he   s a big OU fan.  His sister is a big OSU fan, and she   s a member of that organization. My  really good friend, Tina, who was my roommate, while being from Lawton,  she   s made her career in Oklahoma City, and I was able to design a vet  clinic for her. She built a brand-new building up there several years ago and  then more than doubled the size of it a few years later, and she has the  biggest twenty-four-hour emergency vet clinic in Oklahoma City.  Little Thunder Wow   Tatroult That was a pleasure to get to work with her and get to do that project.  Little Thunder For sure. What can you tell us about your Lawton? What should a visitor  here know or see or experience?  Tatroult We   ve got a great museum that has some really neat new exhibits that will  be open soon. You can experience what the 1979 tornado was like in a  special room that they   ve built. It   s like you   re in an underground storm  shelter, and you feel and hear and smell all the sounds from a tornado. I  would encourage anyone that   s coming to Lawton to visit the Great Plains  Museum, and of course you need to go see the Mattie Beal Home.  Little Thunder Right. (Laughter)  Tatroult You need to see our work there. It   s only open four days a week, Thursday  through Sunday, from noon to three, but that   s really an architectural  treasure in the middle of the neighborhood just south of downtown Lawton.  17  There   s a lot of Comanche Nation things to do. There   s the Comanche  Nation Museum. I think there   s a couple of museums connected with the  Comanche Nation, and then you need to go to Medicine Park, which is in  the Wichita Mountains just north of here.  Medicine Park is out by the Wichita Mountains. It was a resort community  in its heyday in the    20s. It has a really interesting history. Elmer Thomas,  one of the senators, Oklahoma senators, was a big influence out there.  Bonnie and Clyde stayed out there. It   s had a sordid history over the years,  and it had a real downturn maybe twenty years ago. There wasn   t much  happening out there. There was a lot of rundown buildings, but it has been  revived. All kinds of new construction, some really, really neat houses have  been built out there, as well as all of the old cobblestone log cabins, lots of  activity, music festivals. Just a fun place to go, very unique place with  beautiful, beautiful views.  I recently had the opportunity to design a house that sits up on the hill on the  east side of the creek that has the best views in the whole community. It   s  million dollar views in all directions: Mount Scott, Lake Lawtonka Dam,  and then down at the bottom, Gondola Lake. That has been a really, really  fun project.  Little Thunder I bet. It seems like a lot of OSU alumni and students are pretty loyal to this  school. What is it about OSU that sparks such loyalty?  Tatroult I think people with an OSU attitude are welcoming and open and accepting  and down-to-earth, and you just can   t go to Stillwater without feeling the  fun and the welcoming attitude. You   re not an outsider. Even if you   re from,  a member of the opposing team on game day, you   re invited in to have a  beer and join in on the game day tailgating with the OSU fans. It   s just an  openness and down-to-earth attitude that makes us all love each other.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder Is there anything you   d like to add that we didn   t cover today?  Tatroult Let me think. When I graduated from the program with the two-year degree,  I got a really pretty nice offer from IBM Industries in Austin. I went down  there to interview with them, and my husband-to-be went with me. It  would   ve been an opportunity to go to work for a large corporation in their  design department. They offered me a job, but ultimately we decided that we  were going to put our major emphasis on his job. At that time, there was not  an abundance of union electrical work in the Austin area, and there was back  here in Lawton. Together we made the decision to come back here instead of  pursuing a career with a bigger company, and I   m not sorry for that.  18  It   s worked out so well for me, being able to have my own business and  work out of the home and be flexible with my time. I needed that when my  kids were small, and I need it now. My mother   s ninety-two, and it   s good  for her and it   s good for me that I   m so close. She can live on her own,  which she   s perfectly capable of, but knowing that I   m just two doors down  gives her a lot of comfort. Me too. It   s still a good situation. It always  amazes me how your life choices lead you down a particular path, and  usually it   s the path you   re supposed to be on. That   s the way I kind of feel  is like it all worked out okay. There   s not a lot I   d go back and change. I  don   t know. Things are good  (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, thank you for talking with us today.  Tatroult Well, you   re welcome. Thank you for being interested in the story.  -------  -------   
