 Finchum Today is April 27, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum, and along with me is Dr. Charles Abramson. I am with the Library here on the campus of OSU, and Charles is in the psychology department, and today we are in the history department to speak with Dr. Elizabeth Williams. I need to get your title right, Professor and Director of Graduate Studies for the history department?  Williams That   s correct.  Finchum Soon to be retired.  Williams Yes.  Finchum In a few, short weeks   Williams At the end of this semester, that   s right   Finchum Well, thank you for spending this afternoon with us.  Williams Well, thank you for asking me. I have a long and deep attachment to OSU, so I thought it was a nice occasion.  Finchum Okay  Well, let   s start with learning a little bit about you, beginning with when and where you were born.  Williams I was born in 1950 in Muskogee, Oklahoma, so I am a native Oklahoman, and my family   s been here for a very long time.  Finchum Do you have brothers and sisters?  Williams Yes, I had two brothers and two sisters. Nice, big, Catholic family. 5  Finchum Where are you in the line up?  Williams I   m the last but one, so I   m not the baby, but almost.  Finchum Almost   Williams Yes.  Finchum Well, what did your parents do for a living?  Williams My dad was a loan officer at, I believe it was called Commercial National Bank, if I   m not mistaken, and my mother was a homemaker.  Finchum Okay, and were they both born in Oklahoma?  Williams Yes, they were. My dad was born in Muskogee, my mother was born in a little town called Leedey. I   m not sure I can find that on the Oklahoma map.  Finchum It   s in Dewey County   been there   Williams Okay, there you go  Well, you know more about it than I do. I   ve never been there. When I think about that, I always intended to go see the little town where my mother was born.  Finchum I can get you there.  Williams Okay. (Laughter)  Finchum And then you grandparents   were they from Oklahoma, or did they come in     Williams No, they all came in. My granddad on my dad   s side came around 1910. He and my grandmother were from Iowa. They both went to Cornell College in Mount Vernon, Iowa, and my grandad had a degree in engineering. He went for a little while to Mexico and worked on the railroads there, but apparently that didn   t prove to be exactly to his liking, and so he moved back to Muskogee, and he became a school teacher. He was a school teacher at the junior high and then the high school, and then he was principal at the high school in Muskogee for a number of years. So teachers   my grandmother, of course, since they met in Iowa, she was also from Iowa.  On the other side, they   re from Missouri, and my grandmother (my mother   s mother), was born in Kirksville, Missouri, which interestingly   I teach, as my main research field, history of medicine. There   s a form of medicine called osteopathy, which we know about a great deal at OSU since we have 6  an osteopathic school in Tulsa. The founder of osteopathy was a man named Andrew Still, who was   who practiced and began that form of medicine, (a very American form of medicine) in Kirksville, Missouri. I love to tell my students,    This is a very important place in my life. That   s where my grandmother came from.    He began this whole approach to medicine, which became very important in Oklahoma and up through the Midwest, moved out with Oklahomans who went to California, and all stemming from Kirksville.  Finchum It sounds like education was a very important part of growing up then.  Williams It really was, absolutely.  Finchum It was just assumed that you would go to college then?  Williams Well not exactly, because whether young girls went to college was always open to question. Although my mother had all the admiration in the world for college-educated people and had gone herself for two years to Oklahoma State in the 1930s. She believed that the most important thing for a young girl was to learn a marketable skill, so that if she found herself in a condition where she had to support herself or children, she could do that. She urged me to study stenography and typing as guaranteed skills, and she wanted me to go to college, but she thought that that should also be taken care of so that if I didn   t finish or something got in way, I could always take care of myself. But in those days, those skills were actually taught in college classes. I don   t think they are anymore. (Laughs) Nobody teaches what we would call keyboarding, right, in the university, but I took a shorthand class and a typing class at OSU my first semester in 1968. Times have changed.  Finchum Yes. Well, then let   s back up. Since we   re talking about education, where did you go to elementary school?  Williams I went to Sacred Heart School in Muskogee which was, at that time, the only Catholic primary school in the city. Catholics were few in number in Muskogee. I always felt like I knew a lot about what it was like to be in a religious minority from growing up in Muskogee as a Catholic. The teachers there were from an order of nuns called the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Carondelet, and their mother house was in Saint Louis, so they had a Midwestern base, and they were fabulous teachers. There were only four of them, and they taught eight grades, so these women usually had fifty to sixty students in a classroom. They would teach on one side of the room to the third graders, and move over to the other side of the room and teach the fourth graders, and go back and forth, all day long. (Laughs) When I look back on that, and I think,    How did they do that?    It   s kind of miraculous, but they were wonderful, wonderful teachers. They made it clear that 7  learning (education) was supremely important, so they were a huge influence on me.  Finchum How would they discipline?  Williams Oh dear  (Laughs) They were very strict. They did use corporal punishment on the real troublemakers, I guess. They sent children home. They called their parents and would have them come pick them up if they caused any kind of trouble or disturbance. They   d bring in the parish priest. He terrified everyone  (Laughs) Just his presence in the room scared children, so it was a very different educational world from the one that we know now for primary schools. And that, of course, has its good sides and its bad sides. The discipline, I think, was very helpful in teaching things like grammar for example, which I think is hard for children and requires a lot of discipline and practice and is great for your writing skills. They enforced it with kind of scary methods sometimes. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you have to wear uniforms?  Williams Yes, we wore uniforms, the whole time.  Finchum It wasn   t a boarding school, you   d go during the day and go back home?  Williams It was a day school, yeah, and it was a co-ed school.  Finchum After the eighth grade?  Williams Then I went to Muskogee Junior High, which was where my granddad was   had been (at one time) the principal. Let   s see, that school went from seven, eight, nine grades, and I came in in the ninth grade. The next year, I moved to Central High which was then, and I   m pretty sure still, the only high school in Muskogee, so that was a big change.  Finchum What year did you graduate from there?  Williams Nineteen sixty-eight.  Finchum You were kind of there when they were doing integration?  Williams Umm     Finchum Or maybe kind of toward the end of it, maybe?  Williams Our school was always integrated from the time that I got there, but there were very few African American students. There was a separate African 8  American High School that was called Manual High. Do you know Muskogee? Yeah     Finchum Uh-huh, a little bit.  Williams    and I think probably most of the African American students went there, but there were African American students in my class from the time that I arrived in my sophomore year. There were also some African American students at Sacred Heart, so I had always gone to an integrated school, but I remember all of that very, very well because the town was deeply segregated. The nuns used to take us on a lot of trips, usually to some religious event. I remember very distinctly one time when we went. We were in a van, and we stopped to eat. We went to get a hot dog or something, and we were refused service because there was an African American youngster with us. The nuns herded us all back into the van, and said that we could go somewhere and buy some sandwiches or something, and we would did that instead. That made a huge impression on me.  Finchum Well, did you have a favorite subject in high school?  Williams History. (Laughter)  Finchum Go figure, huh?  Williams I always loved history. I loved history from the time I was in the fifth grade. That   s the first contact that I can remember having with it, and this was again, partly as a result of the sisters. One of them was a great enthusiast for history, and so she taught a lot of history. They had a lot of choice about what they spent their time on in the classroom. This was pre-uniform testing and all that stuff all the time. The one that I remember the best was a great enthusiast for the Crusades. (Laughs) At the time, of course, the Crusades were always presented as heroic adventures on the part of good Catholics and all of that. Anyway, she was a wonderful teacher, and I got very, very interested in that, and I got very interested in France, which was the area that I came later to focus on, partly because of that. Their religious order was based in France originally, and my mother was a great lover of things French, and had studied French, and loved the language, and   so really, from very early, I was interested in what I later became a specialist in.  Finchum From fifth grade, that   s pretty impressive  (Laughter)  Williams From fifth grade. I think I love history as much and more now as I have through all the rest of my life. It   s never lost interest for me in any way but has just grown and deepened as I   ve been a professional historian.  Finchum Oh, the other thing I know about Muskogee is they had a Carnegie library. 9  Williams Uh-huh, yeah   Finchum Did you spent much time there?  Williams I loved that library. I really did. In those days, the library was right near the high school. There were three great places there. There was the high school, there was the library, and there was the Carnation Ice Cream Store, (laughs) and that was a great combination  I was on the debate team, so I would go after school to the library to do research for our topics, and then my friend, who was my debate partner, and I would go to the Carnation place and have a chocolate malt, so that was a great thrill whenever we did that  I loved that old library. The one they have know is wonderful, beautiful, modernized, but I was sad when they abandoned that building, because I had gone there as often as I possibly could when I was little, you know, from when I was in grade school on, so   .  Finchum Well, growing up before   I mean, as you finished high school, did you have a part-time job or work in any way?  Williams Yes, I worked   did I work during the school year? I   m not sure about that. I had my first summer job between my junior and senior year, and I worked fulltime at the hospital in the food service area. That was incredibly interesting because I moved every two weeks, so I met a new set of adults every two weeks, and they had the most amazing stories. I remember one woman   big, strong, flaming red hair, Irish woman, whose husband was in the Merchant Marine. I had never heard of the Merchant Marine, and she told me stories about where he had traveled around the world, and that was something entirely different to me.  One of the really wonderful things about that job was that there were, of course, a lot of African American women, who worked in the food service in the hospital, and that was the first time I   d ever really had the opportunity to get to know African American women. They had stories of their life in Muskogee that were entirely outside my kin, and that was   it was incredibly interesting. They were incredibly brave and strong, and a lot of them had had really hard lives, so that was a good job.  Finchum From being interested in history, it would be, I would think.  Williams Yes, it was. It was a really good job. I don   t think that I worked during the school year though, as I recall. I always worked part-time while I was going to college, but I don   t think my parents wanted us to work while we were going to high school.  Finchum You were on the debate team in high school? 10  Williams Uh-huh, yeah.  Finchum Were you involved in any other activities?  Williams That was my main one. A guy, who later became the mayor of Muskogee, Orville Eaton was his name. He was just a wonderful character and great coach. We, the debate team, was incredibly active. At that time, we took probably ten to twelve major trips a year to   what did   we didn   t call them conferences   tournaments, and so during the debate season, we were on the go all the time, and he had oversight of all those kids. Again, I marvel when I look back at my teachers, at the things they did  I did have other activities. I was on the drill team, I don   t think there is such a thing anymore. And I belonged to one of the social organizations. What did they call them then? I can   t remember, but debate was the most important thing to me.  Finchum After high school graduation, what did you do? Or I guess, where were you considering college?  Williams Okay, this is where the story gets a little uncomfortable from the point of view of OSU. (Laughs)  Finchum Okay.  Williams My mother, again, thinking very practically, and not that keen to send me off to college, wanted me to go to Northeastern in Tahlequah, which I   I love that region very much because we had gone there a lot to debate. It   s a beautiful part of the state, as you know. I didn   t want to do that. I really wanted to leave home. I didn   t want to live at home, so both my mother and dad went to OSU. My father graduated with a degree in what was then called commerce, a business degree, sometime in the later thirties (maybe    36,    37), and he loved OSU deeply, and obviously wanted me, if I was going to go to one of the two schools, to go to OSU. And so I did what my parents wanted, but I was here for one semester, and I had a great history teacher (by the way), Dr. Ted Agnew, whom a lot of people my age and older will remember.  He was a great member of the history department   died, I think, about eight years ago, something like that. My other classes were excellent too, but most of my debate friends had gone to OU, and I missed them, and I would hear of things that were going on down there, and I really wanted to go down there. Without even talking to my parents, (laughs), which seems so arrogant when I look back on it, almost unbelievable, I applied to OU. Then I just announced to my parents at Christmas time that I was switching to OU. Well, I   m sure my dad was not happy about that, but he didn   t say a thing about it.    If that   s what you want to do,    and so I moved. 11  I did not, at the time, realize that probably somewhere hidden in my thinking was that in those days, OU was much more active in the humanities and the fields that I wanted to study than OSU. I think if you compared the two, you would still find that there is more money, resources, supplied to the humanities disciplines there than with us. They have a bigger history department, for example   not better, bigger. (Laughs). The contrast was fairly marked, I think, in the late    60s. Our PhD program in this department, for example, only got underway in 1967, so one year before I started to school at OSU. Anyway, at that point, I left and went to OU, and I took my degree from OU, and the reason that I was able to be a member of Phi Beta Kappa was precisely because I had gone down there.  They had a Phi Beta Kappa Chapter, and as you well know, ours came along quite a bit later. As I say, how much of that figured into my eighteen-year-old thinking I   m not sure, but students absorb things from their atmosphere, and I was very happy at OU. I loved it, I loved Norman, I loved the people. I   ve always thought that the fact that people carry the athletic rivalry over into other elements of the university experience is pretty silly. I   ve had a lot of contact over the years with people at OU, while I was a teacher here, and we   ve gotten on just fine. (Laughter) That was a shock, I think, to my dad   s system, and it is somewhat ironic then that later in my life, as things moved along, I ended up coming back to OSU. That was an unexpected development.  Finchum Where were   which dorm did you live in when you were here?  Williams I lived in   was it called Kerr-Drummond then? It was one of the big ones. Is that the one   there   s one left, right? From the old days, one of the high rise ones?  Finchum I think that   s Kerr-Drummond.  Williams Yes, and I lived way up on the   I think it was the tenth floor or something, so I   d never lived in any such locale.  Finchum It wasn   t in this building? It wasn   t in Murray?  Williams Interestingly   so my mother   s sister also went to OSU. As I say, I have many, many OSU connections. Her name was Marguerite Fox Clifton. She was in the   what was then called the home ec department, and she took a degree in home ec. I believe around 1935, something like that. When the project got underway to refurbish Murray, I was then head of the history department, and I was among that first group that came over with Dr. Sherwood to look around and get a sense of the decay into which the building had fallen. I also, then, was privy to certain information about what 12  the building had been in the past that I, at least, had never known. Other people may have known it. One of the things I found out was this was in fact a girl   s dorm. I assume that   s what you   re alluding to...  Finchum Uh-huh.  Williams    and I found a set of photographs of the young women who lived here in, I believe, 1933, and there was a picture of my Aunt Marguerite. For years after we moved in over here, there was a bulletin board down the way that had that set of photographs from nineteen   early 1930s, and there was my aunt. There was a lovely, little article that went along with it that described the life of the young women at that time, what it was like to live in a dorm. It said, I assumed this was accurate, that they used to come down and eat formally at tables with white table clothes. Someone was playing the piano while they had dinner. (Laughs) About as different from dorm room eating as you can imagine now, right? I thought that was so charming  I   ve told my students about that ever since   about my aunt and what the style was for a young women   s dorm in those days, and I was just thrilled to find her picture. She was a very beautiful woman, and every time I passed that, down in the hallway there, it made me happy to think about her having been here.  Finchum A lot of connections.  Williams Oh, yes, many connections  (Laughs) They go way back.  Finchum You would have graduated from OU in seventy     Williams Seventy-two, yes.  Finchum    two, and Vietnam was going on around in that time too?  Williams Oh, yes   Finchum Do you have any memories of campus during that time?  Williams Oh, yes  Very, very, very distinct. In Norman, there were a great many, very large, and powerful demonstrations   student demonstrations, and I was a part of those. I was very, very much opposed to the war, and when I was   what year would that have been,    69? The great mobilization where a million people, I believe, went to Washington, DC, and protested against the war. That was one of the most important events of my college career because it was the first political issue that I ever read about in-depth, and studied, and thought about for myself, and it left a huge impression on me. You may know the writer Seymour Hersh. He   s still incredibly active. His writings at that time were incredibly important to me. It was the first 13  historical issue, I always think of it as a historical issue, that impinged very powerfully on my own life.  Finchum Well, graduating from OU, did you plan to go on to get a graduate degree, or what was your plan?  Williams So here again, I had a crucial teacher. His name was Robert Nye. He, I just realized recently (we have remained friends all our lives), had just come to OU, taken his first teaching job the semester before I arrived, and I took a class with him in the spring of 1969. That was just a powerful, powerful introduction to the field that became my major field, which is European Intellectual and Cultural History, and he was a magnificent teacher. He is the one who, when I started talking to him about what I was going to do in the future, encouraged me to think and realized that I could go to graduate school, and I could try to get a PhD, and I could try to become a university professor.  I had thought about being a high school teacher, and my mother was very much   once she realized I wasn   t going to be a stenographer, (laughs) she was very much in favor of that. I enrolled in the teacher certification program, but I really didn   t like it because in those days, and to some extent this is still true, teachers who are certified in social studies, instead of taking a lot of upper division work in one field or two fields, they take a smattering of introductory courses in all kinds of things, right? You take introductory soc, and introductory econ, and introductory history, introductory geography, and that to me was just not exciting.  I wanted to move on into the, you know, sort of higher reaches of a discipline, and of course, my primary love was always history, and so I talked to him about that. I realized that maybe in fact I could get a PhD, which had seemed impossible and way beyond my kin, and he told me how to do it, that you could go to graduate school and get funding as a teaching assistant. As long as you could do that, you could make enough money, living a monk   s life, (laughs) to pay your bills, and they would pay your tuition. Once I realized that, then I was on my way.  Finchum Where did you get your     Williams Well, I went first to the University of Oregon, which is where I met my husband, so that   s   that was a crucial moment in my life. Eugene, Oregon, and I stayed there to get my master   s degree, and then I decided to leave for a little while and work for a while. I thought it would be good to test the work world to see   try to make a clear decision, was I making the right decision to think about going on. I was out for a couple of years, and lived in California, and worked for the Securities and Exchange Commission in their office. I think I was there for about fifteen months, and I started thinking,    I 14  really need to get on to graduate school,    so I applied then to   I think I just applied to three schools, which was crazy because I always tell my students,    Pick eight or nine schools. Divide them into three tiers     (Laughs) I only applied to a few schools, and I got a very nice offer from Indiana University to come and work as an editorial assistant for the American Historical Review, which was and still is the leading journal in our field for all parts of history. I thought that was wonderful, and so I decided to go there, and it was wonderful. I got very great training in editing, and how to put a journal together, and that was a really great experience, so I was on my way then from there.  Finchum That helped writing the dissertation too, I guess, the editing experience.  Williams It really did, it really did. I just think that I got wonderful training. First from the nuns, who were absolutely devoted to grammar and good writing, and, you know, sort of thought of it as    Good writing is Godly.    (Laughs) That training, which was under the direction of the man who was the editor of the journal for three years was very precise and a tremendous help to me when I went to do my own writing that I hoped to have published.  Finchum What was the topic of your dissertation?  Williams I worked on   I was very interested in race theory, and I became aware, at a certain point, of the existence of what was often called the pseudoscience of craniology, which was a science in the nineteenth century that thought that you could establish a hierarchy of racial superiority and inferiority according to the size of the cranium. These characters developed a whole bunch of methods for measuring the cranium (and other bodily features) and participated very intensely in the elaboration of theories of racism that had the cache of science. I was very much opposed to the term pseudoscience because that was actual, very prestigious, state-of-the-art science in the nineteenth century. If you call it a pseudoscience, you can think of these people as quacks, and try to push them other the rug, right?  I got interested then in, essentially, the participation of anthropologists in, most of the people who did this were anthropologists, in the creation of European theories of race, and that   s what I wrote my dissertation on, specifically focused on the Anthropological Society of Paris. I had by that point definitely settled on being a French historian, and I went to Paris, and went to their headquarters, and worked in their archives, and read in the French national library much of their printed work, and that   s what I worked on. It is called   What was it called? I know I just found it the other day. (Laughs) The Science of Man: Anthropological Thought and Institutions in Nineteenth-Century France. I didn   t know I still had a copy of it. (Laughs) That was kind of a shocker. There it is  That   s how this whole thing got started. 15  Finchum Were you married at that time?  Williams No, I   .  Finchum So he didn   t go to Paris with you?  Williams No, he came the second half of my year   s research period in Paris, and it was at that time that we decided to get married. He was teaching   in the interim, he had taken a linguistics degree and gotten a TESL certificate, and he was teaching English in Spain. Which was wonderful, because we went back and forth between Spain and France, which, you know, when you   re thirty years old, what could be better than that? (Laughs) That was wonderful, and we got married when we got home.  Finchum I should back up, and ask what your maiden name was then?  Williams I use my maiden name. I did not change my name, so my name   s always been Elizabeth Williams. His name is  Robert  Mayer.  Finchum And what were your parents    names?  Williams My mother   s name was Grace Marie, and my dad   s name was Fred Neff Williams.  Finchum Okay, so once you finished with your PhD, take us through your career.  Williams I did all my coursework, and my exams and everything, took that year in Paris. After we got married, I quickly had a baby, and that kind of slowed me down for a little bit, for a while. I didn   t work very much on my dissertation for about a year, and then one day I thought,    Got to get moving again.    My teachers at Indiana would write to me, and say,    Okay, when is this going to happen?    That was very helpful, so I finished that up, took my degree in December of    83. Went on the job market, applied for how many jobs? I don   t know, a great many. A problem with my having served as an editorial assistant for the American Historical Review was that I was never a teaching assistant, so I had had no teaching experience. I did not know what a drawback this was going to be when it came time to go onto the job market because everybody wants somebody who has had at least some teaching experience, but I didn   t have any.  I began to realize, as I kept sending out these letters, that this might in fact be a real problem, but one day, after I   d sent out   I don   t know how many. I wonder if it was a hundred, probably something like that. I got a call from the department head at the University of Georgia, and he told me he   d read my file, and he wondered if I would be interested in a one-year appointment 16  with a potential renewal to three, and I said,    Would I be interested     (Laughs) I was so thrilled. He hired three people from Indiana University that year, sight unseen, so he had a lot of confidence in that university, I think, and so that was my first teaching job. I went there in the fall of 1984, and I taught there for two years, and I loved it there. I loved the University of Georgia, loved the state, but my husband and I were trying to coordinate the two job issue, and there were not one, not two, but three people in the English department in his field, and we assumed that he was never going to get a job at Georgia.  We began looking around and one day, very late in the year, I went down and on the bulletin board in the history department was a flyer. You know, that   s how they used to advertise in those days, no internet. And it was an opening at Oklahoma State University. I saw that, and I thought    Wait a minute. I bet I could get that job,    (laughs) because I had a lot of ties with OSU, and that never hurts. We checked the English department. Did they have anything that looked like it might be an opening within the next couple of years for Robert? And we decided that it would probably be a pretty good move for us. I had, at that point, been away from Oklahoma for fourteen years.  When I called my mother and said,    Well, we might be coming back,    she was just ecstatic because Georgia is a long way from Oklahoma, and I had a beautiful little daughter by that point. She was thrilled at the thought of our coming back. I came out and met many of the people who are still my colleagues up and down this hall right now. I guess a lot of them have left by now, but some of the ones who were most important in meeting me, and talking to me, and encouraging me when I came for that interview are still here. So we   ve been here a long time. (Laughs)  Finchum You came in eighty   ?  Williams So I came in    86, yeah.  Finchum    so thirty years   Williams Yes, thirty years here, and two at Georgia.  Finchum Three, zero. (Laughs)  Williams By that point, I had another child, and she was six months old when we moved here. My mother   my father had died in the interim. My mother moved to Stillwater and lived with us for the first year while I was teaching and Robert was teaching and took care of our little girl, which was just a wonderful, wonderful thing for her to do, I later realized. At the time, you know, it   s amazing the things you take for granted that you parents do for 17  you. I later thought about it, and I thought,    My goodness  My mother was seventy years old when she offered to do this.    (Laughs) I only now realize what it means for a seventy-year-old woman to take on the care of a six-month-old child, fulltime.  Finchum Things just seemed to fall into place.  Williams They did, yes, and my husband was hired for a temporary job first, and then he got a regular appointment in the English department, and that made possible for us just a wonderful life. We both had the kind of work we wanted. We had wonderful colleagues and associates and students, and we were working at a very fine institution, one that I actually have come to admire more and more as I have gotten older. I realized what a really sound institution it is. I had the great, good luck (which most academics don   t have) of being near my family. My sisters and my one brother live in Oklahoma City to this day, so that   s unusual for academics. I was always happy for that, that I could live near them. My husband   s from Detroit, (laughs) so he did not get to enjoy that.  Finchum Well, Oklahoma   s closer than Georgia. (Laughs)  Williams It is  That   s right, and we always say, there   s some kind of a spiritual, Oklahoma-Michigan connection. I don   t know what it is. We   ve met lots of people in Michigan who have ties to Oklahoma, and lots of people in Oklahoma have ties to Michigan. Anyway, that   s how it all unfolded, and it has been a good life.  Finchum Well campus has changed a lot in those thirty years, too, I would think.  Williams Oh, yes  Yeah, absolutely. This campus has changed fantastically in the last ten years. It just seems like another space is filled up with another...  Finchum Where was your first office?  Williams    amazing building. Let   s see, when we started   or when I started, the history department was in Math Sciences on the   I think we were on the fifth floor, and then we were moved to Life Sciences West, and then we moved over here when Murray was   the renovation of Murray was completed. My husband, on the other hand, of course, has been in Morrill, all these years, and the English department has been in Morrill for a very, very long time. Although I believe   now, I could be wrong about this, but it seems to me (like I learned at one time) that my dad, when he was a business student, had been in Morrill, but I could have that wrong. David Peters in the library would know all that, right? (Laughs)  Finchum Most likely, yes  (Laughter) 18  Williams All of that.  Finchum Well, did your dad bring you over when you came your first semester here? Did he travel?  Williams No. My brother brought me.  Finchum Your brother?  Williams Yes, my brother brought me. I   ve looked back on that and thought that was funny, too, because now parents so anxiously go with their children off to college, right? It   s a tremendous moment of transition, and everyone   s a nervous wreck, and my parents took it totally in stride, and my brother was a good driver.    Why not have him take me?    so he took me, and I remember that, and, you know, he moved me into the dorm.  Finchum Were you the first of the children to come to OSU?  Williams To OSU? Yes. I was.  Finchum And then you left   Williams Then I left, yeah. (Laughs) You know, I was trying to think   so my dad died before I got my job at OSU, so he never knew that I was going to be a long-term teacher. He died the second year I was in Georgia.  Finchum Well, but he at least knew you made Phi Beta Kappa at OU?  Williams Oh, yes  He knew that, yes.  Finchum So bring you back   I mean, I   m assuming you did make Phi Beta Kappa at OU.  Williams Yes, that   s right. Yeah, I don   t know what the name of their chapter was. Yes. My mother was the one though who was really, really impressed by Phi Beta Kappa and had told me about   I was trying to remember (when Charles said you wanted to ask me these questions) had we talked about it before it came up when I was nominated by the faculty? I believe so. In those days, to my recollection, Phi Beta Kappa was not only the most prestigious, but the only major humanities, scholarly organization, I believe. My mother knew all about it, and I remember when I got my key, and how happy she was, how proud that made her that I had a become a member of Phi Beta Kappa. She was very attuned to things that went on in the academic world and always somebody who admired learning tremendously.  19  Finchum How do you think she had learned about it, about Phi Beta Kappa?  Williams Probably those years that   so she went to OSU for two years. She, and my aunt, and my grandmother, who was   had long been widowed, lived together in a little house on Walnut Street, I believe, in the 1930s. Mother had been here, and on campus, and you know, was aware, I   m sure, of a lot of things that went on on the University campus. Although she wouldn   t have heard of about Phi Beta Kappa from anything that was going on at OSU, but I believe that if we went back and did a search of general interest magazines like LIFE magazine or the ones that were standard in middle class households, I think you would find references to Phi Beta Kappa. It   d be interesting to do that.  Abramson How about old movies?  Williams And movies perhaps as well, yes. The cultural presence of Phi Beta Kappa, I believe, was stronger in those days than it is now. We have so many different organizations now, and it was, I believe, unique. If you paid attention to that sort of thing in LIFE or Reader   s Digest or any of those sort of standard publications that were in people   s homes, I think she probably would have encountered it.  Finchum Did they have a ceremony where she could come and watch when you got your pin?  Williams They did have a ceremony, yes. I don   t believe my parents came though. I think it was held during the regular work week, and as I recall, in the afternoon, and I don   t believe it was something that parents   many parents came to. I remember our professors being there in a big, sort of conclave of academics. I don   t believe it was something that was pitched at the families. I could be wrong, but   .  Finchum Did they do the secret handshake?  Williams That I don   t remember, no. (Laughter)  Abramson I   m like the only one that remembers the secret handshake.  Williams (Laughs) No, Charles, I do not remember a secret handshake.  Abramson Where   s you pin? Do you still have the original pin?  Williams I believe I do. I don   t know where it is right this minute, but   well, we are moving, but yes, I think it   s in a little box of things that I have always kept careful from my young days.  20  Finchum Well, when you arrived at OSU in    86, was that even on your consideration list, it does or doesn   t have one?  Williams I doubt if I thought of it that early. I   although it probably wasn   t long, because one of the first things that you start to do, of course, when you   re a young teacher is to think about ways that your really outstanding students can be recognized and honors and achievements that they can gain to project themselves out into the academic world. I do remember at some point, now it wasn   t probably that early, but I do remember being really disgruntled that there was no Phi Beta Kappa chapter, and thinking that for my students who were going to go on in the humanities, or who were going to go into the law, or the professions that history students tend to gravitate toward that that would be something that would be really helpful to them. I remember   yes, early conversations with people around campus,    Why don   t we have this? What   s wrong?    You know,    Can   t we get this done?    but it was a long process.  Finchum How did you get involved with the process? Do you recall?  Williams I   m sure   I don   t know   did Perry Gethner manage this from day one? I can   t remember. Whoever was in charge of the effort drew up a list at some point of all the people on campus they could find who had been members of Phi Beta Kappa, and contacted everybody, and asked them would they be willing to start coming to meetings, and participate, and do various things that were necessary. I really don   t remember when that was exactly, but I thought,    Sure     There were three or four people in the history department, so we talked about it a lot in the history department and were all agreed that this was something we would really like to see happen. So I got involved with my colleagues. I remember Dr. Paul Bischoff, who was our Medievalist, was very active, Dr. Bill Bryans, and then people I knew in English and foreign languages, and so yeah, we all took it up as a goal.  Finchum Were you on a committee or something that would push it through? I know there were several failed attempts.  Williams Yes, I think we tried twice before we   is that right?  Abramson I think it was maybe three times     Williams Maybe even three, yes  There was one time that I was very, very much involved in it, and I did a lot of writing for the application that we submitted which was quite extensive, very complicated. I believe that was in the years when I was serving as department head, so that would have been around 2006 maybe, something like that, 2005, 2006. That was the effort that I put the most time and energy into. The next time that it came around, I went to a lot of meetings, but I was not directly involved in drafting parts of the 21  application   or maybe I did it twice, I can   t remember for sure. It was a lot of work. I remember that for   especially for the people who were responsible for the ultimate coordination of the application and its formal submission because, of course, we wanted it to be letter perfect, and that   s a big responsibility. It really is, so   .  Finchum Well, do you remember where you were when you heard the news that it had finally been awarded?  Williams It was probably   I was probably in the history department. (Laughs) Yes, it was   I don   t remember the exact moment, but it was certainly a big thrill for everybody after all the efforts that we had gone to.  Finchum And did you participate in the induction ceremony, the first one that OSU had?  Williams I did. We had a big formal gathering with a lot of important people. That I don   t think was the induction so much as the     Abramson There was a site visit.  Williams ...opening   there was a site visit. Yes, I always participated in the site visits.  Abramson Then there was a big dinner in the Conoco Center. Then the induction, the founding ceremony, was in Old Central.  Williams Yes, that night I was in the ceremony. I was responsible for reading out the names of the honorary members who had so far been designated, and I remember that was a very thrilling night. Everybody was in their regalia, of course, and it was something that drew a lot of important benefactors of the school for obvious reasons. I remember Dean Stringer, who I think of as one of the absolutely crucial figures in promoting all of this and helping OSU to that point, being there and whether he gave remarks that night or it was another night, I don   t know. He gave a very lovely speech at one point about the importance of the liberal arts and of general education, and trying to convince people that there should not be any kind of direct linkage between employment and education.  That education was about becoming an educated person and citizen, and yes, we want our students to get good jobs and everything, but we don   t tailor education to jobs. We tailor education to being a well-rounded citizen, which as I take it, is one of the things that Phi Beta Kappa tries to promote. That was good to hear from a man like that, who was a, you know, powerful figure in the OSU system, and I think very, very strongly committed to general education and the liberal arts. That was very nice.  22  Finchum Have you had students since then that have become members?  Williams Yes. Oh, yes  Yeah, very, very happy to see that because I do believe that it helps them to make their way. It still has   when you look at a resume, your eye gravitates to that Phi Beta Kappa, and I think it really helps our students to move forward. I have had some fantastically talented students here, so I   m very, very happy to see them get that kind of recognition, and be able to carry the prestige of Phi Beta Kappa with them as they go because it is a tough, competitive world that our students are in. They need as many markers as they can get to indicate to people    I am a person who   s really struggled for academic excellence,    and it   s just a kind of an immediate marker (snaps fingers) that that   because nobody gets it unless they work hard. You can   t get Phi Beta Kappa just because you   re, you know, intellectually brilliant. You have to work and get the recognition of your teachers that you are committed and dedicated, and so it just carries a lot of weight, I think.  Abramson Did anything surprise you about the failures of previous attempts? We   ve heard stories from others or some faculty, for example, would write negative letters. There was some scandals on campus.  Williams That did happen. There was a   now that, I don   t know anything about any scandals, but on the part of some faculty, there was an idea that getting the Phi Beta Kappa chapter could be used as leverage for trying to get increased resources for the liberal arts. It was their thinking that if we tell the Phi Beta Kappa people,    Well, we don   t have this, and we don   t have this, and we don   t have this, and we need this, and we need this, and we need this,    that then they would turn around and say to the school,    Well, you know, it   s a wonderful, little school and everything, but you need to strengthen this, and this, and this, and this, and this.    I had very mixed feelings about that all the way along, but there were people who thought that.  They believed that it could be used as a way   for example, to improve the amount of money that went to the foreign languages department, because Phi Beta Kappa had always put a big emphasis on foreign languages. We knew that the foreign languages department was often strapped for funds. We hoped all along that the range of languages that were offered at OSU would grow. For people in history, in European history or world history, that   s absolutely crucial. Our students cannot go to graduate school if they do not have the language training in a given language, and so if we want to prepare students to go to graduate school, they have got to be able to study Italian, and Chinese, and Arabic, and the standard European languages. That was a hope, that the Phi Beta Kappa application could be used in that way. I think it was a vain hope. (Laughs)  Abramson Were you here for Dexter Manley, the football player? 23  Williams Yes. I knew about him, yeah.  Abramson Because that was one of the     Williams One of the things that was reported     Abramson    yeah, one of the things that happened. Yeah.  Williams    yeah, exactly. No, I guess more   in the discussions that I was privy to among faculty were focused on what I have talked about, about trying to use the Phi Beta Kappa thing as a leverage for more money to the library, bigger budget for books, more journals. When the databases came along that we all are utterly dependent on now, some of those are very expensive, and we had begun to enter into that era, and could see that that kind of electronic research was going to be very important in the future.  You know, I think that since my days here in 1968, it has remained true that on the OSU campus, the ag school and the engineering school have remained the most prestigious divisions of the University. Business has become more important, I think, in the last ten years than it was before, and the liberal arts   most, I believe in the humanities, but in the sciences as well, I know that people feel like the resources that we need are sometimes lacking, and more attention needs to be paid, if it is indeed a comprehensive university, to the divisions of the university that offer grounding in the liberal arts. That was part of the thinking.  Of course, when you   ve been here for a long time, you realize that the economics of the state and of education in the state extend way beyond the sway of Phi Beta Kappa, or even often of our decision makers and leaders who might want to do certain things. Our history is an up-and-down of good and bad support for education overall. A lot of those things have to do with the larger culture of the state. They   re not unique to our institution, they   re certainly not unique to our scholarly organizations, or even to any particular division of the University. Looking back on it, I think that way of thinking was perhaps somewhat misguided.  Why our applications failed, though, my own sense is that it was not that there was something deficient in our application. I don   t think the last one we did was any better than the ones that we had done before. I think that Phi Beta Kappa takes a very slow and measured approach toward admitting new institutions, and in a sense, I think we were   without anybody ever saying so (nobody ever said this to me), we were kind of being told,    You just have to bide your time.    I don   t know whether that   s your theory of it or not, Charles, but that was what I thought, that it was not because of something 24  we did wrong, so much as that we just kind of had to wait in the wings, right?  Finchum Almost a test of endurance, wasn   t it?  Williams (Laughs) That it was, and it wasn   t cheap either  There was a lot of expense involved in it. Well, think of the man hours alone that were put   that were put into the developing of the applications, and then there was the site visits, and the trips to Washington to deliver the materials and all of that, so it required a tremendous effort and expenditure of resources.  Finchum For the site visit, does the campus pay for it   the University pay for it?  Abramson Oh yes   Williams I   m sure they did, yes. Well, because it   s not a rich organization, and they depend on their members for funds. Then when they go out to make their assessments, yeah, they   re not going to pay for it. (Laughs)  Abramson Gary Clark relayed a story to us last week where they were going to put the site visitors in the Student Union hotel, but the air conditioning went out, so then they had to scramble to get window units.  Williams Oh, really? (Laughs) That   s one of those stories you were telling me about.  Abramson Right, one of those stories. I may have an incorrect recollection, but when I came here, I thought the College of Arts and Sciences was the College of Liberal Arts.  Williams No.  Abramson It was always the College of Arts and Sciences?  Williams It   s always been the College of Arts and Sciences since I have been here. That   s actually always been, I think, a good thing from the point of view of those of us in the humanities, because the College of Arts and Sciences has nurtured the two together without buying into the two cultures. Arts on the one side, sciences on the other, and I do know there are schools where the first step toward marginalizing the humanities is to cut the college into two divisions. That has never happened here, and I think the college has done everything it could to try to nurture development on both sides, within the resources that are available. We were never able to hire that Italian professor that I wanted, but   . (Laughter)  Finchum Is that your foreign language?  25  Williams (Laughs) No, French is my favorite, but we do have a professor here, whose expertise is in Italian, and it   s just very difficult for him to help students think of a career in Italian culture and history if we don   t have any language offerings. We really, seriously, need to expand now into regular offerings in the world languages that in the last ten, fifteen years have become so much more important in our politics and our economic life. You know, we   ve had some teaching of Chinese and Japanese but sporadic, and never a regular position devoted to the Asian languages, same now for Arabic. Those things are essential to the growth and development of literary studies, history, art history, as well as the languages themselves, so    keep hoping   Abramson Are you familiar with the effort, at least the discussion, in Arts and Sciences of reducing the number of language hours?  Williams Yes. That   s gone on for a while. I think they   ve come to a compromise now, I just got something yesterday about it, that is shy of what at least one proposal called for when the discussions got under way, but I can   t remember exactly what the new decision was. I also just recently learned that the foreign language department has shifted away from every day training (five days a week) to three day a week classes. They   re the five hour blocks that most of us took (French I, French II, German I, German II) will now be reshuffled. I think the number of credit hours is now going to go along with that redesigning of the number of credit hours devoted to those introductory courses. I believe I read that nine hours was now going to be the requirement for A S, I   m not sure.  There is obviously a nationwide trend to let foreign languages go as economic resources are stretched to the limit, especially in states like ours. To me, that is a colossal error. Students gain so much from studying a foreign language in so many, different ways. Just the sheer recognition, by daily study and use, that people speak other languages, (laughs) is something that you really only gain by that study and that use. It helps, I think, subliminally to introduce a recognition that people are different, that you need to respect differences among people. It goes way beyond being able to say, you know,    Buenos dias,    when you arrive in Mexico or something like that.  Abramson This might be a little off topic, but when I went to college, Boston University required every student to learn a foreign language. I think mine was Sanskrit, and at graduate school, it was the same thing. I think it was actually two languages. Why can   t the University require students learn a foreign language?  Williams Well, that   s an excellent question. I think we need to do the best and the most that we can, and the move to reduce it rather than to improve it is, to my mind, just a real step backward. I know that many young people believe 26  no matter where you go in the world, people speak English. That is true, right? People do speak English. Well, not anywhere that you go in the world, but many places that you go. And some of them have made brief trips to, you know, places in Germany, or Russia, or France, or whatever, where people start speaking to them in English (they want to learn English), and they think,    Well, I don   t really need a foreign language anymore.     It   s up to educators to explain to students and their parents why this commitment of resources and time is valuable in so many different ways. One thing that is utterly undeniable that has been shown in many studies, as I understand it, is that students write better English if they have studied the grammatical structure of a foreign language. When you study a foreign language, you have to begin to understand the way that sentences are put together in a way that you don   t if you   ve never really studied another language. If we want to improve writing and reading comprehension, foreign languages   study of foreign languages helps with that most crucial of all skills, to my mind. I am really on my soap box, aren   t I? (Laughter)  Finchum That   s okay  Sounds like you   re not ready to retire.  Williams The thing is that that   s the kind of thinking that I think Phi Beta Kappa tries to promote, and to get the help of a long-standing, historically prestigious organization in trying to promote such thinking in our own environment, our own school, and our own state is   to me, it was one of the central goals of the people on the faculty who worked to get a Phi Beta Kappa chapter here.    Yep, let   s bring in people who have been promoting such ideas, such thinking about the value of the liberal arts and language training, and education for citizenship,    all the ideas they   ve pushed for years, and years, and years, and years.  Abramson Have you conducted spring break trips overseas?  Williams No, I have never done that.  Abramson I   ve done several. This last trip was to Spain, looking at the Islamic contributions to science and psychology, and every one of the students was shocked by, routinely, how these Europeans know so many languages. (Laughs) Switching from Spanish to English to French, just like that, and they feel embarrassed.  Williams It is a remarkable thing to see. People just, you know, without blinking an eye, move from one language to another. Not a facility that very many Americans ever gain at all. The reasons are clear, I mean, we do live in a vast, continental space, and territory that never fostered that. That is no reason not to recognize that as the world gets closer and closer together in all kinds of ways, when we deal with, communicate with, have exchanges 27  with people in other countries, it   s absolutely crucial that we show an interest in, and respect for, the language in which they think, as well as in the English that they have made great efforts to learn. For them, it   s always going to be a lingua franca for some utilitarian purpose or in many cases, and I don   t know.  OSU really wants to promote travel abroad, study abroad. To me, one effort would be to make that study abroad experience more, and more, and more, and more about language and learning, preparing, speaking to   not going into an English-speaking island. That would be a very different thing from just taking a quick trip and talking to as many people as you can who are willing to speak to you in English. I know not all students can do that. It would not be practical to think otherwise, but it would be nice to see more effort put into language preparation as a background to study abroad, and more interest in facilitating direct exchanges rather than language exchanges mediated by English.  Abramson You may have had the same experience that I had, where you have your engineering friends, you know, your different groups, and they can only talk about maybe engineering or something else. Well, you can talk about a wide range of subjects, and I always thought that was the beauty of Phi Beta Kappa     Williams Yes, it is. Yeah     Abramson    the liberal arts education   Williams    the idea of general education I think is liberal education, where you know something about a great many things. You have a specialty, obviously. Everybody needs a focus for the work of their life, but functioning as a citizen in a democracy means that you need to be aware of and cognizant with all kinds of issues, able to talk to all different kinds of people. I really believe that a lot of our problems stem from the fact that we encourage a very high level of technical expertise in all kind of fields, but we don   t necessarily expect people that have that expertise to be able to understand the positon of whatever is that they do in society, how it effects society.  That   s something that we need to keep working on. You know, it   s not like we   ve not worked on it, or that we   ll stop working on it, but we need to commit ourselves to just keep at it. Try to produce people that read, and know, and think about all kinds of different things, and put that above   . I know parents are anxious,    My kid   s got to get a job     I don   t blame anyone for that. I   ve got two kids, I know what that feels like, but their education should come first. If they   re well-educated, they will make their way in the world. They will find jobs.  28  Abramson Do your children know that you   re a Phi Beta Kappa?  Williams Oh yes   Abramson What do you think about that?  Williams They   re very proud of it, and I have one daughter that is, and one daughter that isn   t. It was something we were certainly aware of when they were going through school.  Abramson Now that we have a chapter, do you have any suggestions on how the chapter can do a better job of making their presence felt on campus?  Williams I think that a thing to do would be to   whether we have the money, I don   t know, because I haven   t had anything to do with the finances of the chapter, but would be to have one prominent speaker every year, and invite the whole community, and have a   you know, make a big deal of it. Have it move around from field to field, so that it wasn   t just in the humanities or just in the sciences. I don   t know, do we have that kind of money? I   m not sure.  Abramson I believe if we don   t have it now, we will because we certainly have access to the Phi Beta Kappa Speakers Bureau. I believe we had a speaker a couple years ago. I think we have another one coming up soon.  Williams I just think that public talks of that kind   and then encourage students to go and write up a report on it or something, for extra credit or whatever. I   ve been just amazed sometimes to see the reaction of   every time there   s any kind of talk that is appropriate to students in my class, I always send them and have them write a statement about what they learned, and what their reaction was. It is so wonderful to   some of them have never been to a talk like that. They have been into their classes, and they   ve heard issues discussed in that way, but they tend to think of it as, you know, like text book classroom stuff.  Then somebody comes from outside, and they hear about this person   s career, and the person takes up some issue that   s exciting or controversial or whatever. I think it just gives them an insight into what the intellectual life is all about. I think that that would be just a lovely way, and then advertise it as a Phi Beta Kappa event so that Phi Beta Kappa gets the credit for keeping up that kind of an intellectual forum. I would be really strongly in favor of that. So you think there is the money there somewhere? I know it   s a lot of work, having speakers come in from outside is   it takes a lot of energy and effort, and   but I think that would be a lovely thing if every spring, we could finish the school year, or a kick-off talk in the fall would be really nice.  29  Abramson I say we suggest that.  Williams Okay. (Laughter) Another thing that I think would be lovely to see would be interchange between Phi Beta Kappa and the Honors College. A lot of our inductees, I   m sure, come from the honors program. Somebody told me, I don   t know who it was now, recently that there was discussion underway in the Honors College about the Honors College becoming more active in trying to sponsor events and activities. If the two could work together, I think that would be really nice, and God knows Old Central is just such a wonderful locale, because it has the whole history of our school right there in that one   I think it   s just a beautiful building, don   t you think so?  Finchum I do too   Williams Yeah, and so it evokes the spirit of the place just by going there. They did, as usual, a beautiful renovation job there. You really have to give it to the folks at OSU, they know how to renovate a building  (Laughter)  Finchum Been a good thirty years?  Williams Yes, it has really been a good thirty years. It has been a wonderful life. I love this department, and I really love this institution, and I really love the state of Oklahoma, and it has   the three have blended together just very beautifully for me over those years. I   ve had a lot of terrific students. I still hear from a lot of them, that   s always wonderful for teachers. Sometimes somebody will   I heard from a student the other day, who   s teaching in high school somewhere in California. I had not heard from him in fifteen years.    Dear Dr. Williams, (laughs) I just wanted you to know how important your class was to me in,    some year a long way back and,    how much I have used what I learned there in my own teaching,    and, you know, when you get little messages like that, it makes you so happy.  Finchum What are you going to miss the most?  Williams Well, I think, of course I   ll miss my students tremendously, and there are a couple of them that I really just   I thought,    Maybe I better not retire this year after all.    (Laughs) One of them was getting ready to do a Wentz project next year, and she asked me if I would direct it for her, and I had at that time to tell her,    You know, I   m really sorry. I   d love to do this, but I   m going to retire,    and then I thought,    Maybe I better wait one more year,    so I   ll miss my students. I think what I will miss the most though is the day-to-day life in my department, which I have really enjoyed. Just being here with my colleagues, with the students in and out. You know, the meetings, sometimes contentious, but mostly not   my department is a very harmonious place. The day-to-day of everything that goes together: the teaching, the students, the research projects, the talks that my colleagues 30  give, the walking over to the Library. You know, I love the Library, I   ve spent a lot of time in that library, and so     Finchum Good to hear it   Williams    just missing the whole, the context, but when I think about it, I think all things come to an end, and I believe this is the moment for me. I   ve been at it a long time, and I think this is the right moment. I certainly won   t stop. My scholarly life I   ll probably continue for as long as I can read and write. I can   t imagine ever giving that up, but that   ll be quite different from doing scholarship that then is integrated into teaching.  Finchum First thing on your to-do list?  Williams Beyond the practicalities of moving and all that   well, I have a book that I   ve been working on for over a decade, and I intend to spend every waking moment (laughs) that I can now on finishing that project, which I have worked on for a long time. One of the reasons actually that I decided I should retire is that I found it more and more difficult to work on this huge synthetic project in the fragments that you get during your teaching year. You know, so I would have two hours here, and two hours there, and two hours there. There   s a lot of individual tasks that you can do in that way, but the brain power   the brain work that goes with putting something together and pulling it into one unified whole I thought,    I really need to be able to work on this every single day until it   s done,    you know?  Abramson Can you tell us the topic?  Williams Yes, it   s called   the title of the manuscript is Appetite and Its Discontents: The Science and Medicine of the Drive to Eat. It   s about the history of   my main field is history of medicine and science. It   s about the history of the way physicians, and psychologists, and others have thought about why we eat what we do, and the choices that we make. It has a theoretical section, and it has a section focused on the clinical medicine of disturbed eating that goes back into the Enlightenment. Covers two hundred years of European science and American, so it   s on the US, France, Germany, and England, from the Enlightenment to around 1950. It   s an enormous project. (Laughs) I bit off, I think, literally (since I am talking about eating) more than I could chew, but it   s been very exciting. I have a draft manuscript that I need now to put into final shape.  Finchum Took a lot of research for all of that   it   s a lot of places, so a lot of research.  Williams I can   t tell you how much I   ve used the   so it   s quite different from   the other projects that I   ve done have been archivally-based, and I   ve gone and 31  plopped myself down in   France or England are the two places that I   ve worked in archives and done very specialized topics. This one is enormous. It moves all over the map, and so I use mostly printed primary sources, many of which have become available to me on the databases that the Library has purchased membership in. So that I can pull up works on my computer that I used to have to write a grant proposal, and get abroad, and go to a rare book library. It is astonishing to me what has become available to scholars in the last ten years in those digitized formats. It   s really unbelievable. If somebody had told me that at the beginning of my career, I   d say,    Oh, you   re living in a dream world     Now, it   s more fun to go to a rare book library in London, or Paris, or Edinburgh or somewhere, but it   s difficult and expensive. Every day, I   m on those databases, and the Library has become a treasure trove for somebody like me.  Finchum See the world from your desk. (Laughs)  Williams Absolutely, yeah   Finchum Or discover it rather.  Williams I   m never going to stop going to those archives, but   . (Laughs) Anyway, so that   s my   that   s what I am going to do as soon as I retire is to finish this big project, and put in a garden. (Laughs) Two pretty good things, right?  Finchum Yeah  New Mexico would require watering, I would think.  Williams (Laughs) Yeah, we   re up in the mountains, and there   s quite a bit of snow there in the winter. They   ve had drought like we have, so we   ll see what the climate   what happens there, right?  Finchum Have any other questions, Charles?  Abramson I am just admiring your books. Yeah, we have some of the same books.  Williams Oh goodness, I love my books. What am I   where am I going to put all these books? My husband has seven shelves like this in his office, over in the English department. (Laughs)  Abramson Wait a minute   I thought I was the only one to read that mosquito book   Williams (Laughs) That   s a good book.  Abramson That   s a good book.  Williams I used that in my History of Medicine class one year. Yeah, so     32  Finchum Well, my last question is this: when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  Williams Well, I guess I would like for it to say that I was incredibly lucky in blending a scholarly life and a family life, which have   putting them together just has made me a happy person.  Finchum And making it back to Oklahoma   Williams Yeah  Oh, yes, definitely. Well, I hope so. (Laughs) I told one of my students the other day   he wrote to me about something,    Thank you for doing x, y, or z,    and,    This has really helped me with blank.    I said,    You know, teaching is a funny profession,    because you hope that you   re having an impact, right, but in the day-by-day, you don   t actually see it very much. I mean, you can see that you   ve helped a student with a project or something like that, but where the teaching that you   ve done fits in relation to the teaching that all the other people around you have done with a particular student, and where they   re going to go with it, and what   s going to come of them, you don   t see it. It   s not like building a desk or something, like a carpenter might, where the product is absolutely right in front of you. What you have is this long-term hope and vision that you   ve contributed to people   s lives, and then every now and then, you get one of those letters, like I was telling you, and you think,    Oh, good     (Laughs) Yes, I hope that I have had a good impact with my   I counted it up, I think it   s been about five thousand students.  Finchum Wow. I think OSU got lucky in getting you here.  Williams Oh, thank you so much. Thank you. It   s been a wonderful place to work. I will miss it all the time. Although I decided I was not going to say goodbye to anybody. I was just going to say,    We   ll be back to visit all the time, and I will come and see you,    you know, and I   m sure I will too. Keep going to that Library.  Finchum That   s right. Come on  (Laughter)  Abramson Certainly, skill plays a big part in you getting jobs, as well as scholarly activity, but how much do you think   I know in my case, there was so much luck involved, being at the right place at the right time.  Williams Absolutely, I think that   s true. Yeah, absolutely. That   s true in most things, isn   t it? I get the impression, I don   t know.  Abramson When I was younger, I didn   t think it was that true, but when I look back on my career, I say,    Boy     I was there at the   I took advantage of the opportunities, but it was just lucky to be there at that particular time. 33  Williams Yes, I think that   s right. Well, like that day that I walked down, and there was that notice about the job at OSU. We didn   t know for sure, but in fact, it worked out to be a wonderful place for my husband and I to make our careers, and that was just happenstance. It might have happened that something else would have come along, you know. Certainly, we would   ve hoped so, but yeah, I think you   re right that   and I just feel overall, that being a professor at a school like this, I mean, you   re just lucky by definition to be in such a wonderful institution with, you know, smart, hardworking, cultivated people around you. Eager students, fresh, ready to take on the world, how could you ask for a better way of life? Really, you couldn   t  In that, we   re all incredibly lucky.  Abramson Especially those that look at this as a vocation and not a job.  Williams Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. No, it   s a wonderful way of life. I remember a professor that I had a Oregon back in the days when students were saying,    How is it relevant?    Remember that? And I remember one day he got very irritated at somebody who made a comment like that. He said,    What   re you talking about? How could anything be more relevant than the university. It   s been here for a thousand years. Everybody who has tried to change the world for the better has moved through it, and been trained and taught within it. You   re just   you know, you   re crazy if you think the university isn   t relevant.     Oh, that student looked disgruntled, but I bet he went home and realized,    Yeah  Well, that   s true.    You know, it   s an ancient institution. It   s hard to imagine how the world ever functioned without it. (Laughs) I, at least, believe that it   s in good part the universities that have made our culture what it is. The sponsoring of free and open discussion, what could be more essential to our self-definition? You can   t think of anything else that   s more important than that, really, and you compare the world that people live in where that kind of discussion is not allowed, and you think   talk about lucky. (Laughs)  Finchum And your path all started with the fifth grade sister?  Williams My   that fifth grade sister, yeah, who loved the Crusaders. (Laughter) Now, the Crusaders don   t have a great rep these days, but (laughs) she inspired a lot of eager enthusiasm among at least one, little girl.  Abramson Did she focus on a favorite, or the first one, or how about the other seven?  Williams That I don   t remember. Yeah, that was   only later, I guess, I started to tell one from another. (Laughs)  34  Finchum Well, and from that inspiration, I   m sure you   ve inspired many others.  Williams Well, I hope so  Finchum It comes full circle, so   .  Williams I do hope so. Yeah, it has been a constant, wonderful challenge. I guess this week when I was thinking about   so I   m teaching my last class tomorrow, right? And I thought   but all my life, a huge part, since I got my first teaching job a huge part of my life has been,    How can I make it go better next semester?    You know,    Maybe that reading   I should get rid of that one, and put this in here in its place. I really need to revise that lecture,    you know? I thought,    What is it going to feel like to walk out of that class tomorrow and think      you know, I   m not thinking toward,    Okay, when I start up again in the fall, I really should do this.    That   s going to be a huge shift.  Finchum Maybe a tear or two?  Williams I   ve had a few tears, yeah. (Laughs) I   m sure I   ll have a few more, anyway   .  Abramson Thank you very much.  Williams Thank you all so much   Finchum Thank you.  Williams When you first wrote to me, I thought,    Now what exactly is this   ,    but then I thought about it, and I thought,    This is so nice     I do have these long-term and really deep connections with OSU, and I thought doing some kind of an oral history of my experience framed around the Phi Beta Kappa would be a really nice thing to do here at the end, so I appreciate your asking me, and taking the time to come and do this with me.  Finchum Well, did we forget anything? Is there anything else you want to add before we close?  Williams No, I think we   ve probably said enough.  Finchum Okay, giving you the chance. Well, thank you.  Williams Okay, thank you.  -------  -------   
