 Little Thunder. Today is Tuesday, January 9,  2016. I   m interviewing veterinarian, Dr. Robert Poteet, for the O-STATE  Stories interview series, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Robert, you   re a small animal  doctor who attended veterinary school at OSU and your practice is located  in midtown Tulsa. You were the Companion Animal Veterinarian for the  year 2000 and you   ve served on a number of boards including the Tulsa  District Board of Directors for the OVMA  Oklahoma Veterinary Medicine  Association . You were chairman of the National AVMA  American  Veterinary Medicine Association  Council on Research. I look forward to  hearing more about your life, and career, and your OSU memories. Thank  you for taking the time to speak with me.  Poteet Good morning, Julie. Thanks for having me.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Poteet I was born in eastern Arkansas at Blytheville, Arkansas, in 1943. That   s in  the Delta area of Arkansas. We lived on a cotton farm, just across the gravel  road from the Mississippi River levy. It was very flat terrain at that time.  Some of my earliest memories are sliding down the side of levy in  cardboard boxes. (Laughter) That was one of our childhood activities. We  thought that that levy was a really, really steep altitude.  Little Thunder What did your parents do for a living?  Poteet My dad was a farmer. He and his brother, my uncle, were cotton farmers in  the Delta. As I grew a little older, my main job was being the water boy for  some of the itinerant farm workers that would chop cotton and pick cotton. I  had a horse     Little Thunder Did you have to pick any yourself?  5  Poteet Later on, yes. When I was little, too small to be much of a field hand, I got  to carry water to the regular hoe hands. I did that on horseback. That was  quite an experience for me.  Little Thunder You had your own horse, you were saying.  Poteet I had a horse at that time, yes. Got a little older. My family moved back  away from the delta area back to the Ouachita Mountain areas in the  Arkansas River Valley. Continued to have farming, but also had livestock  and did some ranching, so I got to be more exposed to a different type of  agriculture endeavor.  Little Thunder Did you have any brothers or sisters?  Poteet I had one sister who is about six years older than myself. We got to work  together quite a lot. Even though we moved back away from the delta area,  my dad still had cotton farming in his blood. We always had some cotton  that we got to take care of, and chop, and cultivate, and pick when it was  ready to pick. Most of my cotton-picking experience was when we moved  back into the Ozark, Ouachita/Ozark area. I was a little bit older at that time.  Little Thunder What was the school that you went to and what was the closest town?  Poteet The farm that we lived on was situated about three miles from a town called  Plainview, Arkansas. The school I went to was a consolidated school called  Plainview/Rover. I attended that from about the third grade until graduation  in 1961.  Little Thunder What were your favorite subjects in school?  Poteet I was sort of a bookworm and was interested in a lot of everything, but  probably more of the science-related subjects. I did take music lessons. I  found out early on that that wasn   t my forte. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What instrument?  Poteet I was studying the piano.  Little Thunder Did you have any good science teachers?  Poteet Yes, we had quite a few memorable teachers. One, in particular, was an  English teacher, Ms. Curry, who was very helpful in getting you to learn to  write properly. We always had some essays we had to do. Another teacher  was a math teacher who also was the music teacher. She was quite a lady  and taught algebra. We had another instructor that taught geometry, and  6  trigonometry, so I had a pretty good basis for mathematics. Then we had a  chemistry instructor that was pretty interesting. Science and biology was  another subject that we studied pretty intensely.  Little Thunder Was there anything in your growing up that pointed you towards this career  path, do you think?  Poteet Of course, we always had lots of animals on the farm   cattle. Of course,  always had dogs and cats as pets, which I was very fond of. Another  instructor was our high school principal, who was a very student-oriented  fellow. He was a pretty good disciplinarian. He still could yield a pretty  mean paddle, but as you got a little older, he would befriend you and take  you under his wing and give you some counseling advice. He had dogs of  his own and he encouraged me to go into veterinarian medicine so I could  come back to Arkansas and take care of all of his hunting dogs.  Unfortunately, he passed away before I could return back to Arkansas,  which, eventually I didn   t make it back there, anyway, since I ended up in  Tulsa.  Little Thunder Right. What did you do after you graduated high school? What happened?  Poteet Dr. McGee, who was the name of a principal that pointed me along that  career path, also helped me acquire a scholarship to University of Arkansas,  which basically paid all my tuition. After graduation I moved to  Fayetteville, Arkansas, and got a summer job, working in a poultry farm at  the university. We had an apartment in town and I would make my way out  to the poultry farm every day. We would have all kinds of activities, taking  care of the large population of birds that they had, doing research. We were  doing everything from candling eggs, to de-beaking chickens, to taking care  of everything that had to be taken care of. Did that all summer and then by  the time classes started, I acquired another job, which turned out to be a  really influential part of my life where I was working for a veterinary  parasitologist on a few research projects. Dr. Conway was the fellow that  had a research program going. He was a very interesting fellow, sort of  became my mentor as well. He had graduated from Cornell University with  a PhD in Veterinary Parasitology.  Had come to the University of Arkansas and had a grant to do research and  some clinical trials for a new anthelmintic product at that time that was  known as Thiabendazole. Prior to that, about the only worming medication  was not terribly effective and not very broad spectrum. This new  anthelmintic that was being introduced was soon to be one of the more  widespread-used products in veterinary medicine. At that time, we had a  flock of sheep at the research farm in Fayetteville, about 180 sheep. We got  to have those divided up into a few different research groups. There   d be a  control group, and about three other different levels of medication. It was  7  very interesting to see how basic research was done. At that time, we would  dose the animals with a larval stage of parasite called Haemonchus  contortus, which was a common parasite of sheep and cattle. After the  infestation was established, they would take regular samples from the fecal  samples and check for worm eggs and also take blood samples and monitor  their hemoglobin and packed cell volume levels. Do that to establish a  baseline. We   d use the new medication as a treatment in the various levels  and continue to monitor their egg counts and blood values throughout the  treatment program.  Then at the end of that time, some of the animals would be slaughtered and  autopsies would be done to check the worm burden in their intestinal track.  In addition to the sheep, there were two research areas at different parts of  the state that had a total of about 300 cattle. We would make trips to those  areas. One was in Newport, Arkansas, and the other was in Hope, Arkansas.  We would make trips down there to get fecal samples and blood samples on  all those cattle. Go through the same process with theirs. Later on, after all  the data was compiled, we would put all the information into key cards and  wait for your turn for the large computer system that took up a whole room  in the animal science building. After you waited your turn, you would have  a day with this huge computer to read all your key cards and crunch out your  analysis of variance and all of the things. Then the information would be  compiled and paper was eventually written.  ringing phone  Dr. Conway  was able to get this data and paper that he   d compiled published in the  London Journal of Helminthology. He was kind enough to include all of his  technical assistants on the paper letterhead, so we   d been published at an  early age.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. So how did you end up at Oklahoma State University?  Poteet Well, all my experiences with Dr. Conway had sort of heightened my  interest in veterinary medicine. At that time, the state of Arkansas had a  contract with Oklahoma State University to take in a certain number of  students, being that Arkansas didn   t have a vet school at the time and still  doesn   t. They had a contract with OSU. I applied and came in for an  interview and was one of the fortunate ones to be accepted.  Little Thunder What class was it?  Poteet That was the class of 1969, that graduated in 1969, and we     Little Thunder How many people in your class?  Poteet Started out with forty-eight at that time. It was quite a group of bright, shiny  faces that were pretty intimidated when we came into our first class.  8  Little Thunder Now, it sounds like you had as much experience really with large animals as  with small animals. Did you start off knowing you were going to focus on  companion animals, or did you figure that out later?  Poteet I was probably more interested in the large animal aspect of it as far as the  research potentials. But I really hadn   t made any career choices at that time.  I wasn   t thinking that far ahead. I   d had quite a few courses at the University  of Arkansas that had got me well-prepared for vet school. I already, for  some reason, had taken comparative anatomy and biochemistry and some  other courses at the University of Arkansas, which gave me a little bit of a  head start when we got to Oklahoma State because the first class we had that  was a real difficult class was anatomy. The course in comparative anatomy  that I had taken the year before served me well to get off to a good start in  Dr. Peterson   s anatomy class.  Little Thunder I was going to ask you who maybe one or two stand out professors were.  Poteet Our basic science instructors in the first couple of years were all very, very  excellent people that were very well respected throughout the profession.  Specifically, Dr. Dwayne Peterson, Dr. Jonathan Friend who is the   we had  the most contact with those individuals because they were the anatomy  instructors. That was the course that you had to spend the most time on as a  freshman vet student. Those fellows were very demanding in their testing  and equally excellent in their teaching abilities. Those two were really ones  that stood out dramatically. We also had an individual named Dr. Brazil,  who was a physiology professor. He was a very brilliant individual and he  could lecture at a rapid pace. You really had to be on your toes to keep up  with him. Everybody joked that he would write with one hand on the board  and erase with the other one, so you had to really be sharp and pay attention  to keep up with him. Another individual, who   s since deceased, that I  remember specifically was Dr. Venable. He was our histology professor and  he had a series of slides that he would go through in the classroom to give  you a real good idea of the cellular aspect of veterinary medicine.  Little Thunder Were there many women in your class?  Poteet Yes, we had a few women in our class. It was primarily men at that time. I  believe there were five women in our class. Like I say, we started out with  forty-eight. By the first year   before the first year was over, we   d had three,  four, drop out. A little later, one of the ladies had to withdraw for a period of  time due to illness. She resumed with the second-year class, so she  graduated a year behind us, but she did finish and graduate. I think all of the  ladies made it through and four of the guys decided early on that it wasn   t  for them. They chose different careers.  Little Thunder What buildings did you have your classes in?  9  Poteet At that time, the McElroy Hall was the old vet school. Was nothing like it is  today. We had summer classes in the old auditorium and then the upstairs of  McElroy Hall had a few classrooms there. The histology classroom,  pathology classroom, radiology classroom. Of course, some of those served  as double duties for other classes as well. The newer part of the wing that  had been added sometime in the early    60s, I guess, was the anatomy lab.  Also in that wing was a laboratory for microbiology.  Little Thunder How did you cover your tuition and room and board? Were you working as  well?  Poteet Fortunately, the state of Arkansas covered the out-of-state tuition because  they didn   t supply a vet school at that time. I really don   t know how much it  was, a few thousand dollars, I guess, but the state of Arkansas paid the out-of-  state tuition for all of the Arkansas students.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. You already had the scholarship with the state of  Arkansas also?  Poteet I   d had a scholarship, yes. At that time, it wasn   t that large of a burden. I  think the tuition at the University of Arkansas was only like a  100 a  semester. If you loaded up and took all eighteen hours a semester, then you  could get by pretty cheap, if you had a scholarship that paid for it. You lived  pretty frugally as well. But by the time we got to Oklahoma State at vet  school, I had become married     Little Thunder Okay, I was going to ask how you met your wife, Linda. In Arkansas?  Poteet I   d gotten married my senior year at the University of Arkansas. My wife,  Linda, had a job. She went to school part time at the University of Arkansas,  but she worked full time as a secretary for Jones Truck Line. Got to know  Mr. Jones very well. He was a pretty wealthy individual. But after we  moved to Stillwater, Linda continued to work and like I say, the state of  Arkansas paid our out-of-state tuition. All we had to cover was our living  expenses. As I mentioned before, we lived pretty darn frugally, but things  weren   t terribly expensive then. Gas was thirty-nine cents a gallon. We had  a Volkswagen vehicle that got really good gas mileage. I think hamburgers  were fifteen cents apiece at Griff   s Burgers down the street close to where  we lived.  Little Thunder That was a place you liked to eat, was Griff   s Burgers?  Poteet It was a cheap place.  Little Thunder Were you living in married student housing or off campus?  10  Poteet No, we had a mobile home. We lived in a mobile home park. Linda also had  a job at   well, she had several jobs during our tenure there. Worked part  time as a cashier at the cafeteria in the Student Union. She also was a retail  clerk in a store near where we lived....  Little Thunder Do you remember the name of the store?  Poteet    Worked part time as a receptionist for a veterinary clinic that was close  by. I also had quite a few jobs during vet school as well. Sometimes I   d  work with Dr. Ralph Buckner who was another clinical instructor that was  very memorable. He was doing research on hemophiliac beagles. Studying  blood clotting disorders in this colony of beagles. Several of us, vet students,  got to earn a little extra money by cleaning cages and feeding beagles and  taking care of his research colony. In addition to that, I had a job with  another professor who had a research project going on turkeys, studying a  disease called erysipelas. He and another one of my classmates, Chuck  Homburg, worked with these turkeys, taking blood samples. After all those  samples were collected, we worked the samples up. My job was doing  electrophoresis on some of the blood samples and running them through a  reader to get some data for the research project.  Little Thunder That   s great you were able to work in those areas while you were going to  school, too. Did you have time to attend sporting events? Did you and Linda  go to any sporting events?  Poteet We really didn   t have too much time for sporting events because most of  those were during the week. You were at school from eight to five or after.  That didn   t leave any time for any sporting events. After you got home,  you   re hitting the books pretty good. Other sporting events were on the  weekends. I had another part-time job, working as a bartender at a local  nightclub, so my weekends were tied up there.  Little Thunder It got you out a little bit.  Poteet Yeah, it was a little bit of a relief and a respite from hitting the books. You  could go out and listen to the music at the nightclub.  Little Thunder Where was it?  Poteet It was a nightclub just north of town called Spavs. It was owned by a fellow  called Louis O   Haver, who also had a ranch that some of the other  veterinary students lived on and worked on the ranch. I guess he had a soft  spot in his heart for vet students because he housed some of them on his  property and hired others to work in his nightclub.  Little Thunder Were there any music acts?  11  Poteet The house band was called the Magnificent Seven. I guess they were pretty  good, but they were very, very loud. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Were they playing Red Dirt or rock-and-roll?  Poteet I think their signature song was    Hey Jude   , I guess. I can   t remember  anything else that they did. Like I said, they were very, very loud. They  were probably a pretty good band. But I suspect that that early exposure to  the loud music contributed to my hearing disability later on. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Did you and Linda get to go home very much or did the folks come over this  way to Oklahoma to visit you?  Poteet Vacation time was pretty few and far between. You could get away for some  of the holidays and we   d drive back to Arkansas, occasionally. Her parents  were a little more flexible than my parents, so they would come over quite a  bit. My mother and father were still living on the farm in Arkansas and had a  lot of cattle, and by that time, had a couple of large chicken houses to take  care of. They did come over occasionally, but not quite as frequently as my  in-laws. After we had our first child   Lysa was born in 1966, so it was  during our second year in vet school. My mother-in-law came over a little  more frequently to help with taking care of our first daughter.  Little Thunder Right. Do you have any memories of Homecoming or     Poteet Well, not really. We were never too terribly involved with the Homecoming  procession, which, at that time, we were sort of unaware of how big a  tradition it was at Oklahoma State University because we were still  Razorbacks at heart by that time. So no, didn   t really get involved in  Homecoming, although we were aware that something was going on. We  could see a lot of floats and things, but again, we were busy with work and  side jobs, and later on, taking care of kids.  Little Thunder What are your memories of the library?  Poteet The library on campus is relatively well known and very famous. Sort of an  icon for the campus. It   s what you always see with the photographs of  campus. It usually includes the library. But vet students had their own  library in the veterinary building and it was in part of the new wing.  Occasionally, you would have to go there to look something up, but with all  of the textbooks that we had specifically for our classes, we really didn   t  have to go to the library too much. We had more information than we could  absorb and digest just from our textbooks.  Little Thunder Right. How about Theta Pond? Did you and Linda ever take the kids there  to picnic, or     12  Poteet Theta Pond was another area that was more of just an icon for the university  than a gathering spot for veterinary students. (Laughter) We didn   t spend a  lot of time on campus because vet school was probably about a quarter of a  mile west of the main campus. About the only time I really got to the main  campus was during my second year. I had another part-time job working for  Dr. Bush at the dairy department. That was sort of interesting, too. We were  working on analysis of milk samples and I was doing some gas  chromatography of milk samples that he   d collected. I would get up on  campus during the free time to do that. The other popular spot on campus  for vet students was the dairy department because you could stop in to get a  bottle of chocolate milk and they usually had some doughnuts there...  Little Thunder Is that right?  Poteet    that was pretty inexpensive.  Little Thunder So where was that located?  Poteet I   m not real clear on my memories, exactly. I don   t think the building   s even  there now, but it was on the that north end of campus. Just a block or two  north of the Student Union and sort of past the corner of the big library  there.  Little Thunder Right, but the dairy itself was probably off-campus?  Poteet Oh, the dairy was out west on Farm Road, even past the vet school.  Little Thunder What are your memories of the town of Stillwater? You might have covered  some of them.  Poteet Again, we didn   t spend a lot of time downtown. They had a Piggly Wiggly  grocery store that was close to where we lived. That   s where we did all of  our meager shopping. Like I say, the Griff   s Burgers was close to the Piggly  Wiggly. They had a bank there as well. That   s where we did our banking.  As far as getting downtown, they did have a theater on Main Street that we  attended a movie once or twice. I think I remember seeing Dr. Zhivago and  maybe a James Bond movie there once. Up above that  phone rings  was a  dance hall that could be rented out and there were a couple of social  fraternities involved with the veterinary school. There was Alpha Psi and the  other one was OTS  Omega Tau Sigma . They would compete for the  incoming freshman to join one of the fraternities versus the other. That was  quite a lot of political politicking to get you to join one versus the other.  Little Thunder Which one did you belong to?  13  Poteet Most of the people in our class ended up with OTS for some reason. They  would have dances in this particular dance hall up above the theater. Linda  and I attended a few of those functions. My memory gets sort of blurry after  that. They   d have lots of refreshments. Other places they would have it  would be at the Isaac Walton Lodge. I think the majority of our class ended  up with OTS. A few of the individuals ended up with Alpha Psi. That was  pretty much most of the social interaction that we had with other veterinary  students was through those events.  Little Thunder Right. How did you end up in Tulsa?  Poteet After graduation, you   re looking around for a job. Some of the professors  would be on the lookout for things to help you do. At that time, there  weren   t too many options other than private practice because internships and  residencies were sort of in their infancy. One of our classmates got an  internship to Cornell and ended up doing his residency there and eventually  became the dean of OSU later on. That was my classmate, Dr. Lorenz. At  that time, the residencies and internships and all that were not very common.  Somehow I heard of an opening in Tulsa and applied for a job with Central  Veterinary Clinic on South Harvard and got accepted. Worked there from  1969   started in June   worked there until  1977 . Then I left and started  my own practice.  Little Thunder Nineteen seventy-seven? Sixty-nine to    77?  Poteet Yes.  Little Thunder How many vets were at Central?  Poteet There was just two. The founder was Dr. Speer. He had been a practitioner  in Tulsa for quite some time. He   d had quite a few associate veterinarians,  prior to myself. He   d been in practice for quite a few years as a Texas A M  graduate. At that time, he was beginning to cut back. After I got my feet on  the ground, he was not there quite a lot of the time. Eventually, we became  partners for a few years and we decided to go separate ways and dissolve  that partnership. Then I started a practice called Cedarwood Veterinary  Clinic, which was a nearby practice.  Little Thunder Which you still run there off 15th and Harvard. It   s your practice now, off of  15th and Harvard.  Poteet Yes. We started off in a shopping center practice in Cedarwood Shopping  Center. That   s how I got the name Cedarwood Veterinary Clinic. We started  off, a bare bones type of practice. Linda worked as a receptionist and I was  the veterinary practitioner, veterinary technician, and kennel help all rolled  into one, although, by that time as our kids were old enough to help out a  14  little bit. After school, they would help take care of the animals as well. Our  youngest daughter, Robyn, was not quite old enough to go to school yet, so  she would come and hang out in the office during that time as well. It started  off sort of a bare bones practice, but began to build up a clientele very  rapidly. We had quite a few clients that had I developed a relationship with  over the years that followed me over there. We were there on the shopping  center until 1993 and we just outgrew that spot. So we purchased a building  on South Harvard and had it remodeled and moved into that in March of  1993.  Little Thunder Okay. What are some of the challenges of being a companion animal vet?  Poteet A lot of people decide to go into veterinary medicine because they think  they like the concept of medicine, but they don   t want to have to deal with  people. But then you find out that each patient has at least two people  attached to it. Some of the challenges are finding out what   s going on with  the patient itself and then communicating all of that information to the  owners and getting them to understand the treatments that are needed, and  the expenses that are involved, and the risks that are involved. Sometimes  the prognosis is not too good, so communications is probably the key. If  you   re not good at that, that leads to some of the biggest problems that you  could encounter.  Little Thunder Right. What are some of the rewards?  Poteet Basically, it goes back to that same scenario. Frequently, you   re able to help  an animal and when you help an animal who   s an integral part of the family,  you can make the owners have a sense of accomplishment or you can make  them feel a lot better and be happy and be able to enjoy their pet for a longer  period of time. That gives you a sense of accomplishment.  Little Thunder Right. What   s one of the most unusual animals, companion animals, you   ve  ever treated?  Poteet Well, we   ve had quite a few of those. We   ve gotten into a few pocket pets  like hamsters, hedgehogs. I suppose a hedgehog is probably one of the most  unusual things. We   ve seen a snake or two, an iguana or so, but unless you  were in a large city and had a specifically exotic animal practice, you  wouldn   t see enough of those to really become proficient in it. We did see  quite a few birds over the years. We actually had a client who had quite a  few birds that gave us two so we would be able to know a little more about  birds. We had a large parrot called Tequila and a smaller conure named  Tico, and a large double yellow-headed Amazon called Pierre. We kept  those around     Little Thunder They were at the office, right?  15  Poteet    they were office birds. Ms. Hess was the lady that brought those in. She  had a bird of her own named Waleetka, who at one time, had an injury to a  leg that she kept irritating and picking at and biting at and was causing  problems, so the lady had to bring her in to be hospitalized. We had to fix up  an Elizabethan collar to keep the bird from injuring her leg irreparably. We  had to keep the bird in the clinic for quite a while. The bird could mimic the  owner   s voice almost exactly, When you said hello to Waleetka, she   d say  hello back. You say goodbye to her and she   d say goodbye back. When I  came in to treat her after a few days and handle her, I would say hello to her,  she would begin to say goodbye to me. (Laughter) I think she was trying to  give me a message that she didn   t want to see me anymore.  Little Thunder (Laughs) I think she was. That   s a great story.  Poteet The lady also would relate a story about her bird calling her dogs, Tuffy and  Missy. The bird sounded so much like the lady that it would fool the dogs.  The bird would whistle,    Come on, Tuffy. Come on, Missy. Let   s go  outside.    The dogs would come running through and the bird would laugh at  them. I, of course, never did witness that, but the lady told it as an actual  anecdote that happened.  Little Thunder That   s funny. I know you work with a number of animal rescue  organizations. I   m thinking that the infrastructure for those organizations  wasn   t always in place. I   m wondering how you might have helped those  grow.  Poteet Over the years, we   ve worked with quite a few rescue organizations and still  do. Animal Aid was the first one. In early stages there was a lady named  Becky Sanderson who was sort of the heart and soul of Animal Aid. We  worked with them for years. This was before there were any emergency  clinics around, so if an animal was injured and found, Animal Aid would be  called. One of their telephone coordinators would look up who was on call,  and you might get a call at midnight or one or two in the morning that one of  their volunteer rescuers was on their way in with an injured animal. You  would haul yourself out of bed and meet them at the clinic and take care of  the animal.  We continued to work with them until after Becky had passed away and the  organization kind of went in a different direction. Some of the people we  were used to working with, started another group called Animal Rescue  Foundation. Subsequently, we started working with the Animal Rescue  Foundation. In addition to those, we worked with Pet Adoption League,  Street Cats. Let   s see. Homeward Bound, Pug Rescue, and Great Plains  Mastiff Rescue. We worked some with a Labrador Rescue group and the  SPCA.  16  Little Thunder That   s a lot.  Poteet All of those groups sort of filled a different niche in the animal welfare area.  But all of them still get a lot of things to do.  Little Thunder Does working in Oklahoma present special challenges for veterinarians?  Poteet Just in Oklahoma? They   re always some regional areas, problems that you  encounter. I   m sure other areas have regional problems. Oklahoma,  particularly the Tulsa area, allergies are a really, really big problem with  animals. Some people refer to it as the allergy capital of the world.  Little Thunder For animals.  Poteet Well     Little Thunder And people.  Poteet People, too, yes. Allergies constitute a major problem. Parasites like fleas  and ticks are also a major problem, particularly in the spring, and summer,  and fall. Heartworm disease has become a   developed into a serious  problem. Early on, back in the    60s and    70s, heartworm disease was  relatively uncommon in Oklahoma. I can still remember my first case,  which was in 1972. It was unfortunately discovered on necropsy. After that,  we started looking more carefully for heartworm disease. At that time,  testing was not as sensitive as it is now with some of the antigen-based tests  that are more likely to show up on a case. We probably missed quite a few  before some of the better tests were developed.  Little Thunder I know you   ve rescued or adopted quite a few dogs and cats yourself.  Poteet Yes, we   ve always had pets. When we moved to Oklahoma we had our first  dog that my wife and I had acquired in Arkansas. He lived all the way with  us through vet school. Turned out to be my first diabetic case     Little Thunder Oh my goodness.  Poteet    He lived to be about fifteen years old. Lived all the way through vet  school and all the way through our early years of practice and finally  succumbed later on. By that time, we   d known that he was ill with diabetes,  and although he did well for eight years, we knew he was going to expire  soon. We were worried that our children would have trouble dealing with  the loss of Buffy. By that time, we had acquired a few more dogs. About  five. When Buffy finally did pass, the kids didn   t hardly blink an eye, but  Linda and I were distraught for a while.  17  Little Thunder What kind of ties do you retain with the Vet Med school at OSU? What kind  of ties do you retain?  Poteet Early on, once you got out and started in practice, you were so busy trying  to develop your practice and make a living and take care of all your clients,  and your family and other things you   re involved in with your family that  you really didn   t have too much time to devote to OSU. Later on, when you  got a little more established and had a little more free time, you   d return  back to a few basketball games, and some football games. Then after Dr.  Lorenz, our classmate, returned to OSU first as associate dean for academic  affairs, and then later as interim dean, and finally as dean, our class began to  have a little more better relationship with OSU. Dr. Lorenz has worked hard  to reestablish better ties with the veterinary community. I think that that  made it a lot more rewarding to refer cases to OSU because his emphasis  was on communications with the practitioner, regarding cases. The  clinicians under his guidance would faithfully communicate their findings  back to the referring practitioner. Subsequently, our relationship with OSU  has improved dramatically. We refer cases quite frequently and always have  excellent support and results with OSU clinical staff.  Little Thunder That   s great. I also have to say that you   re also our vet, but I   ve gone with  friends to other vet clinics. I don   t think that everybody is as loyal to their  vet sometimes as I think that people at your clinic are. I know there are lots  of people that love their vets, but I   m wondering if you have any idea about  why people are so loyal to you and your practice?  Poteet I   m not sure other than it   s probably we try to be loyal to them as well.  We   ve had clients over the years that have almost become like family  members, extended family members. I can remember a couple of individuals  that were almost like grandparents to us. They   re both deceased now, but  they came in very regularly for years. I think it   s probably just the practice  or philosophy that we   ve tried treat people the way we wanted to be treated.  I guess people have returned quite a lot. We had a young lady come in about  a year or so ago as a new client filling out her records, and she happened to  remark in passing,    You probably don   t remember me, do you?    I said,    I   m  afraid I don   t. Did you use to come in with your parents?    and she said,    No,  I used to come in with my grandparents.    (Laughter) I was beginning to  think     Little Thunder Wow, third generation.  Poteet    maybe I   d been doing this too long.  Little Thunder Have any of your children attended OSU?  18  Poteet Yes, two of my daughters have gone to OSU. My oldest daughter went to  Tahlequah in her   and Northeastern State her first two years and then  finished up at TU  University of Tulsa , majoring in business. The next  daughter, Jayme, started at TU. She was playing soccer on the TU soccer  team. After two years there, she transferred to OSU to pursue a degree in  medical technology (which TU didn   t have that program). About the same  time my third daughter, Erin, attended OSU as a freshman. She stayed there  for two years and she transferred back to TU to finish her degree in their  nursing program. Turned out that one started at TU, ended up at OSU. One  started at OSU and ended up at TU. My fourth daughter, Robyn, was the  brains of the bunch. She was valedictorian at Booker T. Washington and  finished with a degree in (let   s see exactly what they called it) their IB  International     Little Thunder Right.  Poteet    Baccalaureate program. She applied for a position while she was still in  high school at Illinois Institute of Technology, which had a program if you  got accepted, would have a spot waiting for her in medical school at  Chicago Medical School. She got one of those ten spots from students  across the country. She ended up going to Chicago to college and got a  chemical engineering degree in three years. Then went right into medical  school and graduated from there.  Little Thunder That   s terrific. And she practices in Texas, right?  Poteet After she finished there, she joined the staff of   she did her residency,  internship and residency, at University of Texas Medical Center in San  Antonio. Now she is an internal medicine person on the staff there and  adjunct professor for the University of Texas Medical Center.  Little Thunder Are people around you aware of your OSU connection?  Poteet Oh yeah, I think everybody here is. We have a lot of clientele that, of  course, come in with their OSU sweatshirts, and caps, and have the OSU  leashes for their dogs and all of the paraphernalia for their pets. We also  have a lot of OU supporters that come in. We have a little friendly rivalry  with them. But occasionally we have someone from Texas that comes in  with a Texas sweatshirt, or something for their pet from University of Texas.  We rib a bit about getting stuff like that from a flea market or a swap shop.  Little Thunder What would you tell a Vet Med student at OSU today? What advice would  you have?  Poteet I would say you need to study. Need to plan your career choices very early  on and concentrate on the career path you want to take as soon as you   re  19  able to make that decision wisely because today, there   s a very diversified  opportunity in veterinary medicine. The areas of specialization are much  more readily accessible if you make the right choices, early on. At the time  we graduated, as I mentioned earlier, there were not too many internships  available. The areas of specialization were in their infancy. At that time, I  think you could probably become board-certified in maybe internal  medicine and maybe surgery, but now there   s a much wider variety of  specialization. I   d say that if you want to choose some area like that, you  need to go down that path early on because once you get out and get  established, it   s much harder to go back than it is to continue that career  while you   re still in student mode.  Little Thunder Right, right. It seems like a lot of OSU students and alumni are pretty loyal  to the school. What do you think it is about OSU that sparks that kind of  loyalty?  Poteet I think it has a very family-type atmosphere on campus. Everybody   s very,  very friendly. The academic personnel are generally very friendly and  looking out for the best interests of the student. At least, in my perspective  from vet school. All the professors at vet school were not only trying to  make you a good veterinarian and impart a lot of knowledge to you, they  were always available to give you advice about careers, and ethics, and  things of that nature. I think everyone appreciates that kind of input that they  received and consider it like a big extended family.  Little Thunder You mentioned that you had a funny story I thought it might be nice to close  with, about when you became chairmen of the National AVMA Council on  research.  Poteet This was a   there was an opening becoming available at the time. This was  back in 2000. It was going to be an opening come up for a practitioner  representative on the Council  of  Research. At the time a friend of mine  here in town, Dr. D. C. Smith, was the Oklahoma delegate to the AVMA  and another individual, Dr. Caroline McAlister, who I was acquainted with  also, was the other delegate. When that opening came up in 2001 they had  approached me, see if I   d be interested in that. With my previous  background with Dr. Conway and his research project with parasites at the  University of Arkansas, I had sort of an interest in that. I wasn   t really sure  if the time commitment would be something I   d be willing to do. Anyway, I  said,    Okay, you can put my name in,    but I didn   t really think there   d be a  ghost of a chance for me to get it. As it turns out I was the only applicant. I  had to go to the AVMA convention in Boston and present my resume and  from there it was just a formality.  Since I didn   t have any opposition, I was elected. The first meeting was to  be held in September of 2001. The plan was for everyone to meet at the  20  AVMA headquarters in Chicago. Actually, it was in Schaumburg  IL , just  the suburb of Chicago. As it turns out, 9/11 happened. That meeting was  postponed and instead of having a meeting, there we had a teleconference  with all of the delegates. Most of the other individuals were deans of  veterinary schools or involved in research, specifically. Anyway, we had a  teleconference there. We got sort of acquainted with everyone and the next  meeting was in the spring of 2012. We continued to have meetings twice a  year. In the final year, I became chairman of the program. It was a  rewarding experience, overall. I got to meet a lot of individuals I   d never     would never have become acquainted with otherwise. Got to see a lot more  about how the AVMA worked, how it impacts veterinarians in practice, how  it interacts with some other federal regulatory bodies such as the FDA and  the USDA and the liaisons they have with those groups.  Got a good idea of our lobbying efforts with Congress through our lobbyists.  Also, how the AVMA Foundation functions during that time. The AVMA  Foundation in the aftermath of 9/11 with the function of some of the  AVMF-funded efforts at search and rescue. With all of the search and rescue  teams, going through the rubble and recovering individuals, we got a lot of  publicity. A lot of donations were made to Search and Rescue and disaster  preparedness has sort of become a large part of the American Veterinary  Medical Foundation   s focus. It has also filtered down to some of the state  associations. Oklahoma Foundation has taken on that role to a large extent,  as well, in the aftermath of the Murrah Building bombing and also, some of  the tornadoes that have happened. Oklahoma group has a very strong  functioning Emergency-Preparedness Committee. It still functions and  ongoing today.  Little Thunder Wow. Well is there anything else we should talk about before we close?  Poteet I could say one little anecdote   you asked earlier about one of the most  unusual animals we had taken care of. I forgot to mention our one foray into  large animal medicine. It was sort of a funny deal. This was when we were  just starting out on our own in Cedarwood Veterinary Clinic. We had a  fellow come into town that lived as a hermit over in Arkansas. He came into  the office. We were not too busy and we didn   t turn away anything at the  time. He came in, he said,    I   ve got a goat that I want to get neutered.    Said,     Could you do that?    I said,    Yeah, we can do that.    Turns out he had the  goat with him. This guy lived in a campsite somewhere in the mountains in  Arkansas. This large goat was   large billy goat     was his companion.  I guess it had gotten too odiferous for him, even in the wide open spaces. He  had a Volkswagen Bug that had been modified to have a platform on the  back of it. It just had the driver   s seat and a passenger   s seat, and behind it  was a bed that had this goat tied into. It turns out this billy goat was   had  21  testicles that were almost down below his hocks. Anyway, we took him in,  successfully neutered him. He came back the next day to get him and it took  us about three weeks to air out the building. This goat was so odiferous that  it would make the worst tomcat smell like perfume. (Laughter) My advice to  any fledgling vet student is always do your goat neuters outdoors.  Little Thunder Thank you very much for your time today, Robert.  Poteet Thank you for having me. It was fun to recount some of those old memories.  -------  -------   
