 Ahrberg. Today is October 16, 2009, and I   m visiting  with Jim D. Cobb in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE  Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Jim, welcome back to OSU for your fiftieth class year reunion.  It   s good to be here.  Wow. Tell us why you came back for the reunion.  I   ve been looking forward to this for several years. I have a good friend  that runs around Oklahoma City and wears his OSU fifty-year pin. I   m  envious of him, but now I can show up with him.  So, are you wearing your pin now?  No, I haven   t gotten it yet.  Can you tell us about where you grew up and a little bit about your early  life, your family, the school you attended and some of the activities you  participated in?  Well, I grew up in Norman, Oklahoma, of all places, and I participated  in high school athletics, and after high school I worked awhile, and then  I went into the military service. And after the military service   I was in  the Marine Corps, spent a year in Korea. And after the service, I came to  OSU kind of by accident. A friend of mine (we had gone to high school  together) had gotten out of the service and already enrolled at Oklahoma  A M. I came to see him  in fall of 1955  and spent the night with him,  and the next thing I know, he had me over at Whitehurst and enrolled.  That began, really, my career at Oklahoma State.  So, you graduated from Norman High School?  5  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Yes.  What did your folks do in Norman? What was their line of work?  My dad was also an engineer, and Mother was a housewife.  Any siblings?  Yes, I have four brothers and one sister.  Any of them OSU graduates?  No, no. I   m the only one.  You   re the rebel.  I   m the black sheep.  Where are you living now?  In Oklahoma City and Stillwater. We   ve lived at the same place for  thirty-five years.  So, tell us again what influenced you to enroll at OSU. You said you had  a friend. You went to high school, and he happened to be coming down  here.  Yes. He ended up getting a degree in veterinary medicine.  What year did you enroll at OSU?  1955.  And when did you graduate?  1959.  Four years.  That was the first degree. Second degree in 1960.  Where did you live when you attended OSU? Did you live in a dorm, or  did you live in a house or fraternity?  Lived in a house, and my second year I got married and we lived at 415  West Miller. I still remember the address.  6  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  That   s unique that you married so young on campus. What was it like to  be married and going to school?  Well, of course, finances were pretty tight, and being a veteran, I had the  GI Bill that paid the whole  110 a month, which was good. And when  we were married, my wife was worth another  25 a month, so I got  135  a month. She worked for the City of Stillwater, so we come along   financially  very well.  Is that house still standing today?  No, no. Apartments are there now. It   s at Miller and Duck.  Tell us a little bit about your military history that you mentioned.  Well, I was in the Marine Corps and spent a year in Korea. I was over  there when the truce was signed.  Where was your basic training at?  At Marine Corps Recruit Depot in San Diego, California.  And how long were you there?  About twelve weeks. That separates a lot of people from the Marines.  Did your wife join you out there?  Oh, no. I wasn   t married at that time.  Did you meet your wife on campus?  No, no. She didn   t go to school here.  How did you commute back and forth from campus to your house? Did  you have a car?  Oh, no. I was close enough to walk, and she used our car to go to work.  As a married couple, what did you all like to do to for entertainment  here in Stillwater?  Well, we didn   t have enough money to do very much, so we   d go out to  eat once in a while and we always liked the   what do you call them?  They brought in entertainers at Gallagher Hall  now Gallegher-Iba  Arena  periodically.  7  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Was it Allied Arts?  Yes, Allied Arts. We really enjoyed those.  Can you remember some of the entertainment they brought in? Some of  the names?  Dave Brubeck, Fred Waring. That   s all I can think of right now.  What was your major?  I was a civil engineering  major .  We still have a very strong engineering program.  We do. We do.  Can you tell us about some of the classes that you particularly enjoyed  and some of the professors that taught them that really stand out in your  mind?  Well, I guess, really two teachers stand out. One of them was named  McDole. He was in the math department. I took several courses under  him. McDole ran the game clock at the OSU football games, and he had  been a referee for a time. And then my other teacher was Jan J. Tuma,  who was a professor  of civil engineering  when I came to college, but  he became head of the department before I left, and he had a great  influence on my life. I took several structure courses under him.  How large were those civil engineering classes back then?  They were a reasonable size. I   d say sixteen to twenty-four, especially  the junior and senior classes.  They got a little bit smaller as you went up the ladder. Where were most  of those classes held at? What building?  The engineering building. That   d be Engineering South.  And what other buildings on campus did you have classes in?  The Classroom Building by the Union.  Did you have any classes in the Quonset Huts?  Yes, chemistry lab.  8  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  What was that like in those buildings?  Oh, it didn   t bother me.  I heard they were kind of cold in the winter. Is that right?  Well, yes, I guess they were.  And kind of hot in the summer. What activities were you involved with  on campus? Were you active in any social organizations or engineering  clubs?  Yes. They had American Society of Civil Engineers  ASCE  student  chapter, and also I was involved with the Oklahoma State Engineer  magazine publication.  What did you do in those clubs? What were some of the activities that  you did?  Well, we always looked forward to going to Oklahoma City  for ASCE  meetings  once a month to eat chicken  at Sleepy Holow . That was the  main activity I did. We got to associate with other engineers as well as  the faculty. Those were good times.  How did you all get to the city? Did you take the bus, or did you just  drive in your own cars?  We usually drove in our own cars. We didn   t have a bus. I-35 was not  finished at that time, so  it took some time to travel there .  What kind of car did you have?  Well, at first I had a 1951 Ford, and then I had a 1963 Chevrolet.  Do you remember much about the town of Stillwater at the time? What  was it like?  Very small.  Was there a lot to do in town?  Not really. Of course, they had a couple of theaters. No, I guess there  was three. We always enjoyed   there was a drive-in  restaurant  on  South Main called Cliffs that we enjoyed going to for food.  Now, there were some new buildings on campus at that time; one was  9  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  the Student Union. Did you ever go into the Student Union?  Oh, yes. I spent a lot of time up on the fourth floor playing Bridge  in  my spare time .  I heard that was a popular spot for that. What about the library? Did  you ever go into the library?  Well, yes, but not as often as I should.  I heard there was a dress code.  There was.  Can you tell me something about that?  As I recall, you couldn   t wear blue jeans, couldn   t wear shorts  in the  library .  Do you feel that other people that were married on campus at that time,  did you socialize as a group together? Were there any clubs, or were  you just pretty much on your own?  We were on our own, but we did socialize with other veterans, but no  organization.  You just met them through your classes?  Yes. One couple we still are friends with.  Oh, that   s great.  We traveled with them recently.  That   s great. Well, as you know, this is Homecoming week here at OSU.  Can you tell us a little bit about how Homecoming was conducted when  you were in school?  Well, it   s kind of the same thing. I also remember seeing Pistol Pete   Frank Eaton  several times in the Homecoming parade.  Did they do the floats like they do now?  Oh, yes.  Did they do parades?  10  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Yes. Bands,  floats, politicians .  And did you attend the football games?  Yes.  Did you all go to the athletic events?  We did.  Which ones did you go to?  We went to basketball and football. Our house was close enough to  Gallagher Hall that I could hear the band playing at the basketball  games, and some nights I   d be studying and I always ended up in  Gallagher Hall at halftime to watch the end of the games.  Were you there at the Kansas game when OSU beat Wilt Chamberlain?  I gave my ticket to somebody else and listened to it on the radio. I did  have a ticket for that game, though.  Everyone I   ve talked to mentions that particular game.  That was 1957.  And Hank Iba was our coach?  He was. I enjoyed, on occasion, going into Gallagher Hall and watching  him coach. That was really impressive.  What impressed you the most about him?  How he had control over his players. He was a teacher, a great teacher.  What did he teach?  Well, how to play basketball.  I thought you meant he was also a professor, too.  No, no. What I meant was he was a great teacher of basketball.  Being married and off campus, do you recall still some student activities  or traditions that they held on campus at that time?  11  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Well, one of the things that I do remember is the wrestling club had  initiation, and over by the Student Union they had a nice pit full of mud,  mud and water. And the two wrestlers had to get out in that pit and  wrestle. And you better watch, because the first time they hit the mud, it  splatters.  Did a lot of people gather for that?  Oh yes.  Was it announced? Did they announce that it was going to happen, or  did you just     You know, I don   t remember. I just remember seeing it, though.  So, being here in Stillwater, were you all able to go back and see your  family, you and your wife?  Yes.  Did you leave mostly on the weekends, or did you stay in Stillwater?  We stayed quite a bit. My wife   s family lived in Lincoln County, not far  from here, and then my parents lived in Oklahoma City.  Did they ever come up to visit you?  Oh, yes.  You were kind of the exception to have a car on campus, though, weren   t  you?  Well, not as a veteran. Yes, there weren   t very many cars. It was very  difficult to get here. You either hitchhiked or rode the bus to Perkins  Corner and then hitchhiked up here.  You mentioned that you graduated twice. You have a second degree.  Yes, a master   s.  And why did you decide to stay and pursue your master   s degree?  Well, when I got through my BS, I had about eight hours of graduate  work. So, I stayed one semester and one summer session, and I had  enough for the master   s degree.  Tell us a little bit about your career after you and your wife left  12  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Stillwater.  My father was an engineer and he had a small company, and I had to do  some real soul searching. I had many good offers from air craft  companies. This was the beginning of the space age, and two years after   I graduated  John F. Kennedy announced before the end of the    60s we  were going to have a man on the moon. So, this was really a good time  for people in my profession. Anyway, my dad was getting up in the  years at that time, so I joined him, and I also had another brother who  was in it, too. We did some work together and then we split up in 1971,  and I went out on my own and, you know, I like the success I have had.  Where did you go after you split up with it?  I stayed in Oklahoma City.  Were you able to come back to Stillwater much to participate in  activities?  Oh, yes.  Through the years, you   ve come back for Homecoming or athletic  events?  We haven   t missed many ball games in the last fifty years.  Do you come back for the football?  Oh, yes. I   ve bought season tickets every year.  That   s great. What is it about Oklahoma State for alumni like you that  sparks so much loyalty? What keeps you coming back to OSU?  Well, this is a very special place. I always said that all roads that go to  Heaven come through Stillwater, and I really mean that. It   s just a  special place and, as I mentioned, we do have a place up here now. My  wife and I, we just can   t wait to get up here. We stay up here quite a bit.  Do you? That   s great. Did you all have children?  Yes, I have four children.  Did any of them come to OSU?  All four of them graduated from OSU, and they   re very successful.  13  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Did they go one, two, three, four, or are they staggered out a little bit?  We had a child at OSU for thirteen years. Had three children in college  for about two years.  Wow. That   s a lot of traveling back and forth to see them, then.  Yes.  Can you tell us about how you feel like OSU impacted your life?  Well, it really impacted my life, and after being in the Marine Corps and  seeing how things go in the military, it gave me something to work for. I  guess you might say OSU opened that up, and I got really enthused  about getting a good education, which I think I did. And I really thank  OSU for doing that.  When you look back, though, at your time here at OSU, is there a  particular moment or special memory that you and your wife share, or  you in particular, that really stands out in your mind about OSU as far  as when you were here as a student?  Well, I just really liked the place. It   s hard to say.  Let me ask you, was it the people?  Yes.  Was it just a feeling on campus? You know we have such a beautiful  campus.  Yes.  The architecture and just the way the grounds are laid out. And there   s,  of course, Theta Pond. Those kinds of things. When you walked to  campus, how did you think about     Well, when I was a student, this was a very friendly campus. You could  walk across this campus and people would speak to you, smile at you,  and today it   s the same way. The same way. I hope it remains that way.  Do you remember who the president was at the time on campus?  Dr. Willham.  Can you recall anything about him that stands out in your mind?  14  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Not really. He did shake my hand when I walked across the stage.  Well, I heard that he tried to memorize every student   s name.  I didn   t know that.  So, when he was out and about he would try and greet them by name,  which I thought was just amazing.  I remember Dr. Kamm who preceded him.  Okay, tell us a little bit about him.  Well, I just   several times we were in meetings with him, and I  remember him talking.  Did you study in the library?  No. I had a special place at my house.  If you had to talk to a group of high school students and try to convince  them to come to OSU, what would you tell them?  I might mention to you in the    60s and    70s and    80s in Oklahoma  County we had honors banquets which we invited high school students.  We   d get the top 10 percent of every high school. We had twenty-eight  high schools in Oklahoma County. I worked for several years on that.  We would bring the best speakers, because we   d try to get the president  of the university to come. We didn   t always. And, at that time, we got  the chance to talk to a lot of kids and their parents. We thought these  banquets did wonders, and we got the parent and the student together  thinking about their future, thinking about their future education, and  that was a good time for that.  And how many years did you do that?  Oh gosh, about twenty.  Twenty years, wow.  The Alumni Association does something different now.  What do you think about the athletics that has changed over the years?  I really get enthused about athletics. And my wife played high school  basketball; she really loves basketball.  15  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  So, do you all have season tickets for that?  Do we? Yes.  And you come up for those games, too? That   s wonderful. Do your kids  come back with you? Do they still live in Oklahoma to come back, too?  My oldest son is in Flower Mound, Texas. He   s vice-president of  communication companies called PayTec. Our second son   s in Tulsa.  He   s with Munsters. They   re a motivational speaking group. His wife is  also an OSU graduate. And my oldest daughter lives in Tulsa and works  for ONEOK. She   s married to a Sooner. Our youngest daughter is in  Redmond, Washington, by Seattle, and she  resigned from eBay and is  now employed by Microsoft .  Oh, that   s interesting. Were any of them in Greek Life here on campus?  Yes, they all four of them were.  Do you know which ones?  Yes. The boys were in Delta Chi, and the girls were in Alpha Delta Pi.  Great. Is there anything that you would like to leave upon us with this  interview?  Well, could I talk a little bit about my company?  You bet. Go ahead. Tell us about that.  Well, as I said, I started over in 1970, and we struggled for many years.  Today we have 100 employees and, of that group, thirty of them are  former students or graduates. And we do actually still work for  Oklahoma State University.  And the name of the company?  Cobb Engineering Company. One of the projects that we designed and  that I   m kind of proud of, is the women   s soccer fields. At that location  was the old vet village, and we had to modify that terrain there to  construct the soccer fields. We did work on the transit center where the  buses are and parking garage is located. Did a lot of storm sewer and  sanitary sewer work and some paving work. We still have an open-end  contract with the university. We do a lot of design work for the City of  Oklahoma City and the State of Oklahoma through the Oklahoma  Department of Transportation  and Oklahoma Transportation Authority .  16  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  Where are your offices located in Oklahoma City?  Northwest Thirty-Sixth and Meridian.  So, do you always try to hire OSU grads if possible?  We hire both. You know, you got to get the person that you need, and it  depends on the availability.   I should tell you about the Posse Club.  I   ve got to go back to 1964.  Oklahoma State had a 1-8 record in 1963 in football. They didn   t play  the 10th game because of the assassination of President Kennedy. But,  anyway, 1964 football season I was meeting with the Alumni  Association, and I put forth the idea before the group that let   s organize  a Quarterback Club. And it didn   t go over too well. Then I went back to  my office, and I started getting calls from several people. They said,    I  think you got a good idea.    So, a day or so later we made a few phone  calls, and about thirty of us got together and we decided that we wanted  to go forth on organizing. At first, we called it Quarterback Club, then  we changed it to a Football Club. But November 11, 1964 was the day  that we organized the Oklahoma State Posse Club. There was about  forty-three of us, and I am tremendously proud of what it   s done for  Oklahoma State athletics today. It   s got 8,000 members.  And it   s still going strong.  Yes. So, I was actually the chairman of the committee that organized the  Posse Club.  Are there any other members that you would like to mention that helped  you with this?  Yes, there was Fred Jones and his brother Mitchell Jones who is now  deceased. Let   s see. There was Jim Devine, a veterinarian, J.W.  Mashburn, Ted Bonham, and Jim Hasenbect. That   s all I can think of,  but there was a lot of them.  Well, tell us just before you go about the scholarships that you and your  wife have given to the university. Can you tell us a little bit about those?  I was so proud of myself when I did graduate. I made a promise to  myself that if I ever had anything I was going to give back to the  university. Actually, we have three endowed scholarships: one in her  father   s name and two of them in our name. And then our company also  gives a scholarship annually. We had ten scholarships that we gave this  year.  17  Ahrberg  Cobb  Ahrberg  Cobb  That   s wonderful. Well, thank you again for your support to the  university. We definitely appreciate it. That   s about all I have for the  interview unless there   s something else you would like to add to this.  Well, I thank you for the opportunity to tell you all about  my family and  myself .  Well, we thank you. We   re so happy that you   re willing to step forth and  do this interview with us. It   s been a pleasure to meet you, and I can   t  thank you enough for coming in today.  I enjoyed it. Thank you.  -------  -------   
