Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  My name is Janet Ahrberg. Today is October 15, 2009 and I am visiting  with Tomisene Ingram here in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is  for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. Tomisene, welcome to campus for the Women of  Willard    WOW    reunion. We   re glad to have you.  Thank you.  Can you tell me a little bit about your early life, where you grew up,  your family and the school that you attended?  I grew up in Fay, Oklahoma, actually in the country. My father was a  farmer and my mother was a housewife. I attended Fay School. When I  was about thirteen my father died, and when I was in college, my  freshman year for just about two months, my mother died. But she  supported me those years, and I wanted to go to college. And in Fay you  didn   t go to college unless you had a family of means, and I wanted to  go anyway. My family never had much, but I wanted to go anyway, and  my sister tried to keep me from it, but my mother said,    We   ll find a  way.    I was in 4-H and my extension agent found me a job on campus. I  was working in the home economics research lab on a foods project that  a woman, I can   t remember her name now, was writing and so I worked  there my freshman year.  Wonderful. Was there a reason why you attended OSU?  I always wanted to go to OSU because I was in 4-H, and every year you  came to 4-H Roundup. I loved it. I loved the campus. I loved everything  about it.  What is it about the campus itself? Was it the physical beauty of the  campus, or was it the people you met that gave you a favorable  5  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  impression?  The people were really friendly. I just loved the closeness of everyone.  We stayed in the dorms, so I just loved it all. It was a beautiful campus.  What years did you live in Willard Hall?  I lived in Willard Hall in 1956 and 1957.  So, your freshman and sophomore year.  I only went three years because in those days, you could get as many  hours as you could for one price. It was  169 for tuition for one  semester; you take as many hours as you wanted. So, I went in three  years and two summers.  Wow, that   s impressive. Were you assigned to Willard Hall or did you  specifically request Willard?  I didn   t. I just happened to get Willard Hall, and I happened to get  another freshman who was also in 4-H. She was from southeast  Oklahoma and we just met up, and our freshman year we were together.  So, you were on that second floor?  No, I was on the third floor.  The third floor, okay.  But my counselor, we had a counselor, she was from the second floor.  So, people went up and went down. (Laughs)  What were your first impressions of Willard Hall when you first arrived  there?  It had steam heat. I was not used to any heat. (Laughs) When I grew up,  you didn   t have heat in your bedrooms, and you didn   t have air  conditioning or anything like that. So, we had steam heat. I had a warm  bedroom for the first time in my life. I loved it  (Laughs)  With that said, did it sometimes get a little hot?  It did. You   d just open the window.  What was your room like? Can you describe the surroundings in your  room?  6  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Well, there were two beds and two desks, and a place to keep a chest to  keep your clothes, and a sink. And that was it. You went down the hall  to the bathroom. You went down the hall to take a bath, and the washer  and dryer was in the basement. So, if you had a quarter, you washed  your clothes down there, and if you didn   t, which I usually didn   t, I  washed them in that sink.  What was it like trying to have a personal conversation on that floor  phone? Do you remember the floor phone?  Well, it was out in the hall.  Did you use it?  I used it a lot. I met my husband my freshman year, and he called me a  lot. Actually, I came to school engaged, but the boy I was engaged to did  not want me to go to college. He wanted me to come home and get  married, and I wanted to go to college. So, at Christmastime my  freshman year, I broke that off and I started dating my husband. He  coached my basketball team. I played sports.  Intramural sports?  And college sports.  Oh, you did?  I played on the women   s basketball team, a women   s hockey team and  the women   s softball team. And we traveled.  This is wonderful. Oh, my gosh. You   ll have to tell us about that. Who  were your coaches?  Ms. Lindsay was one of them, I know that. I remember Ms. Lindsay.  Mrs. Colvin was one of them.  Valerie Colvin, okay.  Yes, I remember those two.  Wow, that is interesting. So, how did you juggle your school and playing  sports?  And working.  And working.  7  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Very carefully. Very carefully.  Wow, that   s impressive. Which sport did you prefer the most? Which one  did you like the most?  All of them. Except in basketball, you had to play by the rules, and the  rules were you couldn   t dribble more than two times. I hated that. Of  course, it wasn   t full court.  You   re not the only one to say that today. (Laughter) It   s funny how that  has come out. Did they recruit you? Did you come up on campus and  they had tryouts, and you just went over and tried out?  Yes, I did.  Now, this was not a club team? This was the     The traveling team. We didn   t travel much, but I have an OSU   I have  an O. That was the year I was a freshman, was the year when it went  from A   M to OSU.  So, you became the Big 8 Conference, too.  Yes.  What was it like to travel? How did you all travel? Did you travel by bus  or did you take cars?  No, we traveled in cars. We were never, in those days, important like the  men were. Matter of fact, as a freshman, you had to be in by eight  o   clock and you had to wear dresses. And so that spring, they came out  with, they called them pedal pushers or slim jims or something, but you  could wear those in your leisure time if you wore socks up to     To the top of the pants.  Yes.  Was Willard considered to be a popular or prestigious hall at this time  when you were there?  I think maybe Stout was supposed to be. It was the newest and, I think,  maybe cost a little bit more, but Willard Hall was right by the pond, and  then we went to vespers at Wesley Foundation most nights. So, we just  trotted across there.  8  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  In your mind, what set Willard apart from other women   s halls in the  late 1950s?  I thought we were friendlier, and I thought we were closer. And I did  work in that dorm cafeteria a little bit my second semester, because you  could just go down and work and then go to class. I needed a little bit  more money.  I   m going to see if any of these traditions ring a bell with you. What was  Willard   s beach, and do you know where that took place?  Don   t know.  What about some of the Christmas traditions there at Willard? Do you  remember setting up a tree or singing Christmas carols around a piano?  I don   t remember the carols. I remember the tree. I remember when you  worked, and I went home until my mother died in the last of October, so  you know, I wasn   t able to do all those things. We had a ball, a Snow  Ball, I remember that.  Oh, really?  I don   t know if it was in January or when.  Did Willard participate in Homecoming events or contests?  Yes, and I always worked on the float and did those things.  Did they do it by themselves or did they join in with another     Men   s. Usually joined in with a men   s dorm.  Did a lot of women participate in it or was it usually a few that would do  this?  I think a lot of us did.  Do you remember what would happen when a woman at Willard would  become engaged?  I don   t know.  Do you remember anything about dorm scrapbooks?  I do remember those.  9  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Who was responsible for putting those together?  You know, it seems to me like we elected officers, and we elected an  officer to do that.  Were you ever an officer in Willard?  I was an officer on the floor and I was a monitor. Another job I had, I  went to make sure the women were in. I had the first floor and the fourth  floor.  What was the penalty if somebody was late coming in?  Well, you wrote it down and, of course, our head woman, our mother,  she took care of it.  Can you tell us a little bit about the dorm mom?  She was so good. She was just wonderful. I just loved her.  What was her name?  Oh, gosh, I don   t know, but I can see her. I can see her face and I can see  her   she   s a little bit round, a little bit short. And she was so good. You  would just walk in and sit down and talk to her. I just loved her.  Do you remember anything about the 1955 panty raid?  I didn   t get there until    56.  Did you ever hear about anything?  I heard about the panty raid.  What were the resident hall hours when you were on campus?  As a freshman year, you had to be in at eight, and then if you made your  grades, then you could be out until ten.  You lived on the third floor. What was that like? Did you have any  special events? Did you come in from work and go to somebody   s room  and hang out?  Yes, we did. Yes.  What was that like? Did you play cards?  10  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  We sometimes played cards. I remember one time they put free  cigarettes in our mailboxes, so we all got our cigarettes and we smoked  those as long as we could stand it, and then we threw them all out. I  remember that. Sometimes we went to Jenny   s room. That was our  counselor. Sometimes we went to another room.  Did you do anything special around the holidays to decorate your  doors?  We had door decoration contests.  Is there one particular memory about Willard that really stands out in  your mind when you think back?  Well, I loved Willard. I just loved it. But I meant to tell you, I guess I  talked about it a lot because my youngest daughter ended up in Willard.  Neat   She wanted to live in Willard.  I assume it was just before they turned it into an administrative building.  Yes, right before.  Were there any tough times in your Willard experience?  Absolutely there was. It was difficult to do the things they   you know,  you had to get your schoolwork done, and then they needed for you to  work on this, and then we played intramural sports by floor. So, I played  on, sometimes it was two floors together and sometimes it was one. I  was talking to Harriet. Harriet and I played together, but I always played  co-ed sports. And I also played college sports.  Did you have uniforms, or what did you play in?  We just played in   I really think we might have been able to wear  shorts. Now, for college  teams  we had suits.  Okay, because they probably didn   t give you t-shirts like they do now.  I couldn   t afford it, anyway. I was on a very strict budget. I remember  one time, it was in the summer and I was typing for people. That was  when Langston University   people were allowed to come over to OSU,  and so the women who came from Langston were usually teachers, and  they didn   t do well typing and getting their papers ready. I had a very  11  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  good English teacher in high school, and so I did those papers for those  women, and they paid me early and I had money to eat and they didn   t.  My father was a World War I veteran, and so they gave me  29 a month  and so that bought one meal ticket and I sometimes ran out.  Wow. Was there diversity in Willard? Do you remember any ethnic or  international students being a part of     Yes, they were down on the first floor, and they were my people. I  checked them in. Of course, they were always there, so that wasn   t a  problem, but yes. And then I also took up cleaning for a little bit of  salary. They had their long saris. They had those cleaned.  Can you describe their experience there, or how you felt, did they have a  good experience in Willard?  They seemed to. They were all on first floor east and, so I think    Most  of them were on the first floor.  How were they treated by the other women in the dorm?  They sort of stayed apart, but we all talked. We were a friendly campus.  Matter of fact, I had a boy come over from OU to date me and he said,     Man, this is a friendly place over here.    (Laughs) I tried to talk to them.  Their language was limited. They were from Pakistan. I   ll never forget  that. They were from Pakistan.  That   s incredible, in that time period. Why do you think that the women  of Willard have stayed so close through the years and continue to have  reunions even fifty years later?  Well, almost everybody was a leader of sorts. You know, we were all  leaders and usually one of them was a president of the dorm. Now, some  of them moved over to the house. I know Virginia did, and they were  still leaders. They just enjoyed each other. None of us drank, none of us  smoked, and we went to vespers together and we just loved each other.  And they included me and Willene, even though we were  floor  three.  Have you participated in many of the reunions they   ve had?  Almost all of them.  Oh, that   s wonderful. Where have you traveled with them?  Well, we were in Virginia   s house in Colorado. We were in Sequoia at  that park there, and I can   t tell you where   I think we   ve been to five of  12  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  them.  What was your major, again?  I majored in vocational home economics.  And you graduated in what year?  Actually 1960 because I took a correspondence course to complete my  studies, and I took it in the fall of    59. And in those days, remember,  your semesters went into January.  Can you share some highlights of your life after leaving OSU and where  are you living now?  Well, my husband was an ag major and he looked for jobs in ranges, oil  conservation. Our first job was in Nebraska, and so we just piled our few  little things in a trailer and went to Nebraska. We   ve been in Nebraska,  we   ve been in South Dakota, we   ve been in San Carlos, Arizona and  finally, when our kids got old enough to date, we did come back to  Carnegie, Oklahoma.  And so your daughter went to OSU?  I have two daughters. They both graduated from OSU. I have one son  who graduated from OSU, and one who started here and graduated from  the School of Arts in Chickasha.  That   s wonderful. Do you remember any particular classes or professors  that influenced your life here at OSU?  I   ll never forget Ms. McAllister. Home economics majors had to be in  the Home Management House, and so because I had upped a grade and I  was with these ladies their last year, I was in the Home Management  House with Virginia, who I think is here, and several of them. Ms.  McAllister was the person who stayed in the house, and because I was  married, I got to ride my bike back and forth and I didn   t have to spend  the night. She taught me more about life, at least about cooking and  nutrition, than anybody I knew. I   ll never forget that. We had a high  budget, medium budget, and low budget if we were the manager, and we  were either the cook or the housekeeper or the     Wow.  Yes, she taught me more. I   ll never forget Ms. McAllister. (Laughter)  Never forget her.  13  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Are there any popular student hangouts that you  frequented ?  Student Union, and I did not know how to dance or swim when I went to  campus, and we had to take swimming and I learned to swim and I took  ballroom dancing. Learned to dance, and we went up to the fourth floor  of the Student Union sometimes after vespers and danced with the  foreign students because they knew how to dance. I loved that.  That is so interesting.  I loved that. And also, the Wesley Foundation. I spent a lot of time at the  Wesley Foundation. I loved it.  What about the library? Did you go to the library?  I went to the library a lot until I got scared. Of course, I had to do all my  library work at night, and one night I was coming home and then I got  scared, and I ran all the way home to Willard and I didn   t go at night  anymore. I was scared someone was following me.  Do you know what president was on campus at the time that you were  there? Was it Willham or Bennett?  Probably Bennett. Home ec majors   I was always active in home ec  school, and the main part was on west and then the foods was on east,  and I was active in that. I didn   t have much time to do it, but I was active  in that. I was an officer and I loved that.  What were your favorite memories of your student experience? Was it  working? Was it playing sports? Was it just the classes?  Being free.  Being free?  Being free. For the first time in my life, I made my own decisions, did  what I wanted. I loved that. I had a lot of friends. I loved the  camaraderie of the people who were in school. It   s different with kids  who don   t really care about being a good student. I like being a good  student. I also love the Wesley Foundation. I just loved that. It was just a  good place to be. I just loved that.  Is there anything you want to share with us about your OSU experience  that we haven   t covered?  I remember going to the ball games. You got free tickets if you were a  14  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  student. I remember, if I could, I went to the ball games.  Did you go to basketball? Everybody mentions the basketball games.  Oh, I went to football. I loved football. Hadn   t been around football.  Loved football. Loved basketball. Loved wrestling.  Were you able to travel to any of the out of town games when they  played out of town?  No, didn   t have a way to do that. Did not.  I   m so interested in your sports. Where did you practice?  In the big gym. There was another place, but I just can   t remember  where that was. In the big gym.  And how often did you travel out of Stillwater?  I remember going to North Texas State one time. Also, we had  individual sports, and I played ping pong. I can really play ping pong  because we did it in high school. So, I remember going to Norman and  playing and representing OSU.  Do you remember a big game that you all won that left a big impression  on you?  We beat North Texas State in women   s basketball. Didn   t in field  hockey, but we did in basketball.  Was there a lot of women that went out for sports? You   re the first one  I   ve heard that mentioned it.  No, and I love sports, and I could have really majored in that and I   m  going to be honest with you. Most of them were jocks. You know, and  today we would probably call them, maybe, more oriented toward men-type  sports. And the coaches, none of the teachers were married except  one. The swimming teacher was married. I thought,    No, I   m not. I don   t  fit in here.    And I needed to find a safe place that if I got married  because, see, I had no parents. So, I needed to find a safe thing that I  could do, and I loved teaching home economics. I did for quite awhile.  Did you marry your husband here at OSU?  I married him the end of my sophomore year. We came back our last  year and lived in an apartment right off campus, and I had a ball.  15  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Ingram  Ahrberg  Because you got married, how did you keep up your friendship with the  women at Willard?  I saw them often and I went to visit them and, of course, I was in classes  with them, remember, because I was a senior and they were seniors, too.  Most of these people were seniors. Harriet and I are one down, but then I  was in the Home Management House with Virginia.  Well, since you   ve graduated, you said you   ve lived in other places, but  now you   re back in Carnegie. Do you come back to OSU at all for any  Homecoming events?  When our kids were on campus, we came every football game. We had  season football tickets, came every football game, brought food up to  them. We ate in the dorm wherever they were, and went to the football  game together. They were students but they usually came around and sat  with us. You know how you can squeeze in. (Laughs)  Well, I can   t think of anything else, and I know you need to go. I want to  thank you again for sharing your stories with us. It   s been a pleasure to  meet you. I hope you have a great reunion with these lovely ladies I   ve  met.  I know we will. My husband   you should have interviewed him because  he was their age. He dated a lot     He dated a lot of women of Willard?  Yes, I would say most of them. (Laughs)  Okay. Thank you.  -------  -------   
