 Gill. Today is May 24, 2010. I   m visiting with Dr.  George Oberle in his home, here, southeast of Tulsa. This interview is  for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. George, I appreciate you taking time to visit with us  this afternoon.  Jerry, my pleasure.  You served as head of the Department of Health, Physical Education  and Leisure  Studies  at Oklahoma State University from 1974 to     Nineteen ninety-three.  So, for nearly twenty years.  Yes.  A very pivotal time for the department. I   d like to visit with you a little  bit about the department, specifically about administration in women   s  sports programs, the transfer of women   s sports from HPELS,  Department of Intercollegiate Athletics and around those topics, but first  I   d like to go back and find out a little bit about your early life, your  professional career before you got to Oklahoma State. Can you start  with where you grew up and your family?  I grew up in Indianapolis, Indiana, and graduated from Decatur Central  High School in Indianapolis, a small rural high school in southwest  Indianapolis, and then went on to Earlham College in Richmond,  Indiana, which was a small Quaker school of about a thousand students.  I played football and basketball and baseball there. Then from there,  once I graduated from Earlham College, I took my first head coaching  job as head football coach and head baseball coach at Mooresville,  5  Indiana. I was there from 1952 to 1953. Earlham called and said that  they had an opening on their staff, would I come back and be a part of  their staff. And, of course, being my alma mater, I thought,    Wow, look  at this,    (Laughter) an ideal opportunity, so I said yes. I went back, and I  went back as head baseball coach and assistant football coach at  Earlham from    53-   56, I think it is. Then in    56 I got a call from a brand  new high school which was opening up then in Indianapolis called North  Central High School. North Central High School was just starting, and  they were trying to get a staff together. I said yes, I would come, and I  was there from, I guess,    56-   58 as their head baseball coach and  assistant football coach and, again, director of their summer recreation  program.  Then in    58 Earlham called back and said,    Would you come back?    and  I said,    Well, you know       Hard to cut those strings of your old alma  mater. I said yes, I would, so I went back as athletic director and head  football coach and head baseball coach. I was there two years until 1960,  and in 1960 I got a call from Marion, Indiana, saying that they were  looking for a person to head up their athletic department. They had  eleven elementary schools, three junior highs and a high school that they  wanted an athletic director, a coordinator of athletics, and would I come  down and be that. So, I said,    Well, that   s an unusual opportunity,    so I  said yes and went to Marion, Indiana, and became their athletic director  for their school system. I was there from I guess that would   ve been  from    60-   62, and then in 1962, Indiana State called and said,    We have  an opening on our staff at Indiana State University. Would you consider  coming over?    And I said,    Oh, that   s a university. Okay, I   ll take that  opportunity.     So, I went to Indiana State University as assistant football coach and  assistant baseball coach and was there nine years and decided that I  would go back and get the doctor   s degree. I gave up my coaching after  about five years, went back and got the doctor   s degree because our son  was getting ready to participate in high school sports and I wanted to see  him participate, and so as a coach, you   re always on the road recruiting,  or you   re always on the road doing something, and I felt like I needed to  come and spend some more time with him. So, I went back and got the  doctor   s degree and became the assistant dean of the School of Health,  Physical Education and Recreation at Indiana State for about the last  three years I was there. Then I got a call from Chicago State University,  and Chicago State said,    Would you be interested in coming up and  being our athletic director and chairman of our department?    I said,     Well, okay, I   ve never been to Chicago, so I   ll go to Chicago.    So, I  went to Chicago, and I was up there three years and then got the call  from Oklahoma State in 1974 saying that they had an opening on their  staff and asked me if I would be interested in coming down and  6  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  interviewing at Oklahoma State. I said yes, I would be willing to do that.  I told my parents when they heard that we were thinking about coming  to Oklahoma, they said,    You   re not going to take our grandkids away  from us, are you?    And I said,    Well, we   re just going to be down there  three or four or five years, and we   ll be back up here in Indiana.    Well,  almost twenty years later we never got back to Indiana, so from    74-   93  I was at Oklahoma State, and it was some of the best times of our lives.  Let me back up and ask you a couple questions about your family and  when you grew up. What did your dad do?  My dad had to go to work when he was a sophomore. He dropped out of  high school, had to go to work because his father died. He had to help  support his mother and two sisters, so he dropped out of school and went  to work in a creosoting company in Indianapolis and went from just  being a yard person to eventually becoming manager of their plant there.  So, he spent his whole entire life with Republic Creosoting Company.  Very rarely is that done anymore, where one person spends their entire  years of employment with one company, but he did. Never got his high  school degree, but it didn   t stop him from being the quality of man that  he was.  And did your mother work outside the home?  Well, part-time. She was a night telephone operator for a couple years.  After she got the kids to bed, she went over to the telephone office,  which was about, oh, maybe a hundred yards from our home, and she  had a cot there that she slept in all night and was the night telephone  operator. That   s when they would call in with two longs and a short.  That tells you what the stage of that telephone situation was, but then  later she quit that and did part-time postmistress at the post office there  in the little community that we were in.  Did you have any brothers or sisters?  I had two brothers and a sister. My sister was three years younger than I.  She   s now deceased. My oldest brother was six years younger than I,  and then I have a brother who   s twenty years younger than I who  happens to be an ISU (Indiana State University) graduate and is still  coaching at Decatur Central, our old alma mater, back in Indianapolis.  So, both brothers, they were much better athletes than I. My oldest  brother, Jerry, was all-county in both football and basketball, and my  youngest brother, David, was all-state and all-county in both football  and basketball and went to Indiana State on a scholarship.  In high school, you said, you played football, basketball, baseball?  7  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Yes.  Did the girls play? Did they have sports for girls at that time?  No, no. They really didn   t. There really wasn   t at a high school level,  and that was back in about    45-   48. Now, that   s the period of time that I  was in high school, and there really wasn   t much in the way of sports  participation for girls at all. There wasn   t even play days. Play days  came more on the college level and later on than high school. There  wasn   t much at all.  George, you shared information about your career up to Oklahoma  State. I understand the sports background of coaching and being  involved, but where did your interest in physical education as an  academic career come from?  Well, it came from   when I went to Earlham, my folks wanted me to be  pre-med, so I started in pre-med. Just didn   t want that. So, then I said,     Well, Mom and Dad, I think I want to switch to pre-dentistry.    And  they said,    Okay,    and so I switched to pre-dentistry. And I got to  thinking,    Do I want my hands in people   s mouths eight hours a day?     and I said,    Well, no, I just don   t think I want that either.    So, then I just  decided the fact that,    What do you like to do?    and I liked sports, and I  liked, again, the nature of sports. So, I said,    I think I   d like to become a  physical educator,    because at that point in time to be a coach, you  almost needed to be a physical educator. And so I just became prepared  in physical education to go out and to coach, and that was my first love  was coaching at that point in time.  You were at Indiana State. You said you wanted to kind of get out of the  coaching a little bit to have more time with your son?  Yes.  Is that when you looked at moving into administration?  Yes, I think it was, simply because if I   m going to spend the money  going to get the doctor   s degree, I need to make that work, and to do that  you needed to get into the upper echelon of administration. And so once  I made the decision to give up my coaching and then go back and get the  degree, then my goals switched to becoming department chair or people  who help determine policy, set policy, and to run programs.  George, you talked about at Oklahoma State in    74, your appointment to  the position of chairman of what is now the Department of Health and  8  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Physical Education, Leisure Sciences. What do you remember about the  search? How did you find out about it, and can you tell me about the  search process?  Yes, sure. It was the Department of Physical Education at that point in  time. My predecessor  Alvin Warner, died while in office . Valerie  Colvin was still alive at that point in time. The Colvin Center is now  named after  her . How I got there, I got a call from the search  committee, and indicated the fact that they were looking for a person to  chair that Department of Physical Education and would I be interested. I  said I didn   t know Oklahoma. I   d never been to Oklahoma before. I   d  heard that   s where tornadoes are put together and sent up our way, being  in Chicago, and they said,    Well yes, that   s true. We do have tornadoes  here, but a tornado has never hit Stillwater in all the years of Stillwater.     And I said,    Okay.    So, I said,    Well, yes, we   ll come down and visit  with you.    My first interview with them was done in Las Vegas. They  had a search committee. We were going to the national meeting, and  they said,    If you don   t mind, we   d like to meet with you in Las Vegas  and just kind of do a preliminary interview.     Could I back up and ask you, so you were for the Physical Education  Department at that time, and were you known, had you gone to   I   m  trying to figure out how Oklahoma State University knew you and  contacted you.  Well, professionally, I was quite active.  National association?  National association. I had started to establish a  national  reputation, I  think, in program development and design, and I think it   s a matter that  they did some homework. A lady by the name of Dr. Lindsey and I went  to Indiana University together when we were doing our doctoral degree,  and I don   t know how much influence she had, but Chuck Schelsky,  who was on staff and director of the Colvin Center at that point in time,  was, again, from Indiana. We knew one another casually, so I guess as  my name appeared on the interviews   in fact, I was told (now, this is  second hand, I can   t verify this) that they couldn   t decide on a person.  They had a very difficult time, because Student Services had one  function of the position, academics had a function of the position, and  then Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics was just starting to come on  board at that point in time. They had play days, and it was not well  organized. So, I found out in my interview   I had interviewed Norman  Moore for Student Services, George Gries in academics (he was dean of  the College of Arts and Sciences), dean of Education where our doctoral  program was (our doctoral degree program was in education), and Floyd  9  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gass was in athletics.  That was the committee?  That  these were  people I interviewed with when I came on campus. So,  I interviewed with the folks in Las Vegas, and they came back, and it  wasn   t maybe a couple days I got a call from Dean Gries    office saying,     Could you come down and let us interview you?    And I said,    Okay.     They flew Marie and I down, and we interviewed with the people that I   just  indicated. A short time later they offered the job. I also  interviewed with Dr.  Robert  Kamm, and he was the one who asked me  about my interest in Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, as to whether or  not I felt like this was something that I would feel comfortable with, and  I said,    Yes, I feel comfortable with that.    And so I think the fact that I   d  had the breadth of both academics and athletics and administration of  those programs is probably what led me to Oklahoma State.  George, you indicated that you interviewed with Floyd Gass, who was  the athletic director at the time. Do you recall any of your discussion  about Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics when you visited with him?  I think he felt like,    Boy, you   re bailiwick. I want you to have it.     (Laughter) I think Floyd felt like that the men   s program is where he  belonged, and I think that he could probably see some of the problems  that coordination of men   s and women   s programs and Title IX was not  necessarily really on board with a full-fledged emphasis at that point in  time.  It passed in    72?  In    74. Yes, it was set in 1974. And so, when I came on board they said,     Now, George, you   ll have the academic program, you   ll be in charge of  the Colvin Recreation Center, you   ll be in charge of the graduate  program, and you also will be in charge of the women   s intercollegiate  program, such as it is.    At that point in time, all we had were play days,  and most of the staff in the academic area were the coaches. They  weren   t hired coaches. Women   s coaching was not in the picture at that  point in time.  You mentioned that you visited with President Kamm. What was  President Kamm   s position on women   s intercollegiate sports? Do you  recall?  My recollection is that he was in full support simply because he knew  that it would eventually be here, and I have the greatest respect for Bob  Kamm. He was a  true  intellect.  10  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  George, we talked about your position at Oklahoma State University  being a transitional period. You   ve alluded to it some with coaching, but  what was the status of women   s sports? For example, we   ll start off with  what sports were being offered that were competing intercollegiate, not  just intramural.  Let me go back and say that when I got there,  we were  a Department  of Physical Education. They had just started a four year program in  recreation. I did a year   s study of the department, again, trying to figure  out how all of this could be put together. So, with the staff   s help we  devised a program to become a School of Health, Physical Education,  and Leisure Services, and we did that with the idea that we would be  able to embrace all the different aspects with a structure that would have  direct leadership. The first Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics   coordinator  was Dr. Betty Abercrombie. I acted as the director, but she  was the coordinator, kind of coordinated it. Now, what was there, then,  in 1974? Play days.  Can you explain play days a little bit?  Play days would be   Central State would call and say,    Do you want to  come down and let   s have a play day with the women?    Okay, and so  we   d load up some women who wanted to go down and play, and they   d  play maybe basketball or field hockey or softball. They would  predetermine what they wanted to play. They   d go down, and they   d just  play for a day and then come back. That was the nature of Women   s  Intercollegiate Athletics in 1974, was play day. And the rules governing  that were rules governed by both AIAW  Association for Intercollegiate  Athletics for Women  and DGWS. DGWS was Division  for  Girls    and  Women   s Sports, and that was a council within the American  Association for Health, Physical Education and Recreation, which at that  point in time was the national organization. So, DGWS through AIAW  pretty much ran women   s intercollegiate sports for a period of time, and  then as time went along, DGWS kind of faded out. AIAW kind of took  over, and then later we   ll talk about that period of transition. AIAW then  went to NCAA. In    74, women   s sports were just basically play days.  Field hockey, volleyball, basketball, tennis, golf, swimming and diving,  track and field, softball and gymnastics. Does that sound like what you  were doing?  Yes, I think so. When you called, I tried to put these things together.  Volleyball was one of the early sports. Swimming   once we set the  organization for women   s intercollegiate sports and set it up to run as a  sports program, we then started to add all these programs. Volleyball  11  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  was added, swimming, field hockey was there, softball, golf, tennis,  gymnastics, track and field, basketball, and then those were basically the  sports that we used.  And you talked about earlier that primarily the coaches here were just  PE instructors and were just doubling up as coaches in the sports  department?  That   s right. They had an interest in   Pauline Winter, Betty Edgley, J.  C.  Judy  Showers. Well, I can give you the background. Our first  volleyball coach was Frankie  Frances  Albitz. I don   t know where  Frankie is now, but Frankie was there when volleyball was dropped, and  that was later in the 1980s. We dropped volleyball and swimming, field  hockey, gymnastics. Gymnastics came a little later after, but volleyball  and swimming were the first two to go. And oddly enough, Dr. Richard  Young, who was brought on board as athletic director, he was the one  that, as we looked at the sports going from our area to his area and what  the budget and program could entail, decided that volleyball and  swimming were two that probably we could do  without , and oddly  enough, his daughter was on the volleyball team. (Laughs) Talk about  tough decisions   George, how was the women   s sports program at that time different  from the men   s sports program?  Well, first of all, we had very little budget. I don   t remember exactly  what my budget was. I think  20,000 was the entire program budget in  1974. We finally got it up to, I think it was, around  65,000 to  70,000.  That just wasn   t really enough to carry the program, but we didn   t pay  coaches    salaries. The coaches, Larry Bilhartz was funded out of  academics. He was the gymnastics coach. Betty Edgley was a graduate  assistant. Bilhartz was a graduate assistant, too. Betty Edgley was a  graduate assistant, and she got maybe a little bit of extra money out of  that  20,000 if you could imagine. They didn   t get much. I don   t  remember. Pauline Winter was kind of our first softball coach, and later  after Pauline, Sandy Fischer came on board after that. But Pauline, she  was an academic, and she was paid basically out of academics. Coach   Colonel Jim  Cutter kind of got women   s swimming started, and he, of  course, had the men   s program for years and years and years, but we  finally hired Jean Chase Farnum. She was from the East Coast, and she  was the first female swimming coach, but shortly after she got there, we  dropped swimming, and so I think we didn   t have it longer than two or  three years. But as you can see, most of these women   s coaches at that  point in time were academic people, and just were paid stipend money  for it. Very little consideration.  12  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  How did that differ from the coaches of the men   s sports?  Oh, well I think    (Laughs)  Had to ask.  Yes, I know. You had to ask. I don   t remember exactly what Floyd   s  budget was at that point in time, but I   m going to guess the basketball  coach and J. C. Showers, who was the basketball coach when I got  there   she was coaching the women   s basketball team. I don   t  remember who the men   s basketball coach was, but their budget  probably was around four to five million dollars.  Yours was twenty thousand?  Yes.  And their coaches were     Full time.  Full time. And they were     Full-time coaches, although some of their coaches taught for us. Colonel  Cutter was swimming coach. He taught swimming for us. I had  contacted Mike Holder to see if he was interested in coaching the golf  team. Mike said he had his hands full and probably would not  necessarily want to do that at that point in time, had all he could   handle , so that   s when we hired Anne Pitts. Anne Pitts was brought on  board, and she taught golf for us and then was the women   s golf coach.  So much of these women   s coaches were paid out of the academic  budgets.  George, I picked up on something, that the WIA, Women   s  Intercollegiate Athletics program, was in charge of women   s sports  under HPELS. Do you recall that?  Yes, that was basically a recreation   on most college campuses, WIA,  Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, was, again, the play day experiences  that the girls had and Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, if there were  any kind of awards or acknowledgement of anything anybody   s done  through WIA, and then AIAW came on board.  At that time when you came on board, was there any such thing as  scholarships offered in women   s sports, or other financial aids?  13  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Yes, we did. I think I was talking to Betty Edgley about this the other  day, and I think she said she had two part-time scholarships for women   s  tennis. That would be back in    75. She didn   t come on board   we didn   t  really start the full women   s athletic program until 1975 because we  took a year to do the study and to frame the structure for women   s  intercollegiate sports at Oklahoma State, so there was   and I   m not  sure. Anne Pitts could probably tell you what she had in the beginning,  but it was very meager. The scholarship program, men   s and women   s,  two things were very evident. If Title IX was to be adhered to and  acknowledged and honored, there   s going to have to be a major gift for  scholarships, and we   re going to have to be service providers in  Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, like athletic training. We had no  athletic trainers in    75. I finally hired Jean Chase Farnum. She had a  husband, and he was an athletic trainer, so we kind of hired that  combination to do limited  training , but we had no training room, you  know. All it was, it was taping.  Speaking of that, it leads to another question. Could you describe what  the facilities were like when you got there for women   s intercollegiate  sports?  Colvin Center was taxed. It has always been taxed, from the time I got  there in    74 to the time I left. It   s always been well used because then  you have the academic program, and you have the recreational program,  which is second to none. Kent Bunker, and before him Gordon Gilbert,  those guys have done just an outstanding job, again, in providing  recreational and intramural sports for students here at Oklahoma State  University. Outstanding, outstanding. And then you had not only that  program and the academic program, all vying for space, you put then  Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, so we had to convert. We had to take  some of the gyms   like the gymnastics gym. We had to take away a  basketball court and an activity area and devote that totally to women   s  gymnastics. When you put all that athletic equipment in there, and of  course golf and tennis. Tennis, of course, we used the courts over by  the     By the old armory there?     by the old armory over there until we got the new courts, which are  now by the annex. But we had to get in line to use those because the  instructional program used those for instruction, tennis courts.  James   Wadley used them for tennis and was a stress, so I must admit, much of  my time as an administrator was trying to make sure that all three areas  had enough time to be able to provide programs. We crowded the  recreational program. We crowded the academic program to provide the  space for Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, but that   s the only way it  14  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  could be done.  Really, I   d just kind of summarize. You had competition with, of course,  academic courses and PE courses. Then you had recreational class,  intramural sports, etc., free play, just interested in free play. Then you  had the women   s intercollegiate sports and in some instances, then, even  the men   s sports that you competed with, like tennis and so forth. That  must   ve been some kind of hassle. (Laughter)  Well, we just tried to, again, do the best we could and make sure that  people understood what was needed at that point in time. Chuck  Schelsky, who was the coordinator of the Colvin Center at that point in  time, did an outstanding job in helping with that. Chuck did just a  tremendous job in assisting me with that. He was the coordinator of the  facility, and there were many times he came in and said,    George, can   t  do that. That   s got to be this person   s role. Can   t crowd those folks.     And he and I would sit down, and we   d talk about this, so Chuck was  very instrumental in making sure that we did it right.  Trying to solve it, cut that baby in half.  Right, (Laughter) and sometimes I got to give him the guillotine and say,     Go do it, Chuck.     George, we   re talking about, of course, the Colvin Recreation Center.  What other facilities were you competing with? There   s softball     Well, track and field. We didn   t have, basically, a softball field at that  point.  What facilities were you using?  Using the track and field. We eventually got a softball field put in. I  think Ike Groce was   no, Ike Groce was women   s tennis coach. Sandy  Fischer was probably the one who helped develop the softball field.  She created the field where the current stadium is now, right?  Yes. There was a playfield there, is what   this was the play field.  The intramural play field?  Yes, the intramural play field, and we played softball on that, but it was  later developed into what we now know as the softball stadium. But for  women   s basketball, we used Colvin Center. We didn   t use Iba Hall. For  track and field we used track and field. Swimming we used     15  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  The track was around the stadium, or did you have a track?  We used the track. Beginning, we used the track around the football  field in the stadium, and then   what was the track coach   s name? The  old-timer that   Higgins?  It was Ralph Higgins, then Ralph  Tate .  Anyhow, he got a lady to give some money, and the university  developed the track where it is in existence today. But we used that.  Trying to think, softball, golf. I   m not sure what Anne did with golf.  Larry Bridges was one of the first track coaches, and I think Anne  negotiated time at the Country Club.  Yes, I think she was using Lakeside for the first part too, she indicated in  her interview.  Yes. I think both men   s and women   s used Lakeside a lot.  Can we change it up a little? When you did hold competition, when you  got past the game day and you started developing some more  professions, what kind of teams would you have, typically, in a women   s  athletic event?  Well, we participated basically with the other schools in the state of  Oklahoma. We didn   t go out of the state much at all those first few  years. In fact, with field hockey, we were playing high schools because  there weren   t enough colleges playing field hockey, and we were one of  the only few colleges playing field hockey at that point in time. So,  where would we go? Cascia Hall, we   d go to Oklahoma City, Holland  Hall. We   d come to Tulsa and play Holland Hall or invite them to come  to campus, and so these were basically public schools, and it was just,  again, kind of a play day kind of a situation, but it was concentrated in  that one sport.  If you had an event, say, on OSU   s campus, how many people typically  would come out? Not counting participants, but how many spectators  would you have?  Well, are you talking about people that would walk by, or are you  talking about people that would sit? (Laughs)  Stayed and watched part of the game.  We   re in Colvin Center, now, remember, for the most part. For the most  16  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  part, basketball would draw. Gymnastics would draw. We   d probably  draw a couple hundred.  Did you charge admission?  No. No admission charge. I   m trying to think. Volleyball, maybe a  hundred. Friends and family, definitely, would be basically it. Fraternity,  sorority brothers and sisters would come and follow the team, but that   s  about it.  George, stepping back, kind of looking at your management in a broader  picture a little bit, when you took the program, you visited with  President Kamm, and I guess he was the final sign-off next to the  Regents for you being accepted to this position. Did he give you any  instructions or any mandate about women   s intercollegiate sports?  He just basically said that he was interested in the development of the  program and the fact that he would like to see it grow, but he gave no  instructions as to how we were to do this, and there was really no serious  consideration of budget increases and that kind of thing, other than just  the limited amount that we got from the men   s athletic department, I  guess, is where it came from. I   m never quite sure where that came  from.  When you looked at the picture you got that you were talking about  earlier, it took you about a year to decide, shape your new program, but  from your manager   s perspective, what were your immediate priorities?  Facilities. Facility usage. Colvin Center was so crowded that I wasn   t  quite sure how we could get this program off and going with the limited  facilities that we had, but we did it, and we worked together with the  existing male coaches to share facilities like tennis and track. And, of  course, Anne was off campus with golf, and we developed the facilities  for gymnastics of its own, and swimming was there. Coach Cutter was  extremely helpful with respect to that, so thanks to the coaches and  thanks to the people who were on board. They were helpful. And so my  management style was basically to go to the coaches and people  involved and say,    Hey, look. We want to start this program. Can you  help us?    And they did. They rose to the occasion. That   s the one thing  neat about the staff at Oklahoma State. They have all been really so  wonderful. I had the greatest time in my life at Oklahoma State.  Did you have any specific goals or expectations that you set for the  program when you took it over? If you had a chance to look at the things  and say,    Okay, here   s where I want to   .     17  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Yes.  What were your goals?  Yes, I did. First of all I wanted to build an academic program that was  second to none in Oklahoma. I wanted to be the flagship of Oklahoma.  In fact, I wanted to be the flagship of the Southwest. I wanted to have an  outstanding recreation program so that it would go and grow and  continue the quality that I knew that it had. And Women   s  Intercollegiate Athletics, that was one that I wasn   t quite sure how far  we could go, but I wanted to take it as far as we could. I wanted to  establish new programs and I wanted to establish, again, a core of values  for that activity.  You said you wanted to establish a core of values. What were some of  those values?  I wanted the girls to have the best coaching that we could possibly get  them. I wanted us to have a program which was representative of  Oklahoma State, much like the men   s athletic program. We weren   t  there, but I wanted us to take those steps toward being a top flight  athletic program in women   s sports. Those were all goals that I  established, and I wanted to enhance the facilities, but that was one of  the most difficult things I had. Academics was saying,    We can   t give  more money to buildings, brick and mortar,    and the men   s athletic  programs were saying,    We   re to capacity now.    But Student Services  stepped up. That   s how we got Colvin Annex and the tennis courts.  Wadley, with his ability to raise funding, helped with the tennis courts,  and Student Services funded the Annex, which provided, again, other  opportunities for Colvin Center, release of stress, the use of facilities so  we could expand there. So Student Services, the students of Oklahoma  State University have always, always responded to needs. They built  Colvin Center, they built the Annex, and then they   ve just in the last ten  years have undergone a total revision of Colvin Center to the tune of  millions and millions of dollars. And those are student funds, and so  students have always stepped to the plate and taken their turn at bat.  Do you recall some of the early hires? You talked about Anne Pitts. Who  are some of the other coaches that you hired and programs you  expanded?  Well, as I mentioned, in volleyball we hired Frankie Albitz. Swimming  coach was Coach Cutter for a while, then we hired Jean Chase Farnum.  Field hockey was Pauline Winter and then later followed by Sharon  Homberg, then we dropped field hockey when Sharon left. And for  softball, Pauline Winter was there in    74, and then we hired Sandra  18  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Fischer and her assistant Margaret Rebener, both of those. Margaret was  a graduate assistant in Tulsa and was also assistant softball coach for  years and years and years, and then we hired Anne Pitts as our first  women   s golf coach. Betty Edgley was, again, the first women   s tennis  coach. She was a graduate assistant.  And then later, when Dick came on board and we made the move of  Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics I think around 1980 or thereabouts,  when we made the move going from the program being housed in the  school of HPER over until it went into athletics, that   s when Dick  Young came on board in the    80s or there around, I think. We gave the  staff who were coaching options.    You can either stay with academics,  or you can go to the men   s athletic department.    Anne Pitts decided to  go with athletics. Betty Edgley decided to stay in academics. That   s  when Ike Groce was hired as a tennis coach, and that   s when some of  these coaches then made the decision. They made the decision of which  way they wanted to go. Gymnastics    Larry Bilhartz stayed with athletics,  but also he didn   t separate totally. Dick and I, again, had shared funding  responsibility because he taught all of our gymnastics experiences in our  physical education program. So, Larry we kept on board, and Dick  provided funding for the women   s program, but the facility was housed  in Colvin Center. Track and field, we brought Larry Bridges on board.  He coached track, and given the decision, he decided to stay with  academics and not go into women   s track. And I can   t remember who     was it Weese that went? They hired Weese. I don   t remember that  exactly, but then basketball we had J. C. Showers, and then we went  with Judy Bugher. I   ve kind of lost track who they hired after Judy  Bugher. Judy Bugher there was quite something, so that   s kind of where  we are with regards to the sports that we had.  What about some of your administrators? You mentioned Betty  Abercrombie was your first     She was first coordinator.  Then Janice Thompson.  Janice Thompson.  Cheryl Bridges.  Cheryl Bridges. Cheryl only stayed with us probably six months. I hired  her, and I got Larry Bridges, the track coach, in a package deal. They  were husband and wife, but they separated, and she left after about six  months, and he stayed on staff. But then, after Cheryl Bridges was     19  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Susan Hall?     Susan Hall. Right, and Susan was also one who chose to go with the  women   s athletic program over to the athletic department with Dick  Young.  Can you talk a little bit about your recruiting process? Did you actually  recruit for these positions, regional or national search, or word of  mouth, ads, or     I did national searches when I realized that we could offer them  something that could attract them. You have to recognize the fact that  once we got up to about  65,000- 70,000 most of that was partial  money for salaries, but not all of it. Most of it, again, came out of  academics. These people   once they went over to Dick   s shop, he had  full responsibility of funding the whole package: coaches    salaries, with  the exception of Bilhartz   s, scholarships, whatever.  You commented on the national search, but, for example, Anne Pitts was  a local, grew up in Stillwater. You knew about Anne and just hired her?  I knew about Anne. I looked at, again, other applicants, but I couldn   t  find anyone who would come to Stillwater, Oklahoma, and teach golf in  the golf class and coach golf for what we could offer them. (Laughter)  So, I said to Anne,    Would you be interested?    and she said yes, she  would, that would be of interest to her. We were fortunate to find her.  Do you recall some of the people from your search committees?  Well, Betty Abercrombie was a lot of times. Pauline Winter. For the  most part, we didn   t have a formal committee.  Just you and your team as head administrator of women   s sports?  Yes, and as I would go to professional meetings, I would interview  people and find out if they had any interest. If I found out they had an  interest, I brought it back, and we talked about them in a group meeting.  I would include Mary Fry, often times is one that I would use, and I  would just say,    Take a look at this and see what you think of this.    But  there was no formal application and no search and screen as we know it  today.  What kind of qualities, skills, experiences were you looking for in your  prospective coaches?  Well, in the early years they had to have, really, a teaching background  20  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  plus a strong coaching interest. I remember interviewing one lady for  tennis. She was from a junior college out in west Texas, and she had  played on the women   s pro tour. I thought,    Boy, if I could get her, that  would be great for tennis.    But when I told her what we could offer her,  she kind of laughed and said,    I think I   ll just stay where I am, thank  you.    She was at a junior college, and I was offering her a major  university tennis coaching program. I   m thinking,    Boy, she could  recruit these tennis players,    but she was not interested. Again,  remember, we   re limited to facilities, and we   re limited to budget, and  we   re limited to scholarships and limited to just whatever we had at that  point in time.  George, a little different topic, but what was your staff and your  coaches    philosophy about athletic competition and the role of the  women student athletes? For example, was it more about winning, or  was it more about participation and the individual? How was the  philosophy similar or different from men   s sports?  Well, in the beginning, in    75, we come from play days, and so the  opportunity   and it was not necessarily winning. It was giving students  opportunity, and it was     To participate and to compete and     Yes, you compete, and it   s on a little different level than intramurals.  You   re going to compete against another institution, and as the program  developed and as we were able to put resources into it and as we were  able to get coaches who had the advanced skills, then the attitude and the  philosophy of coaching changed from just participation and opportunity  to competition with the goal of winning. I have never been one who  says,    You have to win to be successful.    I think you have to give 100  percent to be successful, but if you go out there and give your 110  percent, you do the best job you can do, hey, that   s all you can ask for.  But, again, that   s not always a philosophy in athletics that   s shared.  How is that different from men   s sports at that time?  Well, I think men   s sports competed to win. I think at that point, that  stage in life, Mr.  Henry  Iba had a couple national champions, and I  think that once you have that taste of blood, it   s hard to not go after it  again. So, you know, the men   s program was highly competitive, and I  think that the women   s program at that point in time was far behind that.  And I can   t say exactly when   well, I would say when we moved the  program over to become the athletic department, not just men   s athletics,  to become the athletic department under Dr. Richard Young, Dick, I  think, with association of the coaches, both men   s and women   s were  21  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  held to a similar standard: quality coaching, quality effort. If you   re  successful, fine. If you   re not, you come under review.  You may be looking for another job.  That   s right. Well, you take a look and see what you   ve got and see what  we   ve given you and those kinds of things, and I think it   s a matter that  it moved at that point in time from a win-win situation just for  competition.  Speaking of that merger, when did discussion first begin about merging  the men   s and women   s programs? Do you recall?  (Laughter) In my interview with Dick Young   I was on the search and  screen committee when Dick Young was hired.  Must   ve been in    78? Spring of    78?  Spring of    78, I think thereabouts, and I think that I asked him questions  about Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics and what his philosophy was  and that kind of things. But once he got on board, he and I started talking  about Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics and what we could do and what  he could do, and he said,    How could we help you guys in Women   s  Intercollegiate Athletics, and what can we do to make it stronger and  better?    Then I went to President Kamm, and I said,    I really feel like  we need to move Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics over to an athletic  department. First of all, we can   t service them in athletic training. We  can   t service them in any kind of special meal arrangements. You know,  we can   t service them with public information, with sports information.  We don   t have that kind of capability in this school, so we need to move  this program over to the men   s program.    He agreed, and it occurred.  Were there any discussions before you talked to Dick? You started the  program in    75 until    78. Did you have some discussions, a timeline  beginning to emerge, and were there any discussions before Dick got  here about might needing to merge them?  If there were, they were limited. I remember it was in 1975, there was a  Title IX meeting that I went to down in Dallas, Texas. I remember going  to that meeting and thinking,    Boy, this is something that   s going to  have an impact on college sports.    And I remember, again, coming back  and sharing that with Vice President Moore at that point in time and  some others. I think Floyd and I had a brief discussion of this, but not  saying,    Are you ready to take it over?     Would that be director Floyd Gass?  22  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Yes. But, again, there was no real push to do that.  Floyd just wasn   t real excited about taking that over, huh?  No, Floyd had enough on his hands because, if I recall, at that point in  time, we were having some problems with the NCAA, and he was  having to keep an apartment rented for NCAA members to keep them  from voting.  Did you visit with President Kamm during this period? What was his  perspective on that?  Supportive, but yet     Did he feel like it should be merged, or did he have a strong feeling one  way or the other?  We didn   t go to him until we were sure that this is what we wanted,  Dick and I.  I guess when Larry Boger came in about that time that Dick came in  about that same time, too, didn   t you have a new president?  Yes. Right. Right, and I don   t know whether Boger was the one who  finally made the choice or whether Kamm made the decision. I don   t  remember their take, but I remember the discussion I had with Dr.  Kamm. I don   t remember ever discussing that with Larry Boger. Now,  Dick may have, but I don   t know that I did.  Now, Susan Hall was your main women   s administrator.  She was coordinator of women   s athletics.  How did Susan feel about the merger at that time?  Oh, she was in support of it. Yes, yes, yes, she was.  Do you remember getting any sense of how the Regents felt about this  issue?  No, I never got that far. (Laughs) Way, way up there. I never got there. I  let Dick handle that.  We were talking about when you first started having conversations  around the possibility of merging, and the last two questions we talked  23  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  about was President Kamm, and what did you say about how he felt  about the merger?  Well, he was supportive, but, again, he was hesitant about a total budget,  major budget, at that point in time to Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics  simply because we didn   t have in the Big Eight a women   s program  going. If there was, we weren   t participating in it, and I don   t think there  was at that point down there. There were activities at colleges, but,  again, there wasn   t like a Big Eight basketball champion and a Big Eight  golf champion, and the Big Eight had not organized at that point in time  in the early    70s. So, there was no real emphasis other than the incoming  Title IX to be able to move women   s intercollegiate ahead.  George, you mentioned that President Kamm was perhaps, and  rightfully so, concerned about having resources to put into the program  and keep it under your interests, but the same token, was it beginning to  be understood that there was going to have to be larger investments in  women   s sports at that time?  Yes. He realized that, and I think that   s the matter that Dick   and when  we talked about this, Dick, I think, had a commitment from either  President Kamm or President Boger. I don   t remember exactly where  that transition of leadership occurred in the early development of the  combined athletic program under Dick   s leadership. I think that Dick,  I   m sure, had some type of commitment for increased funding when he  took over the program, took women   s intercollegiate, because he had to  have some commitment because he took staff members with him and he  took those positions out of academics and moved them over. This was a  tremendous period of growth for the school. In academics, we moved  from a department of physical education with a four-year degree in  undergraduate physical education, a master   s degree, and a doctorate  through the College of Education, to a new program in recreation. We  instituted a new program in health, all the way through from  undergraduate to graduate programs, so the academic program just  mushroomed. It really grew. The Colvin Center program continued on  its high level.  Incidentally, during this period of time, I went down in 1975 to the  Special Olympics at Central State. They were hosting Special Olympics  at that point in time. I talked with Terry Kerr, who was then director of  the Special Olympics Program, and I said,    Would you       I had had  experience with Special Olympics on the national scene, and so I   d  known Terry Kerr through the national scene. I said,    Would you ever  consider moving the program to Oklahoma State?    And she said,    Well,  oddly enough that you said that because we   re outgrowing Central  State.    So, I went back and talked with the people at Oklahoma State,  24  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  and we were able to get the Special Olympics in Stillwater, and it   s been  here ever since. It   s probably the most significant one-day event as far as  economic impact on Stillwater, of all events that they have, when you  bring in 4,000 athletes to that. And the reason I raised that question is  the coaches, men   s and women   s both, were helpful in providing  leadership for that program, and, you know, it exemplifies the character  of the people that we had in our program, not only academically and  sports-wise and recreationally, but     George, on the subject of the merger of the programs, two quick  questions. One we asked earlier, but to repeat, Susan Hall was your  coordinator of women   s sports.  At that time, yes she was.  And you said she was supportive of the move.  Yes she was.  What was your personal opinion? I mean, pros and cons, how did you  feel about the merger?  How did I feel about the merger? I felt like it was the thing to do. I felt  like if Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics was to succeed, it had to be  part of a total athletic focus, not just men   s on one side, women   s on the  other. That   s just not going to get it done. And I could see the fact that  Title IX was going to put pressure on colleges and universities to give  equality and we weren   t there. Oklahoma State wasn   t there, and I could  tell the fact that by going in and fighting the battles of the budget, that  we weren   t going to get due consideration. When I go in against the  College of Arts and Sciences, and Chemistry Department wants this, and  Physics Department wants that, and they   ll say,    Physical education?  What do you want?       Well, I want a new building. I want a new  facility.    That just wasn   t going to happen, and it didn   t take a crystal  ball to look at that. So, I was in full support of the merger.  George, what were the concerns initially from the women   s coaches  being placed under the administration of the athletic department? What  were they? I mean, like, loss of the spirit of amateurism, becoming  second-class athletes, inequitable resource distribution, winning-is-everything  philosophy? What were their concerns that you recall?  Well, I think their concerns were   first of all, are you talking about at  the time of merger?  At the time of merger when they were preparing what was their     25  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  When we talked about the merger and who was going to stay in  academics and who was going to go to athletics, the concern was,     What   s going to happen to my pay? Will I get an increase? Will there  be a decrease? What are my responsibilities going to be? Am I still  going to have to teach? Am I going to have to do that and coach? Who  will be my supervisor at that point in time?    These were all questions  that they raised with regard to the decision of the merger, and    What  kinds of scholarships will I get? Will I get additional scholarship aid?     Judy Bugher, I think, was saying,    Will I get Iba Hall at three thirty in  the afternoon?    Well, the answer to that   s no, (Laughter) not the first  year. It took a few years before that problem ever resolved itself, but,  again, those are the kinds of things: facilities, facility usage, sharing the  facilities. Again, they weren   t so much for equal pay at that point in  time, because they hadn   t been used to equal pay. I don   t remember who  the basketball coach was. Paul Hansen?  Hansen? Killingsworth? Killingsworth was just a year.  Yes.  He had problems with Bugher and with volleyball, for one.  Oh yes, yes. He did have. (Laughs)  George, the other side of the coin, though, what were some perceived  advantages that the head coaches were anticipating for the merger?  I think that the fact that they can see the fact that there is a sense here of  a commitment on the university   s part to help the program grow. I think  they could see in the athletic department, first of all, they had a leader  who understood the relationship between men   s and women   s athletics.  Dick Young is probably one of the outstanding athletic directors in this  country, bar none. I think they could see the fact that he could help them  develop the programs and he would fight for their programs, and once a  commitment was made, and certainly in Bilhartz   s situation and in  Frankie Albitz   s situation and in Chase Farnum   s situation where they  cut the programs, those were tough decisions to make. And, of course, in  the mergers, they realized that they wouldn   t have a job, and for those  folks it was kind of tough to do.  Well, speaking of Dick Young, he was hired in 1978. Many felt he was  hired in part because of his experience at Bowling Green in merging the  men   s and women   s programs. Is that your perception?  Oh yes. Dick Young is an educator as well as an athletic administrator.  26  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Folding the women   s sports program under the umbrella of the athletic  department began in his first year, in that    78-   79 year. In your opinion,  had that decision been made to merge the sports programs as part of the  hiring of Dick, before he came onboard?  No, I don   t remember that ever being discussed outside Dick and myself  in an interview process. I don   t remember ever, either in the search and  screen committee or in any other discussion in any corner of the  university, the fact that he was hired because he had the philosophy of  merging men   s and women   s sports.  I had read in a couple different publications, part of the centennial  history of the OSU intercollegiate sports series that Doris Dellinger did,  and some others, that as of July 1, the merger took place during that  date, to merge the programs in    78. Dick came actually in August of    78,  so I   m just trying to put that sequence together. Somebody must have,  the Regents or the president, I guess   Larry Boger must have come on  board, made the decision they were going to be merged.  The president. Yes, yes.  I guess the question I was getting at, from your perspective, is that pretty  much a mandate that he had been given? I   m not saying he didn   t want  to do it.  I don   t know. You   d have to ask Dick that question because I don   t  know what dialogue and discussion he   d had with the presidents on that  situation. It was discussed at our level, our level being vice presidents     and the dean   s level, and Dr. Kamm and I had talked about it, too, but I  don   t ever recall the fact that   I think Dick Young was hired as an  administrator in athletics because he had the ability, not necessarily  because he was pro-women   s sports.  George, can you describe your working relationship with Dick Young?  Super.  Did you all talk regularly and communicate?  Regularly, yes. In fact, he volunteered   he wanted to teach classes, in  addition to being the athletic director. He had done this, and so he taught  classes for us. So, I can tell you, he   s an educator, and he   s competent in  his role in every position he went into. I was only sorry that the situation  arose where he felt he had to leave, but he was a man that would not  compromise his principles, and I think that speaks well of him. And as I  27  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  said earlier, he   s probably one of the best athletic administrators I   ve  ever known in my years of experience.  How effective, in your opinion, was Dick in handling the merger of the  women   s programs, folding it into the men   s programs?  Well, I think he was successful in the sense that when you have to cut  programs, it lays claim to the fact that you   re going to upset some  people. Allison may have given him hell at home, (Laughter) but, again,  I know he was successful in that, in effecting the merger.  What were some of the implementation issues that were associated with  the merger? What are some of the things that had to happen to make  that happen?  Well, first of all, I think it   s a matter that we had to get some feeling  from the existing women   s coaches that they would be willing, what  their intentions were and how we could piece together the vacancies that  he would have by people like Dr. Edgley staying with academics and  those kinds of things. I think it really was a crucial time in trying to not  destroy the motivation and the interest and the desire to continue the  programs, and I think he did a good job at that.  You mentioned earlier Dick stepping down. What do you think led to  Dick stepping down as athletic director?  I think it   s a matter that there were pressures, both within the university  and outside the university, that created an atmosphere of his feeling if he  did some things, he would compromise his principles, and I think he   s  too strong an individual to do that. He wouldn   t do some of the things  that he felt were being asked of him, either asked or pressured to do, and  I think it   s the matter that he just said,    No.    I think in some quarters,  that created a problem, and there were forces that asked for his  resignation. I told him I would hire him as a full-time professor if that  happened, and it did happen. And I committed to him a full  professorship within this school because the search and screen  committee   when I was interviewing him, he asked if I would consider  giving him a full professorship because he wanted to teach. I said,    You  have the background. Certainly I would.    And so, when he resigned, we  were prepared and even were preparing him an office in Colvin Center,  and he   d committed to that until Washington State hired him away.  Do you feel that any of the merger issues were a factor?  No. No, not at all. No, not at all.  28  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  No concern from Regents or administration about his handling the  merger of the programs?  No, not at all.  That   s clear enough. (Laughter) In your opinion, what was president  Boger   s relationship with Dick, and how supportive was he of Dick on  the issue of the merger of women   s sports?  I think he was very supportive. In fact, I think it was during his first year  or first years that the merger was effected. I can   t remember when Dr.  Kamm retired and Dr. Boger came on board, but their relationship was  strong, even in the beginning, and I think even at the end of Dick   s  tenure, his working relationship with Larry Boger was strong. I don   t  think   and Dick can answer that question better than I, but from an  outsider   s view, I did not get the idea that Dr. Boger and Dr. Young  were at odds about the way he ran the program or the merger of the  program.  Of the promises, commitments actually made to women   s sports  programs, did some of those promises remain unfilled in the early years,  do you think?  Oh, I think you   d have to ask Dick that question. It   s a matter that from  an outsider   s view, I think eventually they were satisfied. I   m not sure  that they were satisfied as quickly and as timely as maybe the coaches  who moved would   ve liked to have had them done, but I think  eventually you   d have to look at the program now and say,    That   s a  quality program.    Again, it   s run at the same level as the men   s program.  What do you think were the immediate benefits of women   s programs  after the merger in those first two or three years?  I think it   s a matter that they had the resources of support services.  Facilities?  Of the support services. I   m talking about athletic training. I   m talking  about sports information. I   m talking about travel, someone handling  travel, scheduling. I think all this, again, they realized and recognized  that that   s to their benefit. I don   t know that, at least I was not aware of,  comments coming from coaches that they   d made a mistake or they wish  they   d stayed in academics. Some of the academic people thought that  they should   ve gone to athletics because they could see the benefits that  some of the coaches at that point in time were getting.  29  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Fast forwarding to today, have most of the positive expectations of  women   s sports been achieved, and, if so, in what ways?  Well, I would say probably, with the exclusion of volleyball. I think  Oklahoma State probably needs to get back into volleyball. The reason I  say that is that most of the high schools in Oklahoma have women   s  volleyball, and I think Oklahoma State is one of the few state colleges or  universities that doesn   t have a women   s volleyball program, so that  denies some of the women who want to go to Oklahoma State and want  to play volleyball. They can   t do that. I think that, for the most part, the  programs are conducted at a high level. You have the traditional sports  of men   s basketball and men   s football carrying a lot of the weight with  funding, and women   s sports programs on most college campuses do not  have enough income to carry their own program   s weight in budget  consideration. So, there   s still a disparity in women   s sports and men   s  sports in financial income, but there   s been a disparity in men   s sports as  well, program, too. Track and field brings in absolutely nothing. Well,  maybe a little bit, I don   t know, but very little.  Kind of what they call the Olympic sports versus football, basketball,  baseball.  Right, yes, and at Oklahoma State you   ve got football, basketball,  baseball and wrestling are your revenue-generating sports. Probably  football and basketball are the only two that probably have enough  income to carry their budget. I don   t think baseball does, and I don   t  think wrestling does. That   s speculation on my part. I don   t know, but,  certainly, tennis doesn   t. Now, Mike did a pretty good job, when he was  golf coach, of raising money. Now, I can   t say that golf   and I don   t  know now with the new coach there, but I think Mike did a pretty good  job of raising money to keep his golf program going. So, his was one of  the unusual sport programs other than the three majors that are revenue  generating, so, again, there   s a discrepancy of money that the programs  are able to generate.  You see now more than not in men   s versus women   s, but football,  basketball, major revenue sports versus the rest of the sports, men and  women   s?  Yes, right. Well, yes. Football pretty much has to and basketball pretty  much has to carry the income of the sports and without, probably, the  income that comes from the bowls and the television packages and all  those kinds of things. I was just reading this week (I think it was this  week in Tulsa World) the fact that the amount of money that the  television and the Big Twelve is now negotiating with Nebraska and  Missouri, thinking about going into the Big Ten and why would they go  30  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  into the Big Ten, the difference being between the television packages  for the Big Twelve is around seven million  dollars  per university, and  in the Big Ten it   s up towards around fifteen million. That   s a difference  that would probably catch your attention.  George, another issue beyond the merger is, about the same time that  OSU would   ve been merging men   s and women   s programs, it wasn   t  too long before the NCAA essentially took over government of women   s  sports, which had previously been done through the Association of  Intercollegiate Athletics  for Women , AIAW. From your perspective,  were the missions and goals of the two organizations different? Do you  remember how they were similar and how they were different?  NCAA pretty much, I remember when that was going on, and in our  professional meetings we were talking about   we hoped that the women  didn   t make the same mistakes that the men made in their governance  and rules, but I think the women   s programs in NCAA and the men   s  programs aren   t too far apart now. I think their rules and regulations and  things that they have to do and things that they do are pretty much the  same nowadays. They haven   t varied too much.  Back in that era (I guess it was around 1980 or so that they were  beginning to change) how were the philosophies different at AIAW?  What was their major philosophy about women   s sports?  There wasn   t the emphasis on competition, like tournaments, these kinds  of things. AIAW had tournaments, but they were slow compared to the  men   s programs for years. They were slow in getting into tournament  play, that level of competition. AIAW was not concerned with  television, with money generated from television. They were primarily  interested in competition. Again, it differs in the sense that men   s  programs started that way back in the 1800s, and they came through the  same progress in the same process, and so the women   s program was  just a step and a half behind. The AIAW was a step and a half behind the  NCAA, and so when the AIAW gave over to the NCAA, there was  significant difference in rules. There was significant difference in  competition, levels of competition, numbers of competition. AIAW  didn   t have a lot of   well, you know, I   m not sure whether they had  field hockey tournaments and lacrosse tournaments and those kinds of  things, which we still don   t have a lot of those out here in Oklahoma, but  on the East Coast you   ll find that competition pretty strong. AIAW  wasn   t as strong nationally as the NCAA. Didn   t have the money.  AIAW did not have the money that the NCAA had because they had the  benefit of television.  You   re saying that the governance changed. The effect it had on  31  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  women   s sports was perhaps more competition, more varied, in terms of  tournaments, national competition, just the breadth and depth of  competition.  Yes. Agreed.  Did it affect recruiting rules? Do you know?  Yes, because when the women went under NCAA, there were some  things that coaches couldn   t do that they had been doing for years. I   m  not sure what the limitations were on that, but our coaches could do  almost anything they wanted to do when we   re running play days and  we   re running low level AIAW activities, and we weren   t out heavily  recruiting the kids. Although, now, I say that, I know some of our  coaches did recruit. I think Anne recruited from the beginning. Anne  Pitts tried to recruit strong golfers, and Larry Bilhartz tried to recruit  strong gymnasts, and they did, but they didn   t have all the rules and  regulations the NCAA has.  What were the feelings on campus at that time, positive and negative,  about the NCAA taking over governance in women   s sports? Do you  know much about that?  I don   t think students had a reaction to that. I don   t think the faculty had  a reaction to that.  Student athletes, the coaches themselves?  I think the coaches knew that they were going to have new sets of rules,  too, but I think, again, they were challenged by that, and I   m not sure  that played any role in the part of those who stayed behind in the  academic department that didn   t move. I don   t know whether that was  part of their decision to stay or not, but at the same token I think the  coaches that went over went over with a renewed challenge and a  renewed sense of victory, the fact that they felt that they would be better  off over there.  Continuing to look at things in larger context, you would   ve taken the  position at OSU at about the same time as the Title IX was changed. Is  that right? Did you come on board at Oklahoma State in    74, and was  that the same year Title IX     Title IX started basically in the early    70s, but it didn   t start to hit the  forefront until they started holding these national conferences on Title  IX.  32  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Can you talk a little bit about the Title IX legislation itself?  It just says, basically, that women   s intercollegiate sports has to be  treated as equally and fairly as men   s intercollegiate sports, and now I  don   t remember all of the regulations of Title IX, but that   s kind of the  sum total of what I recall is the fact that there has to be equality. Now,  you   re not going to get equality between softball and football because  you   ve got a different number of people participating, and there are  specific rules that I don   t remember that state how equality is to be  determined. Again, it comes back oftentimes to student population: how  many women do you have in the program, how many men do you have  in the school, and those kinds of things. I can   t answer that question with  regards to specifics.  You talked about earlier that you were going to national conferences,  and this had to start appearing on your radar screen in your agendas  and discussions. What were some of the early discussions you recall  around Title IX?  How are you going to deal with this? I chaired a group called College  and University Administrators Council. These were the deans and  directors of schools throughout the United States. Each year, we had a  summer conference. Title IX was a topic of at least two of those, as I  remember, and the discussion, most of us had women   s intercollegiate,  AIAW Women   s Intercollegiate Athletics, whatever we wanted to call  them. Most of us had the responsibility of women   s intercollegiate  sports, and the question becomes,    Well, how are you going to fund it?  How do you fund this?    At that point in time, we didn   t actually know  what    equality    meant in Title IX yet.  Hadn   t established any guidelines yet.  Right. We hadn   t necessarily seen those guidelines, most of us hadn   t,  and that   s when we said,    Hey, we better get to some of these workshops  to find out what all   s involved in Title IX, and what does it mean?    So,  the first one, (I can   t remember exactly what year) it was    72-   73 there,  our summer workshop we talked about that, but I think later we realized  that there would be different rules and that there would be formulas and  that there would be criteria that we would have to follow, and I think  most of the people in academics realized,    Hey, you   d better put them  together, or you   re going to really be in trouble.     And you actually had this first    a-ha    experience when you were at  Chicago State, I guess?  Yes, I did at Chicago State, and then I remember talking with people  33  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  from Iowa State. They had a men   s and women   s program separate, and  their women   s department ran their women   s intercollegiate program,  and their athletic program was separate from their men   s physical  education department. When I came to Oklahoma State, the academic  program was combined, men   s and women   s. We didn   t have a men   s  physical education program and a women   s physical education program.  It was just physical education. I remember talking with the head of the  women   s department up there who was in one of our meetings, and she  was saying that they were going to have major problems. So, again, I  think most of us realized that this whole aspect of Title IX was a force to  be reckoned with and that the universities would have to abide by it.  How did it impact your position, George, when you first got there in  HPLS, the administration of women   s sports, before that merger  happened? How did that start impacting your programs as you looked at  Title IX and you   d taken over your position at Oklahoma State? What  things did you see you had to start putting into place?  Well first of all, we   d have to have coaches, and they were people that  were dedicated to coaching and not just driving the bus or driving the car  or, you know, being out there, chaperoning kinds of things, but they  needed to be able to have the skills to be able to impart to these athletes.  So, that meant that I had to find people who had the skills and had the  ability to coach, so I tried to work on that and to deal with that in hiring  practices, not only of coaches, but of faculty, people that would have  that kind of background where I could combine both academics and  athletics.  In your people, what were the concerns about Title IX early on? And  then I   ll ask you the flip side of it in a minute. What were some initial  concerns about Title IX legislation?  Well, I think the major concern was,    How in the world can we do this?  How can this be done? How can you equate football to softball?    Or,     How can you equate football to tennis?    or,    How can you equate  men   s basketball to women   s basketball?    That was the big concern:     How do you do this?     Sounds good, but can it really be done?  Yes, right. Exactly. I think that was the big concern.  What were people   s hopes for Title IX? What did they hope would  happen early on out of Title IX?  Early on, I don   t think anyone had the knowledge of Title IX to know  34  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  what impact and how long it would take to comply with Title IX. Donna   Lopiano  was at the University of Texas when I was there. She was a  commissioner. She did a pretty good job of trying to motivate colleges  and universities to move as quickly as they could on Title IX because  she said,    It   s coming. It   s coming.    And sure enough, it came.  George, in your opinion, what   s been the legacy of Title IX, after almost  forty years?  Well, I think it has brought women   s intercollegiate sports to the  forefront. It has given it maybe not the same position as men   s  intercollegiate athletics, but close to it, if not. In some instances it   s  exceeded, and other instances it hasn   t. Again, depending on the local  situations of what the perspective is, but I think nationally, Title IX has  given women   s sports an opportunity to grow. Like we said earlier, and  back in high school, women didn   t participate. If you sweat, you didn   t  want to sweat when you took physical education because you   re a  woman. Women glow. They don   t sweat.  They perspire. They don   t sweat.  Yes, right. They glow. But, again, I think it   s given women   s sports an  opportunity that they would   ve never had. I really feel like women   s  sports programs would not be where it is today without Title IX.  Do you feel like it   s fulfilled the expectations of its early advocates?  I think to a degree, yes. Whether or not it   s a total, I don   t know, but for  the most part, it has helped. And it has, again, reached a level that the  early advocates hoped that it would.  In some ways has it realized the fears of its early critics?  Well, there are some critics that are emotional and are not necessarily  rational in their criticism, but we   ll never satisfy them. But for the most  part, I think, in general, Title IX has satisfied most of the critics.  In your opinion, is there anything that remains to be done to ensure  equitable relationship between men   s and women   s sports?  I think they have to continue to work at it and to continue to oversee the  operations of intercollegiate athletics, both in the men   s and the  women   s program, and try to achieve the equality that Title IX implies.  George, looking back on your time in the administration of women   s  sports at OSU, what were some high points? I   m talking about for  35  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  women   s intercollegiate sports, during your administration. Were there  some milestones for you, some high points for you?  Well, yes, I think it   s a matter   the fact that we were able to hire  coaches that had the skills that would permit our athletes to learn and to  train and to acquire the skills that they were seeking. I think the merger  of women   s intercollegiate athletics and men   s intercollegiate athletics at  Oklahoma State was a high point for me. Without Dick Young   s help  and philosophy, I don   t know how much longer we would   ve gone  without it, but he brought it into being.  As you indicated earlier, it might   ve been a little more difficult with his  predecessor.  (Laughter) Yes.  You don   t have to reply to that. Rhetorical question. Aside from women   s  sports, can you share some highlights from your administrative career at  Oklahoma State, just generally, in your time as head of the HPLS?  I   ve talked about my involvement in encouraging Special Olympics to  come to Oklahoma State University. I think that   s a highlight, and I  think that speaks for itself, not only for Oklahoma State, but for the  community of Stillwater and what it   s done for them over these course  of years. The fact that we were able to get the women   s intercollegiate  program, again, merged and successful and off and running was a  highlight. Being able to develop quality academic programs in Health  and Physical Education and Leisure through the doctoral program and  become, probably, the flagship of Oklahoma and one of the flagships of  the Southwest, academically, is for me a highlight. Also, it was during  those periods from    74 to probably    90, we had growth and quality in  every phase of our operation. I was so proud of our staff. There were  people like Schelsky, Mary Fry, Ada van Whitley, and people like that. I  just got an e-mail from Sid Gonsoulin, who was only with us for a  couple of years, and he said,    Dr. Oberle, I want you to know that I have  really reflected on my time at Oklahoma State and experiences that I had  had there. I want you to know that I   m using a lot of your philosophy  and a lot of those things that I learned at Oklahoma State.    He   s   associate  vice president of Student  Affairs  at  University of   Southern Mississippi.  So, watching our students, we   ve had two students within the last ten  years to become national presidents of our national organization of  AAHPERD  American Alliance for Health, Physical Education,  Recreation and Dance . That speaks well for that period of time when  Oklahoma State supported our program. Since that period of time, I  36  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  understand that there have been changes made, and that philosophy of  unity in purpose of sports and athletics and recreation and physical  education and health is just no longer there because it   s been separated.  Another highlight for me is the creation of the Wellness Center. I went  to a conference in Denver years ago, and I heard this one person talk  about wellness, and that was a new topic for me.    Wellness.    I   d heard     health    and    fitness    and all those, but not    wellness.    He put wellness  into a concept for me, and I brought it back and got a hold of Ron Beer,  and I said,    Ron, I want to develop this program.    And bless Dr.  Harrison   s heart, he was able to put together a mobile laboratory, and we  took it out to business and industry throughout the state of Oklahoma.  A. B. Harrison.  A. B. Harrison. And he and Mac McCrory and the staff, Robin Purdie,  took that motor fitness lab all over the state and helped identify stress  factors for, at that point in time, the senior administrators in business and  industry. Well, that led to the wellness facility, the establishment of the  wellness facility, and that was another highlight of mine was being able  to put that together. I released Jim Rogers from his health chairmanship  and put him in charge of raising funds for the new facility and, again,  students stepped forward and put in a million dollars, and we raised a  million dollars and put together the first free-standing wellness facility  in the United States. And since that time, that model has been replicated  throughout the country.  And Bud Seretean was involved in the     Bud Seretean, yes, that   s right. A few stories on that one, too. (Laughter)  In addition to these, do you have some special memories of your time at  OSU generally?  Oh, I think it   s a matter that all of my time at Oklahoma State is a total,  wonderful memory for me. Staff, my bosses, all of them, they were  good. They learned how to say no to me that I would accept, (Laughter)  but they were very supportive. During that period of    74-   75 the school  just flourished, and it became the quality institution in Oklahoma that I  had hoped it would be. We were nationally recognized, and we drew  graduate students from all over the country and all over the world,  England, China. We had graduate students from all over the world, and  it was just a wonderful, wonderful time for me.  This is 1974 to 1993?  37  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Well, basically from early 1990   I stepped down I think in 1992 and  told them that I wanted to retire in    93 and that I wanted to finish with  my doctoral students. I wanted to finish them and make sure that they  got finished before I left, and then they wouldn   t have to be stuck with  someone else, so we did that. And my staff, I inherited some great  people, and I hired some great people.  Looking back on your career, how do you hope people remember  George Oberle?  Well, I think I   d like for them to develop the fact that I was a  professional, that I had the professional ethics and the principles that  stood for quality and that I was a developer. I developed programs, and I  developed people, and I was one who was creative and one who was  willing to go that extra mile to make sure that students had an  opportunity. I still have a student who is a black student who was  finishing up his doctorate with us when I came on board, and there was  some question to whether or not he   d serve to have the doctor   s degree,  and I went to bat for him. I pulled him aside, and I said,    Now you   ve  got to do this, and you   ve got to do this, and you   ve got to do this if you  want to graduate.    In the course of that year, he did a 180, and to this  day, he still says,    Dr. Oberle, you saved my life.    (Laughs)  So, the pride I have in our products, in our students and the things that  they   ve done. We   ve had, as I say, two national presidents. We   ve had  another student who was president of a national association. That   s the  quality of students we have, and people like Betty Edgley, who   s a  quality teacher, outstanding teacher. Pauline Winter, who was on staff,  but she   s just quality. Betty Abercrombie, who is revered by many,  many people throughout the state, so there are quality people. As I say, I  inherited a quality staff and people like Mary Fry, who not only put in  time, she and her husband put in money to develop the outdoor program  that we had out at Lake Carl Blackwell, and our staff gave well and  beyond. And Chuck Schelsky, all the work that he did for us.  I   ve said to the vice president of Student Services,    I hope that one of  these days, Student Services will develop a wall of honor or some kind  of way of acknowledging people like Kent Bunker, who was there on  staff when I was there, still is there. And I don   t know whether he   s  served at any other institution or not, but he ran one of the best  intramural programs in the country, and he is one of the people who  developed the new Colvin Center along with students. They designed  and did that, and that   s a fantastic facility. So, I hope that they would  remember George Oberle as a person who had a love for people and a  love for what he did.  38  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  I appreciate it. George, kind of give us a wrap-up if you can after you  left Stillwater in    93. Can you talk a little bit about your career after  that, your life?  Okay. I headed back to Indiana where most of my family live, and I got  a call from Barry University asking me if I would be interested in  coming down and giving them three to five years of consulting work.  And where   s that, George?  Barry University is in Miami Shores, Florida, just north of Miami itself.  And so they convinced me to come down, and I went down. As I told the  dean, I said no to them first, and the second time she called, she said,     Can I come out and visit with you in Stillwater?    I knew that she was  serious when she said she wanted to come to Stillwater because she  normally wouldn   t come to Stillwater unless it was really very important  because, as you know, Stillwater is kind of a unique place to be.  It   s not a destination place.  It   s not on the way to anyplace (Laughter) unless it is to Stillwater. So,  she came, and as I   ve often said, we said she could stay with us, and she  said she wouldn   t leave until she got us to commit to come to Barry, and  so we did.  How old were you at this time?  I was sixty-six at that time.  And you   d really planned to retire and stay retired at that time.  Right, I had. Well no, no because I had planned to go back to Ball State.  I had fourteen years in Indiana Teachers    Retirement, and I needed one  more year to fully vest in my retirement program at Ball State. The  chairman at the department was a good friend of mine. He said,    Come  on back.    He says,    I   ll help you. We   ll find something for you to do,     and I said,    Okay.    So, when I left Indiana State as assistant dean, I was  making eighteen thousand a year, and your retirement is based on the  best of the last three years. Eighteen thousand doesn   t do much for you  for retirement, so he said,    Come on back. We   ll get your retirement  up.    So, I said,    Okay.     But they convinced me to come to Barry, so I went to Barry instead, and  I said I   d give them three to five years. I gave them three years, and I  developed their academic program for them and worked with an  outstanding administrator, Dr.  G.  Jean Cerra. She was the associate  39  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  athletic director at Missouri before she went down to Miami to become  the dean down there, and she said,    You know more about the  academics than I do. You   ve spent your life in it.    She said,    Most of my  life has been spent in athletics.    So, we worked well together, and she  was very supportive of what we wanted to do, and she created probably  one of the strongest division-two academic athletic programs. They are  scholar athletes there, and so they are outstanding in almost everything  that they do, and they have several national champions.  We were there three years, and I retired and went over to Sarasota,  where we now lived full time. We were over there about two years, and I  got a call from her saying,    Could I visit with you?    And I said,    Okay,  what   s it all about now?    She said,    I just want to visit with you.    I said,     Okay, come on over.    So, she came over to Sarasota from Miami, and  she said,    I have a project I   d like for you to do.    So, I got to start a  regional campus in our field in health and physical education and  recreation in St. Petersburg,  Florida , and so Barry University now has  a regional campus in St. Petersburg. So, I spent two years in developing  that program for Barry and hired one of my OSU students who has now  taken over my job there.  Who was that?  Dr. Leta Hicks. She was a graduate of ours at Oklahoma State, so I   ve  enjoyed Barry University. It was a good place to create. It was my last  hurrah on creation, I tell them.  So, you never got back to Ball State, did you?  I didn   t go back to Ball State, no. John   s still mad at me. He said,    I got  this job all ready for you, and you didn   t come back      So, George, over the years, I know from your resume, many times you   ve  received recognition and awards, and I know you   re too humble, but  you   ve been regionally and nationally recognized. Could you share  some of those recognitions that have been most meaningful to you?  I think probably starting, athletics has always been an integral part of my  life. I coached the first fifteen years of my professional life, and I   ve  never regretted it, and I   ve always kind of missed a little bit of it. But it  started back in high school, in athletics. If you achieve a little bit of  success, it motivates you to want a little bit more and a little bit more  and a little bit more. So, I was successful in high school in making some  all-star teams, then went on to college, not on an athletic scholarship but  on an academic scholarship because I had good grades. I wanted to go to  Indiana University, but I was only 145 pounds, and they didn   t feel like I  40  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  probably could handle that. I played guard on the high school football  team at 145, but that   s when we played the single wing. I was the pulling  guard, so that meant I had speed to get out there and to get in  somebody   s way, but I ended up going to a little place called Earlham  College, a school of about a thousand, and I was successful there in  attaining all-state awards in football there. Then, later, when I came back  to Earlham to coach, my 1955 baseball team won the conference, first  time in the history of Earlham that any of their teams had won a  conference championship, and so my 1955 baseball team   and I was  voted coach of the year. Our kids, in fact, just in 2005 we celebrated our  fiftieth year, and the team came back together, and we all went into the  Hall of Fame together, and that was a neat experience. But I   ve been  blessed.  One of the things that has been significant for me was my working with  Special Olympics. I   ve worked with Special Olympics since its  inception back in the early    60s, and we started Special Olympics in  Indiana. I   ve served on several international game screening committees  and committees to insure quality. It was my work in Special Olympics, I  guess, that got the attention of President Reagan, and he appointed me to  the National Council on Disability. It was during that period of time that  we wrote the Americans with Disabilities Act, so the Americans with  Disabilities Act is now the responsibility of the National Council on  Disability. So, the six years that I served under President Reagan and  then President     President Clinton?  No, Clinton   s the one that asked me to move over and let someone else  take my position.  Laughs  President Bush, the first president Bush. So, I  served six years in that capacity, and it was during that period of time,  and so that   s probably the most significant worldwide event that I was a  part of. I   ve been blessed with honors at many functions, and I won   t go  into that. You have a resume.  What about in PE? With your National Association of Physical  Education, you   ve been a national officer. I wonder if you might share  some of that.  I   ve served on the Board of Governors of the national association     American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and  Dance is a national organization that I   ve been a part of. I started  attending professional meetings in 1956 with that group, so my wife will  remind me that I probably only missed three meetings since 1956, but I  still, this was the first year that   I attended the year before last, but I  didn   t attend this year because of my illness. But, again, my professional  41  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  Gill  life has been really rewarding for me. I   ve served on national boards,  and I   ve served as National Association President and served in a variety  of positions nationally. I also served internationally on my officiating  career. We didn   t talk about my officiating career.  Laughs   I know  You were keeping it back, George.  You didn   t even remember I had that officiating career   I had forgotten that.  Well, thank you for not remembering. (Laughs) I started officiating back  when I had just graduated from college and had gone back to Earlham  College. I started officiating because when I went back to Earlham, my  pay was  3,000 a year, but I got free room and board because I was  assistant men   s head resident of a dormitory, but I was also assistant  football coach, and the head football coach wanted me to go out and  recruit. Well, now, on three thousand a year, you don   t   and their  budget was very limited too, so I took up officiating to go out and start  to scout the football players. So, from that, then I got into officiating  basketball and got into officiating high school basketball and then into  college basketball, and then lucky enough to get into international  basketball. The first major college I worked in was the Ohio Valley  Conference. Then I worked the Big Ten, and I worked Missouri Valley,  and I worked the Big Eight, and I worked NAIA  National Association  of Intercollegiate Athletics  tournament for six years, and that   s the limit  you can work the tournament in the NAIA, six years. That   s the limit  you can work an NAIA tournament, and you have to retire.  I worked the NIT  National Invitational Tournament  basketball  tournament, and I worked the NCAA when we had major division and  small college. I worked the small college tournament three years, and  then I worked   luckily enough, I was selected as the United States  official to represent the United States in the University World Games in  Bucharest, Romania, in 1981, so I went over and represented us and  officiated basketball in those games in 1981. And then came back, and  the next year I figured was about it, so I retired in 1982 or    83, I think, in  basketball.  And you officiated how many years? You started in    56?  Fifty-six, yes.  So, nearly thirty years? Wow. George, what else have we left out that we  haven   t talked about? Anything you   d like to share?  42  Oberle  Gill  Oberle  I think that   s it. I think that   s significant enough. If you find anything in  the resume that I   ll send with you, well, you can add to it or whatever  you want to do.  I appreciate it, George. Thank you very much.  Thank you, Jerry. Thank you for the opportunity.  -------  -------   
