 Gill  Today is February 20, 2010. My name is Jerry Gill. I   m visiting with  Arthur    Art    Roberts in the home of Bob Adams in Dallas, Texas. This  interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project, which is part of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program.  Art, appreciate you coming down and visiting with us. You drove up  from Austin to be with us today and we appreciate the coconut cream pie  that you brought.  My pleasure, my pleasure.  Art, I want to ask you, obviously, about your family and some of the  background but first of all, I want to ask you about your personal life.  Can you talk a little bit about where you grew up, your family and some  of those things?  Yes, I was raised in the oil fields of West Texas. In fact, I was born in  the small community of Pecos. My family lived in Fort Stockton, Texas  but thirty miles away in the town of Pecos is where the doctor was. In  1942, I was born there. My grandmother   the then widow of Arthur  Adams, OSU   s first graduate, was my grandmother and lived in Fort  Stockton. My mother and my father, an oil field driller, lived there and  then later he traveled the country and took two children. I was raised by  Arthur Adams    widow from about age four or five until I was nine or ten  years old. Then, when my family and my father was drilling in West  Texas back in Odessa, Texas, a city of about 100,000 now, I moved back  up there. My grandmother, in fact, joined us up there. I attended Odessa  High School and Odessa College and then on to the University of Texas.  Then, training in my profession, the management of chambers of  commerce around our state.  I might back up just a little bit and ask you, so you graduated from  5  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Odessa High School?  Odessa High, 1960.  Can you tell me some of your activities when you were growing up,  community activities, high school activities?  I give my grandmother credit because my grandmother, Arthur Adams     wife was     Was this  Olive ?   Olive  Glazier Adams, a Kansas native, was a graduate of the  University of Chicago and she majored in what I would have called     speech.    They called it elocution at the time. When she returned to her  prominent Kansas family, they said it wasn   t proper for her ever to  teach. I got to be the one and only victim. (Laughter) She told me on  many occasions,    No, young Arthur, we will not have that West Texas  vernacular in our vocabulary.    I was surrounded by    On the wings of a  snow white dove,    but I was not allowed to speak in those terms. She  had a huge impact on my life, repeating books of the Bible:    Genesis,  Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, Arthur, Deuteronomy.     It was a huge impact, because I wound up in an industry where I speak a  great deal. Her influence and that of her husband before her or with her  that I never met had a huge impact on my life.  Olive is your grandmother, married obviously to Arthur Wesley.  To Arthur Wesley Adams, yes.  And, of course, the background there that I should have mentioned  earlier, you   re a descendent and certainly a namesake for your  grandfather, Arthur Wesley Adams, who along with his brother, James  Homer, were the first graduates  and  were in the first graduating class  of then Oklahoma A M, now Oklahoma State University.  Exactly, received the first two diplomas because their names were  Adams. Of course, I had no clue at the time of all this history, but my  grandmother was a deep, deep admirer of her deceased husband and  what she taught me about his love of music, et cetera, it had an impact  on my entire life.  Did she ever visit with you about her husband, your grandfather?  Generally, only in his loves and preferences. I spent ages four or five  until I was nine years old in Fort Stockton, Texas. I never heard anything  6  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  played other than classical music and opera in that house. She used to sit  down and tell me about his love of that   dear love of that music. She  also tried to get me to learn how to eat Limburger cheese, which was his  absolute favorite. That one I never mastered.  Did she ever talk about his college experiences at Oklahoma State?  I   m embarrassed to say not much. She talked about his early business  experiences but I truly did not know, even when I was starting to decide  where to go to college, that my granddad had gone to Oklahoma State. I  had no clue. It just was made quite clear to me what a great and  outstanding individual and human being he was. But I did not know  about his Oklahoma State relationship. My father certainly never  discussed it because he was never quite willing to forgive the state of  Oklahoma for my mother. We didn   t talk a lot about Oklahoma in our  Texas household. My father adored my grandmother. He was a working  oil field man and anything   he added room in our Odessa home for her.  He just thought she was magnificent. I heard about my granddad on  many an occasion through her but hardly ever otherwise.  Is there a story about how they met?  My mother and father? Oh, it   s a wonderful story. In fact, there are two.  First, my grandfather had made his monies in oil and gas and with his  brother Homer in many instances. He became a very prosperous banker  in Fort Worth, Texas, quite successful apparently.  He  had everything  invested in a stock market that crashed in 1929 and his entire life  disappeared. The only reason I ever figured that out was hearing my  mother and she   d talk about living in that beautiful mansion in Ridglea  in Fort Worth one day and being out in a roof of the chauffeur   s quarters  the next as they had to leave their home and so on as it was all  destroyed. He went to West Texas to make his money again in oil and  gas. That   s why he was there.  She met a driller, a young man named Donald Allen Roberts from Big  Spring, Texas, my father. She met a driller and my grandmother and  grandfather forbade their marriage. They told my mother she could not  marry that oil field young man and my mother eloped with my father.  Upon which point they were immediately forgiven and he was brought  into the household.  I   m going to tell a quick one on my dad because I know about it. I was  telling my cousin about it. My father, Donald Allen Roberts after   I was  born after my granddad had died, so my grandmother was a huge  influence on my life. My father borrowed   you could build an entire  house in the early 1940s for four thousand dollars. My father borrowed  7  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  that money from my grandmother and our house was built two blocks  away from her home in Fort Stockton. One day, my mother went to my  grandmother and said,    Nanny, Donald has not been home in three  days.    And she said,    Bring the children.    And as we walked into the  home   at least our legend has it   my grandmother said,    You will  never see that man again as long as you live.    On that Sunday, there was  a knock at the door and my father was there. Legend has it that my  grandmother turned to him and said,    Donald Allen Roberts, you   re no  longer welcome in this household.    He said,    Nanny, I have been  playing poker for six days. Here is the four thousand dollars I owe you.     My grandmother, we are told, hugged him and said,    I love you Donald.  I love you. Your wife is in the bedroom.    (Laughter) From that day to  the day she died, my father adored that woman.  Great story. (Laughs) To  talk about  your father again, can you tell me  a little bit about what you remember about him? His personality traits     A rough, oil field, hard working man. High school graduate only. During  World War II, he was one of those classified   I   ve forgotten what the  term is   but vital because of the oil field industry, so he didn   t serve in  the war. He traveled the oil fields. The fields were opening up in Odessa,  Texas, but prior to that my sister and brother were in Casper, Wyoming  while I was with my grandmother. Granddad had long since died, of  course, before I was born. I always maintained that my grandmother had  picked the best one and let the other two go. (Laughter) My sister never  quite understood that argument. He was a very hard working driller,  eventually owned his own well-servicing company in West Texas. Most  importantly, he was a rather rough man. I honestly can   t tell you we  were all that close. But I can tell you that he, as we in West Texas would  have said,    put the beans on the table    and fed his family and made sure  they were well housed all the years that he was with us.  In your family, how many brothers and sisters?  I had an older sister, she is passed, Donna Goodwin Roberts and a  younger brother, Johnny (we called him Johnny). I tried to call him  Johnny, his name was Johnny Bob which my grandmother and I both  thought was outrageous. (Laughter) But we had to endure that. He has  not been with the family in many years. Last time we saw him was at the  death of my mother in 1983. We do not know where Johnny Bob is at  this point. My sister passed about five or six years ago. I   ve been a  single man. We   ve apparently done a very respectable job of killing out  our line. (Laughter)  Now, your mother was Susan.  8  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Susan Adelaide Adams, yes. She was raised, of course, in Oklahoma  when it was still Indian Territory.  In Ardmore?  In Ardmore; born in Ardmore, Oklahoma.  She  attended but did not  graduate from Oklahoma State. Her brothers   my uncles   Uncle  Wesley graduated and I   m not sure whether Rodney did or not, quite  frankly (the other brother). There were three children of Arthur and  Olive Adams. Then, of course, he married  Olive Glazier , a lady from  Kansas, who is from a rather prominent family there. Her father worked  for the Santa Fe Railroad and she was a very well-educated woman and  married this gentleman from Oklahoma.  Kind of your relationship with your mother, then. Can you talk a little bit  about what you remember about her and her personality?  Oh, quite close. My grandmother and mother were just absolutely the  loves and lessons of my life. As my grandmother had me in the earlier  years while they were traveling the country, I got spoiled rotten by her.  We had a lovely maid that would travel with us. My granddad had  remade his fortune. We had a summer cabin up in New Mexico that I got  to go to every single summer, the maid and I and my grandmother and  people would come visit. My mother I got to know much better after I  returned at age nine. She was a devotedly dedicated mother. She  sponsored all of my youth groups. She would take the responsibility of  my being active.  In fact, our earliest argument was when I was about nine years old   when  I joined the Cub Scouts. We went on what was known as a     camperooni    and I immediately wanted to quit. She was den queen or  whatever you call it, I   m not quite certain. She said   we remembered it  for years   she said,    You cannot quit. I   m the den mother.    She said,    I  can   t be den mother if you   re going to quit.    And I said,    Get another  kid     (Laughter) And walked out of the room. We   ve laughed about that  on many an occasion.  I was in a youth organization called DeMolay for all of my high school  and college career and long beyond was a sponsor and she followed me  all the way through. She was a devoted mother. While my father was  looking for this eighty-eight pound kid to be a football player, my  mother supported all my speech activities, attended every play I acted in.   She  just was an absolutely devoted mother in terms of my relationship  and how much we cared for each other.  Did your mom ever talk about her family, the Adams Family, her  9  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  brothers and sisters?  She did. Yes, she did very much. She didn   t talk a great deal about one  brother, Rodney, because Rodney   I   m sure for probably legitimate  reasons   when my grandmother died, her mother passed away (Arthur  Adams    wife) he did not come from Washington State where he lived to  the funeral. Mother just never quite forgave Rodney for that. My uncle  Wes lived twenty miles away and was an accountant in Midland, Texas  and he and his wife Agnes and son, Arthur, my cousin (we   re all Arthurs  in our family) saw each other so very, very often. She was very, very  close and admiring of Wes and his accounting abilities and the fact that  he and his wife had been very successful in their finances  where ours  was  based on the vagaries of the oil industry which had been up and  down and up and down; we were sometimes barely making it along. I  realize it now, I didn   t have a clue at the time, and she was very, very  devoted. There wasn   t a morning in my life that I didn   t get a bowl of  those Cheerios that I so disliked. And come home for my Morton   s pot  pie. She saved every penny she could but she ran a marvelous  household. She loved Uncle Wes and that family. I hardly knew the  other until many, many years later. Most respectfully she adored her  mother and father. She was the one, and I   ll be happy to tell this story  when it   s appropriate, that caused me to return my grandfather   s original  diploma to the university because she understood what he had  accomplished. I had no clue. She made me make some promises that  eventually became a reality.  I   d like to get into that but let me lead into a couple questions first, if we  can. First of all, from your father and from your grandmother, his  mother, what stories did you hear about Arthur and what kind of person  he was; a little about his career and his life? I mean, what things did  you learn about him from the stories they told you?  I   m not sure I   ve ever seen a picture of my grandfather that he was not in  a coat and tie. He was considered by both of them in their perspective,  and they believed that he was considered by others, to be a very  dignified man. He was also an incredibly thoughtful man in terms of  trying to help some friends who occasionally in some of those very  tough times could not quite make it and was very thoughtful of them and  very giving. He was a lover of music, both classical and opera, as I  suggested. Mother used to talk about the hours when the two brothers  would flee the room and he and she would eat that Limburger cheese  (laughter) and read books together. His relationship with my  grandmother was just a remarkable one and she was a highly educated  woman and worked so very, very hard with me to make sure that I  understood the language and in her perspective, at least pronounced it  properly.  10  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Where did they meet?  I have no clue. I do not know any, nor do I recall any of the history of  how or where they first met. I just do not know, Jerry.  You had this conversation before but you really sort of disengaged from  the Adams Family and the history of their association with the  university.  I truly was. As I was, in Odessa, Texas considering what university to go  to, there was one five minute conversation saying,    We can get you an  opportunity to attend Oklahoma State University if you   d like to go and  get the same rate that students in Oklahoma pay if you want to       I   d  never asked why and no one ever told me why. I knew nothing about  that until I had already gone off to the University of Texas and gone  through my career and was in business, in fact. But Mother,  acknowledging the fact that she was getting a little older, I   d already  started my career managing a local chamber of commerce. It was in a  community called   it   s pronounced Lamesa in West Texas but it was  within an hour   s drive of where she lived in Odessa. She called me there  once and set down with me and gave me all the history and the  importance of what my grandfather had accomplished, what history had  put on his shoulders and explained to me the location of a diploma.  Where was it?  It was, in fact, in a very large chest and it was very guarded with leather  around it, all kinds of bedspreads and so on. It was in a very special  location and papers over it and under it to make sure it was well kept.  She guarded it, but she had never given it to the university because she  was very bitter about a previous experience. She added that there, in that  class of six, there was an award given out called the Magruder Medal.  Apparently, my impression is it was the valedictory medal, but it may  have been for literature; I don   t know which, frankly. But she gave that  to Oklahoma State University Library and they lost it. She went to see it  once and they could not produce it. She was determined that she knew  the importance of this diploma that she had but she didn   t trust  Oklahoma State University. A historian in your university named  Bernard Chapman  B.B. Chapman, yes.  B. B. Chapman, who stayed in touch with our entire family for  generations and wrote us letters, long retired from the university and was  in Florida, I communicated with the man on so many occasions. When  he figured out that I had the chalice, the diploma, he stayed in touch the  11  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  whole time because my mother asked me for a promise to her. That was,  that I would not, she said,    As the centennial of Oklahoma State  approaches, this diploma is going to be very important and very valuable  to them and Mr. Chapman, I   m sure, will cause them to see the light  of...    She said,    This diploma is not to be returned to them until you get  a written agreement on how it will be handled and how it will be cared  for and how people can access it, et cetera.    I made her close that  bedside pledge and we were able to keep that in 1996 when we  presented that diploma at OSU as they were starting to celebrate their  centennial. Then, the thrill of my lifetime occurred one hundred years to  the day when my cousin Arthur and I went, to the hour, to Old Central.  In Old Central, on the stage, one hundred years to the hour when they  graduated, they reproduced that ceremony. A young man had memorized  my grandfather   s graduation speech and I watched my granddad  graduate from college. It was just a remarkable experience.  I   ll tell you a little bit behind the rest of the story.  I would love to know it, thank you.  You were how old when your mother pulled you aside and told you  about your tie with Oklahoma State University? Why so long?  I   m afraid that   s a mystery that I don   t think  the author  Dan Brown can  resolve. He   s written some wonderful books but it   s one of the ancient  mysteries because no one has ever suggested to me why I was never told  or it was never discussed in the family; my grandmother never  mentioned it. In all those years, I had absolutely no clue why it was not  discussed. Until my sister   my brother was gone, my sister was married  and gone and I was the one within the sixty mile drive and I was chosen  to guard that diploma until the time came and I got the agreement that  she believed was so necessary. Until approaching that time and she told  me all that, it was never mentioned, never discussed.  How old were you at the time you had this conversation?  I was, let   s see. It was sometime between 1974 and    77, so forty-two,  yes, I was in my late twenties, early thirties when I was finally told  about that.  Interesting thing, and sort of the reason I   m asking you is, Arthur was  past president of the former Student Association, now the Alumni  Association at Oklahoma State. He came back for reunions occasionally,  for Homecomings. He was very proud of that tie, as was James Homer,  his brother. It was interesting that they would not have had that  conversation     12  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  It never came up.  Your grandmother would have known those stories and would have  known that about Arthur.  Unquestionably, unquestionably.     and yet this time you spent with her     Whether it was the influence of my Texas father, who wasn   t all that  fond of the state (laughs) and had only gone to high school, I have no  real feel of that. But it was never discussed to my knowledge. My uncle  Wesley and she never discussed it either, particularly. My grandmother,  quite amazingly, who took such pride in   and she told me many stories  of him and not one of them involved Oklahoma State University.  Speaking of stories she told about your  grandfather  again, I   ve heard  that he was very much a people person, very entrepreneurial. I know you  didn   t know him personally, but through your mother and through your  grandmother, what stories did you hear about Arthur Wesley, your  grandfather? What did you pick up about him?  I picked up that he was a colossally successful businessman. That the  disaster he faced only is the one that faced everybody in the nation.  Apparently, he was a very prominent banker in Fort Worth when their  world collapsed around them and returned to that area he knew he was  very good at in the oil and gas industry in a tiny little West Texas town.  Everyone in Fort Stockton, Texas, for years knew Arthur Adams. They  knew I was his grandson because he was so highly known. I met the  postmaster, I met mayors, et cetera.    This is the grandson of       He was  very, very highly regarded then. I think he was a civic leader who never  sought office but loved to be involved in the process. Very, very highly  regarded and a skilled people person, no question about that.  But he also was one of the more civilized, if you pardon the use of the  term, people in Fort Stockton, because he before me, I think, had to go  into his home and play all that classical music and so on. I realized in  Odessa, Texas, when I was being raised, I had graduated high school  with friends that never in their life knew that I closed the door every  night and played my classical music and my opera because they   d said  somebody would get a rope. (Laughs) It just was not appropriate in that  environment. That came from Granddad. My grandmother made sure  that I knew a lot about my grandfather   s likes and dislikes. I think it  instilled a lot of them in me. I   m going to the opera tomorrow after this  interview. She and Arthur Adams are responsible for that fact.  13  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  I   ll just ask one more time. You did not hear any stories about Oklahoma  State as related to your grandfather at all then?  Absolutely not. I did not even know of Oklahoma State, et cetera, at all  as I was growing up. I know the other Adams    families have saluted that  flag. All of his brothers, etcetera have so devotedly done so. I don   t  think he turned his back on anything. I think he found himself in a  foreign country in Texas where it just wasn   t either an issue or a point of  discussion. What one thing I was told about my granddad was that he  was a remarkable pragmatist. Whatever the environment required, he  would do and do well. I think that was to be seen as a hard-working  Texan. I think he worked to do that.  After you finally had the conversation with your mother and found out   about  that tie and had been to some family reunions, which I   m going  to ask you about in a minute, has this been a source of pride for you to  find out that your grandfather is in the first graduating class of  Oklahoma State University?  It   s a colossal point of pride, quite frankly, and one of the most  invigorating experiences of my life was to watch that young man on that  stage stand and speak up. I remember my cousin, the other Arthur,  sitting next to me when the young man gave   each of the six graduates  had somebody representing them and giving their speech. When Arthur  first spoke and his was a little stuffy, my cousin turned and smiled and  said,    Now I understand.    (Laughter) He   s always thought that of me.  He   s never said it before but it was quite accurate. But the answer is  through my mother. My grandmother sold me on Arthur Adams in terms  of his cultural interests and his great feel of the world around him and all  that she so dearly loved, and that I thought was spectacular. My mother  sold me on him based on making me aware of the heritage I had  received through his blood in terms of the Oklahoma State connection  that had never been mentioned to me before.  Your mother never talked about that either?  She never did until it was time to make it clear to me. I think, frankly, it  was the Texas factor because we   re in the oil fields of West Texas. The  only issue in front of me was whether it was going to be Texas Tech or  the University of Texas. Those were the obvious alternatives, I thought.  They mentioned the name Oklahoma State without telling me why. I  truly didn   t know. I also have to admit that I was getting ready to leave  high school and so on, I doubt that it would have made the least bit of  difference. It only meant so much, much later.  Art, what do you recall about that conversation that you had with your  14  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  mother, because she was proud of being a graduate of Oklahoma State  and of her father     She was not a graduate. Mother did not graduate OSU.  She attended, did she not?  She did attend. Yes, she attended several years, but she did not graduate.  My uncle certainly did.  Certainly she felt the historical significance of her dad.  Absolutely, and she was very proud of him.  Can you kind of reconstruct that conversation, how you remember it and  the feelings about that?  I can reconstruct it in two fashions. I think it was the most prideful  moment of her life that her father graduated from that institution that my  great-grandfather, William Henry Harrison Adams, had laid out the  entire survey plan for Stillwater. He was a confederate soldier who   d  spent part of the war on Johnson   s Island in the River Ohio, and went  when they had the Land Run and settled and surveyed the plan and  designed it, so I think, I believe at least, that Adams Avenue doesn   t end  in the Adams Family farm area accidentally. She was very prideful of all  of that and she shared all of that. But  she was  most prideful of the fact  that her father  Arthur  received the first diploma given out by that  distinguished institution. Although, it was in her later years that she  shared that with me her disappointment in the way she believed the  Magruder Medal was ignored by the university, Mr. Chapman so carried  and reinforced her pride for so many years that it, I think, was a single  most prideful moment of her life regarding that connection and what  Granddad had managed to do.  Arthur, I had heard from a previous interview that your great-grandfather  Arthur actually made the run with his father, William H. H.,  at the age of about thirteen or fourteen     William Henry Harrison.  He actually made the Run with him. The other three kids were in school,  but he actually made the Run.  That   s a piece of information I   d never heard, and if that   s accurate,  that   s even more intriguing. It was quite interesting. There were four  sons, and the decision was made that two would inherit the land, and the  15  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  other two would be sent to the new university. And so, Arthur and   James  Homer went off to the university and were well aware,  apparently, they would not inherit the family farm. It was a remarkable  series of accomplishments and to know that my great-grandfather was in  the Land Run and all of that is just a tremendous heritage that I can   t  even envision, frankly, but it   s very remarkable. Mother was quite proud  of all of that. I had understood that Granddad was part of the Run.  Maybe closing some questions, you didn   t know a lot of the others, other  than your cousins, your mother   s brother and her family. But you didn   t  know about the extended Adams Family.  I had no clue, other than one distant cousin, Bob, who of course was the  son of  James  Homer and stayed in touch with our family. The entire  rest of the family was a mystery to me. My name was Roberts. Theirs  was Adams, and Mother had been in touch with few, if any, of them  except my Uncle Wes in Midland. Bob Adams would occasionally carry  out his work in our part of the world and visit with us, and I knew there  was some distant relationship. But the entire Adams gathering of all of  the descendants, of all of the four brothers and so on, did not happen  until long after Mother had passed, and I regret that so seriously because  she would   ve adored it. But Bob Adams, son of  James  Homer, is the  one who put that together when all of us gathered in Angel Fire, New  Mexico, and I met distant cousins, obviously, sons and daughters of the  brothers of my grandfather and so on, who were Presbyterian ministers  and instructors at universities up in the northeast and so on. It was a  remarkable feeling of family that I   d never shared. My father, Donald  Roberts, had no brothers and sisters, and so I did not have any kind of  extended family out there and wasn   t aware of it until Bob Adams  brought that for us, and we have, on several occasions, gotten together  since and it   s a very rewarding experience.  Do you remember some stories from that first reunion? I mean, because  this was the first time you   d met most of these people. What memories go  through your mind about that reunion?  Well, first, the location, in Angel Fire, New Mexico. Bob Adams    and  Pat   s home was just such a beautiful place to be. My heavens, it was  great. Secondly, I remember a lot of people who were a little bit like me,  rather reserved, and not particularly outgoing and so on. It was all  intriguing. My sister brought her new husband, a gentleman named  Ralph Goodwin, who was fascinated by our family and how brilliant and  clever we were, and that we were the unhandiest people (laughter) he   d  ever met in his life. He told a story about a commode breaking, and all  of these educated Adams people from all over, a senior vice president of  a state chamber of commerce, Presbyterian minister, professor. The  16  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  commode didn   t work, and eleven men walked to the telephone, and he  went and fixed it. (Laughter) Every time, from that point on, when I  picked up a hammer around my brother-in-law, he would hum the old  television theme of the Adams Family, (laughter) and that was my way  of knowing I was not supposed to touch anything. Apparently, I don   t  think any of us inherited any kind of working-with-hands skill  whatsoever, because that seems to be fallow ground in our family. But I  met a whole lot of absolutely wonderful people. Then, of course, the  deep-seeded mystery that I finally stumbled across was that my cousin  Arthur and I were the two non-members of the    Oklahoma State Is The  Center Of The Universe Club.    (Laughter) They have been very patient  with us in our difficulty in understanding that fact, but they   ve been very  inclusive all the way, and it   s been a very rewarding experience.  Longhorns are welcome in the family.  (Laughs) Exactly.  Would you share with us a little bit how your career went in the  association business, in the chamber business, and the things you   ve  done over the years?  Sure. Odessa High 1960, attended Odessa College, attended University  of Texas. Had a minor fling at law school at the University of Houston,  quite unsuccessfully. Lied to my parents about going to law school and I  was playing duplicate bridge and working at Joske   s Department Store  in Houston for a year or so. I then returned to Odessa. I had minored in  communications at UT and was in the business of helping form the first  FM radio station in the Permian Basin. That   s how long ago it was. I  wrote all the commercials and all the materials. That was just a  somewhat innate talent I had.  But the gentleman I worked for that owned the station, as I told him   that  I was going off to another station that had made me an offer he  said,    No, you need to look at this profession that needs your skill.    He  was on the board of directors of the Odessa Chamber of Commerce, and  he took me over there and introduced me. They had a vacancy, and he  changed my life as a result. I found a profession. I started on the staff of  the Odessa Chamber of Commerce, served chambers of commerce over  twenty-one years in Lamesa, Edinburg, down in the Rio Grande Valley  of Texas, back to Odessa, when the man who hired me retired. That had  become a West Texas oil field city of 100,000 people, and I managed  their chamber of commerce. Off to El Paso, city of nearly three-quarters  of a million people, managing their chamber. As I left there, I went to  board the state chamber of commerce as it was being organized, and I   ve  headed up the division since 1991 that works with the 638 chambers all  17  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  Gill  Roberts  over the U.S.  I authored two books. I authored a book the U.S. Chamber used for  eleven years to train chamber executives all over the United States. It  was designed for the people who manage chambers. Authored a second  one for volunteers, on how to become very effective in volunteer  organizations. I have conducted 495 board-training retreats for chambers  only, and then many more for many other associations.  Got the thrill of my lifetime. I spent a lot of time studying Egyptology.  Personally, I   m just fascinated by it. The U.S. State Department invited  me to go to Cairo to form the first mortgage business association in that  country, and I taught them how to do that and trained it. So, it was a  wonderful skill, and I give my grandmother Olive Adams more credit  for that than any other human. She and my mother were huge factors,  and then, of course, the visage of Granddad Arthur Adams has brought  me all of my love of the arts and so on that wouldn   t have been there  otherwise.  Art, as you   ve learned more about the family history, and going back to  the 1600s and to the Adams presidency, what sense do you get of the  Adams Family? What do you think about when you think of all that  history and tradition?  Well, frankly, I   m embarrassingly impressed with us, (laughter) because  I think there have been some remarkable successes in our family, some  very, very successful business people, like my dear cousin-uncle-slash  Bob, and some tremendously impressive religious leaders, educators, et  cetera. Although I think my brother-in-law was right, we could probably  never be trusted with a screwdriver in our hands. I think the Adams  family has made a remarkable contribution to the society around it and  certainly to Oklahoma State University.  I appreciate it, Arthur. Is there anything that we haven   t talked about,  that we missed?  I certainly hope not. (Laughter)  Well, I appreciate your perspective on it, Arthur.  Thank you. My pleasure, too.  -------  -------   
