 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is October 19, 2007 and I   m at the ConocoPhillips OSU  Alumni Center interviewing Norma Crane. This interview is being  conducted as part of O-STATE Stories, an Oral History Project of the  OSU Library. Thank you for joining us today Mrs. Crane.  Thank you.  Let   s begin by having you tell us a little bit about yourself   where  you   re from, where you grew up?  I grew up in Hobart, Oklahoma and I live there now. I lived in Wichita  Falls, Texas for about 43 years. I was Public Information Officer for the  city of Wichita Falls and I retired from there and moved back home to  Oklahoma.  And going back now to your OAMC years, can you tell me why you  decided to attend Oklahoma A M College?  Well I have kind of a deep-seated background in Oklahoma State  University. My great-uncle and my great-aunt were two of the first  people to work as county agent and home demonstration agents when it  was a land-grant college. My great-uncle was in charge of the  southwestern part of Oklahoma and my great-aunt was the woman in  charge of the northeastern part. There was a man and a woman in charge  of each section in Oklahoma. This was way back when it first started. So  there was no question but that my allegiance was going to be to  Oklahoma A M College. When I started to school, from Hobart, I was  the only one who went to Oklahoma A M. At that time everybody  teased me unmercifully because I did not go to OU, and I had to endure  all of those horrible aggie jokes. I hated them and loved Oklahoma  A M.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Now when you were at OAMC what was your major? What did you  study?  I majored in journalism and I had three minors   a minor in sociology, a  minor in advertising and a minor in political science. I had a teacher, an  advisor, Professor Stratton   wonderful teacher. He felt that every  journalism major should have between 18 and 21 hours every semester.  He wanted us to take classes in every school on the campus if you could.  I had so many hours I had to take that I ended up with three minors.  That   s amazing. Were there many women in the journalism program?  When I started to school my freshman year, there were about 250 to 275  declared majors for journalism. There were probably five or six women  in that group. And there were two of us that graduated. But the total  graduating journalism majors only numbered fourteen. So a lot of them  washed out or quit and changed their majors. No, there were not very  many women in journalism. In fact, when I started to work on the  O   Colly, because I was one of the few women in journalism, they  expected me to be a really loose woman because I was in journalism.  Hmm.  So I don   t know whether they were disappointed or what. (Laughs) But  it wasn   t true.  (Laughs) What was it like working on the O   Colly in those days? What  was your beat?  I had worked on a newspaper all through high school. I worked on a  weekly newspaper and I had a wonderful editor and publisher. They had  really helped me. One thing that publisher told me was when I got to  school to go in and volunteer to work on the newspaper, not wait. At OU  you had to wait until your junior or senior year to work on the  newspaper. So I started to school and the second week I was in school  here, I went to the O   Colly office and said,    I want to volunteer to write  some news stories.    And they just looked at me and said,    Well you  have to go through freshman English   freshman journalism first.    And I  said,    But I think I know how to do it. I   ve been working on a  newspaper for three years.    Finally I wore them down and they gave me  a story to do. So I did the story and from then on, I got to work on the  newspaper. Well the first thing that I did was Assistant Society Editor.  You know, in those days there was always society. And then Society  Editor and then I went on up to Associate Editor.  What was the first story about that they gave you?  6  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  I don   t remember. It was some innocuous little club meeting somewhere  that was not difficult at all.  What was your favorite story? Do you remember?  Oh that   s a good one. Margaret Truman, President Truman   s daughter,  came here to give a concert. These were in the days when she was  singing and traveling giving concerts. So she came to give a concert and  they had a press conference for her. There were people from Oklahoma  City and Tulsa. All the different newspapers were here and the news  conference was in the Student Union building. I was sent to cover the  news conference. Well, she was a member of the same sorority that I  was a member of. My sorority had said,    Please ask her for dinner.    So  when the press conference was over, I went up to her and said,    Miss  Truman we would like for you to come to dinner at the Pi Phi house  tonight.    And she said,    I can   t, but if you could sit down for just a few  minutes I   d like to talk to you.    So I sat down and talked to her for an  hour. She talked about the people she was dating. You know, the one she  was dating in particular and how she got out of the house with all the  Secret Service people there, all of this stuff that nobody was supposed to  know and it would have been a wonderful   but I was sworn to secrecy.  I couldn   t tell anything. Now can you believe today that any reporter  would have kept that secret? They would have put it on the news as fast  as they could. But I didn   t write it. I didn   t write anything about it  because I promised her I wouldn   t. When I got back to the O   Colly  office they said,    Where have you been?    I said,    Talking to Margaret  Truman.    That was one of the most interesting stories I ever did. She  was a lovely person and she had the prettiest blonde hair I   ve ever seen  in my life.  Did she have Secret Service agents with her?  Not in the room. Now I don   t know whether they were there or not. I  don   t think they were here.  That   s interesting. Now, where did you take the majority of your  classes? What buildings?  (Laughs) When I started to school in 1949, there were lots of people on  the campus then because they had come back from the war and they  were going to school on the G.I. Bill. We didn   t have enough  classrooms. We had so many people here on the campus   so many more  than normal   so they had barracks set up and Quonset huts. We went to  classes in Quonset huts and barracks. My journalism classes were in  barracks. And the Library, which is you know this gorgeous Library  over here  Edmon Low Library , opened my senior year. For the three  7  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  years before then all the library books were scattered all over the campus  in 15 to 17 different libraries. So if you had a class in journalism and  you had to do some research on something, they would say,    Go to  Library number ten and Library number fourteen to find out this  information.    That was terrible. That was awful. I was so glad to see that  Library open.  Was there a central place that you could go to tell you where to find the  book you were looking for?  Usually it was your teachers.  In the Quonset huts, was it cold? Could they control the temperature?  It was cold and it was hot. It was never just right except for in the fall  and a little bit in the spring. In the spring, we would have rain and they  would put sheep manure on the campus to get the grass to grow and it  would rain and for almost a week and a half it was almost unbearable  around here. The smell was just awful. But the grass was gorgeous when  it came up.  So when you smell that smell you just     The grass is coming.  (Laughs) Where did you live when you were going to school?  Here?  On campus.  I lived in Murray Hall my first year, on the third floor the southeast  corner. I   ll never forget it because it had two windows   one of the south  and one on the east. Then the next three years I lived in the Pi Phi house  which at that time was located across from Theta Pond. I think it   s the  Lambda Chi house now. I think that   s who we sold it to. And I lived  there for three years.  When you were in the dorm, did you eat dinner together? Did you have  social events in the hall?  They did. We had dinner from like five to seven at night. I missed my  mother   s cooking, I remember that. And I remember my dad calling me  and saying,    What are all these checks that you   ve written to the Frat  Shop?    And I said,    They make the best cheeseburgers anywhere.     What I was doing was eating at the dorm and then getting a  8  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  cheeseburger at the Frat Shop every night. The Frat Shop was located  across the street from   do you know where the Chi Omega house is  now? It was on corner across from the Chi Omega house then. An old  house with a front porch on it and three booths inside and the best  cheeseburgers you   ve ever eaten. The food was not the best at the  dormitory. I remember you would have ham on Sunday and peas and  something else and then on Monday you had ham loaf with peas in it     leftover from Sunday. It was not the best.  Did you enjoy your time living in the dorm?  Yes, yes. It was fun and I met a lot of people that are still friends of  mine. We lived together in the dorm.  Tell me about laundry. How did you do your laundry?  I sent it home. At that time, there was something called Mistletoe  Express and it was a trucking company that every day went throughout  Oklahoma. It had a box that had a belt around it. I remember that. And  you put your dirty laundry in there and I just addressed it to home and  called Mistletoe Express and they   d come by and pick it up. My mother  would get it that night, wash it and send it back to me. This is peculiar  but in the Pi Phi house we had a washing machine. We had no dryer and  no clothes line. So it didn   t do you much good.  Did your mother ever put anything extra in your laundry to send back to  you?  My mother sent me a cake almost every week and the Mistletoe Express  man would come wagging that cake up holding it up by strings where  she had wrapped the strings around it. The Mistletoe Express was one of  the best things going in Oklahoma at that time.  Now you moved from Murray Hall into the sorority house, tell me about  your sorority.  Well I loved it. It was fun. It was nice having all those people there. I  made a lot of good friends and I think it   s a good life. It was particularly  for me because I was very busy and between going to class and working  on the O   Colly and doing the things I was doing, I didn   t have time to do  a lot of extra running around with the girls. So I saw them at the house.  That   s where I got to hobnob with them, mainly.  Did you have a house mother?  Oh yes.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Tell me about her.  Well, she was very strict. And she was okay. She wasn   t my mother   I  mean, she wasn   t like my mother, but she had all those girls to contend  with and she did a good job of doing that. I remember though, when I  became Associate Editor of the newspaper, I would get home at one  o   clock or 1:30 in the morning sometimes and she didn   t like that. We  had to get special permission for that to happen. Now, we got that from  Dean Patchin. She was the Dean of Women. Dean Patchin grew up a  block from me in Hobart, Oklahoma. So when I said,    Dean Patchin I   m  working at the O   Colly, I don   t get home       She trusted me, she  believed me. Another kind of funny thing, the O   Colly office at that time  was in this ramshackle little old building. It was old then and it was kind  of   do you know where the north entrance is to the Student Union? If  you came out of the north wing, it was kind of right there.  Was that the Publications Building?  Yes, Publications Building, I think that   s what they called it. And at that  time, the Sigma Chi fraternity had a Great Dane dog named Sig. I had  seen Sig a couple of times but I didn   t know this dog very well and it  was a huge dog. But when I started working late at night, that dog would  be at the door and walk me home at night. Now this is the gospel truth, I  think he was an angel because I would have to walk through the dark  park of Theta Pond through there. And that dog would walk me home. I  never was afraid.  Did you feel safe on campus back then?  Oh yes, yes, yes. We had one incident and somebody may have told you  about this. We had an alligator that lived in Theta Pond. Have they told  you about the alligator?  No, this is our first alligator story.  I can   t remember that alligator   s name. But periodically, some boys  would drag that alligator out of that pond. Now that alligator was  about   about that long  Crane motions , I guess a fairly good sized  alligator. And they   d drag it out you know and do something with it and  throw it back in the pond. It was the night before we played the  University of Arkansas. Arkansas just landed in droves on our campus  when we played them. And if they were Pi Phi   s, they showed up at our  house and stayed there. If they were independents they stayed at the  dorm, doesn   t matter. So they were staying at our house, I   d given up  my bed to somebody and I was sleeping on the couch in the basement.  Our house had a sunken backyard and part of the basement looked out  10  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  onto this backyard with windows.  It was about four o   clock in the morning I heard this thud coming from  upstairs. I went upstairs and there was this alligator tied to a table in  what we called the sunroom. It was a little room off the living room. He  was just lashing that furniture right and left. So I got the president and  brought her down there and we decided that the thing to do was to call  the police and have them take it to the Theta house, another sorority on  campus. And so we called them and they took it down to the Theta  house. Finally that spring I was in a wedding and one of the groomsman  was sitting next to me at the dinner. He said,    I can   t stand it. How did  that alligator get down to the Theta house?    And so I found out from  him who had done it. It was a bunch of Beta   s, Sigma Chi   s and Sigma  Nu   s who had all gotten together and gotten the alligator out and  crawled in our windows. We were all asleep down there and they   d gone  in between us to take the alligator upstairs. But that poor old alligator. It  spent more time out of that water with someone wrestling around and  doing something with it, I don   t know how it ever got there. But it lived  there for about ten years I think.  People weren   t afraid of being thrown in Theta Pond with an alligator?  Well I   yes. I mean, a little bit.  (Laughs) From the house you were able to see a lot of activity at Theta  Pond.  Uh-huh.  Do you have any, outside of the alligator stories, any crazy happenings?  The O-Club, which was the Athletic Club, used to have an initiation.  And they would streak down what was then called College Avenue     University Avenue. And we were up in the fourth floor looking out the  windows and saw all of this one night   all of the streaking down the  street. They didn   t know it. In those days they would have been  mortified. Today they probably would have showed off more.  How many of your sorority sisters lived in the house?  All of them except the ones that were married.  Approximately   ?  In those days there were probably seventy-five of us that lived in the  house. In those days, a lot of women came to school to get married. I  11  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  remember, in my pledge class there were thirty-five girls. There were  five of us that graduated, the rest of them got married. One of those girls  parents were visiting and I overheard them. Her dad was saying,    We  sent you up here to get married and you haven   t found a husband yet and  you   re about to graduate.    So a lot of parents sent their kids up here to  get married   sent the girls up here to find a husband. In those days there  was the School of Home Economics and that occupied most girls. You  could be a teacher   education, you could be a secretary, you could be a  nurse, or you could major in home economics. Outside of that, it was  very rare for women to do anything other than those things.  What motivated you? What was your whole purpose for going to  college? What did you want to do?  I   d always wanted to go to college. College just sounded like that dream  thing, you know, that   s off there that you always want to do. I   d always  wanted to work on a newspaper.  Tell me about being involved with the Student Senate. How did that  come about?  I ran for the Student Senate and won. I was from the School of Arts and  Sciences. Journalism was in the School of Arts and Sciences so that was  the one I represented. And it was very interesting. I loved being on the  Student Senate because I like things like that.  Now it is Homecoming weekend here. It   s 2007. Tomorrow we   re having  the big parade and you had a role in the parade when you were in  school.  If you were on the Senate, you had to be responsible for something  during the year and my job was the Homecoming parade. I remember I  was up all night long. I remember that   being up all night long, putting  the floats in position. The floats were so ornate.  So it was very elaborate?  Very elaborate. And I think at one time   wasn   t our Homecoming  parade voted the top parade in the nation or something like that?  I   m not sure. I know Homecoming is one of the largest in the nation  here.  Yes, yes.  What was that experience like, helping put all the pieces together? Was  12  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  it stressful? Was it easy to work with everybody? During the parade  were you keeping things moving?  During the parade, I just kept them in order just to make sure they were  number one, number two, number   everything was in order. The  stressful thing was getting everybody there on time and getting it lined  up. You don   t want to start a parade late, you lose your people. But the  stressfulness was staying up all night. That was the main thing. All I  remember is going home and crashing. Everybody was going to the  game, and I just crashed, I just remember that.  What was the parade route?  It was through downtown Stillwater. And I can   t remember where we  started. It   s so different now. This town has built up so much. We built  floats   I remember that the Pi Phi   s built their float at one of the garages  downtown. I remember it was freezing cold and we were punching that  paper in the chicken wire. And it seems as if the parade route started east  of there a little bit. It kind of dipped down into the railroad tracks but I  can   t remember the exact route.  Did they end up taking a loop down to the stadium?  They took the winners to the stadium but they didn   t make a loop. Only  the winning floats went to the stadium.  How many winning floats did they pick?  Oh gosh Juliana, I don   t know.  Were there different categories you could win?  Yes, there were different categories but I can   t remember what the  categories were.  What else do you remember about Homecoming? Were house  decorations big?  Yes, in those days you either did house decorations or you did parade.  You didn   t do both in the same year, at the same time. You did one or  the other. And you combined   I think they still do that. The houses or  the dorms worked with other   girls worked with boys. Like a girl   s  dorm would work with a boy   s dorm and a sorority would work with a  fraternity.  They teamed up?  13  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. At the football stadium we nearly froze to death.  In those days, women didn   t wear jeans like they do now. We went to a  football game in high heels. And the only thing that saved us in those  days was that our skirts were long, so that the wind couldn   t really  freeze us to death. The wind would whip-in under those steps on the  north part of the stadium and oh, it was cold.  Did you dress up to go to class?  We wore skirts and sweaters and loafers and socks. And the rule was,  the socks were six inches from the hem of your skirt. So that made them  what? About like that  Crane motions . From the top of your socks to the  hem of your skirt. And you wore little scarves around your neck.  Did you attend many sporting events?  Basketball   basketball was the big thing. We had a great basketball  team. That was Mr. Iba   s team. A friend of mine in Wichita Falls was a  player on his team. Have you interviewed Harold Rogers?  No.  He would be a good one. Harold is a lawyer in Wichita Falls and he was  on the first-string of Henry Iba   s team for about three years in the    50s.  When you were at the games, what was the atmosphere like? What was  the attendance like?  It was always full. We had tickets in our packet at the beginning of the  season but it was for every other game. So if you wanted to go to every  game you spent half your time trying to trade around. Basketball was a  different game then. Mr. Iba perfected the stall. Do you know what the  stall is?  No.  It means get that ball and hold it. Maybe I   ll pass it to you but you pass  it right back to me. We   re not going to shoot it until like ten seconds  before the game is over. And stall it for five minutes. They would stand  out there and stall that ball. I have seen Harold stand there and not shoot  that ball until it was like six seconds before the end of the game   shoot  it and hit the basket and win the game. So it was exciting and it was  always good with Mr. Iba here.  I know your time was very chewed up with the O   Colly and your other  activities, did you ever have any down time? And if you did, what did  14  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  you do for fun with your friends?  Well I dated and we went to lots of parties. Every night at seven   every  night we could make it   we went to the fourth floor of the Student  Union where they had a big juke box. And we danced. We danced to  that wonderful    40   s and    50   s music. It was fun.  What were some of the musical groups of the time?  It was the Big Band era. And many of them came here. There was Ray  Anthony. And then we had this thing called the Allied Artists Series and  we would bring people in here like   Duke Ellington. I remember when  Duke Ellington came. He was great. And then some of the fraternities  would bring in big bands. They were just wonderful. And dances were a  big thing then.  Were there, on any given night, multiple dances going on?  Oh yes. Sometimes the ballroom at the Student Union would have a  dance going on and then somebody else would and then they had lots of  theme dances. Like the Sigma Nu   s had a big western dance and  somebody else would have some other kind of dance. When they had  their western dance they had Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys   well  you   ve never heard of them. But that was a big western band then. So  they had big name bands come in here for those things.  Did your sorority host dances?  We hosted parties. We didn   t host dances. The fraternities hosted most  of the dances.  Tell me about a typical date. What would you go and do?  There were no cars. I defy you to look in those annuals and find a fat  person. We walked. We walked everywhere. We walked to class. We  walked downtown to the show. I don   t know whether the movie is still  there by the fire station. Is there still a movie on the corner?  No.  Okay, there used to be a movie to the southwest of the fire station. We  walked everywhere   in the dead of winter. Sometimes if you had a date  that had some money, you could take a cab downtown. But we walked  most of the time. Lots of times we   d walk somewhere and play bridge.  Or we would go to a fraternity house and play bridge. We did a lot of  that. And the fraternity houses, most of them all had that new invention  15  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  called television. I hated it because you turned it on and it was snowy  and everybody sat there and looked at it and you couldn   t see anything. I  thought,    I don   t know whether this is ever going to work out or not.     Where did you learn how to play bridge?  Here, at school. I learned at the Pi Phi house and some of the fraternity  houses, I mean we were all playing bridge. It was fun. I mean, in those  days we had lots of fun.  Outside of the Student Union, what were some of the other popular  places on campus or off-campus to hang out?  Well of course there was the Frat Shop that had the greatest  cheeseburgers in the world. And I just drove down coming here and it  doesn   t look the same at all. What is this street that the AGR house is on  and   right here?  Hester Street  There was a hangout there and I can   t  think of the name of that place   in the middle of that block. I can   t think  of the name of it. And then there was a drug store across the street.  There was a drycleaners there but it was really a quiet street. Now it   s  not quiet. There   s nothing quiet on that street. And then down by the fire  station where that movie was, next door to it was a big drug store.  We really hung out a lot on the campus. The Union wasn   t open my  freshman year. I think it opened toward the end of my freshman year.  And it was a very popular place. One time I remember the Allied Artists  had Charles Boyer and Charles Laughton and his wife Elsa Lanchester.  Well you don   t know any of those people, do you?  No.  They were very famous movie stars   very famous actors and actress.  And they were here to play. I   ve forgotten what play it was. We had this  horrible snow storm and they were snowed in. They couldn   t get out. So  they were in the Union coffee shop one morning with all the kids  hanging around talking to them, which I thought was pretty neat. It was  just kind of a hands-on interview with the stars. It seemed like there was  something all the time. We went to Lake Carl Blackwell a lot too.  Wiener roasts and things like that out there. Good clean fun type things.  Tell me about telephones. Were there a lot of telephones on campus   in  the dorm, in the sorority house?  In the sorority house, we had a couple on each floor. And in the dorms  there were little pockets where they   d have two or three phones and you  were always standing in line to use the phone unless you were going to  16  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  call real early in the morning.  One of the things that took place during this time was Joseph McCarthy.  Do you know what the Joe McCarthy era is? If you were working for the  state or anything federally funded, you had to sign a loyalty oath. I was  working for the O   Colly. So my dad called me at six o   clock in the  morning and said,    You go over there and sign that loyalty oath and  don   t you give them any guff.    Well the loyalty oath said,    I will take up  arms for my country.    That   s what it said. Well it didn   t bother me but  Joe McCarthy bothered me a lot and that   s what my dad was afraid of     that I would decide to rebel and not sign it. But I signed it. That was one  of the news things that happened at the time.  Were they making everybody who worked in student publications sign  this loyalty oath?  Yes, yes, because we were paid   this was a state supported school and a  federally supported land-grant school.  Did you cover it in the paper?  Sure, I think so.  Did any students feel uneasy signing it or refuse to sign it?  Well most of them   journalism students are rebellious people anyway,  they always have been. Even though back in those days journalism was a  totally different thing than it is now. The Watergate thing changed  journalism, changed the face of journalism forever, I think. But still, we  felt like we knew more than just about anybody and we would sit down  and say,    Well we don   t like this but we went along with it.     One of the things that happened on the Student Senate   I think I told  you this on the phone   was our Student Senate made the motion that the  next year   s Senate work with the Board of Regents to change the name  of this college from A M to Oklahoma State University. And to my  knowledge, that was the first move made to change the name of the  school. And it was changed about, when? Three years later, two years  later?  And how did you feel about the name changing?  I loved it, I wanted it desperately. It needed to be changed.  Why?  17  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Because we had suffered through all those aggie jokes. And it was like  we were nothing but agriculture and mechanics and that wasn   t it at all.  There were lots of other things going on at this school besides that.  Did you ever have classes in Old Central?  I had one my freshman year. It was an English class and it was in the  basement and I felt like the thing was going to fall down on me.  Because, literally, the ceiling was falling down and every once in a  while a chunk would fall down. You   ve got to remember that   not only  housing but classrooms were at such a premium in those days. And there  were so many classes, there were so many kids on campus.  Did you go home often when you were in school?  Never. There were no cars. I had a friend from Altus who had a car and  he would go home at Thanksgiving and Christmas and that   s when I  went home.  And did your parents ever visit?  Every once in a while. My dad was a manager of a co-op and he had  quite a few things, agriculturally-related, up here. He was a good friend  of Dr. Willham who was a president of the university at one time. They  were on the National Wheat Board together so he would come through  here every once in a while.  Is there a place on campus that is special to you?  The whole campus is. If you asked me if there was something I   d like to  see on this campus, I   d like to see some signage on that highway out  there that is more than just,    Oklahoma State University to the right.    I   d  like to see something that is neat and good-looking out there. And  there   s no reason it   s not out there. It just hasn   t been done yet.  That   s the journalism in you.  I guess it is, I don   t know. (Laughter)  Is there a faculty member who played a big role in your life here on  campus?  I had a political science teacher named Dr. Donnell. He was a wonderful  teacher, wonderful teacher. And I loved him and I loved his classes. In  journalism, I have to say Professor Stratton was an excellent teacher.  Journalism and political science were my two things I loved. So I would  18  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  say they were the two that I remember the most.  Is there just one key memory that you would put above all others  working in the O   Colly that   s just   when you think of the O   Colly, that   s  the memory that comes to mind?  Well, there were two or three things. There was a guy who worked on  the O   Colly who started to school with me, Bill Connors. He was the  sports editor. Bill became, eventually, the sports editor for the Tulsa  World, Tribune. He died about three years ago and he was taken into the  Oklahoma Hall of Fame about two years before he died. He was such an  excellent sports writer and one that all the sports people admired so  much. You know how they get mad at sports writers and they have a  right to get mad at them. The incident that happened with our coach   referring to OSU Football Coach Mike Gundy  would never have  happened with Bill Connors, never. That would never have happened if  Bill had done it. Then we had another guy here, his name was Arnold  Young and I don   t know whether he is still alive or not. He was from  Commerce, Oklahoma and he had a good friend and brought him up  there once and introduced him to us once. It was Mickey Mantle.  Did you work on the O   Colly all four years?  Mm-hmm, after they finally let me work my freshman year.  After you graduated from OAMC, what did you end up doing?  I applied to The Daily Oklahoman and what they offered me was   in  spite of working for them for two years with a column   work writing  obituaries at a salary that wouldn   t even pay my rent. Now that was  because I was a woman.  And what year approximately?     54 or    53.  Okay.  And I   ll have to tell you this. My advertising final the year before, I had  decided to do it on American Airlines. And at that time their home office  was in Tulsa. I went to American and got all this information and said,     I   m going to do my report, my final exam, on American Airlines.    So I  made this huge map and had all the routes strung out and everything. I  made an A on it and I really put the time into it. American was coming  here to interview on campus so I took my report and I went over to  American Airlines and said,    Okay, here   s what I did.    By this time, I  19  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  knew everybody there. I said,    Here   s what I did and I made an A on it.     They liked it, they wanted it. So I said,    Okay, will you give me a job in  your advertising department at American Airlines?    And they said,    We  don   t hire women in our advertising department but you can have a job  as a hostess.    I said, no and took my project and left.  I went to work finally at a radio station. It was a country-western radio  station in Oklahoma City writing copy. But at least it paid me enough to  pay the rent. But this is one of the things that was terribly unfair. And in  those days, you   ve got to remember, very few women majored in  anything except home economics. Women weren   t allowed to do very  much. And that still makes me mad to this day. Then, the salaries were  so much lower for women and they are still not up there with men. The  job I had in Texas, the person who took my place was a man and he  made nearly  10,000 more a year than what I did because I was a  woman. That   s not fair, that   s not right. We   ve come a long way but we  still have a long way to go.  Definitely.  But we have come a long way.  Definitely. Did you meet your husband here at     No, I met him at the radio station where I was working. He was working  at the TV station in conjunction.  And have any of your children attended Oklahoma State?  Yes, my daughter went to Oklahoma State and she is married and lives  out in the Panhandle on a ranch now. Her degree was in pre-law and  what she does is kind of what I do. I mean, she works on marketing  projects and does advertising programs and things like that. And my son  went to Texas Tech and then to Texas Tech Medical School and he   s a  doctor and lives in Loveland, Colorado.  Do you have any grandkids who go to school here?  Mm-hmm, I have four grandsons.  And are they in school yet?  No, well they are in grade school.  What is it about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty in students and  alumni?  20  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  Crane  Nykolaiszyn  I don   t know. It   s that indefinable spirit of allegiance that just   it  becomes yours. You belong to it and it belongs to you and it will never  desert you. It   s there. I don   t know how to describe it.  But it means a lot to you?  Oh, yes   What advice would you give to students today?  Well, to girls   to women, my advice is to get that degree. Whatever it is  in, you need to get a degree because you may have to take care of  yourself and you need that degree. To students, I just think it   s important  that they get the best education they can get. But they need to realize that  this may be the best four years of their life and they need to appreciate it.  Is there anything that you   d like to add that we haven   t spoken about  today that I haven   t asked you? And memories you would like to share?  I think I   ve just about said everything I can think of. I could talk about it  forever. One thing sparks another. But it   s just a wonderful school. I was  looking at it today   it   s so well-kept. Most of the lawns are mowed and  it looks so nice and well-kept. And that   s good. The grounds have  always been one of the strong suits for the college. And they still look  good. The college itself is just beautiful, really pretty. It   s fun up here.  When my daughter was trying to decide where she wanted to go to  school, we lived in Texas. She   d been to Texas Tech and to TCU  Texas  Christian University  and SMU  Southern Methodist University  and to  the University of Texas. And so I brought her up here and just let her  out. I said,    I   ll pick you up in three hours at such and such place.    She  found the student something or other and somebody took her on a tour.  By the time I came back she   d gotten all the pre-enrollment forms and  was ready to enroll. She was ready to come up here. And there are quite  a few people coming from Texas now. It   s becoming pretty well known.  Definitely.  Have I answered everything you need?  You have. Well let me thank you for being here and sharing your  memories with us today. We do appreciate it.  You   re welcome.  Thank you very much.  21  ------  -------   
