 Gill. Today is October 13, 2008. I   m visiting with Tom  Bennett, Jr. in his father   s home in Oklahoma City. This interview is for  the O-STATE Stories project for the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Tom, you have quite a history. Your family has been a family  of Oklahoma State University. So I could ask you a question like,    How  did you get to Oklahoma State?    but probably should start with    How  did you not get to Oklahoma State?     (Laughs) Yeah, I suppose for my family, I was born in Washington  D.C., grew up in Oklahoma City and then went back and graduated from  high school in Bethesda, Maryland. But there was never really any  question of where I was going after high school. It was onto Oklahoma  State in the fall of 1969.  You went to high school, where did you say?  Well, I started off in Oklahoma City at John Marshall and my last two  years were at BCC High School in Bethesda, Maryland.  Can you share a little bit about your experiences and activities here at  OSU?  Sure. Well, gosh, when I got there in the summer of 1969 to go through  Rush, the first thing was fraternity life. There were many terrific  fraternities. My family had been involved in several. My sisters, mother  and others had all been Pi Phi   s and I was horribly disappointed the Pi  Phi   s didn   t rush me and then I discovered they didn   t take men.  (Laughs) But in any event, I went on and was a member of Sigma Nu.  There I think I learned, more than anything, how to study. Coming out  of high school I hadn   t been a particularly studious student and there  they had study hall, they checked your grades, made sure you were  going to classes and that sort of thing. That was an important part of my  5  freshman year.  They also required that you be involved on campus. That wasn   t hard for  me. I loved to be involved on campus. So my freshman year would have  been principally spent as a fraternity pledge and a new member. My  second year I got involved in the Arts and Sciences Student Council.  Dan Wesley was our counselor, terrific man, great friend, all the time I  was at OSU and after. I showed up at the first meeting and lo and behold  came out president (laughs). We put on an event called Discovery    71 in  1971, a year right after great turmoil in the country over the Vietnam  War. There had been riots at Kent State University in Ohio the summer  before where four students were killed. There had been Woodstock the  summer before and there had been an Honor America Day in  Washington D.C. the summer before. We said,    How can we put those  three ideas together and have an event in Stillwater, Oklahoma at OSU?     which became Discovery    71 where we brought speakers in and we  brought musicians in and we spent a day trying to talk about, how do we  solve our country   s problems and how do we work cooperatively  together. So that was my first big experience in student government.  Went on from there and continued to be involved in other student  activities. I had the honor, while I was on campus, of being the Student  Government Association President. The year I ran for office, the  gentleman running against me ran to abolish student government. So my  quest was to demonstrate that student government was relevant and it  could really make a difference on campus and in everyone   s lives. We,  over the course of that year, did all kinds of things ranging from  publishing a    How to Do It in Stillwater    guide for students to engaging  in all kinds of campus activities, including sponsoring a lawsuit against  the state of Oklahoma   s beer purchasing laws. At this time, men had to  be 21 to drink and women had to be 18, which we thought was  unconstitutional, and we turned out to be correct. Nobody anticipated  that when the Supreme Court ruled against the state of Oklahoma they  would raise the drinking age for everyone to 21. So anyway, there were  a whole lot of educational experiences during that time that opened my  eyes to all kinds of practical politics and all kinds of relationship  management. It really was a wonderful experience in a turbulent time in  America.  When I was student body president it was the second election of Richard  Nixon and the democratic candidate was George McGovern. In spite of  Richard Nixon   s landslide election, with an early concession by George  McGovern, some of the last votes in the country for President of the  United States were cast in Stillwater, Oklahoma. As of that time, they  had just moved the voting age to 18 and they hadn   t yet divided the  precinct where the students lived into different precincts, so they were  6  Gill  Bennett  all in one precinct. As a result the students were lined up at the closing  time and stuck around and voted even though the election time was over.  It was a great time of participation and being involved and wanting to  make a difference. So I look back on my college days as a wonderful  experience that included the academic world but also the activity world  of the campus.  Jerry, there   s one more thing that I would like to say about my campus  life. For me, like thousands of other students, the most important thing  of being on the Oklahoma State campus was meeting my wife, Sue. I  think that   s a place where people fall in love and make lifetime  relationships. Sue and I were both students at OSU. Sue was a year  behind me, but a much better student. So that   s where we met and then  we married shortly after she graduated.  After you graduated you went into banking. We would like you to talk  about your relationship throughout your lifetime with Oklahoma State  University as your alma mater.  Sure. Well I did start off my career in banking in 1973 at Stillwater  National Bank at the suggestion of the OSU Vice President, Norman  Moore. I never thought for a moment of banking as a career, but I  needed a job and Norman Moore introduced me to Bob McCormick at  Stillwater National and one thing led to another and here I am 35 years  later, still in the banking business. But a natural part of being banker, I  think, is being involved in the community. Bankers, unlike some of the  professions in the community, get paid by the day rather than by the  hour. So it has always seemed natural to be involved in a variety of  activities including OSU. When we lived in Stillwater, Sue and I were  involved in the Payne County OSU Alumni Club. That was a positive  activity, and we were involved in fundraising activities for the OSU  Foundation.  Later, we left Stillwater and we went to Washington, D.C. and then  Boston and back to Oklahoma City. I was involved in putting together  an economic development plan for the state of Oklahoma under  Governor Bellmon, and two of the members of the board that I reported  to included the presidents of OU and OSU. At that time, Larry Boger  was president at OSU and he was a member of that board. So I had the  occasion to go once a month to Stillwater to meet with Larry Boger and  update him on how we were doing on the plan and consciously thinking  about how OSU should be involved in the state   s economic development  efforts whether its county extension or the overall work on the campus  or expansion elsewhere. So that was a good long running experience  with OSU.  7  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Sue and I and the boys subsequently moved to Tulsa. During that time,  Sue was involved in the Tulsa Alumni Club. She was president there and  Jerry, you and others invited me to start becoming involved in the  national OSU Alumni Association. I can   t remember all of the different  activities we got to participate in together, but I had the opportunity to  be the president of the Alumni Association. I think it was in 1994. That  was really a great exciting experience seeing OSU in a period of growth  and a period of fun things happening both in Stillwater and in other  places across the state. During that time I had the opportunity to  represent the Alumni Association on the OSU Presidential Search  Committee that led to the selection of Jim Halligan as President.  Also, during that period of time, I was a trustee and regent at what was  called the University Center of Tulsa which became the Oklahoma State  University-Tulsa. The original concept was four universities  participating together at what was called UCT. I wasn   t formally the  OSU representative, but because I was coincidentally the president of  the Alumni Association I had the affect of being the OSU representative  on that board. That was a really positive experience, engaging in OSU  and seeing how they can be involved in Tulsa in a really major way and  make a difference on that campus. So those would be a wide range of  activities in which Sue and I participated with OSU. Our oldest son Tom  graduated from OSU and our two younger sons, Jim and Hank (Henry  IV) both went for a period of time at OSU. They graduated elsewhere.  Tom, was it special for you to be president of the OSU Alumni  Association because your grandfather was the president of university?  Oh yeah, it really was. My grandfather unfortunately died when I was  one year old. I am sure that I knew him and he knew me. But I don   t  have memories dating back to when I was a one year old. Growing up I  had always heard about him all of my life from stories from my father,  mother, cousins, aunts, uncles and friends of the family, so I had always  felt a great affinity for Oklahoma A M and subsequently OSU. I heard  stories of him being a dreamer, not just of his own dreams, but a person  that pulled together the dreams of other people and was able to say them  back in a way that people could see how to make that happen and build  something, and make it happen originally in Stillwater and subsequently  around the state. So that always fascinated me and I always wanted to be  a part of that and I always wanted to be a part of helping advance the  dream for OSU both for the students and for how it could make a  difference in the state of Oklahoma and the world.  When we visited your father earlier we talked about your role in the  alumni and how your grandfather Dr. Bennett really seemed to believe  in the value of the alumni and the involvement in the university. Is that  8  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  your take on that as well?  Oh, sure. He was an active speaker during his presidency around the  state, whether it was at high school graduations or alumni meetings or  civic groups or to just about anybody that would listen.  He was  always  promoting OSU and promoting the idea that education is the opportunity  for young people to succeed. I think that resonated and connected with  people, both the young people themselves in coming and also their  parents and grandparents who wanted to see them come to A M or  OSU. So yeah, I think he continuously was involved with OSU alumni.  This has been my experience through your network of friendships that  continue beyond the university form a network of people, with whom  you can do business, with whom you are friends and with whom you  share life   s adventures.  Tom, what roles do you see alumni playing in the life of the university?  I am thrilled to death that we currently have an alum as president of  Oklahoma State University. I don   t think you could have made a better  choice than Burns Hargis. I think from running the university, to my  guess, a high percentage of the faculty members have one of their  degrees from Oklahoma State University so a lot of times they go on to  be the professors. I think the alumni support the university in all kinds of  ways, not the least of which would be sending their kids off to OSU as  students. Also as taxpayers in the state of Oklahoma the alumni support  and provide a political base, if you will, for OSU to continue to gain its  support as well as financial contributions to the OSU foundation and  many programs OSU has.  Can you recall some of the issues during your presidency on the  national board?  Yes. As you   ll recall, from time to time we would ask the question,    Is  there another way to do this?    I think prior to my presidency, one of the  key activities was dinners across the state that had been a principle focus  and I think that we    That didn   t discontinue but it wasn   t the major  emphasis, it shifted to a different focus in getting the students to come to  campus under the idea of, it   s one thing to think about OSU in their  hometown, it   s another thing for them to get on the campus, to see the  campus, to feel the campus, and have a sense of the campus. Then  they   d want to come back and be students at OSU. So student  recruitment, as a part of the alumni board, has always been a positive  thing.  While I was president of the Alumni Association we had a new  president, Jim Halligan. That was an exciting period of time to see a new  9  Gill  Bennett  president come in with new energy and new ideas and try to take the  campus forward and I think he did. Just prior to that, with John  Campbell as president, there had been challenges in discussing,    What  are the roles of administration?     and     How do you change things?    I  don   t think it was my position as a president of the Alumni Association,  but as an active alum I got engaged in that dialogue and talked about  how we needed to have a strong president. We needed to have strong  engagement by the administration and so that was one of the issues at  the time. The one I was personally very involved in was what would be  OSU   s role in Tulsa through the University Center at Tulsa, which was  at the time debated. Which university was going to offer which  programs? Could they offer joint programs? Who got to do what? That  was a matter of great controversy then that I think has    it   s not been  settled, but OSU has established itself with a clear presence in Tulsa and  is making a great difference for the community.  Tom, what do you recall, and I realize this is two generations removed  from your grandfather but some of the questions and the discussion with  your father about the legacy of Henry G. Bennett. Let   s talk first about  Oklahoma State University. What do you think was the legacy he left for  OSU?  I think as people look back at his presidency now, if they think about it,  he arrived as the Depression arrived. He arrived as the Dust Bowl  arrived; he arrived as the wheels were falling off in the state of  Oklahoma. What he did was pull together the alumni and the faculty and  the students and the friends of the university to create a vision of what it  could look like someday. It became known as the 25 Year Plan. I think  in all of our lives, no one knows what is going to happen in 25 years.  That is a euphemism for someday. Someday if we all work hard, this  great thing can happen and we can build this university. He didn   t just  dream it. He put it on paper and put it in a model that people could look  at and think about and visualize how that was going to happen, and they  all set out working to make it happen.  I think that today, you can look at the campus, not only did they  accomplish the 25 year dream, but all of those who succeeded him made  it bigger and better than they dreamed about back in 1928 and    29. So I  think a part of his legacy would be that, in spite of hard times, in spite of  a Depression, a Dust Bowl, and things going badly, you can still dream  great dreams. You can still pull people together and make those dreams  come true. It may not happen this year, it may not happen next year; it  may not happen during your administration. A lot of the 25 Year Plan  happened after my grandfather passed away and came to pass in the  administrations of Oliver Willham and Bob Kamm and those who  followed. But I think a key part of his legacy is that you can dream great  10  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  dreams in spite of how bad things might be and they can come true if  you set about the hard work of making them happen.  Moving from there to the international stage and working again as your  father pointed out, he had a lot of experience in international policy and  making decisions and all sorts of programs abroad before he became the  director of the Four Point Program, but before in the Four Point  Program, what do you think his vision was for international educational  development programs?  Well, I think it started from his experience as a young man, a boy and a  young man, that education is the key. Education is the ticket out of  poverty. Education is what you have to have in order to make things  better, for you and for your family, and for those you care about. I think  he endeavored through the Four Point Program and the other things he  was involved in before to bring education to bear on helping lesser  developed countries make things better. Whether it was formal  education or technical education, he was engaged in teaching people  how to do things better, how to make their lives better. I think two of the  programs that have followed on the Point Four Program   USAID  continues to invest in lesser developed countries around the world and  the Peace Corps has gone on to take Americans to other countries to  engage hands-on and helping teach people how to make their life better.  So I think the overall arching thing for him would be that education is  the key out. It   s the ticket to a better life.  Then I suppose that if you   re going deeper than that in his life his  faith   his faith that there is a God who is in charge and knows what he  is doing. He cares about each of us and He wants us to have a better life.  He wants people to engage in helping each other. He wants people to  live out the Golden Rule of doing unto others as you would have them  do unto you. So you take that philosophy of getting out and doing,  actively making a difference for other people with education so you   re  equipped and ready to help other people, and you can really make a  difference in the world around you.  Would you throw in too, Tom, about his work ethic and background. His  parents owned sharecrops. Sometimes you own the land. He grew up in  a pretty tough environment and he learned if you work hard and are  persistent, good things will happen.  He did. He did. He had many jobs growing up. You know, whether it  was delivering the mail as a young man, education   I have heard stories  about his work ethic and the amount of travel he was willing to do, the  amount of speeches he was willing to give and still be an active  president involved in running the university and that sort of thing. I think  11  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  he passed that example on to my father. My father is 88 and still  working full time. Annually when they call him to ask him on his  birthday if he   s ready to retire, he reminds them, like Moses, he is  planning on working    til he   s 120 and then he   s going to visit the Lord  about it and see what   s ahead. But I think that hard work combined with  education and a focused place you are trying to accomplish things makes  things happen.  It   s been said that his concept of the land grant university of teaching  people and research to create products and services to benefit people  and then extensions to take that out to the people, that sometimes his  preferences were simplistic but that his philosophy about an excess  education reared that on the international scale that was that kind of  land grant model. Would that be an accurate statement?  Oh, yeah. I think that for sure. Extension is a descriptive word. You go  beyond the campus to extend yourself out into the community. The first  extension was here in Oklahoma through the extension workers in all the  different counties. Subsequently, it was extending his work all around  the world with the Point Four Program and the other things he got  involved in with President Truman. I   m sure if he were alive today, he  would be focused on extension through the internet. Through the various  means of technology that can get us involved in extending ourselves  beyond where we are, where all the people are. So you can make a  difference wherever people live.  Tom, this may be speculating, or better, asking you to think about it, but  if Dr. Bennett has been in charge of Point Four and  if he had saved the  Point Four today  how would our policies and programs be different?  Well I think it was Eric Severied who in a eulogy for my grandfather  talked about him as a practitioner of Christianity. And I don   t mean that  as an evangelical Christian but as a practitioner of doing unto others as  they would do unto you. I think my grandfather   s philosophy, along with  his generation of the leaders of our country after World War II, they  didn   t set out to colonize, they didn   t set out to dominate, they set out to  help. They helped rebuild Germany. They helped rebuild Japan. They  helped rebuild through the Point Four Program lesser developed  countries around the world. I think if we were doing that today, doing a  better job of that today, not only would it be a better world to live in, but  we   d have a lot more friends around the world that appreciated the  difference in helping them educate their children and helping then build  a better economy so they have better opportunities. I think it would be a  friendlier place to live, a safer place to live, because I think one of the  paradoxes that Jesus taught was that we should love our enemies. At first  you go,    That doesn   t make sense,    until you think,    The best way to  12  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  defeat one   s enemies is to make them our friends; then they are no  longer our enemies.    I think that was his approach. After the war, so  many people were destroyed, so many economies were destroyed and to  step in and help people build things back again, that was the right  approach. That   s the right approach today.  Tell me about the Bennett Family. You   re very special to Oklahoma  State University, obviously Tom. Could you share a little bit about your  brothers and sisters and siblings, a little bit about the families and the  ties with the Swim family? Just give us a little genealogy and family  history maybe.  Quickly, I can try. The first part of our family that came to Oklahoma  was the Swim family; my mother   s family came in 1889 to the land run.  They settled in Stillwater, ultimately. They didn   t start off in Stillwater,  they started off in a rural area farming but they got there. My mother   s  father Leslie Swim got to go to Oklahoma A M College in 1920. Then  the newcomers, the Bennett   s, arrived in 1928. Dad   s father and his  mother had come from his presidency at South Eastern State Teacher   s  College in Durant and they also settled in Stillwater. As a result of my  family   s early arrival in Oklahoma I   m a fifth generation Oklahoman  and my sons are sixth and our grandchildren are seventh generation.  People that stick around for a long time marry members of other  Oklahoma families that have been around for a long time, so part of our  family is the Drummond family  who have had a  long association with  OSU, and other groups with long time connections with OSU. But as to  my immediate family, I have two sisters and a brother. My sister  Beverly, now Beverley Groom, lives in Virginia,  a  long time OSU  activist worker in the Washington D.C. area. She was a lobbyist for  many years until she decided to settle down and raise her daughter.  She was also president of the Washington D.C. area chapter for many  years     Yes, and a very proud OSU alum. As a matter of fact, when OSU won  the football game the other night, the first call I got was from Beverly,     Did you see that? Isn   t that fantastic?    and it occurred to me that  everyone else at her house had gone to sleep while she stayed up and  watched OSU beat Missouri. (Laughs) My second sister, Elizabeth, we  are in her home today, Elizabeth is here in Oklahoma City in the life  insurance business after a long, successful career in the garment industry  in New York City. My brother David also lives in Oklahoma City. He is  a professor at the University of Central Oklahoma  and also a  retired  colonel in the army reserves. And then my wife Sue and I live in Tulsa.  We have three sons. Our oldest son Tom and his wife have two children.  Tom IV is their oldest son. As my son Tom points out we   re not very  13  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  original with names. We just keep the ones we like going. (Laughs)  Like T.B. III?  Yeah, and their daughter is Anna. Then our son Jim and his wife  Jennifer also live in Tulsa. An interesting footnote, Jennifer is a  Stillwater girl whose family has a long association with the University.  They have two children. The eldest is a daughter Taylor and their son  Noah. Then our youngest son, Henry the Fourth, whom we all call Hank,  lives in Washington D.C. where he presently works for the Democratic  National Committee, and is actively engaged in electing Barack Obama  as President of the United States.  Just from your observations from over the years and your family  connections, you know multi-generational, your times as a student here,  your times as a leader of the Alumni Association. What are the things  that you think make OSU special? It seems like there   s a lot of passion  that people have about OSU. What do you think it is that makes OSU  special?  Well Jerry, I guess as I   ve grown older, I   ve come to believe that life is  all about relationships and everything else is extra. I think what makes  OSU special is the people   the long-term relationships that people  establish not only with their fellow students, although certainly with  their fellow students. I mean I can   t even imagine how many young  people fall in love and have started their families as students at OSU.  But  also  the relationship between the students and the faculty. I   ve  maintained many long term friendly relationships with faculty members  who not only taught me but befriended me in school, and people in the  administration over the years who encouraged me and helped me along.  The alumni base provides a wonderful resource. When Sue and I moved  to Tulsa, we didn   t know many people, but we knew there were many  OSU alums there so it was an easy network to become a part of. I think  what makes OSU special is the relationships between a lot of really good  people who have good hearts and want to make a difference, and they   re  friendly. I guess other universities also have strong networks of  relationships, but ours is special because it   s our people.  You see all of the things happening on campus now, the 700 million plus  dollars worth currently planned for renovation and construction. How  do you feel about that as alum?  Well, I think it   s great. I think anything they can do to make it a better  experience for the college students is wonderful. I think anything they  can do to make it a better place for the faculty to teach and do research is  wonderful. I think that it makes an attractive draw for young people to  14  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  come to college. And I know that that   s not all they   re doing. It   s not  just the building on the Stillwater campus, but its continuing to build in  Tulsa and other places in Oklahoma and around the world. Continuing to  build the network of relationships. So I think OSU is at a very good time  in OSU   s history, led by a great president; I think the future is very  bright. All of us should feel very good about where OSU is at this time.  What do you think about the chairs program? The chairs program that  many have stepped up, and, of course, Boone Pickens gives as a  challenge gift that would match with the state. Do you think that   s going  to make a difference academically to OSU?  Well it should. Both in terms of building to attract faculty to endowed  chairs, but also in terms of keeping the cost of going to college for the  students at a reasonable level. I think that anything that we can do to  enhance the educational opportunity for the people of our state and for  others that come to Oklahoma to come and go to college is a good thing.  You know we   ve talked before   there are a lot of different public policy  things people focus on in our country that are all interesting, but not of  equal importance. It   s my view that in our state we need to adjust the  lenses in our glasses   the paradigm through which we see our world     so that we can see that education is the ticket and the more we can do,  whether it   s to increase taxes, or it   s increased endowment, contributions  from alumni   anything we can do to advance the cause of education  will have a long term benefit of advancing economical well-being and  quality of life of our people. That   s the road, not cutting taxes, not  finding other things to focus our energies on, but that   s the road out. I  hope we can keep that focus.  Was that something that Dr. Henry G. Bennett would have said as well?  Well, you know, I   ve read a number of his speeches from back when he  was speaking across Oklahoma. One of them really has resonated with  my thinking over time. He was saying that the only unique contribution  that Americans have made to the idea of governance is mandatory free  public education. America didn   t think of democracy; the Greeks  thought of democracy. America didn   t think of a bunch of the stuff     like capitalism. We didn   t think of capitalism, other people thought of  that before us. But before America, there was no mandatory free public  education. Now, when they thought of it, what they were thinking of was  white boys in elementary school. Now over the years that idea has  evolved not only for white boys but children of all colors, both boys and  girls. Originally it was elementary school and then it became junior high  and then it became high school. It   s interesting how it was structured  that way because it was chopped up in how we made it mandatory in  15  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  going forward. He was making the case and this was in the 1930s, the  next step was free public higher education. And that didn   t come to pass  in Oklahoma, it was experimented     Higher education?  Free public higher education was the pitch he was making. That didn   t  come to pass in Oklahoma. But the philosophy being what made  America great wasn   t capitalism, that was already done; and it wasn   t  democracy, that was already done. It was free mandatory public  education that made America great. That   s because an educated people  can govern themselves, an educated people can build their society, an  educated people can build a quality of life that is better than non-educated  people. We   ve proven that over 200 years and that   s what he  believed. That   s what I believe, and I think that   s what I would like to  think an educated people from Oklahoma State University can come to  realize so we can make our state what our potential is.  I had the opportunity the last couple of weeks to visit a couple of Student  Government Association   s presidents. One of them was the first black  female.  Oh yeah, Patrice.  Patrice Latimer.  She followed me.  So my question is, sometimes we talk about education opportunities  outside of the classroom. You lived some of the activities, in terms of  leadership opportunities, personal growth opportunities. Are these  important and should OSU continue to emphasize these kinds of things?  Well, they   re absolutely critical. I   m embarrassed to say when people  ask,    What did you major in at OSU?    I say,    Well, until I was a junior I  majored in student government until I discovered that wasn   t an  academic program.    (Laughs) Then I had to sit down with my counselor  and look at the classes I had taken to see what kind of degree it looked  like I was going to finish.  What did you wind up with, Tom?  I have a degree in sociology. Could have been history, could have been  family relations and child development, or psychology. (Laughs) Those  are the classes I gravitated to because they were   I liked them, I enjoyed  them. I think if I had discovered economics as an undergraduate, that  16  Gill  Bennett  might also have been in the bucket there. But yeah, the greatest part of  my undergraduate education was, in fact, outside of the classroom. In a  wide range of student activities   was faculty members helping me there,  was administrators helping me there in student government, giving me  coaching and direction and helping us see how to make a difference. I  can promise you they didn   t hire me at Stillwater National Bank out of  college for my sociology degree, they hired me for my student  government activities and the things I was able to do.  I did go back and started on an MBA at OSU, got halfway through and  got distracted. The activities, I think, are critical to both learning and to  make it an enjoyable experience and it   s the practical side of what  they   re going to be doing when they finish the university. They   re going  to be going out in the communities all over the world, especially here in  Oklahoma, and need to get involved in city councils, United Ways, civic  organizations and churches. That   s the kind of thing they   re going to  have to learn how to do in college and carry on as they go forward out of  the university. So I think student activities are a critical part of the  learning experience at Oklahoma State University and would encourage  young people to do them and older people to financially support them  and the administration to give them time to let them do it. To make that  experience really rich and worthwhile.  Anything we haven   t covered? Would you like to discuss anything  relating to your grandfather, Dr. Bennett, to your dad, to the Bennett  family, about OSU?  Well, I guess I could summarize, for me, what my father and mother  passed on to me that I think both of their parents passed on to them, both  Leslie and Gertrude Swim on my mother   s side, and Henry and Vera  Bennett on my father   s side. Which was that the first building block of  life is faith; that   s central to understanding who you are, why you   re here  and what you   re supposed to be doing. God has given us an incredible  world to get to live in and to grow up and raise our families and  participate in. God wants to engage us in being active citizens of his  kingdom in making this a better place.  Secondly, the only group God permanently assigned to you is your  family. You will always be your parent   s child, you will always be your  sibling   s sibling, you will always be your children   s parent. That   s  permanent, that   s an assignment, that   s a fundamental human  relationship. And you need to build family, you need to consciously  work at building family, you can look from the earliest as the biblical  times, as human beings we goofed things up and we need to fix it. We  need to keep the family going and keep the family as a strong cohesive,  positive unity. A lot of people do that through OSU, through that being  17  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  Bennett  Gill  part of their family, the extension of their family and who they are.  The third thing is that with faith and with family, if you   re going  forward to a better future, education is the ticket. That   s what it takes.  Not just during the college years, certainly during the college years,  without a doubt. Young people should finish their degrees and make that  the spin board to their future, but to keep being educated all of their life  as they look at the things they want to do, like build a family, build a  career, build an education plan. And that education plan should be both  formal, in the sense of classes and training and seminars, perhaps a  graduate degree, and it should be informal in the sense of travel. I don   t  think someone is an educated person if they haven   t gone outside of the  United States. If you haven   t traveled to another country, you have no  idea what we have here. This country is unbelievable, if you see it  through the eyes of people from another country. What we have put  together in the United States is not like anything else in the world. And  so, I would say those three things and I think I have gotten all of those  from my parents and through their parents. Faith, family and education.  And hard work.  And hard work, oh yeah, I just assumed that, I just assumed hard work is  part of the deal. It doesn   t have to be hard, bitter work. It can be fun  work. Watching the Cowboys play football is fun for everybody. Now  it   s hard work for the young men (laughs) out there on the field. It   s fun  to get to participate in life. People won   t achieve things in life if they  don   t think of hard work as fun. In fact, I have always felt like in all of  the working environments I have been a part of that it needs to be fun. It  needs to consciously be fun. You need to celebrate your victories and  quickly get over your defeats and get up and go again. And have fun  doing it. And that makes for a good life.  Tom it   s a good wrap of faith, family, education and     And hard work.  Hard work, that   s a great combination. I appreciate it very much     Sure.  That ends our interview with Tom Bennett, Jr.  -------  -------   
