 Neurohr, and I   m a librarian at Oklahoma State  University. I   m here in the ConocoPhillips Alumni Center today,  October 16, 2009, to interview Mr. Dwight Beck for the O-STATE  Stories Oral History Project at the Library. Thank you, Mr. Beck, for  coming and participating in our interview today.  You   re welcome.  We appreciate that. Are you here for the fiftieth class reunion?  Yes, I am.  Great. Why did you decide to participate in that?  Oh, we intended to come all along, and when we got the information in  the mail we thought,    Well, it   d be kind of fun, take a couple days off  and spend time here on campus.     Can you tell me about where you grew up and about your early life?  Sure. I   m the only one in my family of five that was actually born in a  hospital. It was almost a one-room shack of a hospital in Lucien,  Oklahoma. Lucien   s just a wide spot in the road now, just west of Perry,  Oklahoma. But, anyway, I grew up on a farm in Noble County,  Oklahoma, attended the local high school and then went on to college at  NOC  Northern Oklahoma College  and subsequently here at Oklahoma  State.  Was there a high school at Lucien that you attended?  No, I was just born there, and we actually lived on a farm about forty or  fifty miles from there.  5  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  And who were your parents?  Abner and Pearl Beck. My mother was a student here at I think, well, it  was in the late 19-teens, and I think it was kind of a preparatory school.  At that particular time, that was what she was attending, but she actually  attended here. I don   t know how long. Anyway, our roots go back to  Oklahoma State quite a number of years.  And where are you living now?  We live on the farm that my grandfather settled on in the early 1900s.  We   re still living on the family farm. We   re the third generation Beck  family to live on that farm.  What do you raise?  Well, traditional Oklahoma crops: mainly small grains, wheat, milo.  There is a lot of corn grown up there now. We haven   t been growing  any. We have alfalfa. Of course, we have cattle. Like I say, it   s just a  traditional Oklahoma farm for this part of the country.  You mentioned that your mother had come to school here. Was she a big  influence on your decision to attend OSU?  Not really. This was basically the university I   d always wanted to go to,  even though I went the first two years at a junior college. Coming from a  small high school, I sometimes think it   s good to go to a smaller college  to start out with. I wish I   d spent all four years here, but it was a good  experience being involved in both schools.  What did you major in here?  Well, I started in chemical engineering, but I found out that, going to a  small high school, my math background was pretty weak. I ended up in  the College of Education with a degree in math and science.  Are there any classes or faculty members that stand out in your  memory?  Oh gosh, I can   t   I   ll probably get his name wrong, but my advisor in  the College of Education, the name that sticks in my mind is Frasier but  that may be incorrect. I   m not sure, but he was pretty influential and a  good mentor, and he actually helped me get my first job. He had come  down here from the Omaha Nebraska Public Schools. I graduated at  mid-term, and so jobs were kind of hard to come by. And (Laughs) the  College of Education people probably won   t like this comment, but I  6  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  had wanted to go on and get my master   s degree, but I was so  disenchanted with the education courses that I would have to take that I  decided I   d just go into teaching. So, Dr. Frasier got me the interview at  the Omaha Public Schools in Omaha, Nebraska, and we moved up there.  And, actually, two of our sons were born in Nebraska, so they   re  Cornhuskers, even though they went to school here.  What buildings were your classes in?  Well, of course I had a lot of classes in the Engineering Building, and a  lot of them were in the Classroom Building, which was fairly new at that  time. And of course the library at that time was fairly new, and it was  one of the top libraries probably in the nation, as was our Student Union.  It was by far the best Student Union in Oklahoma of all the universities  in Oklahoma. And of course I had a lot of classes in I believe it was  called the Life Sciences Building at that time. I don   t know what it   s  called now.  Did you have any classes in the Quonset huts?  No, but I remember the Quonset huts. I may have had one, now that I  think about it. It might have been a descriptive geometry class, but, yes,  there were several of the Quonset huts still on campus at that time.  During your time on campus, Oklahoma A M College became  Oklahoma State University, joined the Big 8 Conference and became the  Cowboys. How did students generally react to these changes?  Well, I don   t think there were any thoughts probably one way or the  other. I believe at the time the general consensus of opinion was that it  would just be better for all the students to have a degree that said  Oklahoma State University rather than Oklahoma A M because a lot of  people in other parts of the country thought of them as a agricultural  college, which it was much more than an agricultural college.  So, it was an identity     Yes, just an identity thing.  Did you ever see Frank Eaton,    Pistol Pete,    on campus?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  Oh, tell me about that.  Well, being a native of Oklahoma, I   d known of him for years and knew  7  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  that he was a resident of Perkins, Oklahoma, and, of course, he was alive  and quite spirited whenever I was going to school here. He was almost  always a Grand Marshal of the Homecoming parade, or he was involved  with a lot of the sports activities on the campus, you know, and the  celebrations that we had at that time.  So, would he actually attend? Was he attending as a mascot figure at  that time?  No, he wasn   t a mascot. Well, I don   t know. You might refer to him as a  mascot, but he was just the headliner, you might say, of a lot of the  celebrations.  Did he pack his pistols with him?  Oh yes, sure. Sure he did.  Did he? Did he wear a badge, too?  I don   t remember for sure. Probably so.  And you said that he was the Grand Marshal of Homecoming parades.  Oh yes, he was in every Homecoming parade that I can remember for  many years. I don   t remember exactly when he passed away, but he was  a mainstay at all of the Homecoming celebrations as long as he was able.  Horseback for the parades?  I don   t remember for sure. I think most of the time he was riding in  some vehicle. I don   t think I ever remember him on horseback, but he  may have been.  I   ve heard stories about him actually shooting his gun on campus. Do  you know anything about that?  No. (Laughs)  Where did you live when you were going to school here?  Cordell Hall.  What was that like?  Well, we had a super group of men there, and our house mother and  father, they were just top notch. And for some reason that name has  8  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  slipped my mind, but they were very strict, and they ran a tight ship. We  were always at the top of the residence halls as far as grade point  average and that sort of thing was concerned, so we were pretty proud of  the people that lived in Cordell Hall. I actually lived up on the east side  up on the fourth floor, and if the weather was bad, well, we could stay in  our room and watch the football games. (Laughter) Now that   s all  blocked off.  What did your room look like?  It was a fairly large room. We had two dormers, two dormer windows,  and I think that that room would accommodate three people. However,  most of the time there was only two there, so it was a fairly large room,  and the furnishings were nice. And we had a phone right outside of the  door and that sort of thing, so accommodations were very good.  What about the food situation? Was there a cafeteria in Cordell?  Yes, we had our own cafeteria food service. That   s where I started  gaining weight. (Laughter)  So, it must have been pretty good food.  It was good food. It really was.  Did Cordell host dances or other social activities?  Oh, they had several different things that they always hosted, and, of  course, Homecoming day was a day where most parents came and  visited the campus, so we were involved in a lot of different things. I  didn   t participate in a lot of the so-called extracurricular activities at that  time, but it was quite an involved   well, it was a nice group of young  men, as I   ve said before. And we had a lot of campus leaders that lived  at Cordell Hall. At the time I was there, the ROTC Cadet Colonel lived  right next door to me. He was the top-ranking ROTC officer at  Oklahoma State at the time. I   ll mention a story about him.  As a top-ranked officer he had what we call three diamonds on his  shoulder, and the military people tried to get him, kept after him to make  a decision as to whether he wanted to take a reserve commission or a  regular Army commission. He kept putting them off and putting them  off, and all along he didn   t want a regular Army commission. He wanted  to take the reserve commission and then go in and serve his two years  and get out and continue his education. Whenever he told them that he  was going to take his reserve commission, why, they cut one of the  diamonds off of his shoulders. (Laughs) They demoted him in rank. So,  9  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  we   ve always laughed about that, that he went on to get a law degree and  was a general counsel and, I think, secretary for the Williams brothers in  I believe it   s the Williams brothers in Tulsa. Anyway, very large firm.  So, he was quite successful, even though they demoted him in rank.  (Laughter)  That   s a good story. Was there a curfew at Cordell for the students?  You know, I don   t remember. But if you came in fairly late, usually  there was a knock on your door shortly after you returned (Laughs)  because, like I say, our house parents were really on top of things. I  don   t really remember that there was a curfew. Twelve o   clock was  considered kind of a cut-off period. If you came in after that you were  usually asked some questions as to where you   d been and what you   d  been doing.  Would the door be locked after that?  No, I don   t recall that the doors were locked. I think they were open the  entire night. I may be wrong about that, but I don   t think there was a  curfew. It was kind of understood, though, that you ought to be in your  room by about twelve.  The next question has to do with rules or standards. It has to do with  public displays of affection and if there was a serious infraction for that  sort of thing. Do you remember anything about that?  I don   t remember anything about it, no.  You mentioned your dorm mom and dad. Could you tell me a little about  them? There was just one couple living there?  One couple that lived there.  Probably several hundred young men.  She was actually a registered nurse, and several years after I graduated  from OSU, I had to spend a few days in the hospital at the Ponca City  Hospital, and lo and behold, she was one of the nurses on duty. She was  a few years younger than her husband, and I think her husband had  passed away and she went back and worked as a nurse, or he had retired.  I think maybe he was still alive at that time, but he had retired and she  was still working.  Did the students tend to form a bond with the dorm parents?  10  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  I think so. Like I say, they were just super people, and we didn   t have  any serious problems that I know of when I was living on campus. I  think there were a lot more restrictions on alcoholic beverages. I never  did develop a taste for alcohol, anyway, so it wasn   t a problem for me,  and it wasn   t a problem for most of the people that I associated with, but  there were some pretty strict rules about alcohol. There were no  alcoholic beverages in any of the rooms. If you were caught with that,  you were probably, I guess, expelled would be the word, from college,  or at least put on probation, maybe. Maybe you had to sit out a semester  or something like that.  Do you still keep in touch with any friends that you made while you were  living in Cordell?  Oh, yes. Yes, I just talked to one of my friends that graduated in    59. He  was my roommate in college, and his wife, of course, graduated from  here. I talked with him just two or three days ago. I was hoping maybe  he   d come up for the celebration, but he didn   t. He was best man at our  wedding. And there   s a couple of other   one of the fellows that I told  you about earlier, Royse Parr, we keep in contact with him. They live in  Tulsa. So, you make some pretty close friends in college, and I think  probably your college friends are the ones that you   re going to be closer  to. At least that   s been our situation. We   re closer to our college friends  than we have been to our high school  friends  because most people, you  know, your high school friends are scattered in a lot of different  directions. And, so, your college friends a lot of times, it   s a more close-knit,  and you kind of follow each other   s career and that sort of thing.  What do you remember most about Homecoming when you were a  student here? You mentioned the parade already.  Oh, I don   t know. It was just a good time for celebration. And, like I say,  usually our parents came down to the game, and it was just time to spend  with people.  Did people tailgate back then?  No.  No? No tailgating.  Not that I   that   s something that   s kind of unique to Oklahoma State,  really, in probably the last ten years, maybe fifteen.  Were you involved in any campus activities or organizations when you  were here?  11  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Oh yes, I was in most of the clubs that were affiliated with my major,  and I was in a political organization. I was in the Young Republican  organization, and through the years, putting politics aside, the fact is it  seems that most of the people that attend Oklahoma State are more  conservative than those that attend the other major university in the  state. I think that   s because a lot of us are rural-born and raised, and so  those values tend to filter down. Through the years I   ve become  disenchanted with a lot of our universities and the professors at a lot of  those universities trying to instill their beliefs on the college students. I  think that   s a real danger that we have in our educational system today,  not so much here at Oklahoma State, but I know I had some pretty frank  discussions with some of my professors when I was here who espoused  liberal ideas that I didn   t agree with at the time. And, of course, those  ideas and those values have stuck with me through the rest of my life.  What values are you referring to as far as people from a rural  background?  Well, of course a lot of the ideas, I guess, probably would be concerning  the selection of your lifetime partner and farming. I   ve been a farmer all  my life, but I   ve also done other things, but you have to work together to  accomplish your goals. And in other lines of work sometimes husbands  and wives seem to go separate ways, but whenever you   re working on a  farm or a ranch or any kind of business where the spouses are included  in the business, then those values tend to be more conservative, you  know, the idea of a strong home life and that sort of thing. That   s one  thing that bothers me about today   s generation, even my children and  my grandchildren. When we had kids at home we always had three  meals a day where we sat down at the table and enjoyed our meals and  had our family discussions and things like that, and now I don   t think  most families hardly ever sit down for a meal during the week even.  And, of course, on Sundays we always had the traditional Sunday meal.  Those are some of the things that I think are   a strong family is  important, and we   re pretty proud of our sons and our daughter-in-laws  and our grandchildren.  Did they come to OSU?  Yes, all three of our sons attended here. Only one actually graduated  here. The one boy, he just wasn   t particularly interested in going to  college, and the other one, he just lacked a few hours in graduating. And  then we   ve had three granddaughters that have attended here, and we   re  pretty proud of Jimikaye. She was selected as Senior of Significance,  and then she was also selected as one of the thirteen Outstanding Seniors  for 2009.  12  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  I met Jimikaye.  Oh, really?  Yes, our library dean invites the Outstanding Seniors and Seniors of  Significance in for luncheons to honor them, and I coordinate those for  the library, and I remember meeting her. I was very impressed with her.  Was it different, since you came in as a transfer student? Did you come  in then at the junior level?  Yes.  It interests me that you still joined organizations and activities and  things coming in as a transfer student. Did you think that was unusual,  or was that pretty expected?  Well, I think the climate here at OSU facilitates the students taking part  in these things. It   s certainly not an exclusive fraternity, as you would  say, here at OSU, and I think that   s something that has been maintained  and continues even today. So, no, I didn   t think it was unusual. It was  just something that you did.  Did you hold any leadership positions in any of your organizations?  No, not really. You know, there are people that are joiners, and I wasn   t  one of those. I just chose the ones that I wanted to belong to fairly  closely, but I never did aspire to any roles of leadership. I mean, I was  an active participant, but I didn   t really get involved with that totally.  You may not remember this, but how did you learn about the  organizations? How did you know which ones were out there and be  able to choose?  I think probably through the O   Colly was the main thing. And there were  always students on campus that were active in different organizations,  and if they knew you they might ask you to come.    Why don   t you come  to this organization,    or    Why don   t you get involved here or there?     What were some student traditions and activities that you remember that  stand out from your time? Anything in particular?  I can   t think of anything right now. I know that even back then we had  so many students that not everyone could attend the basketball games,  for example. You were either an even or an odd, and so you only got to  attend about half of the games. But most of the students were fairly  active in participating in the sporting events.  13  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Did you see the game that Wilt Chamberlain played in?  Yes, I did.  What do you recall about that?  Well, I remember we won at the buzzer by two points, and, of course,  the next day we didn   t have school, so I can remember that. But I also  remember   and my wife, well, she was my fianc  e at the time. She   s  from Pennsylvania, and the first basketball game that I took her to, we  played Cincinnati, and Cincinnati had an All-American player named  Oscar Robertson. I don   t know whether that record still stands or not,  but he scored the most points that had ever been scored at Gallagher  Arena that night. And if my memory   s correct, and I may be wrong, (I  need to look in the archives and just see for sure if my memory   s right)  but even though he scored all those points, I think Coach Iba managed to  beat Cincinnati that night. I think that we won the game, but I   m not  positive. Of course, Eddie Sutton was a junior or senior then.  What was his playing style?  Well, if you played for Coach Iba it was one style. (Laughter) It was  defense, and you didn   t take shots that weren   t high-percentage shots.  And I think Coach Sutton coached that way even though he changed as  the times changed, but he still emphasized defense and shot selection.  What did you do for fun and entertainment?  Well, of course, we had movie theaters in Stillwater at that time. I tell  you, most of us didn   t have a lot of financial resources, and so we might  go to a movie once or twice a month, but that was about it. Just the  activities on campus kept you busy.  Did you have any favorite student hangouts on campus or off campus?  Not really.  What about dating? Did you meet your wife while you were going to  school here?  No. Actually, like I say, my wife is from Pennsylvania, and I met my  wife, I think I was a junior. It might have been my senior year in the fall  semester. I   m not sure. But my brother was a naval aviator, and, of  course, he was stationed on the East Coast, and he met a young lady  back there, and they subsequently were married, and I was best man at  the wedding, and my wife was maid of honor, so that   s how we met. We  14  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  carried on our courtship by mail for several months, and she was going  to the nurse   s school at Philadelphia Methodist Hospital. So, after she  graduated, why, she moved out here and we were subsequently married  out here.  Did you have a car while you were in school?  I never owned a car. I had my brother   s car. He was transferred out of  the country for about a year, so, yes, I had one of the hottest cars on  campus. It was a 1955 red and white Pontiac hard-top, so it was a nice  car. But, like I say, our finances were such that it mainly stayed in the  parking lot.  Did you work while you were in school?  Well I was a farmer. We   d go home on weekends, and a lot of times  after class, like the year I had my brother   s car, I   d go home and help my  dad with the farm work.  You mentioned the library. Can you tell me anything in particular about  your memories of the library?  Well, I know it seemed awful big at the time, and I suppose it   s a lot  bigger now. (Laughs) But one thing that sticks in my mind about the  library, one of our education classes, I can   t remember which one it was  now, but we had a lot of reading that we had to do, and there was just a  minimum number of books that were available. So, when the professor  would give us an assignment, if at all possible we   d rush to the library to  get a hold of that book because they were supposed to remain in the  library. You could go to the library and read them, but they were  supposed to stay there. And I can   t remember, but most of the time I  couldn   t get a hold of the book, and it never would become available. I  found out that the other students were taking these books, and they were  hiding them in different places in the library, and maybe they might tell  their friends,    Well, it   s in such-and-so place,    so they could get a hold  of the book and read it. And it never entered my mind that I would even  think of doing such a thing, but there were students that did those things,  and that was kind of an aggravation.  I would imagine so. Was there any key event or development during your  time as a student that you especially remember?  No, I really don   t. Of course, the campus was growing. There was even a  lot of construction back then, but nothing like we have now. Let   s see, I  think Dr. Willham (wasn   t it Dr. Willham?) was president, and then later  on Dr. Kamm came on. And I don   t really remember who was president  15  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  when I graduated. I think Dr. Willham.  Do you remember seeing him out on campus?  Oh, yes.  Oh, really. Are there any particular traditions that come to mind, either  for Cordell or for campus, like student traditions, things that you knew  were traditions that were just the way things were around here in  particular?  I can   t think of any. One thing I think they used to do, I don   t know  whether they still do it or not, but if you got engaged while you were  here, your friends probably threw you in Theta Pond, but I don   t know  whether they do that anymore or not. (Laughter)  I heard that they used to do that. I don   t think they do that now. What is  it about Oklahoma State that sparks the loyalty in the students and the  alumni?  Well, I don   t know. I just think that the leadership has been more down-to-  earth, and most people, I think, understand that term. It has just  always been a good atmosphere here at Oklahoma State, and we have a  lot of traditions as far as athletics are concerned. The wrestling team and  the basketball team and, of course, in years past the football team, but  nobody   s ever got really, you would say, the big head over their  accomplishments. But I think the thing that   s important, a lot of the  people that I was associated with when I went to school here and a lot of  other graduates from Oklahoma State University I   ve worked with  through the years, they   ve just been good solid citizens, and I think that  that   s carried throughout from years past. Usually if you have a person  who   s graduated from Oklahoma State University, they   re going to  make a good employee and a good citizen of the community that they  settle in.  That kind of goes into the next question which is how did attending OSU  impact your life?  Well, I don   t quite know how to answer that. Even back in 1959, and I  don   t know what the percentages are now, but only about a third of the  students that started as freshmen actually graduated from college with a  degree. Probably it   s higher now. I don   t know. I know the numbers are  a lot higher now. But the associations you make and the acquaintances  that you make, it just goes a long way in whatever endeavor you decide  to follow after you leave. Now, I went to work   it   s kind of interesting.  Only graduate students could take computer courses when I was here.  16  Neurohr  Beck  And, of course, I went into education, and I got interested in computers  when I went to a special seminar day that we had there in the Omaha  Public Schools.  I actually went to the Mutual of Omaha headquarters, and we were  touring the computer facility. And the young man that was taking us  through, I asked him what his education background was, and he said,     Oh, I just have a high school education.    I said,    Well, how did you get  started in computers?    He said,    Well, I took an aptitude test, and it  showed that I would be good in computers, and so they gave me a job  here, and I   ve been working with computers ever since.    And it just  triggered something in my mind: Now, why is our educational system  behind where our big corporations are? We should be generating  employees for the big corporations, but at that time, it was an exclusive  group that got to take computer courses here at the university. Well, of  course, you know that   s all changed now, but at that time all the major  corporations would hire somebody that had a good aptitude, and then  they would train them. Well, now it   s kind of the other way around. The  universities are doing the training, and the different corporations are  looking for people with good educational backgrounds.  So, you started out as a teacher, and then you moved into some other  career areas?  Yes, teaching salaries weren   t very much in 1959. I think my first job I  got paid  4,050 a year. Well, I taught up there for about two and a half  years, and then we moved back to Oklahoma. They say they can take the  boy away from the farm but they can   t take the farm out of the boy, so I  came back here because I wanted to be associated with the farm, and I  had to take a decrease in pay. I was making about  4,500 a year up there  at the time, and when I moved back down here I got a job teaching math  for  3,900 a year. So, after a year of that, I guess it was a little bit of  jealousy on my part, but when I found out that the band instructor was  making more money than the math teacher, when they put the contract in  front of me I said,    I   m not going to sign this contract unless you pay me   5,000 a year.       Oh, we can   t do that.    I said,    Well, then I   m not going  to sign the contract.     Anyway, I started looking for another job, and Conoco, the headquarters  office for Conoco, was in Ponca City at that time, and they had just  announced setting up a new department called the Central Computer  Department. So, I told my wife, I said,    Well, if that young guy in  Omaha with a high school education can work with computers, I   m  going to see if I can   t get a job down there.    And I was fortunate to get a  job. I, a graduate from OU, and a graduate from Georgia Tech  University were the first three non-experienced computer programmers  17  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  that were hired in that department, so we started from scratch, and I  thought I was in pretty good company being with a   well, actually, he  had a master   s degree from Georgia Tech, and the other young lady had  her degree in math from OU, so I tried to hold up the OSU end of it.  Did you stay with that career quite awhile?  Yes, I was there about fourteen, almost fifteen, years. Of course, I had  farmed all those years, and my dad at that time was seventy-six, and he  was wanting to kind of semi-retire. I had too many responsibilities at  Conoco and too many on the farm, and I made the choice to go back to  the farm. I   d have probably been much better off financially, but I don   t  know. A lot of the people that I worked with, you know, they   re retired  and six foot under now. I still work every day, and my health is good,  and I think that   s important at this stage of our life.  Do you return to campus often?  Oh, quite often. We   re in Stillwater quite often. Ponca City I   ve always  considered my hometown, but the consolidation of Conoco and Phillips,  and they moved almost all the professional people out of Ponca City,  and our city is having a tough time, well, in some respects. There   s just a  lot of vacant Main Street businesses. Of course, that   s not uncommon in  most cities, but Stillwater is alive and booming, and we like to come  down here to do a lot of our shopping.  What advice would you give to OSU students today?  Well, I think they need to strive to be the best they can be. You know,  for example, grade point average is important because I was in a position  with a large corporation where I had to interview prospective employees,  and, also, one thing that I always looked for was the extracurricular  activities. I worked with a lot of people that were probably a whole lot  more intelligent than I am, but a lot of them couldn   t seem to get along  with their fellow employees, fellow associates, and a lot of them had a  hard time communicating with people. For example, in the computer  department, we were responsible for developing systems that we had to  teach other people how to use, and a lot of those people couldn   t  communicate, couldn   t get through to the other people that maybe didn   t  have a college education or just weren   t quite as capable as they were.  So, the best advice I could give is be conscientious about your work, get  affiliated with extracurricular activities, communicate with your  professors. Most of these professors, I think, enjoy having students drop  by during their hours off to visit with them and ask them questions and  things like that. I always found that that was the situation here at OSU  18  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  Neurohr  Beck  when I was here. I didn   t do enough of that, and I think that   s important.  What would you say to high school students who are thinking about  attending OSU?  Well, it depends somewhat on their background, but I certainly have  never hesitated to encourage people that if they   re thinking about going  to a four-year university to start at OSU. We used to have a program  there in Kay County, the Alumni Association did, where we took all the  high school graduates in the county to a banquet, paid for their meal and  that sort of thing, and, of course, it was a recruiting tool to get students  to come to Oklahoma State University. But I certainly wouldn   t hesitate  to encourage people to go to Oklahoma State.  Is there anything else that you would like to add that we didn   t cover,  any special memory or experience that you want to share?  (Laughs) No, I think we   ve already mentioned the one. I tell you what, it  was pretty exciting whenever we beat Wilt Chamberlain and the number  one Kansas Jayhawks at that time. That was probably one of the  most   outstanding things that happened on campus, and then, of course, just  the general atmosphere of a lot of the football games. I remember one  game where we were beat in the final seconds by our number one  competitor from down south and another game where we played the Air  Force Academy, and they won in the final seconds on a ricocheted pass.  I can remember those things. Just the camaraderie of attending the  different sports events and things like that, those stick with you. And  then, of course, the people that you meet while you   re here. You   ll  establish some lifelong friends.  Well, I   m glad that you   re here for your fiftieth reunion this year.  Thank you.  I hope you have a wonderful weekend. Thank you for participating in the  interview for the library.  All right, you   re welcome.  -------  -------   
