 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, February 4,  2016. I   m interviewing Mr. Lloyd Mitchell for the O-STATE Stories  interview series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Lloyd, you received your bachelor   s  and master   s degrees from OSU when it was still Oklahoma A M. You  worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs until your retirement. I look forward  to learning more about your life and career and your OSU memories. Thank  you for speaking with me today. Where were you born, and where did you  grow up?  Mitchell I was born in Spencer, Tennessee. Most of my childhood days and growing  up days was in Harmon County, Oklahoma.  Little Thunder What did your parents do for a living?  Mitchell Dad was a sharecropper in Harmon County.  Little Thunder Your mother, a homemaker?  Mitchell Mother was a homemaker, yes.  Little Thunder How about brothers or sisters?  Mitchell I have three brothers.  Little Thunder Where did you fall in the lineup?  Mitchell I was number two. My older brother graduated from OSU, and he was in  education.  5  Little Thunder I understand you moved from Tennessee to Oklahoma during the  Depression, which seems like a hard time to make that move. What do you  remember about   what drew your family to Oklahoma?  Mitchell Well, Dad really moved from Tennessee to Ohio and spent five years there  working in a Miller Rubber Company. Then in 1927, we moved to Harmon  County. Then I graduated from high school there at Arnett  Oklahoma ,  which is a small consolidated high school out from Hollis  Oklahoma .  Little Thunder You were out in the country there.  Mitchell Yes. We lived out north of Hollis in the OM community. I don   t know what  the OM means. I   ve inquired a number of times, and best that I could get  was there was a big ranch back in the early days, OM Ranch.  Little Thunder I see. (Laughs) What are your memories of growing up in the OM  community?  Mitchell Well, OM was a grade school, and I liked school. It was a, of course, had  two or three classes in one room. It was a good little grade school to go to.  We had to walk to school about, probably a mile and a half. I felt like it was  a good school and that it was one that you get a good education in.  Little Thunder What kinds of things did you do for fun?  Mitchell Well, a big thing, I guess, was hunt jackrabbits. Every boy had a dog, just  about. We always prided ourselves on having the fastest dog, and we   d go  out hunting jackrabbits. Oh, at home, we   d always, my brother and I,  younger than I, we loved to play checkers, and we   d play checkers whenever  we got a chance. Then we   d keep track of who won, who lost. We had a  great time playing checkers. Sometimes, when Dad wasn   t there, we   d get  out and try to ride the calves like a cowboy and pretend we was a cowboy.  We went to church every Sunday. We   d go on a wagon and team. That little  Church of Christ there right next to the school, they had a brush arbor built  out there. In the summertime, they   d have what they called protracted  meetings. The yard would be filled with horses and teams and wagons. I  remember those clearly   didn   t have no television, didn   t have no radio,  most of the time, didn   t have a car. Once in a while, we   d have an old car.  It   d be broke down most of the time.  Little Thunder (Laughs) Well, you mentioned that you felt you got a pretty good education  in Hollis. What was your favorite subject?  Mitchell I guess, thinking back on it, history was probably my favorite subject. I was  real good at spelling. Every year, we   d have a county contest for arithmetic  and spelling, and even at OM, I would represent my grade in spelling. Once  6  or twice, I did in arithmetic, but there   s another boy that consistently beat  me in arithmetic. I liked history and geography and that type of thing. I  wasn   t the best at math. I had to work a little bit at mathematics.  Little Thunder Were there some reasons that, looking back now, you think you got  interested in agronomy, which is what you majored in?  Mitchell Yeah. When I started this college at Cameron  Oklahoma  back in 1939, I  didn   t know what to major in. They had a dean of men, Dean Breedlove  there, and he taught chemistry. I got interested in chemistry there at  Cameron  University , and then in fall at    41, I went to OU and enrolled as a  chemistry major. Well, you had to take calculus, two courses in calculus. I  got through the first one, but I had to drop the second one because somehow  or other, I just never did grab on to what it was about. Then I was pulled into  the Air Force in the fall of    41. After I came back, then, and went to OSU in     45, I had changed my majors back to agronomy because I was boogered  with that math that I had to take.  Little Thunder Had your parents gone to college?  Mitchell Yeah, they have. Dad went to Burritt College in Spencer. Burritt was the  second school of higher learning associated with the Churches of Christ at  that time, and Dad got in two years there. That was the highest it went, what  we   d call a junior college. Mother, I   m not sure. She must have got through  high school because she taught school some. I assume that she got through  high school.  Little Thunder Was it easy for you to go to Cameron? What did you do after high school  before that move to Cameron College?  Mitchell Well, I graduated in 1937. There was absolutely no work for a kid. Dad  didn   t need me on the farm really, and they had absolutely no work around  there for a kid. I went into the CCC camps, Civilian Conservation Corps  camps, and I was in a camp up at about north of Altus  Oklahoma  there. It  is what is now the Quartz Mountain State Park, where the CCCs was  located, and I spent a year and a half there. I remember I was what they call  the assistant camp engineer, which there wasn   t anything detailed or hard  about. I just drug a chain and held the rod for the engineer. It was raining  one day, and we were in the engineering building. He said,    Mitchell, did  you ever think about going to college?    His name was English. I said,    Mr.  English, there   s nothing in the world that I   d rather do than be able to go to  school, go to college, but there   s no way I can go. Dad hasn   t got anything  to help me with, and no way I see I can go.    He said,    Well, I   ll tell you  what. I got a friend over at Cameron. His name is Clarence Breedlove, and  I   ll write Clarence about you and see what he says.    Mr. English got a note  back from Clarence Breedlove that says,    Yes. Send him up. We   ll find a  7  way. We can give him half room and board.    Half room and board was nine  dollars.  Little Thunder Wow. (Laughter)  Mitchell This was in January of    39 mid-semester. I remember very well, woke up  that morning. There was a cold northern blowing, and it was cold and  windy. I just debated.    Well, do I want to try to go up there or not? Well,  yeah, I do,    had twenty-five dollars in my pocket. That   s all. Dad had spent,  and I didn   t regret it at all. They sent twenty-five a month to your parents.  He had had to spend it for living, which was fine with me, but he had  twenty-five dollars. I went down to Hollis and then out Route 62. I put my  thumb in the air and thumbed my way to Cameron, and that   s how I got to  Cameron.  Little Thunder Well, after a stint at Cameron and OU, then you end up at OSU. How did  you choose     Mitchell I spent two-and-a-half years, I spent through that semester. I had graduated  at midterm, but I stayed on for another semester. I spent two-and-half years.  I wanted to go on and, of course, still didn   t have any money to go on with,  but I wrote every school in the state. I wrote to OSU. I wrote to OU. I wrote  to Goodwell  Oklahoma Panhandle State University , which is affiliated  with OSU, and at first, didn   t get any chances. Dad had a friend there in  Harmon County. He was a state legislator. He said that he found me a job, to  come up to Norman  Oklahoma  and working with the mental institution  there. Several students going to school there would, they had a place for  them to sleep out there. That semester of    41, I put in at OU. Then the war  broke, of course. That finished that, and then 1945, rather than go back to  OU, I went to OSU, 1945.  Little Thunder Your brothers, I guess, also served in World War II.  Mitchell Yeah, four boys. We were all just the right age and called us all up. I put in  four years. The other boys put in about, two of them put in about three years,  and then the younger one, he was in a couple of years. World War II caught  us all.  Little Thunder When you ended up going to OSU at this point, did you have some  resources, or were you     Mitchell At OSU?  Little Thunder Yes.  8  Mitchell Oh, yeah, GI Bill of Rights. That was the salvation. That was the best piece  of legislation the Congress ever passed, ninety dollars a month. Of course,  then I had a wife and two children. I had to work at anything else I could  find.  Little Thunder When did you meet your wife, your first wife?  Mitchell I met the wife down at Cameron there. She started at September of    39. It  wasn   t long after that till her and I dated all through. Then we married in  1942 in San Antonio.  Little Thunder When you entered OSU, had you already decided you were going to major  in agronomy?  Mitchell I was a farm boy, and I thought everybody was engaged in farming.  (Laughter) I knew a little bit about farming but not too much. That   s why I  switched from chemistry over to agronomy. I liked agronomy. It was  interesting, and I really enjoyed it.  Little Thunder Were there a couple of professors who stood out for you?  Mitchell Yeah. I was just the other day trying to remember the man that was really,  he was a soils teacher. Murphy was the head of the soils. This fellow was  assistant to Murphy. I can   t think of his name, but he was a really sharp  fellow and a good prof. I just can   t recall his name. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What kind of an impact did he have on you?  Mitchell Well, he was a very, very smart fellow. One thing, he couldn   t tolerate fools.  (Laughs) If you gave a smart answer, you got cut down. You was always  careful with your words when you answered him. (Laughter) He was good.  He was a good man, good to his students, but he required a lot of you. He  made you want to study, made you want to learn.  Little Thunder What was the environment on campus like outside of your major?  Mitchell That year I started was a chaos, in    45. You had all these veterans flocking  in, a lot of veterans coming in trying to find a place to live, and     Little Thunder    the campus and the town weren   t prepared for those numbers.  Mitchell No, no. The numbers were terrific in the fall of    45. They got a lot of  Quonset huts when the military didn   t need anymore, and they called it the  hill. The vets lived out there on the hill. I was a little more fortunate. I was  flying B-25s up at Enid  Oklahoma  when the war quit. I made a quick  break down to Stillwater to find a place to live, and I found a little two-  9  bedroom house. It backed up against the railroad tracks, can   t think of the  name of the streets, but it   s in the northeast part of the campus and paid  twenty dollars a month for it. Well, I could foresee the rents booming. I gave  her a year, paid a year   s rent in advance so I could cinch that twenty dollars  a month down. She moaned and groaned about it, and    Oh, when that   s up,  I   ll fix you.    (Laughs) I just grinned because I knew I   d be out of there by  then. (Laughter)  Little Thunder That was smart. How about transportation, etcetera? Were you walking to  school then from the house?  Mitchell Oh, oh, walking and riding a bike, mainly, yeah, back and forth, yeah, yeah.  Little Thunder Did you work at all while you were studying, or have you been     Mitchell Oh yeah, yeah. I worked at anything I could find. I mopped floors. I washed  windows. I mowed lawns. (Laughs) Anything I could find to make an extra  dollar, I worked at because wife and two kids at ninety dollars went a ways,  but it didn   t go all the way. I was just doing little pickup jobs like that.  Little Thunder What do you recall about any campus tradition?  Mitchell I can   t quite think of any campus tradition. I wasn   t involved too much in  other than the work and studying.  Little Thunder Did you go to any sporting events, though?  Mitchell Oh yes. I made every football game I could when we could get a babysitter.  (Laughs) We made all the football games.  Little Thunder How about your favorite place off campus?  Mitchell Well, of course, wife and I went to church there all the time. I loved going to  church and associating with the young people there, but as far as any other  eating place, anything like that, we didn   t have anything. We didn   t eat out  much. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Did you have a favorite place on campus to study or hang out?  Mitchell Not really. The library was overcrowded. I remember people standing  everywhere reading. They couldn   t find a place to sit down. They didn   t  have a student union. They had a small, house-like thing. I forget what they  called it, but once in a while, we   d go there. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You and your wife didn   t go to any of the dances there.  10  Mitchell Dances?  Little Thunder Yeah.  Mitchell No, no.  Little Thunder Probably not much time to hang out with friends, either.  Mitchell No, no, most of the friends you had was kids that went to church. We went  to Church of Christ there. Kids that went to church there, they had to have  things associated with the church that we   d go to. That was the main place  we went to.  Little Thunder Did your parents come see you while you were in school?  Mitchell No, they didn   t. They didn   t have any way to come. They never did come  while I was in school, not that they wouldn   t have liked to, but just beyond  their doing.  Little Thunder Were you able to go home, you and your family, for vacations?  Mitchell While I was in school? Yeah, we had an old car. Dad had an old    36 Buick  he sold us, and it ran most of the time. We   d visit with the folks some.  Little Thunder Do you remember Homecoming at all or any parades?  Mitchell We would go to them, but I didn   t participate.  Little Thunder Do you have any memories of Gallagher or Iba?  Mitchell Gallagher-Iba  Arena ? Well, yeah, we made several basketball games, the  ones we could, yeah. I liked that.  Little Thunder How about Theta Pond?  Mitchell Our children were small then. See, the boy was born in    43 and the girl in     45, and we   d go down and picnic there fairly frequently. They liked to  watch the ducks and the birds there. We used it, a place to picnic.  Little Thunder What are your memories of the town of Stillwater?  Mitchell I don   t have any particular memories, good or bad, really, about Stillwater.  Of course, we didn   t have enough money. We didn   t shop much there. I  didn   t form an opinion, whether good or bad. (Laughter)  11  Little Thunder After graduation, you went after your master   s degree within two years,  right? What did you do between your bachelor   s and your master   s  degrees?  Mitchell I was working with the BIA. We moved to Shawnee  Oklahoma . They had  a house for us to move into, and that was probably the reason I took that job  over any other. (Laughs) It had a nice three-bedroom home. We moved to  Shawnee, and we stayed there. I continued working on my master   s degree  then.  Little Thunder How did you end up working for the BIA?  Mitchell They had recruiters, one or two recruiters to recruit students. I   ll brag a little  bit. I was a good student. I belonged to Alpha Zeta, which is the honorary  institution for agriculture students, and I also was a Phi Kappa Phi  graduating. I think that helped me to get a job. They showed up on campus.  Soil conservation services offered me the job, too, but BIA had this house.  That tipped the scales for me. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, how did you like Shawnee?  Mitchell It was fine. It was a nice, nice town. We made lots of friends there, and it  was a nice town.  Little Thunder As you know, the BIA has this complex and contentious history. In 1947, it  had just gotten that name, Bureau of Indian Affairs. I   m wondering about  some of the changes you may have seen while you were working there, and  perhaps explain what you did also.  Mitchell You mean while I worked for them?  Little Thunder Yes.  Mitchell Well, yeah, there was a big change, I thought. When I started working for  the BIA, they would pick the best people they could find to work for them,  regardless of whether they were Indian or white. It was merit. You got your  job by merit, and you kept your job by merit. Gradually, and it kept going,  they started employing more Indian people, which was all right. There was  nothing wrong with that if they could match their white opponent, but it got  so that the only people they were employing were Indians. Necessarily, they  gave more credit to them being Indian than they did to the qualifications of  the job and that the white person, which was me   of course, it didn   t hurt  me because I   d already went on up the ladder, but going in, it would keep  good white boys or girls from going in. I can see the merits to that, see the  reasoning for that, but it changed a lot. That   s one reason I quit early. I  12  got   they had an RF a RIF in    50   let   s see, when was that RIF? Seventy-three,  they had a reduction in force. I got out early.  Little Thunder What did you do at the BIA?  Mitchell I was chief land appraiser both at  Ana darko  Oklahoma  and at  Albuquerque. I had several appraisers working under me. I explained a  while ago any transaction dealing with Indian land required an appraisal.  Little Thunder You also worked in South Dakota for a while.  Mitchell Yeah, at first   I worked for five years before   I went into the BIA as a soil  scientist and stayed as a soil scientist about five years, and most of that time  was in South Dakota. Then in    55, I had a chance to switch over to real  estate appraisals, and that   s when I made the switch. I spent about twenty-five  years as an appraiser, I guess, and the other four or five as the soil  scientist.  Little Thunder Did you enjoy living in Albuquerque?  Mitchell Yes, very much. Albuquerque was a nice town, really did enjoy it. When I  retired in    73, we debated about staying there and retiring, living there. Most  of our children, grandchildren lived in Oklahoma, and that tipped it. We  said,    Well, we   ll go where we can be   .    and then they all left. Like a flock  of quail, they were gone. (Laughter) I   ve got one brother   .  Little Thunder When you moved back to Oklahoma, they     Mitchell Yeah, I   ve got one granddaughter that lives there now. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, what were some of your best memories of your work with the Bureau  of Indian Affairs?  Mitchell Well, I was fortunate in having good supervisors. When I look back on it, I  had very good supervisors. In Anadarko, I was twelve years. They had a  man that was head of the land division. He was a Cherokee Indian, a lawyer,  very smart, very fair, and really enjoyed working under him. At Aberdeen   South Dakota , I had another man. I guess the quality of my supervisors  was probably the one thing I appreciated more than anything else.  Little Thunder I guess after you retired, then you began working as an independent  appraiser     Mitchell Yes. I did, yeah. I guess I was about eighty-eight or eighty-nine when I quit.  (Laughs)  13  Little Thunder When you quit doing that?  Mitchell When I quit appraising, yeah. (Laughs)  Little Thunder You took about twelve years. Were you just consulting, or were you working  for   I guess you were consulting.  Mitchell Well, I was appraising. My specialty was appraising farm and ranch  properties because of my education. Then I did a lot of house appraising,  residential appraising and didn   t do too much commercial, but I stayed  pretty busy all those years. I enjoyed my work a lot. I enjoyed appraising.  Little Thunder Is there any funny story or unusual appraisal you did that you remember?  Mitchell I remember one that was particularly enjoyable. When I was at  Ana  darko,  over in Shawnee, there were two tribes that owned land jointly, the  Potawatomies and maybe the Absentee Shawnee. I forget. Out south of town  where the agents, they were, they had a hospital out there for a long time.  They owned quite a bit of land and owned that hospital property, and they  wanted to divide it so that it wasn   t joint ownership. I had to appraise the  whole property and then make a division of it that could turn out to where  each tribe got approximately the same values, and then I had to go to  Washington to testify up there about the appraisal. I took advantage. I took  my whole family with me, and we made a vacation out of it. (Laughs) That   s  one appraisal that I did that, there were several of them I did enjoy.  Little Thunder It was not your first time traveling to Washington yourself probably, but for  the family, it was.  Mitchell No. Back in 1949, the Department of Interior was selecting young men that  had a promise of advancement. In the nation, they selected three out of the  BIA. Two of them were Indian and then myself. One was a Zuni, and one  was a Navajo and then myself. We three then were selected to go to  Washington and spend several months there in training. The wife and I  moved in    49, I guess it was. We moved to Washington a few months. That  was enjoyable. Then, we had three children. We enjoyed that a lot.  Little Thunder What did you like about Washington?  Mitchell I guess, actually, we didn   t. We lived over in Virginia. There wasn   t too  much I liked about the city itself, so big, so crowded, and of course, we  didn   t have much transportation. Of course, I enjoyed very much the   we  took courses at American University, I believe it was, there, and I enjoyed  the training program we had, met some nice men. It advanced me pretty  quick. I remember I got to jump a grade. I was a GS-7, and I went from a  14  seven to eleven. I skipped the nine, and it was because of that special  training that I got up there.  Little Thunder A little pay raise there. When did you move to your present home here?  Mitchell When did we buy this home?  Little Thunder Yes.  Mitchell Two thousand-three.  Little Thunder Have you been involved in any civic organizations or activities here in  Oklahoma City?  Mitchell No, no, I really haven   t gotten involved in any of that.  Little Thunder What has changed about Oklahoma City since you   ve moved here?  Mitchell Well, the growth, for one thing. Traffic   s got a lot worse, a lot more  crowded, but it don   t bother us too much because we seldom get into  Oklahoma City. We go to Norman. It   s the good roads from here to Norman.  We do our grocery shopping here because we   re close to a Walmart, but  buying other things, we go to Norman to shop, yeah.  Little Thunder Well, if somebody were to come visit, what would you suggest they see,  either in Oklahoma City or Norman?  Mitchell To see and do?  Little Thunder Yes.  Mitchell Well, there in Norman, they   ve got this out on the south side of Norman  there where they have the extinct animals and all that. You know what I  mean? I can   t think of the name.  Little Thunder The museum there?  N. Mitchell The Museum of Natural History or something.  Little Thunder Sam Noble Museum or   .  Mitchell People come to see us that haven   t been there, and we like to take them to  that. Of course, Cowboy Hall of Fame, that   s very, very interesting, and this  new Oklahoma City museum out of the Capital. You   ve been there?  Little Thunder No.  15  Mitchell It   s a really, really nice exhibit there. It   s a huge building and relatively new.  Little Thunder The historical museum, I think, isn   t it, Oklahoma Historical     Mitchell Yeah, museum, we go there, and places like that, we take our visitors to see.  Little Thunder Right. How about Stillwater? Do you get up to Stillwater still?  Mitchell (Laughs) Very seldom. Here about four or five months ago, they had this  induction of men into the hall of fame, and my son came down and picked  me up. He and I went up there. Other than that, we don   t get to Stillwater  too much. Of course, I   ll be ninety-eight in August. The wife, she   s not as  old. I won   t say. (Laughter) She   s listening. Health things keep us from  going too much.  Little Thunder Well, you certainly don   t look your age. (Laughs) Your son was the one  inducted, right?  Mitchell Yes, yeah.  Little Thunder You want to tell us a little bit about him and if any other of your children  attended OSU because he went to OSU?  Mitchell Well, I had some nieces and nephews that went to OSU.  N. Mitchell Well, David   s kids went to OSU.  Little Thunder This is Nancy talking, your grandchildren.  Mitchell Oh yeah. Well, yeah, that was my nieces and nephews. They went to OSU.  N. Mitchell He had two grandchildren graduate from OSU.  Mitchell Yeah, that   s right. Okay, okay, you   re right. I   m wrong.  Little Thunder Your son was inducted?  Mitchell Yeah. Well, as I say, he   s a professor. He got his doctorate from  University  of  North Texas, I believe it was, at Denison  Texas . He got his doctorate.  He graduated from, got his master   s at Southern Methodist  University , and  then he got his doctorate there and taught several years. He   s got a good  going business. As I say, it   s highly computerized, and I can   t tell you what  he does. He   s pretty much retired. His son   s taking over the business and  doing well at it.  Little Thunder Do people you know, are they aware of your OSU connection?  16  Mitchell Oh, yes, yes, yes, I   m not too bashful about that. (Laughter) They know my  OSU connections, yeah. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You still follow the football games     Mitchell Oh, very much so, yeah, yeah. Basketball, they play tonight, play Wisconsin  tonight, their basketball team.  Little Thunder (Laughs) Are there any other cowboys in this area that you know, we   ve  talked     Mitchell Yeah, I go to church with several cowboys, yeah.  Little Thunder What advice would you give to students at OSU today or to faculty or  administrators?  Mitchell I wouldn   t have too much advice, just thinking a little more personal. One,  the students ought to major in something in which you can get a job. He  ought to look into it. Does our economy need people like this? I   m thinking  of people like one of our, wife   s grandsons. He   s taking drama. What   s he  going to do when he gets the degree in drama? That would be one thing. To  choose which avenue, which field you   re going to get in, you or your  parents should do some looking into    Is there a demand for it?     Little Thunder No advice for the faculty, though, or administrators?  Mitchell No, no, none of that. I don   t know any of the faculty. Long gone are the  people that I knew.  Little Thunder It seems many OSU alumni are loyal to this school. What do you think it is  about OSU that sparks such loyalty?  Mitchell I   m having to speak from the past. I don   t know too much about the present,  but the instructors were interested in the students, genuinely interested in the  students and teaching them and teaching them to work at it and be good at it.  OSU   s always had a reputation of friendliness, the campus. Some of the  other schools maybe don   t have that so much. That   s one thing, I would say.  I wouldn   t hesitate at all to advise a student to go to OSU.  Little Thunder I   m thinking back to the story you told about working for the WPA  Works  Project Administration  and getting steered in the direction of college to  Cameron. I wonder if you   ve gone back to, was it at Altus that you did that  work?  Mitchell The Quartz Mountain CCC Camp?  17  Little Thunder Have you gone back and     Mitchell Yes, several times. Yeah, they have a nice, nice lodge there.  Little Thunder What are your thoughts on what   s up there?  Mitchell Oh, it   s just always enjoyable to try to pick out spots that I remember when I  was there. Generally, I had a good time there. CCCs was a good  organization. They picked up enlisted kids like myself that didn   t have  anywhere to go, any job to do. It gave them the job, a dollar a day, but that  was something, a dollar-a-day. It   s fun to go back and see those things.  Little Thunder Well, is there anything you would like to talk about that we didn   t cover  today?  Mitchell This probably hadn   t got much to do with what we   re doing. I   ll tell you a  story that   s, interests me, intrigues me. I was going to school at OU in    41,  fall of    41 when the war broke. Well, come Christmas vacation, I had  already passed all of my tests out here at the air base for Air Force, and I  wanted to go home and see my folks before the Air Force got me, before  they called me up. Well, it only lacked about two weeks of completing our  courses in the fall of    41 there and come Christmas, and then we   d come  back and spend a couple of weeks and then take our exams. I, of course,  didn   t have any transportation, and I hitchhiked wherever I went. I  remember going to the dean of men and saying, asking him, telling him,     Say, is there any way I cannot have to come back after going, I   d like to go  spend a little time with my folks. I   ve already passed my exams, and I   m  going to be called up shortly.    He said,    Well, maybe. Take this slip of  paper. Go to your instructors. Get them to put the grades you got at the  present time, and that will be the grade that you get for the subject.    Okay. I  did it. I was taking some hard courses, taking chemistry, German, physics,  taking some hard courses. I did it and got them signed up and went back.  Then shortly, January or February, they called me, and I went off into the  Air Force. Two or three months later, I got a notice from the school. Is,  incompletes, they gave me, not an hour of credit. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Oh my God.  Mitchell Here I   d spent that semester working out at the mental institution, working  like a dog. Oh, I was pretty t-o   d about it. A few years ago, not too many,  my oldest son wrote a book about me and my Air Force experiences and all  that. It   s a good book.  Little Thunder What   s it called?  18  Mitchell Kipling   s Error III. Kipling   s Error was the name of the plane, Kipling   s  Error III. Well, in this book, I had recalled, I had recited this. I   ve got a  nephew that lives at Duncan  Oklahoma . Actually, he   s my wife   s nephew,  but I   ve known him since he was ten years old. He   s just another nephew to  me, and I   m his uncle. Ed Apple   s his name. Well, Ed, he was on the  corporation commission here for a while, and he   s a politician there in  Duncan. He read this book. He   s in this story. He said,    Uncle Lloyd, they  did you dirty.    I said,    Absolutely.    He said,    I   ll write David about it, at  David in head. I   ll write David about it.     Little Thunder (Laughs) This is David Boren.  Mitchell David Boren. He wrote David Boren about it. Well, David Boren says,    Ed,  I   ll look into it.    He looked into it. Sure enough, it was like I said. They got  up a dinner and a big recognition for it. They didn   t give me any credit, but I  got a real nice plaque in the office I   ll show you that resulted. (Laughter)  David got sick that day. I   m sure it was intentional. (Laughter) He was  eating crow, and he didn   t like it. (Laughter) Yeah, I got a nice plaque over  it. You want to go? Are you about through? I   ll go in the office and show  you a few things.  Little Thunder Yes, we   ll go take a look and take a picture. Well, thank you for sharing that  story with us, and thank you for your time today.  Mitchell Well, it   s enjoyable. I   m glad to be able to do it.  -------  -------   
