 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Also with me is Anna McDougal. Today is Friday, September 25,  2015, and we   re in Hugo, Oklahoma, Choctaw County. We   re here to  interview Taylor Payne as part of our Cowboys in Every County Oral  History Project. Taylor, thank you for joining us.  Payne Thank you for having me.  Nykolaiszyn Well, Taylor, we   re going to learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell  me the year you were born and where you were born?  Payne Sure. I was born in 1992 in Paris, Texas.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about your parents.  Payne My father   s name is Steve Payne, and my mother is Patty Payne. They grew  up here in Hugo, and they   ve been, next month they will have been married  thirty-one years. That   s a little bit about them. My dad is a contractor here in  Hugo. He   s been building houses for about thirty years probably, and my  mother is a legal secretary at the district attorney   s office here in Choctaw  County.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me what it was like growing up in Hugo as a little girl.  Payne Gosh, it was really great growing up here because both of my sides of the  family do live here. There were very   things that were very, you know,  traditions we had throughout the year that we like to do, whether it was  getting to enjoy the county fair or, you know, a big thing, in Hugo, with it  being Circus City, USA, every year at the Christmas parade, we have Santa  Claus ride an elephant. That was something that we looked forward to every  year was seeing the parade, and then obviously when the circus comes to  town they always have a circus when they leave and go out on the road and  then when they come back through the years. Really, it was just everything  5  you can imagine about, you know, a great small town life where you walk  into the feed store and see somebody you know or walk down Main Street or  go into the bank and make a deposit in your savings account and get  something, a little treat. It was just that   it was more of a feeling. You have  those great memories of growing up here, and like I said, with both of my  families being here, I got to experience it all here.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me about going to school in Hugo.  Payne I did go to school in Hugo. I have an older brother. He   s seven years older  than me, and we both started to school here. Then he graduated, and then I  actually started going to Soper, which is a neighboring town here in  Choctaw County and where I graduated from. I went to Hugo from pre-K,  which here in town is called Gingerbread  Pre-School . It   s actually still  going today. I had a wonderful teacher named Ms. Cindy, and she had four  daughters that we all went to church with for a while. Then Ms. Cindy, she  passed away a few years ago and had another teacher who has been a  teacher here in Hugo for years and years take over. Gingerbread still lives on  today. (Laughs) We actually went to pre-K there and then went to Hugo, and  it was really neat because I remember in the first year I started fifth grade  we had just moved into a new house. It was right on the bypass, and that is  where the elementary school is. It was really neat, you know, to be able to  go to school very close and ride the bus home every day. You don   t think  about that being very exciting when you   re older, but it seems like a big deal  when you   re younger. Like I said, I finished fifth grade here in Hugo and  then moved over to Soper and started sixth grade there.  Nykolaiszyn I was going to ask if you lived in town or on the outskirts of town.  Payne When I was born, we lived in a little community. It   s just northeast of here  about five miles. It   s called Messer  Oklahoma . It   s just an outskirt of Hugo  kind of towards the lake. Grew up there, and it was actually really neat  because when you, it   d turn off the dirt road on the highway. There was an  older couple that lived there and then my grandma, and then if you go on  straight down the road, my uncle and his wife. Then across the road from  him was my dad   s first cousin and his wife and kids, and then if you kind of  come back to my grandma   s house, there was another road. My other aunt  and uncle lived there, other aunt and uncle lived there, and then we lived at  the end of the road. We all lived in kind of one little area there. We lived  there until I was about six, and then we moved into the house that I grew up  it. It   s just across the bypass, and it   s in the country but southeast of Hugo.  My parents just actually recently moved about   they moved in last week,  actually, to their new house. I grew up in that house, and it was just, yeah.  Nykolaiszyn In addition to going to school in the area, what would you do for fun outside  of school?  6  Payne Definitely growing up, kind of elementary and middle school age, a lot of  your friends, obviously that was another good thing about growing up is  they all, the parents all knew each other. We got to do a lot of things with  the other kids there, whether it was just sleeping over at each other   s houses.  I remember we lived on forty acres in the house that I was in, that I grew up  in, and had cattle and stuff, and a lot of times we would come over, whether  it was camping in the backyard or doing something fun. Sometimes around  Halloween we would have hayrides at the house. Then other than that, when  I was younger, we still had a movie theater here in Hugo that you could go  to, but by the time we were in middle school and high school, that had  closed down. Sometimes we would travel to Paris  Texas  and go, whether it  was bowling or to the movies, over there.  Nykolaiszyn As you   re going through school, are your thoughts on going to college?  Payne Yes, yes, most definitely. Another thing that I was really, really passionate  about was showing livestock. When my brother started the ninth grade his  freshman year, he joined FFA. That would have put me being around seven  years old. I wasn   t quite old enough to join 4-H, but by the time he had  started his sophomore year   I guess I was a little older than that. By the  time he was in his sophomore year, I was old enough to show, and I got a  pig. He had cattle as well, and we started showing. That   s really when,  probably what I spent most of my outside time doing was, rather than going  to the movies or hanging out, it was hanging out with my friends that  showed and going to shows on the weekend and stuff. That was really my  passion and how I got into knowing about OSU and what they did because  it   s surrounded by the agriculture at the college. That was something I was  really passionate about and kind of drove my passion to want to go to school  there.  Nykolaiszyn You became active in 4-H. Did you ever go to Round-Up?  Payne Yes, I did. Yeah. I was there, gosh, I think we went two years at Round-Up  and stayed on the twelfth floor of Drummond. The elevators were out. It was  a great time. (Laughs) No, it was really neat, and that was the first time I  ever got to go to campus. I think I was probably eleven or twelve when I  went to Round-Up, and it was just massive, you know, going there. It was  neat when I was back at college there to walk around campus like,    Oh, I  remember that building. I was there when we went to Round-Up.    It is  really great, yeah.  Nykolaiszyn Did you go to the dances?  Payne Yes, yep, yep. I do remember those. I think there were only two kids that,  myself and one other, that came from Choctaw County that went, but we  7  knew some of the neighboring county kids. There was a small group of us  that got to go, and I can   t remember the building it was in. I remember the  inside. It might have been actually in the mezzanine. Is that how you     maybe I don   t remember. I remember what the inside looks like, but I can   t  remember the name of the building where we had the dances at.  Nykolaiszyn Good time at 4-H Round-Up.  Payne Yes, yeah.  Nykolaiszyn That was your real first introduction to OSU, you liked the campus, and then  from there, when people would ask you what your plans are when you   re a  senior, you just knew?  Payne Well, actually, probably no. Going on back a little ways, I feel like I find  myself talking about him a lot, but my brother is a big part of my life. He  definitely contributed to that fact. He was at OSU when I was starting in  high school. He was a student there, and then I   d go up and visit him on the  weekends and get to see kind of a college life there. He did the same, similar  thing as going to a junior college and then on to OSU. He lived off campus.  It was really neat. It was kind of a fun view of Stillwater. When I got to my  senior year, I was doing classes concurrently at Eastern Oklahoma State  College in Wilburton  Oklahoma  and did that for the last part of my senior  year. I had a full semester started. I really wanted to go to OSU, but then I  was really nervous about starting at such a big college with being away. The  school that I went to was smaller. They didn   t have a lot, you know, a few  college prep classes. There was just a part of me that felt like I wasn   t  completely ready to be immersed in that many kids at one college. I did  decide to go to Southeastern Oklahoma State University in Durant   Oklahoma . It was about an hour from Hugo, and I went there and lived on  campus. Kind of got my feet wet in the college experience, but after being  there three semesters, I shortly decided that OSU was definitely where I  wanted and needed to be.  Nykolaiszyn When you decided to come to OSU, did you know what you wanted to study?  Payne I kind of had a pretty good idea just because I   ve always felt like I cling  more to the marketing and sales and those aspects. When I did my tour out  at Southeastern, they had a communications department. I felt like, more  than anything, that was kind of where I fit in, and when I started at  Southeastern, I was just a general communications major, as they didn   t  have any ag-related courses at all there. Then when I transferred to OSU, I  knew I wanted to be in the ag, you know, in the CASNR  College of  Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources  department, and I   d already  been in communications. I kind of would say stumbled on ag  communications because it just seemed like the two things I wanted to do in  8  one, and it wasn   t really, you know, kind of one of those things where I  definitely knew I wanted to go OSU and be in the ag-com department.  Those were the two things I liked, and they happened to be together. It fit.  That   s how I ended up in that department.  Nykolaiszyn Your first year at OSU was in what year?  Payne Two thousand twelve.  Nykolaiszyn Did you drive to campus to get there?  Payne Yes.  Nykolaiszyn What did you drive?  Payne I had a 2008 Jeep Liberty.  Nykolaiszyn You loaded up the Jeep     Payne Loaded up the Jeep.  Nykolaiszyn    and you headed to Stillwater. Where   d you live?  Payne I lived in   they   re called Cowboy Town Apartments now, I believe, and  that   s how I met Macy, my roommate. We had a lot of mutual friends, and  Macy was actually two years older than me. She had suffered some medical  problems that she had to leave school for, and she was coming back a few  semesters later. We just said,    Hey, what the heck? We   ll live together.    We  lived in the Cowboy Town Apartments. It   s across from Texas Roadhouse in  Stillwater. We didn   t know anything about Stillwater. Like I said, my mom  and I had drove up there a couple of months prior to that, and I had gotten an  interview for a job there. I did that, and we looked for a place to live and just  decided, you know,    We   ll start here.    Lived there and took most of  everything and loaded up and went.  Nykolaiszyn Did you get the job?  Payne Yeah, yeah. I interviewed at Stillwater National Bank, and I worked there as  a proof in the proof department. I had previously worked at a bank here in  Hugo, and that   s why I did that. I worked in the afternoons and went to  school in the mornings.  Nykolaiszyn Let   s talk about some of the classes you remember that really had an impact  on you.  9  Payne This is actually pretty funny because we were   it   s a class that is required  by all CASNR majors at OSU, but it   s not actually an ag-con course. It is  Dr. Anderson   s sales and marketing class. It   s actually, oh, he would kill me  if I didn   t remember this. I believe it is an econ course by title, but that class  just definitely led me into the direction of the career I wanted to do. I  remember I took it, took some summer classes 2012. In the fall, I started my  full semester, and it was that first semester I was in the class with about 120  other kids and wasn   t really sure what I   d gotten myself into. (Laughs) I just  thoroughly enjoyed everything about it. He definitely has a somewhat  unconventional way of teaching. He   s not one of those professors that   s just  going to go in and say,    Hey, here   s what we   re learning this week,    you  know, and just kind of lecture. He   s very interactive with the students and  definitely has a way of keeping your attention, and he teaches you real life  scenarios where sometimes you go in and learn things that you   re not going  to maybe use in the real world. Definitely that class, more than any, stuck  with me, as far as being able to take something out of it.  We   d have to do two major projects in the class, and it   s actually called a  SWAS, a    sashay with a salesperson.    He comes up with the craziest things.  You ride along with a salesperson for the class, and then you have to  basically shadow them, write a paper about what they did. Is that something  you   re interested in or not? Then at the end of the semester you do a project  where you sell a product, and you can pick whatever you want, anything,  whether it   s agriculture-related or not, whether you want to sell feed or you  want to sell buckets or you want to sell medicine, whatever it may be. You  pick that, and you sell it to someone. They have people come in who are in  sales positions or deal with something like that. I came in with three, I think  there were three other students and myself and sold to a lady that came in  and volunteered her time to be with us that night. You get to do that, and  then you have a dinner afterwards where you get to mingle with the people,  especially for the students that are interested in sales and doing things like  that. It   s definitely, like I said, it really puts you in a position where you get  some feedback from people who are in a career that you would enjoy. I  really, really enjoyed that class.  Nykolaiszyn How was your ride-along?  Payne It was good. Yeah, it was good. It actually worked out in my favor. I know a  lot of people kind of just call random people and say,    Hey, this is really  crazy,    but I got lucky. It was actually someone that I knew. It was a man  from, he   s actually from a town right outside of Hugo, from Choctaw  County. He was kind of in between the ages of my brother and I, and he was  in a sales position on the large animal side, kind of a distributor-type person.  He had one of the little vans that has the medicine in the back. He just drives  around to places. I got to ride along with him. It was really interesting. I felt  like there wasn   t a lot of pressure as far, because we did have a relationship  10  before that, as far as being with each other. It was really fun. We met a guy  in a pasture that was on a tractor who got off to talk to us. That was kind of  the turning point when I really knew what I wanted to do because I   m like,     People get paid to do this? This is great.     Nykolaiszyn Any other professors, outside of Dr. Anderson, that just really stick out for  you?  Payne I can   t just really nail down one in the ag-com profession. I mean, they all  prefer that we call them by their first names, Dwayne, Dr. Cartmell, Shelly,  of course, Dr. Sitton, and then Dr. Nell, Tracy, and then Angel  Riggs , of  course, they were all, at the time. I know they   re definitely adding on to the  department, as it is getting larger and larger, but they were both just, all,  they all four were just so welcoming and being   . I felt a very tightknit  group with that department. In our graduating class, there were upwards of  thirty to forty kids, which seems small, but it   s really large for what it started  out as. I mean, any of them,    Here   s my number. Here   s my e-mail. Call me  anytime,    and to be at such a large university but to have that personal  connection with each of your advisors and to not go in and say,    Oh, I   m  seat number so-and-so in this class on this day.    They know, when you walk  by, who you are, and that was really important to me, coming from such a  small town, to be able to have that.  Nykolaiszyn It really helps with your transition, too.  Payne Yes. Yeah, most definitely. I remember the day that I, there were several  other students, which, actually ended up graduating with most of them, that  OSU has the transfer day. If you   re coming from another school into OSU,  you all come on this certain day and go through kind of a tour, and then you  go to your respective colleges and meet with professors. They enroll you in  your classes. I remember the first, that day that I was in there with two other  students, and we were getting enrolled in a lot of the same courses. They  were just like   I was like,    Well, I can   t be in that class at that time. I have  my job,    and they were like,    This is why you   re here.    You just had to drop  everything, and I was just kind of devastated because I was like,    What have  I gotten myself into?    I felt like, because they, with being in a freshman, in a  sophomore level, they have lots of hours they offer courses. When you get  into your junior, senior, into your major level, they   re only offered at certain  times. Adjusting to that was hard, but they made it very easy. It was  something that they knew. You knew they were putting you on the right  path. It did make that transition definitely easier because by the third week  of school you knew everyone and saw everyone in your classes.  Nykolaiszyn Well, it sounds like your plate was full with work and with school. Did you  have time for fun?  11  Payne Of course, of course. You always have to have time for fun, and that was  another thing. I wasn   t really sure what   how it was going to turn out, but I  definitely have to be very lucky that I got the roommate that I did. I didn   t  have to go through the being put with someone you weren   t sure about or  didn   t know or anything like that. I got to be lucky enough to choose mine,  and she   s turned out to be one of my dearest friends. Definitely Macy and I  have our share of fun. She had been in Stillwater for about a year, like I said,  before, and she kind of took me under her wing and introduced me to other  people that she knew there. That made it a lot more fun. Then you weren   t  just going to school, work, home, and being a little hermit. We had a lot of  fun together and got to do a lot of Stillwater traditions.  Nykolaiszyn What kind of Stillwater traditions? (Laughter)  Payne Well, you know, stuff, I guess. (Laughs) She took me to   I went with her to  the annual Calf Fry for the first time, which actually happens to be on my  birthday every year. That ended up being something we did. I think last year  was the fifth year that we have been together. Just fun things like that, going  to enjoy a nice Dirty Curty on the Strip, which, now they have their own  building now. They are moving up in the world. (Laughter) Anyway, and of  course Homecoming, Walkaround, I   d never experienced anything, anything  like that. It   s insane to try to explain it to someone. It was a lot to take in.  (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Were there any particular places off campus that you liked to visit or  frequent?  Payne As far as     Nykolaiszyn    businesses?  Payne Yeah, I actually made a personal connection with   I   m a big shopper. Pretty  much any little nook and cranny that   s laying around in Stillwater I   ve been  into, know about, know somebody that works there, and one particular store  came into business while I was living there called Downtown Marketplace.  It   s owned by this lovely couple, Rex and Debbie, and I   d just seen them in  town a lot, stopped by there. They have an assortment of things in their store  to offer, and it was almost a nice, calming place. If you   d have a long day of  work, you could go in and visit with them and look at the new things they  had there. Definitely enjoyed going into there, and then of course we had  our favorite eateries that we would go into and hang out in. There is nothing  like Red Rock Bakery in Stillwater. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Were there popular places on campus that the ag-com students would  gather or that you would visit often?  12  Payne Gosh, I would like to say we were a lot cooler, but really the fourth floor is  pretty much, the fourth floor on the north side, I should say, is all ag-com. If  you wanted to find any of us at any given time, the computer lab was kind of  where we all hung out. It was a place for us to   that we all knew each other  would be or if we needed help with something, and there were definitely,  with it being where it was, it wasn   t kind of in the center of campus. It was  hard to kind of meet up in the lawn or somewhere like that. Anywhere  around Ag Hall or around that area, we would kind of hang out and stuff. It  was an easy place to be.  Nykolaiszyn Would you attend many of the sporting events on campus?  Payne Went to the majority of the football games. I   ve been to a few of the  basketball games. We, I say    we,    I and friends, whoever was with me that  day, I really enjoyed the baseball games, and we would go. Whether it was  baseball, softball, whoever was playing that day, it was something just  to   nice to go to on a Sunday afternoon or even after school one day. Did a  lot of those sporting events.  Nykolaiszyn Were you involved in any organizations on campus?  Payne I was in ACT, which is the Ag Communicators of Tomorrow. It   s just kind  of the internal ag-com group. They   re at colleges and universities in the US.  Nykolaiszyn All right. In your career at OSU, did you have any internships or     Payne I did. It is a requirement in ag-com to have an internship to graduate. It is  part of your degree plan. Usually, typically they like you to do it the year  after you finish your junior year and before you start your senior year that  summer. That summer, I actually worked for the company that I   m now  employed with. It   s called Zoetis. I interned with them that summer for  approximately eight weeks, and then at the end of the internship you have to  do a report. Then in the fall, when you come back to school, you   re actually  enrolled in an internship course, and then part of that is just presenting to the  ag-com department about your internship and what you did.  Nykolaiszyn Did you find them, or did they find you?  Payne I found them. It was actually through the man who I did my ride-along with  at SWAS. He actually gave me several contacts with different animal health  companies, and I just got out my notebook and started calling and actually  had someone say,    Send me your resume.    I did, and I didn   t hear anything  for   that was probably in the fall. I didn   t hear anything for about two  months, and then about the week before Christmas break was out, I got an  e-mail. It said I had an interview, and it turned out to be the second day of  school in the next semester. I was like,    Oh great. Already missing school  13  first week,    and I drove to Tulsa for my interview for that and interned for  that positon. That   s how I got it. They pick someone, usually by the end of  January, and then you start around the end of May.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   re kind of getting ready to graduate, and did you have any idea,  you kind of knew the area you wanted to work in, but did you, were you  actively looking for positions? How did you     Payne I feel like I was kind of like every college student.    What am I going to do  with my life? Here I am. I   ve spent four years, sometimes plus, getting an  education,    and then what are you going to do with it? I was definitely  actively searching for jobs in the agricultural field, particularly with sales or  in the banking industry since I did have previous experience doing that, and  I just applied for what seemed like tons of jobs. It seemed like there were  about three of us out of the twenty-five or so in our little group that  graduated that didn   t have jobs when we were getting ready to graduate, and  I remember in April (it was probably about four weeks before graduation) I  applied for a job with Zoetis in Austin, Texas. It was not ideal, as that is not  my color of orange, but it was something that was relatively, you know,  driving distance.  You weren   t going to have to take a plane to go to Christmas or something  like that. I applied for that and talked with my contacts from the internship,  and I kind of was, since I wasn   t ready to graduate, couldn   t start in a couple  of weeks, it was something that wasn   t really a possibility. It turns out that  was actually a great blessing because the lady who was in the position or  who got the positon in Austin was actually in Oklahoma City, which turns  out to be tremendously closer for me. It all kind of worked out. That position  became available at the end of May, and I called my contacts again and got  in touch with someone from my internship. I had several friends that I   ve  made from the internship that actually, there   s probably about at least a  quarter of us from the internship that particular year that work for Zoetis  now.  Nykolaiszyn Wow.  Payne Yeah, and I had a friend that was working for them and said,    Hey, you  know, so-and-so that we met at the dinner we had at the end of our  internship, she works out there now. You should give her a call.    I gave her  a call, and she actually wasn   t over the territory but knew who was. The next  day, I got a phone call from that person and got an interview and kind of  worked everything out, which was great. I got to come home and enjoy  Hugo and enjoy the lake and hang out for about two months, which was two  months longer than my parents didn   t want me to go without a job.  (Laughter) It was a great break for me. I got to enjoy graduation and come  home and spend most of the summer here.  14  Nykolaiszyn Well, let   s talk about graduation. What was that like?  Payne It was great. Like I said, my brother had graduated from OSU. I would be  lying if I went without saying my mother   s parents are the huge OU fans,  and they were a little disappointed when my brother decided to go there.  Then by the time I did, they were just like,    Whatever.    My grandpa   s had  season tickets for over thirty years, big, big fans, and it was kind of funny. I  said,    I promise this is the last time you ever have to go to Stillwater.    He  wore black. He said he was in mourning. (Laughter) I was like,    Really,  you   re fitting in.    Anyway, it was a really good time. My grandparents were  there, my parents and my brother and his family. My aunt and uncle and  some other relatives get to come. It was nice to have, you know, look up and  have your own cheering section there, and I remember getting up that  morning. I believe our graduation was at two that day. Lined up with the rest  of the students, and it   s just unbelievable to look around and see the amount  of, which, CASNR, being one of the biggest colleges in the whole college,  ah, I felt like we were there for hours lining up across Boone Pickens and  getting under the stadium and going into Gallagher Iba. Finally got seated,  and I sat with a lot of the ag-com students. We got up and listened to the  speech, and it was just, it was really, it was neat, but it was almost like  something that I had been watching happen for years. It was finally my time  to do it. It was really enjoyable. It was definitely a once in a lifetime  experience.  Nykolaiszyn What   d you do afterwards?  Payne Oh gosh.  Nykolaiszyn Do you remember afterwards? (Laughter)  Payne Yes, yes, yes. I remember pretty clearly I went to dinner with my parents  afterwards, well, and the rest of my family that was there. We had cake  because, of course, what   s a party without cake? Then they helped me pack  up the rest of my house. I was leaving the next day. I did that, kind of sent  them on their way, and met up with some friends. Probably our favorite  hangout off campus was the  Copper  Penny. A lot of the ag college, that   s  kind of the designated hangout, and most of us met up there afterwards. One  other student I graduated with, her family, she   s actually from Canada, and  her family had flown in and stayed the night. Her parents came out. They  were a ball of fun. We just all had a good time, and it was more kind of a big  group hangout. We always got together and say,    We finally did it.    It was a  lot of fun, and then I headed out the next morning. That was the last time I  left Stillwater as an official student, graduate.  Nykolaiszyn You   ve mentioned Zoetis quite a bit. Kind of tell me a little bit about the  company and kind of what you   re doing now with the company.  15  Payne Zoetis is formally Pfizer Animal Health. Everyone   s pretty familiar with  Pfizer as a human company. This was just their sister animal health  company, and the start of the year 2013, they broke away. It was kind of a  situation where they were being governed by the human side where a lot of  the rules didn   t apply to the animal health side, and when they broke away,  they came up with a new name. Zoetis, it actually does have a meaningful  meaning. People say,    That   s the craziest name ever.    The root word    zo     derives from zoology, zoo, life. It   s actually from zoetic, and it means     pertaining to life.    That   s kind of where the name came from, as far as that  goes. Like I mentioned, it is the largest global animal health company in the  world. They   re located in New Jersey, their headquarters, I should say, and  their products are sold over 120 different countries in the world. We   re  everywhere in some way, shape, or form, and what I do for them is very  similar to what I did as an intern as what I do now. I work in the companion  animal division, which is particularly dogs and cats and then somewhat  horses, as those are considered companion animals.  I just travel as a territory business manager across the Oklahoma City metro  and then western Oklahoma minus kind of the panhandle area and travel to  veterinary clinics and talk about our products. Most everyone, I should say,  unless it   s someone new starting out, is familiar with the products that we  offer because they have derived from things starting sixty years ago to now.  It   s a new label, I should say. I   m just there to field questions, or there are  some products that only we offer directly that cannot be sold through other  entities. I help veterinarians, discuss protocols, and if we have any kind of  things going on throughout the year, I help host promotions. We have booths  at several of the Oklahoma, the OVMA  Oklahoma Veterinary Medical  Association , and then we   re at Stillwater every year in the fall. It   s actually  coming up for our fall conference where we get to meet all the vet students,  and then I was actually invited this year to go to the end of the year  scholarship conference at the vet school where Zoetis has student (what   s  the word?), kind of student reps. They   re actually there promoting Zoetis  within the vet school, and we offer scholarships to students that are chosen  for those positions. We get to do a lot of work with the vet school, and then  like I said, I just work with vets in Oklahoma.  Nykolaiszyn It   s great that you still have that OSU connection.  Payne Yes, yeah, yeah, I love that. There   s actually someone in that position whose  title is career liaison. They   re actually the ones that go through and  interview the vet students, and he knows I   m an OSU grad. He   s very  gracious into inviting me to anything that   s on campus, and since I   m the  young one, I kind of get thrown into doing all the fun stuff like that.  (Laughs) I do enjoy it, and it   s something I feel like I get to be interactive  with the campus.  16  Nykolaiszyn How often do you get back to Stillwater these days?  Payne I was actually there twice last week. (Laughter) That was kind of on a semi-work-  related basis, but I try to at least visit once every other month or so. It  seems like sometimes that   s, you know, I think before yesterday, the last  time I was there was June or so and then April. I try to get there every other  month if I can.  Nykolaiszyn Do you find that there are a lot of OSU alums in this part of Oklahoma? I  mean, we   re pretty far south in Choctaw County.  Payne I do. It   s surprisingly more than I would think. Definitely, growing up, I  wasn   t one of those people who even thought about something like that.  Even when I got into high school, it wasn   t something until I was at OSU or  even more that I had graduated when I ran into someone at the local diner  who was like,    Oh yeah, I graduated from OSU.    It   s really neat to know  that you have things in common with that person that you didn   t even  realize, and you can talk about football games at Boone Pickens or, like I  said, Walkaround at Homecoming. They know the experience because they  got to experience the same thing. I would say it   s surprisingly more. It is  further south, but being such a large agricultural area, I feel like there are a  lot of people in the community that have, are OSU alumni.  Nykolaiszyn These days, how do you show your OSU pride?  Payne I have this really funny story that I remember when I was in Gingerbread.  We had taken these pictures one day with these crayons. It was kind of a     something they did at Easter when we took pictures with bunnies. We had  these crayons, and we put our hands on them. I remember I asked the  photographer, he had several different colors there, and I said I wanted a  pink crayon. Well, he didn   t have pink. In my mind, I would initially think  you would give me the red crayon because that   s the next closest thing.  Well, he gives me the orange crayon, and I was just,    Ah. Just orange?    I  used to tell people it makes my head hurt to look at it. I remember finding  that picture when we were, during the move, and I thought,    You know, I  had it all figured out then.    Who would have thought years later that half my  closet would be orange? Definitely, I try, I am a member of the Alumni  Association.  I try to stay up with things that are going on here in the community, and  especially with working in Oklahoma City, there   s a lot more events that  happen there that we get to, that I get to participate in. Then of course just  trying to get back as much as possible to the games and participating in OSU  and things like that. As I mentioned before, my roommate, Macy, that is one  of my dear friends, she actually works for the extension office at OSU now  in the county she is from. Any chance I get, I try to go back and help with  17  events that she   s hosting or if she does go to Stillwater for things like that. I  try to, as much as possible, be back there, and then, of course, with my job,  being at the vet school, even if it   s a career fair or participating with students  who are now in Dr. Anderson   s class riding along with myself. Being a part  is definitely something, you know, I never wanted to be one of those  students where I just went through school and then you go back and people  are like,    Uh.    Maybe a year later your professors are like,    Uh, I don   t  really remember them.    I try to stay involved because it is such a great  university, and it gave so much to me.  Nykolaiszyn Are those ride-alongs fun now?  Payne Yeah. They   re a lot more fun then    (Laughter) I actually had two this year.  I usually have one a semester, and I had two. They were both actually ag-com  majors. That kind of made it a little bit easier that they were telling me  about their highs and lows, I like to say, of ag-com, and they   re a lot more  fun because you kind of get to dictate what goes on. Yeah, they   re  interesting, to say the least.  Nykolaiszyn It   s different being on the other side.  Payne It is. It is because I remember thinking when I went with mine that I was  like,    Okay. I need to ask lots of questions. I need to do this. I don   t want to  be unprofessional or seem like that,    and then on the other side I feel like,     Oh, I hope they don   t ask lots of questions.    (Laughter) I feel like I   m the  one where they   re, I need to appear as though I   m all business. It   s nice just  to be able, especially being as close as I am in age with the students that are  there now, just to kind of relax and give them a true point of view how  things are, and it   s not all, you get to have fun, too.  Nykolaiszyn Kind of along those lines, what advice would you give to ag-com students  these days?  Payne I guess I   m kind of, like I said, I found myself in ag-com, but I immediately  knew that I didn   t want to do traditional ag-com things. I did get to work  with two students during my ride-along that are completely different. One of  them told me about her passion, that she works for SUNUP  TV  at OSU,  and she wants to go into video. It was nice to not feel like I had to say,     Hey, sales is great.    She had something that she was going for, and I really  love meeting those students who come to OSU specifically for the ag-com  department because they know what they   re, whether it   s video or writing or  photography for a magazine. I think, while they   re at OSU, you definitely  just, you feel like you don   t fit in anywhere, but you   ll find that one class  that is just super easy. You think,    How did I not know about this before?     Just kind of advice would be to, if nothing fits, just wait because there will  be something that makes sense to you and will remind you why you   re there.  18  Nykolaiszyn Looking back on your time at OSU, how did attending the university and  earning your degree impact your life today?  Payne I would be completely lying if I said I could go to school somewhere else  and have been in the same position I am there because I think I owe  everything to going to OSU to put me where I am today. Like I said, I was  one of those students that felt like that was a really big school, wasn   t really  sure if I wanted to immerse myself in something like that, but it   s the best  decision. For anyone who   s scared about that or thinks that you can   t attend  a school that large or you can   t make the grades, you can do it because I  definitely think that going to OSU put me in an entirely different pool of  being able to meet people who are associated, whether it   s their family or  they work for so-and-so. The pool of networking is just endless at OSU. I  met people who, you know, I graduated with people who are in every aspect  of everything ag-related these days. I felt like that was something that  wouldn   t have been offered to me anywhere else, and it definitely put me in  contact with people I work with now that I get to call my colleagues. My  boss is actually an OSU alumni, and the several people I work with on my  team as well. Then, actually, my boss during my internship was an OSU  alum. It just kind of worked out that that was just, you know, I had that  rapport with them. Made things a lot easier, too, but I definitely don   t think  that I would have been able to get the same opportunities that I   ve been  blessed with to, you know, if I wouldn   t have been at OSU.  Nykolaiszyn I know you commute to Oklahoma City for work, but thinking about your  time at OSU, do you see any impact within Choctaw County in this area?  Payne As far   .  Nykolaiszyn Is the impact of OSU alums down south?  Payne Ah, that would probably be something I   d have to do a little more research  on because I hate to say that   I wish I had a list. I wish I had a list of all the  OSU alums that reside in Choctaw County because I feel like that   s  something I   d definitely be interested in, but there   s definitely, I would say,  a sense of community with that, whether it may be on game day and you  walk in somewhere and you   re wearing your shirt or something that   s going  on. As far as that, you kind of feel that sense of pride that you can   t just  have that in Stillwater. You can have it here, too, at home. I would definitely  say a little bit.  Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about Choctaw County. You grew up here. How has it  changed through the years?  Payne Gosh, well, it   s definitely, it   s actually, there are several new businesses  going in this year, which I   m super excited about because I feel like, with it  19  being a small town and traditionally the population is of an older age, there   s  a lot of don   t want change or you don   t want things that you don   t know  about coming in, which definitely kind of puts a damper on the young  people here at Hugo because I feel like sometimes it   s not somewhere that   s  desired to live. It   s a good retirement community. I hear people say that all  the time. It   s a good place to retire at. I shouldn   t say retirement community,  but it   s a great place to retire in. Cost of living is low, and it   s really pretty  around here. It   s beautiful, but I feel like there   s not   there could be so  much more for people to want to come here. Unless you   re from here, I  don   t think it   s somewhere where you would just,    Hey, let   s move there,     you know, but it   s definitely changed, as far as there are more, I would say,  family-owned businesses that have been put in place since I have been here.  There   s definitely things that have changed for, I wouldn   t really say the  worst, but is maybe pushing people more to Paris, the Texas area, to have to  find jobs or something like that, but I think a lot of it is changing and getting  better.  They just built a new high school here in Hugo, and I know that a lot of  young people that have maybe went to other rural schools that were maybe  closer to home are interested in coming to school here for that, having new  teachers and new technology at the school. I really think, kind of would be  leaving out a big part if I didn   t mention the Choctaw Nation. I feel like if it  wasn   t for them that Choctaw County, you know, what they call the  Choctaw Nation area wouldn   t be anything without it, without them and  their community. Their headquarters is down the road about fifteen miles in  Durant, in Bryan County, but they have several offices here in Choctaw  County. I would say it probably boosts the economy or would be lying if 50  percent of the population didn   t work for some entity of the Choctaw  Nation. If it wasn   t for them, Hugo wouldn   t be anything of what it is today,  and then of course the circus bringing in all the winter residents it does.  Those are definitely two things that help Hugo keep keeping on. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Whenever I drive through town, downtown is always still very busy and very  going on.  Payne Yes, yeah, yeah, and that   s something that   s really   every town, I get to  travel through a lot of towns for my job, and the very first thing I look  through is the downtown area. I love downtown. Stillwater is one of my  favorite downtown areas. I feel like a lot of businesses have moved back  downtown to Hugo, and I think that   s great. I think it   s really   a lot of the  banks in the community have really tried to put forth more effort to being in  the community and host things, whether it   s on Fridays when they have  football games or whether it   s something in the spring that they   re hosting. I  think they   ve tried to focus more on the downtown areas and have, you  know, like I said, whether it was a party after the game and block off the  downtown area and have games or something for the community to do. I  20  think that they   re definitely working, and it   s getting much improved. More  businesses are moving into old, abandoned shops that were downtown that  used to once be something else. I think that   s really great, and like I said, I  look forward to more of that.  Nykolaiszyn Well, it seems many OSU alums are very loyal to the school. What is it  about Oklahoma State that sparks such loyalty?  Payne I don   t really think   I would hate to have to put it into words. It   s just a  feeling of   a girl that rode along with me the other day kind of, when she  was talking about it, I was like,    I know exactly what you   re talking about.     She   s from Delaware, and she said she went to visit the University of  Tennessee. Then she went to visit Oklahoma State, and she said she visited  there and liked it pretty well. Came to OSU. She said she was on campus  five minutes and said,    This is where I   m going to be at,    and I was like,     That   s just kind of how it is.    Once you step on campus and it   s just, you  know, and I wouldn   t even say   my opinion, it   s the friendliest campus I   ve  ever been to, but I wouldn   t even say that. It just goes above and beyond to  make you feel at home.  I mean, I would go as far as saying Stillwater would be not half the town it  is without the college, but the community, the people that aren   t even tied to  the school are so welcoming to students, where a lot of colleges, probably a  lot of towns are like,    Oh, I wish that school wasn   t here.    I feel like that   s  just completely opposite with Stillwater. It   s home away from home. I wish  it was a lot closer to Choctaw County. (Laughs) I could just have the best of  both in one place. Like I said, I really couldn   t put it into words. It   s more of  a feeling, and then once you   re a part of that, it   s just something you want  everyone to know. The sense of going two thousand miles away and running  into someone that has an OSU shirt on, you just instantly, you know they   re  going to be a nice person or you know they   re going to want to visit because  they have some of the same experiences that you   ve had.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you make your home in Choctaw County. Do you plan on   I always  love this with the ones in their twenties. Do you plan on retiring to Choctaw  County? (Laughter)  Payne I would be lying if I said I wouldn   t totally enjoy that because I would. Like  I said, I feel like with my family   s roots being here, and my parents, like I  said, just moved into their new house, what we would call their retirement  home. It   s out by the lake. I would definitely be completely happy and fine.  Nykolaiszyn I hear it   s a good retirement community.  Payne It is. (Laughter) I would be more than content to retire and live here and  enjoy Choctaw County. Some of my struggle in when I   in Oklahoma City  21  is to, well,    I have to look where the Wal-Mart is    or    I have to look where  this is    or    I have to get a cake made.    Where do I go? That   s the one thing  you don   t ever, you know, I feel like I don   t have to worry about here is you  always,    Oh, Suzy down the road, she makes the best cakes. Well, of course  we   re having a party. Call her,    or you want a certain type of sandwich. I  feel like I   m talking about food continuously here, but you know, if it   s  anything you need done, you need your yard mowed because your mower,  you know you can call the neighbor boy down the road to mow it. It   s just a  sense of contentment, I guess, that it   s the good part of knowing everyone in  town and the pride of saying,    I grew up here. This is my home, and this is  where I want to be.    Yeah, I definitely think I   ll be retiring here. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Your brother, did he end up graduating from OSU?  Payne Yes. Yeah, he graduated in 2007, and then I graduated in 2014.  Nykolaiszyn What   s he doing these days?  Payne He is a journeyman for People   s Electric Cooperative. Kind of nothing  really to do with his degree, but it actually did help him a lot with moving  up a lot faster in the company. He   s very happy, except when it storms really  bad. Then they   re gone for days and days at a time, but yeah.  Nykolaiszyn Well, it   s great that you two could share such a close bond with Oklahoma  State.  Payne Yes. Yeah, yeah. I definitely think it was something that I   m super glad we  can look back on and say,    We didn   t necessarily do it together, but we both  did that,    and now I hope my niece does that, too. We   ll see. (Laughs)  Nykolaiszyn Well, what have we missed? Is there anything else you   d like to mention,  anybody we forgot?  Payne One day, it was probably the third, fourth week, first month of school, and I  was walking around campus with my camera for a photo project we were  doing in ag-com photo. I was with another student, and we were pretty far  up on the library lawn. It was August, September, hot day, and we were  getting ready to walk back to Ag Hall. We were just like,    Oh gosh, this is  so far.    It   s two thirty, hottest part of the day, and we were just kind of like,     Let   s skip through some buildings.    Well, about that time, this lady comes  up in this orange taxi. We were kind of like,    What   s going on?    She   s like,     Hey, do you want a ride?    and we were a little scared that we might get in  trouble. You know, we were kind of like,    Uh, where did this lady come  from?    and this sweet lady, Ann Hargis, gives us a ride on who I now know  is Clementine, her taxi. That was definitely one of the neatest things. We got  to take pictures. She was definitely nice enough to include us in all that, and  22  that was kind of our fifteen seconds of fame, I should say, because it didn   t  last fifteen minutes of getting to meet the first lady of OSU. That was  definitely an experience and one of my first experiences at OSU. She was  very, the sweetest lady, and then she ever offered,    If you see me around,  flag me down.    She says she gives rides to all the students. She   s definitely  a great lady at a great campus.  Nykolaiszyn Well, thank you for sharing that memory.  -------  -------   
