 Finchum Today is March 30, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University, and today I   m on campus in Stillwater to interview Dr. Charles Abramson. This is part of our Phi Beta Kappa series, so thank you for talking with me today.  Abramson Thank you for taking the time.  Finchum Let   s learn a little bit about you starting with when and where you were born.  Abramson I was born June 28, 1956 in Brooklyn, New York. Then when I was about three years old we moved to Manhattan. We have had that apartment for over fifty years. Now, sad to say, we lost it.  Finchum Really?  Abramson Yeah, because my brother lived in it but it   s not his full-time residence anymore. It   s rent control and that   s one of the issues. You   ve got to be there full-time. So September 8  2016  is when he has to be out. I   ll go back and reminisce a little bit. I   ll take my wife and she   s never been to New York.  Finchum Walk through it and tell stories?  Abramson Right, tell stories. (Laughs)  Finchum What did your parents do for a living?  Abramson I never really knew them. I   ve never known my mother and father living together. He had a variety of jobs. It was not always the best. My mother, who I stayed with until I was about ten years old when I was shipped off to military school and various boarding schools, she worked as an insurance broker. Many of her clients, probably most of them, were in Harlem. When I 5  was a child, we used to go up to Harlem and do collecting. She would front the money, and then they would pay her in installments. I had my first hamburger, for example, in Thumpford   s Restaurant in Harlem. Used to go to the Apollo Theatre. It was very, very different. It was actually a lot of fun.  Finchum Well, did you have brothers and sisters?  Abramson I had one brother. As it turns out, we had to do a genetic test. We are not related. We found that out. My life is probably different than most. Everybody has stories, but this is different. Then I have a sister, and we are the same age for one month out of the year. I was born June 28, she was born May 22. From May 22nd to June 28th we are the same age. Then, I jump up a year.  Finchum Did you grow up with her?  Abramson I grew up in boarding schools and military schools.  Finchum Well, take me through your early education, first through twelfth.  Abramson Well, it wasn   t very   I went to two of them. At that time   what they would do to us would be considered child abuse now. I did get a good education. The last one I went to was called New York Military Academy. That   s interesting because Donald Trump went there, John Gotti went there, John Gotti   s son went there and a bunch of others. You   d never understand why some people would get beaten up and others wouldn   t, they   d do whatever they want. Then I realized, years later, it was the money they contributed. It became obvious that I couldn   t stay there. I was getting into fights all the time. It was a big mess.  Eighth grade, I lived with my father for a year. That was a mess also. Then, ninth grade, I applied for   New York City, at the time, had several special schools. Bronx  High School of  Science, a lot people are familiar with, Stuyvesant High School, the third was Brooklyn Tech. I applied for Brooklyn Tech. Much to my surprise, I got in. It was just like military school. You had to walk on a certain side of the hallway. So instead of going to school, I didn   t go. I was in the audience of the TV game shows. When they tell you that in the sixties the New York City Public System started to go down, it was true. Nobody cared. I could do whatever I wanted, but eventually they caught me. Then, they sent me to Brandeis High School Annex. It was across from Lincoln Center. I was on Seventy-eighth. Lincoln Center was like Sixty-six, Sixty-seventh. You had seventeen-year-old, eighteen-year-old ninth graders in there. I got into fights almost every day. Again I quit. It was easy.  6  They sent me down to Georgia, I think my father, to live with a farm family. I would do chores and then they would take care of me. I would go to school. That probably lasted   I think I was sent back in a week. I was really almost uncontrollable, you know, by that point. At the time my father had a friend called Mandel. I don   t remember the first name, but he ran Mandel Security. I got a job as a security guard at the World Trade Center when they were building it up. I still have my eight millimeter films of the World Trade Center. I liked that job. It was easy. I could do whatever I wanted, but I had to go to school. Then, I took a test for schools, and I guess I did really bad. More arguments, but one school would take me. That was Croydon Hall Academy in Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey, which is out of business now. Same with the first military school. The second one went out of business, but then somebody else bought it. I found that out recently. Really interesting. I always wanted to buy that place and tear it into the ground. Sort of like, what is the famous literary character? Count of Monte Cristo, when he bought that island that he was imprisoned on and tore it down.  So I   m in that school. They asked me what grade I am. I never said I didn   t go to ninth grade. They were about to go bankrupt, they didn   t care. I said tenth. It   s been my experience that usually one hand doesn   t know what the other hand is doing. I counted on that. Lo and behold they didn   t. I did pretty well. I had to get all A   s, because I needed the benefit of the doubt from people, that even though this guy has problems, he   s okay. He can work through it and he can do some good things, but I was always being sent back because my father couldn   t afford it. It was always that way for a long time. You go to a dentist, you can   t pay the bill, they send you home. I didn   t care for it too much. I didn   t like it.  Time for eleventh grade, I went back to public school. The same stuff, this was Brandeis High School proper, I think on Eighty- fourth  Street. Same thing. Now, I   m fighting against other groups of people. I quit earlier. I remember one teacher. Her name was Mrs. Ellen Kane. If she was over five foot I would be surprised. She used to fight these giant students, and she got their attention. She got my attention. The little bit I did stay in school was because of her. I think it was an English class. I remember she had us do some sort of a project on women, and I did Helen Reddy,    I am woman, hear me roar,    or something like that. I got an A on that and I remember she was impressed. I tried to find her years later, but I think she died. I couldn   t get the number. So I quit again.  Where did I go back? I went back to the World Trade Center, being a security guard. I saved my money. Now came time for twelfth grade. I went back to Croydon Hall. They knew me in tenth grade. I did pretty well. Now came time to go to college. They would help you try and get to college. I remember the owner, his name was William Carr. He said,    Abramson you don   t have any grades for ninth and eleventh grade.    I said,    You know the 7  New York City school system, they probably just lost it.    I don   t know what happened, but I applied to New York University, Seaton Hall, and Boston University. I got into all three, much to my shock. I picked Boston University because it was the farthest away. Just get out of New York. If I stayed there, I would have problems.  Finchum You were making these decisions on your own?  Abramson Right.  Finchum On your own without     Abramson I have always been on my own. For a long time. It   s part of the reason why I am what I am, you know, distrustful. Right? Some of these characteristics that people don   t like, but other people do like them, because I can get things done. Now, I   m in Boston University, and imagine you   re a professor and I walk into your office the first day of class saying,    I want to work with you. I want to be a behaviorist,    to study how to manipulate and control behavior, which is what I do for a living. A lot of people get into psychology because they want to help people. That was not my intention. I want to understand how to control and manipulate. Again, that   s what I do for a living.  He took me in, and I worked every day for four years. I never took a day off. I got Phi Beta Kappa. Sigma Xi published my first paper, I think I was a junior. I learned that hard work pays off. I got scholarships and to this day, anybody that wants to work with me, I never look at reference letters, I never look at grades. I don   t care. You get that chance, but if you fail, some students do, you can never say you were never given a chance. That is what I think is my best contribution. Then when I got Phi Beta Kappa, nobody went to the ceremonies and stuff. It was Boston and they were in New York. My mother was very proud about that because she always knew about Phi Beta Kappa, and like so did I. At the time, if you look at old movies, like the Thin Man, she used to like   I think it was William Powell, Myrna Lloyd and the Thin Man. She loved those movies. They were like a husband and wife detective team. She was rich and she married a detective. They tried to solve crimes together. Phi Beta Kappa is mentioned in part of it.  She was disappointed that I became a psychologist, because she thought the best thing you could be was a theoretical physicist. (Laughs) But hey, you can   t have everything. When I got the Phi Beta Kappa she was very proud. She asked to be buried with the Phi Beta Kappa key, which is what I did. As a kid, she   d always take me to   she never finished high school. I don   t think my father ever did. She would always take me to plays, to museums and all sorts of things, to try and encourage that interest. She would have me read biographies and autobiographies of people that have achieved things after 8  having difficult times. Helen Keller, you know, when I was a kid that was popular. Helen Keller was popular and there were several others. To this day, I   m an avid reader. I appreciate what she did for me.  Finchum At what point did you start the   I mean was it because of school? I mean down that path, you could have gone different directions too, but     Abramson I had always heard about Phi Beta Kappa and Boston University had a chapter. Again, you had to have decent grades, you know, good grades. My language was Sanskrit in college, which was rare, so I think that made a difference. It   s not all about grades. You have to have a certain grade point average and so on, but it   s also about breadth of knowledge. I took a lot of philosophy classes and other kinds of things.  Finchum You knew that going in. That was your goal, to get Phi Beta Kappa?  Abramson No, not really a goal. It was to get educated. If I achieved a certain level, then that level would be acknowledged by Phi Beta Kappa. In the end, that   s what happened. If I was an engineering major, I would not be eligible for Phi Beta Kappa. It worked out fine as she was, again, very proud of that.  Finchum Those four years at Boston, does anything else standout? If you worked every day     Abramson Yeah, even today, even though I   m a regents professor and have an endowed chair, I   ll never be outworked by anybody. I get here at five in the morning, five fifteen on weekends I   m still here. I don   t need to do that. I think part of it is that early life experience. It   s hard to stop, you know. I think that   s part of it. Then I went on to graduate school at Boston University. That was an odd thing. I didn   t apply to anyplace else. So I take my first vacation, but before that I had to take the GRE. I tell students you really got to study for these tests. You can   t just use the Socratic method of thinking that within you, you have all the answers you just have to get someone to help draw it out. I   m looking at the test. I look at the question, I think whatever the answer, multiple choice, the number pops in my head and I put it down. I didn   t do well. I got the lowest scores in the history of Boston University for accepting a graduate student. I think it was 220 or 210. They give you two hundred points, but I had Phi Beta Kappa. I had all the experience. I was out publishing some of the faculty members. So this test didn   t really mean much, at least when it comes to me.  Then I get back from my first vacation ever, a cross-country trip in an old Volkswagen camper from Boston to Colorado. I get back and the department head says,    You pissed so many people off about that because you didn   t take it seriously.    But because I was always around the department, everybody knew me. I had the old Kung Fu hat that was popular 9  in the seventies. I trained pigeons. They   d come flying whenever they saw me. Everybody in that area knew me. One of the people that I met at that time was a fellow named Geoffrey Bannister, who was a geography professor. Then years later when I applied to graduate school, he had become the dean. He overruled people and let me in. Again, I was always very fortunate that way.  Finchum Relationships, connections, and such.  Abramson I think I do the same thing. You see people that may have hard times, but they show something. Why not give them a break? That   s what I try to do, but they have to take advantage of it. But then I realize   and I tell people,    Unless you go for a specific reason, you shouldn   t go to the same undergraduate place as a graduate student.    I think in my cases, for some students, I asked them to apply to work with me. For example, Ana Chicas-Mosier. She was an undergraduate psychology major and zoology major, now she works with me. Now she has the graduate research fellowship from NSF. I can do these things, but I would only ask certain students for that, the ones that work hard and so on. Not every student.  So it quickly became apparent that I should go someplace else, so I wrote this fellow named M.E. Bitterman. He was, at the time, probably America   s most famous comparative psychologist. He died a few years ago at the age of ninety. I wrote him a letter. We didn   t really have email at that time. It was just a letter, with a stamp on it, saying    God   s gift to psychology,    (laughs) and stuff. Then I get a letter back saying,    Okay. Why don   t you come out to Hawaii?    I did that. Then he turned out to be a creep, a really bitter man. So I came back to BU, but I kept on going. I still didn   t want to do it. I wanted to go back to someplace else. I wrote him again. He said,    Sure, come out now.    Essentially, I was enrolled in two graduate schools simultaneously, Boston University and the University of Hawaii. Then eventually Boston University let him direct my dissertation.  Finchum Your diploma is from Boston?  Abramson Boston University, but all the work was done at the University of Hawaii. Now it   s time to defend a thesis. It just so happened that one of the meetings that Bitterman goes to is called Psychonomics Society. It happened to be in Boston that year so he was able to come down to the defense and stuff. There was a fellow that had an ad looking for someone that could do neurobiology of crustacean learning. I applied for it and lo and behold I got the job. I didn   t realize that it was the advertising science. You just happened to be there and it was advertised at that conference. Again, just a bunch of lucky things. What do I do? I see the ad and the first thing I do is rip it down off the thing. (Laughs) I mean, I want that job. It   s back in New 10  York of all places. I get the job. I live in the apartment that I lived in as a kid.  Then, my mother died just a few months after that. I think I got the job in January, and she died in March. If I wasn   t there, we would have lost the apartment. Under the rent control, the succession rights, you have to be there. It has to be your primary residence. When she died, my brother moved in. Then when I took this job in    93   I got tenure there in the biochemistry department and then I moved from New York to OSU. I wanted the full-service university. As you know it   s always better to look for a job when you don   t need one. A lot of it was me interviewing OSU rather than the other way around. I could still be in New York. I didn   t have to come here.  I wanted to meet other people in different departments, like entomology and so on. One of the professors I met is Ray Eikenbary. He had a student name Italo Aquino. Italo Aquino was from Brazil. And at that time, and you probably do now but less so, you can be a professor with just a master   s degree in Brazil. Now it   s changed, you   ve got to get a PhD. So he came back to OSU to get his PhD. Then, he told me that he works with Africanized honey bees and has a laboratory. I jumped right on that thing. We got a grant and I started doing Africanized honey bee research, and that   s how I met my wife.  Finchum Okay.  Abramson Just a different   my path was not the traditional path.  Finchum No, not at all.  Abramson Then, when I won a national teaching award, they asked me what I think is a good teacher. I said I don   t really   I say this in all sincerity, I don   t believe in good teachers. It   s only good students. I have had lousy teachers. I learned from them as well as from the good ones. It   s up to the student to learn. If you get a bad teacher, well pick up another book, or now with all the YouTube stuff, look for other explanations. It   s your life. It   s not the professor   s life. I never let anybody stand in my way when it comes to that. It   s my life. I make the decisions. Some people didn   t like what I wrote.  I remember as a kid thinking,    What job can I get that I can be left alone to do what I want?    And that   s a job like this. I had no love of being a professor, I still don   t. I think some people just should not be professors, you know, but that   s not my call. For me, it   s like I won the lottery. I can do pretty much whatever I want, within reason. For me, this job is the closest thing to being self-employed without the risk. And I value people who are self-employed. That   s not easy to do, especially in today   s society. If I don   t do anything stupid, I   ve got a lifetime income, like I won the lottery. I get to 11  travel the world. I only work, technically, nine months out of the year. I can get grant money. People like what I do. I publish a lot of books, a lot of articles. I just came back from Spain with a group of students looking at the Islamic contributions to science. So I don   t have really a worry in the world.  Finchum It   s more than a forty-hour week though.  Abramson Right, but for me it   s a vocation, though sometimes it does   some of the things that we have to do, like now you have to an accountant, you   ve got to worry about every single word that comes out of your mouth. That stuff I don   t like. I   m glad it hasn   t happened here yet, but I think it   s only a matter of time.  Finchum At what point did you decide that the professor was the route you were going to go?  Abramson Well, I saw what they did. Again, I wanted a job where I could be left alone and do whatever I want. That was being a professor.  Finchum With a background in psychology, did you do private practice at some point?  Abramson When I was a student, it   s all changed now. Most of the clinical programs, and let   s say experimental, they took most of the same courses. Many of the kids that I went to school with in the experimental program became behavior therapists. There was only me and John Neill, and maybe one other that became academic psychologists. I did some clinical work too. That was all part of the training. Now, it   s totally separate programs. The courses, the tracks are for the most part separate.  Dr. Henry  Marcucella was a licensed behavior therapist so he was able to train some of the students in an experimental program who wanted to be therapists rather than an academic psychologist.  Finchum I   m curious about what prompted you to take a vacation?  Abramson I met my goal. Then, there was a woman that I met. She was a country western singer in Colorado and so I went out there to drive her back to Nashville. That was part of the motivation to go. Also, I wanted to see the United States. It was good.  Finchum Prior to going to Boston U, you had just been to New York and Georgia?  Abramson Yep. New York, Georgia, and New Jersey, Upstate New York, but that was as far as I   d been.  12  Finchum Well, when you went to those, did you travel by car or did they put you on a plane or train?  Abramson That was the thing I never really cared for. I think I was about ten. I did not know I was going to go to military school. I remember one summer my mother was crying. I knew something was up. He comes over and my bags are packed. He takes me to the airport, he gives me a piece of paper. He says,    I   m going to put you on a plane. When you get to Florida call this number.    That   s what I did. Then they, I   ll never forget it. It was one of those station wagons with the fake wood paneling, at the time. It said FAA, Florida Air Academy. He said,    Abramson?       Yes.    Takes my bag and I get in the car and then I get processed. After I get processed, I was on a parade field and I just lay down, looking up in the sky and saying,    Boy I   m in trouble now.    That   s how it began.  Finchum She decided to send you or your father decided?  Abramson No, it was him.  Finchum Him     Abramson I guess. You know, I didn   t know. Every time they were together, it was nothing but arguments. Not so much him arguing with her, as opposed to she arguing with him over just silly things. But again, I didn   t know the history.  Finchum Up to age ten, it was pretty normal?  Abramson Um, she used to have money at one time. I guess with the insurance. I don   t know how she got it. One year, it was all lost. I remember the Christmases she would have a lot of presents under the tree. Then, after a certain Christmas, that was it. It was over, you know, something happened. We were never a close family. I couldn   t even tell you her birthday. I remember once I gave her a Mother   s Day gift. It was one of these statues that said    World   s Greatest Mother,    and then she threw it at me and said,    I never want to see this junk again.    I never gave her another present.  Finchum Did your brother and sister go down a similar path?  Abramson My sister didn   t finish high school. Then, she stayed behind. She   s still got problems to this very day. Sometimes, you know, you wonder how you can have people in the same environmental conditions and one does this while another does that.  Finchum She didn   t get sent off to military boarding school?  13  Abramson No, in many ways she may have had it worse off. She had to stay behind, but I don   t know that.  Finchum Is she younger or older?  Abramson We   re the same age for one month out of the year.  Finchum Yes, that   s what you said.  Abramson I   m fifty-nine now, she is fifty-eight. May 22nd she   ll be fifty-nine and June 28th I   ll be sixty. These early life experiences, you never forget them. They stay with you all the time. Right? That   s why I was glad to get the Phi Beta Kappa, when I earned that. I thought I could pay her back, in some respects. She died a long time ago, and I think she would   ve been really proud of the stuff that I have done. She was Italian. She was born in Rome, and she came here and married my father. He was Jewish. So at that time, it was considered a mixed marriage. We never knew, except for Aunt Emily and her husband Uncle Rainey, we never knew the Italian side of the family.  I do remember another sister, Aunt Alice. If I am going off topic, you let me know. He was a creep. He had one eye and treated her really badly. He is in the hospital now, and we   re going over to visit. He is about to sign some document with a lawyer there to sell the house right under his wife. And literally he starts shaking, and the pen drops out of his hand and he dies. There wasn   t a dry eye in the place. (Laughs) Except for the lawyer. He earned every bit of it. They still have that house.  Finchum That must have been interesting growing up in New York in that time period.  Abramson Oh yeah, it was. Even with all that it was better than what the kids do now. We played stickball, roller hockey, all sorts of games out in the street. Now, people just do the cell phone stuff and the computer games.  Finchum You couldn   t wait to get out?  Abramson Right  Our building had a doorman, on that side of the street. The doorman would be the one to try to take a look at the kids and make sure they don   t get hurt and that kind of thing. Now, you have to worry about doormen molesting the kids. The times have changed. Our times have changed. We had the roller hockey, the punch ball, stick ball, stoop ball, I enjoyed it. Our neighborhood was always very diverse, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, African Americans, Italians, and all over.  Finchum Ever visit the public library?  14  Abramson Yep, I shouldn   t admit this, but I still have a book from that public library. (Laughter) Yep, I always loved the public library. You go to Boston, these classic libraries that you just don   t see anymore, with the lions out front and so on. I always enjoy the library.  Finchum That wasn   t the reason you were getting into fights, though, because you liked books?  Abramson No, I was getting into fights for other reasons. Marcucella retired a few years ago so I went up there for his retirement party and gave a speech. He remembers the time   I always come back to Marcucella. We didn   t really socialize. I don   t socialize with my students even today. If they do something good, I take them out to dinner or whatever. I   m always Dr. Abramson or Dr. A, I   m not Charles to them. So he takes me out to some place called Jacob Wirth  Restaurant  where they used to brew their own beer, near the North End. Someone, I don   t know, either said something to him, anyway, I didn   t like it. I almost killed that guy. That   s what it was. He remembered that. They had to pull me off this person or I would   ve killed him. I really thank him for doing a lot for me. Even though we didn   t socialize, he gave me the opportunity, all right? Again, I try to do that today. Everybody can work with me, no questions asked but if you fail, don   t complain,    Nobody ever gave me a chance.    You blew your chance   Finchum You get a second chance?  Abramson No   Finchum Well, when you were looking for another positon, was there other competition besides OSU?  Abramson Well, Brooklyn College was one, but I really wanted to get out of New York.  Finchum You came to OSU in 19     Abramson I think it was    93.  Finchum Ninety-three     Abramson I got hired in    92, but I came in    93. I wanted to finish some of my work that I was doing in New York.  Finchum Was Stillwater quite different from the big city?  Abramson Yeah, big difference. Yeah, then I realized that, at least in New York, maybe it   s different now. If you argue with somebody, you shake hands. Here, they 15  can hold a grudge for a decade. That   s what I notice. I think it   s, in some cases, unfortunate. Also, they don   t seem to like blunt speaking, like we do in New York, you know. Maybe some people just tap dance around something. If you want me to do something, you ask me. Even today, if somebody asks me to do something on an email list, I don   t respond to it. Want me to do something for you, pick up a phone or send me an email. Better you pick up a phone. I don   t respond to group emails. Even when I was doing the, getting information for Phi Beta Kappa, I sent personal emails. It   s not that hard to do.  Finchum Well, since we are there, how did you get involved with putting forth the application here?  Abramson I knew that OSU was trying to get a Phi Beta Kappa chapter. I knew from Perry Gethner. I didn   t know, I never met him personally. I just knew the name. That   s an amazing story. When I teach, I always try to get there early so I can do my demonstrations. I need time to set up. Here is the class, it   s a big classroom and maybe only five or six people in there. This guy is always late. I try being nice, you know, knock on the door, at different times. Finally I had enough. I think it was like two weeks into the semester of classes. I go in there and I started complaining. Who was it? Perry Gethner  Would you believe it? (Laughs) I couldn   t believe it. This guy? The guy that I asked to be on the committee to help get Phi Beta Kappa to OSU. To his credit, we became friends, and to his credit it didn   t make a difference to him.  Finchum He didn   t hold a grudge?  Abramson Right  He didn   t hold a grudge, but he   s from the East Coast too. He   s east side, he wasn   t born in this part of the country. Again, I always appreciated that. Maybe in your life   I   ve had this happen several times, people you may have disagreements with early on, become good friends later. That   s what happened with Perry and the others. That was kind of, I couldn   t believe it. I   m arguing with the guy that I   m asking to be on the committee. (Laughs) I was right. He shouldn   t be going overtime when you have another professor with a class coming in. It   s a matter of respect. Again, at least he was able to go past it.  Finchum Did everyone you asked say yes?  Abramson Say again.  Finchum Did everyone you asked to be involved say yes?  Abramson I don   t know. He asked me and I certainly said yes. I wanted to do this and I thought it was very important. I know in this part of the country Phi Beta 16  Kappa is not generally as well-known as the East or West Coast. It is something to be really proud of, especially for the parents. I remember that first ceremony. The first induction ceremony I gave the speech, as the historian, about the history, and you see the look in the parents    eyes and stuff. It   s worth all the effort.  Finchum Well, let   s talk a little bit more about your role in the application process.  Abramson The application, I really didn   t do that much. I had to find out essentially all the people at OSU, all the faculty that were Phi Beta Kappa. I did. It took a while but we did get the number. The national office needs a certain number of Phi Beta Kappa faculty. We had enough. It was fun to see husband/wife teams that were Phi Beta Kappa. There were several on campus. In the psychology department, we have maybe, not the most, but up there. I think physics may have had the most. We have at least five here. I think physics, at the time had just as many, if not more. Maybe so, the math department had quite a few too.  Finchum They had already been through one or two applications before you got here, from what I understand.  Abramson Right. It   s every four years or every three years you can do it if you were denied. I   ve got to go through again to find out how many Phi Beta Kappa faculty we have and keep it up. It   s part of my role as historian, besides the project we are working on together, also is to maintain the website and do other kinds of things that shows the history of what we   ve done.  Finchum Well, as the historian, you know what we   ve already covered. Is there something we   ve not hit on along the way?  Abramson Well, I think we got the   once we get President Hargis, we would   ve had a lot of the major players. Certainly, Dr. Gethner and Dr. Crauder both gave a lot of the information. President Hargis certainly had a big role to play, you know. He helped us get that. I remember, my wife was always asking me,    How come you can   t get tickets for the football game?    I think I told you this story.    Can   t you go to the president   s box?    You know, the guy   s busy  He doesn   t know who I am. So they asked, once we got the chapter, he asked,    What can we do for you?    I said,    Football tickets.    Lo and behold he came through. We were in his box, and then my wife was very happy. It worked out for two years in a row. Yes, so she was very happy.  Finchum For the entire season?  Abramson No, just for one game.  Finchum Cool. 17  Abramson It was a real nice place to see the football game, up in that box. Of course, you get your food and stuff. It   s nice. You meet other people.  Finchum Well, were you in Florida when the vote was taken?  Abramson No.  Finchum You weren   t among that group?  Abramson That was only for the bigger people. Yeah, but that   s fine. I don   t need to, I fly around too much as it is.  Finchum Well, if you buried the key with your mother, did you get a replacement?  Abramson Yep. I got a replacement.  Finchum That was important to you, I know.  Abramson Then, I actually did something else. I don   t know if it   s legal or not, but I had a medallion made. Yeah, I can show that to you if you like.  Finchum What would make it illegal?  Abramson I think the national office really guards that symbol.  Finchum Oh, okay.  Abramson You can   t put it on t-shirts, things like that.  Finchum Well, then we won   t do it on tape.  Abramson Okay, thanks.  Finchum It may show up online.  Abramson It   s really nice. I did a good job with that, I think.  Finchum Just made one for yourself?  Abramson Right, just made one for myself. I   m thinking about getting one for Perry when he steps down. This is his last term as president, he   s term limited. There are term limits for what I do also. You get to the second term, three-year term, that   s it.  Finchum Those rules based on this chapter or the national chapter? 18  Abramson National. National.  Finchum Then be off a term and come back?  Abramson I might. I don   t know. Unfortunately, I do so much international travel that as soon as the semester   s over, I   m gone. The first time, I wasn   t. I left later so I was able to give the history speech. For the last two years, I couldn   t. Someone else had to do that. I don   t know. This year I won   t be able to do that either, because I   ll be leaving. I sort of miss that. The first year, it   s always nerve-racking, because you don   t want to fumble and stuff like that. It   s nice to see the parents    faces and the kids, all proud.  Finchum What else do you recall about that ceremony?  Abramson A lot of work went into it. We had it in the ballroom the first time.  Finchum In the Student Union?  Abramson That   s right. In the Student Union. We had practice. It was real tense, at least for me, tense kind of thing. You don   t want to blow that with all the parents being there. When we had the foundation ceremony I had to bring up Dean Stinger to the stage and I almost knocked him over. That was like    Crap     You know, that happens. I was able to get him before he fell. I think I may have knocked off his hat or something like that.  Finchum You were in regalia?  Abramson Yeah, ugly. They rented them. I think it   s better if you have your school colors. So I   m thinking about getting one for Boston University. Those things are really expensive, but they look nicer than the rental. Those look like a bunch of rags. And that mortar board hat is not convenient. It slides off a lot. You know, I think I can spring for the Boston University, and I like that. What else can I tell you?  Finchum Well, you   re not going to demonstrate the secret handshake?  Abramson It   s supposed to be secret. At the ceremony, they never gave the students the secret handshake. To this day, I don   t know whether it   s the same secret handshake across chapters, or is it just the one unique for Boston University.  Finchum It   s not per person, it   s per chapter? Maybe?  Abramson Maybe. Nobody ever says anything so you never know. Also, I don   t know whether they still do that tradition. I guess I can find out from Boston University if they still do that. 19  Finchum Well, do you put that on your vita?  Abramson That I   m a member of Phi Beta Kappa? Yeah. Also Sigma Xi too, which is sort of like the science version, at least at one time, like Phi Beta Kappa. I was able to get two of those as an undergraduate. I appreciate that. Phi Beta Kappa is the more prestigious.  Finchum Well moving forward, do you plan to retire from OSU?  Abramson I thought I was never going to retire. I could do it in four years. I can   t be the only faculty member that sees this. It   s just changed too much. It   s not what it was when I first began. Every generation says that. Now you have to have plagiarism software. You can   t really talk about an issue without somebody getting upset, you know. I   ve had a number of these things. It   s just really distasteful. The University is here to get new ideas, to expand yourself. Now you   ve got safe zones, you   ve got this, you   ve got that. It   s just, in my view, it   s ridiculous. Somebody should say something. You are here to learn. If you don   t    like it, well there are plenty of other choices you have. If it   s the faculty that don   t like it, well feel free to retire. No one is keeping you here.  We are here to have these students to challenge their views. I don   t see that happening as much anymore. Thank god it   s still that way here, for the most part, but other places it   s terrible. Like Emery University, just the other day, somebody was chalking something about Donald Trump, like a Donald Trump club, like we do here, all these kinds of clubs. Some people got so upset that now they have to go into therapy. Come on, you know, this is Emery University. It   s supposed to be like the Harvard of the South.  Or some of the ridiculous majors that people can engage in. You are never going to get employed. You get to go into debt. The average college student is twenty-seven thousand dollars in debt. That is unforgiven. I understand that college is not just a job-training place. These other things you can take on your own. Take a course in this or in that. So this is sort of what upsets me the most. Also, now we   ve got to be like accountants. That   s the other thing. It   s not easy to engage in what I would consider professorial activities.  Finchum Well, were there other universities that tried to woo you away from OSU?  Abramson Yeah, I turned down a couple of jobs. Yeah, I do like it here. I won   t retire now. I accepted another graduate student. I will probably keep on working.  Finchum Until you   re ninety?  20  Abramson Right, until yeah. I was going to say until I die in the classroom with a piece of chalk in my hand, but we can   t use chalk anymore. That   s another thing. You got to use these markers that after five or six uses you   ve got to throw them away and get new ones. All for some silly reason.  Finchum Are you still doing bee research?  Abramson Oh yeah. We got part of that four million dollar grant. The molecular analysis of decision making. Our part is on honey bees. We   re going to do it in Turkey. They are home of 20 percent of the world   s subspecies of honey bees. We have a place where we have two of these subspecies all under the same environmental conditions. Genetically we keep them apart so there   s no mixture, but they all have the same environmental conditions. Now, of course, we   re worried about what   s going on in Turkey. We have to be concerned with that.  Finchum When you first came to OSU, you had bees?  Abramson Oh yeah, it was one of the first things I did.  Finchum Where did you keep those?  Abramson You may remember the Dairy Barn building.  Finchum Yeah.  Abramson Now, it   s the Bellmon Research Center. I had them on the roof. Many times, they would fly into this office they give me. I did experiments there. From time to time, the OSU police would come over because somebody reported some guy in a white suit on the roof. That was me. Then eventually they stopped coming over because they knew it was me.  Finchum This may be a dumb question, but how did they learn to fly in to you?  Abramson You train them. It   s amazing what they can do given the size of their brain. They are really phenomenal organisms. I   ve been working with bees   well when I left Boston University I went over to Hawaii. Bitterman was working with bees. That   s when I started getting an interest in honey bees. We also work with fish and pigeons. I do the same thing, everything from ants to elephants. Now, I   ll be working with the aquarium. I   m doing some teaching exercise for the Oklahoma Aquarium. They   ll give me a small research space. That will work out fine. Then I   ll try to do it at the zoo. It   s hard to work at the zoo because everybody thinks they are king and queen of something. They don   t want to share.  21  I learned the best way is try to work together. Some people say   I   ll never get an administrative job here. One person asked me,    You don   t like authority, do you?    I said,    It depends on the authority.    It   s like if you   re working on a team, it depends on your team members. If you   re surrounded by people who are unmotivated, it   s better to work by yourself.  Finchum True. Well is there really an issue with bees in Oklahoma?  Abramson Many, many years ago I was on TV, and I said the Africanized honey bees will be coming to Oklahoma. As I knew from Brazil   I did an experiment where I put a colony of honey bees in a refrigerator. You know, it was cold. I lowered the temperature so they would forage outside, but they would come back in. They lived there for thirty days, the length of the experiment. These animals aren   t stupid. If it   s cold, they   re going to find warm places.  I   m not a big believer in colony collapse disorder. Some people thought it was cell phones, so we did a cell phone study. Cell phones have no effect on this, on honey bees. I had a reporter, I can   t remember the station, come out so I gave her a cell phone   she had a cell phone, and I put her in front of my honey bees. She was surrounded by bees, but nothing with the cell phone.  I think it   s inappropriate use of pesticides. Also a lot of inbreeding reduces the immune system. We don   t get honey bees from other countries, for example, to replenish the population. In Turkey there was a big scandal where someone tried to smuggle out and bring to the Unites States honey bee semen, drone semen with the idea of trying to repopulate or give genetic diversity to the bees here. They weren   t able to get away with it. There are people working on the problem but again, I don   t think it   s global warming. The point is, nobody knows. It   s probably more likely a combination of factors. Especially when it comes to the use of pesticides.  Finchum Have you been stung?  Abramson I   m highly allergic to honey bees now. I   ve been stung and I have to be very careful. One sting and I   d end up in the hospital. You just be careful, you know. It   s a good lesson in life. It   s one thing about working with the animals, the lesson I learned with the bees, you leave me alone, I leave you alone. We can all work together. Don   t bug me, I won   t bug you. That is what I learned from these honey bees.  Finchum In high school, when you were there, you never imagined being here?  Abramson No. That   s why no one from my background will ever come up here. I would not want anybody from my childhood to come up here. And again, my background is very different than most. I remember when I got tenure, 22  the dean at the time, different one now, said,    People like you don   t normally get jobs like these.    That   s true. They don   t.  Finchum You had tenure before you came here.  Abramson Right.  Finchum You had to go through the process again?  Abramson I had to give it up. At the time, they give you a big start-up pack. It wasn   t that big, but it was bigger than anybody had here at that time. When I got here, some people didn   t like me. They tried to fire me. So then the dean stepped in, and I always appreciate this, Smith Holt, he got rid of people in that committee. For me, that   s an administrator. You don   t let the process run out, because then I would have to do the appeal process. An appeal process is much like overtime in any kind of sporting event, you never know. You may be the better team. A bounce here, a bounce there, looking left versus looking right can make all the whole difference in the world. This guy did what he was supposed to do, like I would have done, stepped in and said    Hey, you   re going to go off this committee.    Then I found out later something else, that somebody came and said to the people here,    Make sure you don   t have any problem with Abramson   s tenure.    I appreciated that too. An administrator is supposed to mean something, not just be a pencil pusher, paper pusher. I always appreciated Smith Holt. A lot of people, I guess, didn   t like Smith Holt but I appreciated him. He was a standup guy.  Finchum Well, he would have been in that position when you started helping with the Phi Beta Kappa?  Abramson No. He was long gone, long retired. You know, I   ve been here for, I think, five University presidents, four or five department heads. A lot of faculty have went through this department. Either they lost their job because they didn   t get tenure or reappointment or they just went someplace else. Some people say that   s the normal course of things with academics, but I   ve only had two jobs in my career. Downstate Medical Center in the biochemistry department and the one here. Other people, I guess, they say that they move from place to place to place. I wouldn   t want to do that.  Finchum Where do you consider home nowadays?  Abramson It   s funny you ask that, because I take all these trips and I come back through Tulsa or Oklahoma City. I don   t really view that I have a home. I don   t look at it that way. I haven   t been there to New York   I   ve been there once in twenty-three years. Only went back for a couple of days when my father got inducted in to a boxing hall of fame in New Jersey. When he said,    I   m nominated,    I said,    Okay. If you get elected, I   ll go and hear you.    So 23  I went back for one day. He gave that thing in the evening, and I left the next day. I haven   t been back since, so once in twenty-three years.  Finchum Boxing?  Abramson Yep. I still got the   I remember meeting Muhammad Ali when he was Cassius Clay. He (Irv Abramson) put on fights in World War II. He was called, I still got these clippings. He was called the    Bastard Gunner.    He could kill anything, this guy, anything that moved. If you   ve ever been to New York, you   ve noticed the kiosks, newspapers, the old newspaper stands. I can verify this. His father ran out on the family. Him, his brother, and his sister and the mother had to sell newspapers to make a living. You couldn   t sell newspapers in certain areas because you   d get in trouble. The mother got arrested twice. To make a long story short, the kiosk they have now was because of her. I think it was Mayor LaGuardia that signed the law that you could have a kiosk, and it was because of his mother.  Now World War II, he   s in Chicago, listed in the Army Air Corp, B-25s. He was gunner and a radio operator. Everywhere he went, he   d be looking for, no matter where he went, to Chicago or any other place. He was looking for his father. He was in a group of soldiers marching some place in Chicago. He looks around and who does he see? Some old guy staring at this group, this company of soldiers. It was his father. Then, he got the father back together with the mother, but they weren   t happy for the rest of their lives. It was an interesting story. Then, he was in New Guinea. I   ve still got all his old military stuff.  Finchum Well, if he was a boxer, is he the one who taught you how to fight?  Abramson Yeah. He gave me a lot of tips I used to use quite effectively. Like when you   re fighting outside, turn around so that your opponent is facing the sun. Also, kick them until they don   t move. When I was a kid they used to say    girl fighting,    because you   re kicking somebody. Now they call it karate or kung fu. No one remembers a loser, they remember the winner. There are other things like that.  When I have female students I always tell them,    Make sure you   re going to have a breast pocket and put a pencil in there.    If you   re going to get attacked, if you   re a woman, nine times out of ten it   s from behind. Take out that pencil and go just like that. (Gestures to throat) I had to do that in Russia. It   s amazing how effective it is. Of course also the knees and joints and so on. They should learn self-defense.  One of this issues, for me anyway, is that they don   t prepare you that you have to hurt somebody because they   re trying to hurt you. That   s probably the hardest lesson to learn. That   s why I say kick them until they don   t 24  move. That   s what I was doing to that guy with Marcucella. They had to pull me off. I would have killed him. I would have killed him. He remembered that, which was interesting. I always appreciated what he did for me. I try to do that, even to this day. I think now he   s retired to Cape Cod. We don   t talk or anything. I always appreciate what he did for me.  Finchum Would he be the base of your tree that they talk about? Your academic tree?  Abramson Yeah, perhaps, but also Bitterman too. Bitternman was very, very famous. Bitterman, if the university had a guest, and Hawaii had many people come over there, and he didn   t like that person, you were not even allowed to talk to that person, take a class with that person. I remember one case, Sue Brandon, she was one of his students. They disagreed on something, some trivial thing. Then, he said right before her defense,    I   m not going to be your adviser anymore.    Her defense is like a week or so away. He was so universally disliked that she was able to find other committee members to replace him. He was around for many, many years. I think I   m one of a handful of PhD students that ever finished with him. Then my students can say that Bitterman is part of their lineage.  Finchum Well, along the way, you have worked so much. What have you done for fun, to relax, that type of thing?  Abramson Just sit at home and do nothing and just think.  Finchum About work?  Abramson Yeah, some books. I want to start writing historical novels.  Finchum Oh  Okay   Abramson I want to start slowing down with this. I   m not sure that I can, because anything I   ve ever earned I have earned from this. I have written seventeen books, you know, sans memoranda. I   m always looking for opportunities. For example, when I first went to Slovenia, there was no Slovene phrase book. I go to Slovenia and I   m working with this person. The one who ran, who ran the animal facilities. She was going through a divorce, had problems, needed money. I said,    Let   s do this phrase book.    We wrote a Slovenia/English phrase book that became so popular that it was translated into German and Italian. Now there   s a second English edition.  I wrote a book about my alcohol studies. It   s called Betty the Boozing Bee. I did an Electron Microscopy Atlas of the Africanized Honey Bee. My latest book is an edited volume with a former student here, Psychology Gone Astray: A Selection of Racist and Sexist Literature  From Early Psychological Research . There   s a lot of it. Just a lot of it. The next book, 25  part of the library project, where we   re writing free textbooks. I   m doing one on comparative psychology. That   ll probably be the next one. Then, I would really like to start doing these historical novels.  Finchum Well, do a chapter or two on Phi Beta Kappa. That experience. Someone has probably written a book on the history of     Abramson Oh, I donated it.  Finchum    at various institutions along the way, too. Kind of like a timeline.  Abramson Yeah. I feel better being at OSU, if nothing else, for the Phi Beta Kappa. You can   t, in my view, you really can   t be at an institution and call it an intellectual institution without it being related to Phi Beta Kappa somehow.  Finchum That wasn   t a reason for you not to come, back when you came in    93 and we didn   t have one?  Abramson I was shocked. I just assumed that it was, like many people did. Then, when I started learning about the problems that they had over time, like faculty members writing the national office saying, You shouldn   t have a chapter here.    A lot of people were not on the same page. Over time, with Perry  Gethner  and some of the others, they were able to get people on the same page. I   m proud of the University. I look around and see all the construction projects. Many universities are having problems. OSU is building things all over the place. A new art center announced today, the Business College is going to be expanding, Human Sciences, nice new building. Very, very impressive, very impressive. OSU earned it, the right to be a chapter, be a member of Phi Beta Kappa. I   m glad that they finally recognize that.  Finchum We have covered a lot. Is there anything else you want to add?  Abramson No, I was just hoping it was not boring. It is, it is an odd story.  Finchum No, but it is odd. There   s probably more you could tell.  Abramson Yeah. Sometimes I feel bad that some people are afraid of me. I am blunt. I am really goal directed. Other things, like personality differences, I don   t care. It   s the goal that makes the difference. Get the job done. Like I said, I never look at reference letters. I had a graduate student who had eleven papers with me, just graduated. Some people didn   t like him because of the way he looked. What difference does it make the way someone looks? Or they   re this or they   re that? It   s the ability to get the job done that counts. That   s what I look for. They don   t want to be insulting, that kind of thing, but most people aren   t. You don   t go out of your way to hurt somebody or call them names or whatever it is. The way someone looks or the way they 26  speak, what difference does it make? If they want to get an academic job, they   re going to have to shape up anyway, like he did. You shave and so on. People aren   t stupid.  Finchum Have you run into trouble with Abramson as a last name?  Abramson Not so much the last name, but my initials are Charles Ira. My initials are CIA, Charles Ira Abramson. I get in to a lot of problems with that. Then I think I   m on some watch list, because when I went to Columbia recently I got detained. Venezuela, I got detained, and it all started with Venezuela. I don   t like making trips from country to country, then having to go back. You   ve got differences in money. Europe is a different story because of the European Union. I had to go to Venezuela first, then to Brazil, and then back to Venezuela. People in Brazil wanted me to bring certain kinds of flour back for them, some Indian company. I don   t remember what, but some kind of flour. I am about to go on the airplane, from Venezuela to Brazil, and I get arrested. They put me   I didn   t know the airports had jails, so they said I was transporting cocaine. It wasn   t. Venezuela, you know, has a lot of problems now.  They stole all my gifts, except the ring that I had for my wife. Almost two carats, internally flawless, diamond engagement ring. I kept it on me, but they took everything else, the crystal and so on. Then they eventually put me back on an airplane. I guess they thought they were going to intimidate me. I   m not that easily intimidated. So eventually they put me back on the plane, and then I was able to do what I had to do.  Then, before that, when I first came to Oklahoma, I didn   t have a car. I lived off Jardot and McElroy, so I had to walk in every day and walk back. Occasionally people would give me lifts. On two occasions I would get a lift to go down that hill on McElroy. They would ask me,    What are you doing here?       I   m a professor.       What church do you belong to?       Well, I   m Jewish.    They stopped the car and I had to get out. That happened twice. So what? You know people are people. There are others that it makes no difference at all. You can   t let those kind of things bother you, bother you to the point where you become incapacitated and you get angry all the time. People got their issues, so what? You want to persuade them, you don   t want to legislate. If you get a chance to persuade people, do it that way. Not force them into things, because you always have the backlash. No one can force me to do anything. I will refuse. I will refuse.  Then, my wife is funny. In Brazil there was a list that came out of the top fifty crime ridden cities in the world. Brazil has twenty-one of them. Most of those are places where I   d been to. She said,    Honey, Charles, you have to be careful. You can get attacked.    I tell her, I laugh, because   our tenth anniversary is April 6th.    It   s the other way around.    It   s the other way 27  around, because I   ve got all these things built up over the years, you know. Like I learned from the honey bees, don   t bug me and I won   t bug you. I don   t mind discussion but don   t push me to do something I don   t want to do, because I   m not going to do it. You   ve got to persuade me, then that   s a different story, because I could be wrong. I   ve been wrong, I guess, a couple of times that I can remember.  My living is prediction of controlled behavior, so I can spot a bull-shitter a long way off. This is what I do for a living. I   m not in the helping profession. Even with the students, don   t complain. If you don   t learn, don   t complain about the professor stinks. It   s your behavior that   s the problem. You can learn just as much from a bad professor, as long as the professor is competent. If they   re not, that   s a different story. They shouldn   t be here if they don   t know what they   re supposed to be teaching. There   s nothing wrong with you picking up another book, or going to some video, or going to office hours, and so on. How many people, in the course of teaching, do you think come to office hours? I have a class of forty-six, I don   t think three people come in here.  Finchum Hmmm.  Abramson And you ask them. You almost beg them,    This is what you are supposed to do.    They don   t want to do it yet they have the right to evaluate you, which I think is outrageous. I think that should be changed. The course evaluations should ask questions like, how often do you come to class? Do you ever go to office hours? How often do you study? They don   t ask that. As far as I   m concerned these things are totally invalid. It   s always, in my view, like blame the professor, never    Gee, why don   t you study a little harder. If you don   t, you   re going to have a problem unless you   re independently wealthy or you   re going to live with your parents or something. They don   t want you there either. They want you to be independent. Got to be able to think for yourself. You   re being manipulated by slogans. That   s not what you   re supposed to be learning here.    This is what I think is unfortunate overall. That   s why I thought I was going to retire, but now I know I can   t. It hasn   t happened here as much, but it does happen here. Other places, much, much more.  Finchum Sounds like you have too much more to contribute to retire. It   s too early.  Abramson Yeah, I don   t know. Sometimes you get really depressed. .  Finchum That   s when you take a trip.  Abramson Yeah.  Finchum How many different languages do you speak? 28  Abramson Well, I used to, probably just bad English now, but I used to be Russian, German. Sanskrit was one I learned in college. When I went to college, what people don   t understand, we had to learn two languages at Boston University. You had to pass these language tests. Now, people are getting rid of language.  Finchum For your undergrad?  Abramson For graduate school also. For undergraduate you had to have a language, it was German. Then grad school we had to have two. Now, it   s all    let   s get rid of the language,    or things like the fees that the students have to pay. Why can   t there be a fee, five or ten dollars, for a general fund for kids to go overseas, to help them defray the cost of their international trips. Excuse me. (Coughs) There   s a grass fee, all other kinds of things. Why don   t they have a fee like this? That can benefit almost every student on campus. OSU wants to have all our students have international experiences. Who   s going to pay for it? Oklahoma is not the richest state, so there   s got to be some help here. Some people are trying to do that, but then let everybody contribute towards it, because something like that helps benefit the University.  Finchum When you do travel, students go with you?  Abramson Oh yeah   Finchum Or at least a few?  Abramson Oh yeah, we just came back from a spring break class to Spain. I think I mentioned that earlier, looking at Islamic contributions to science. There   s a lot of it, which most people don   t know. I think we brought seven students. It   s    Explorations in the History of Psychology.    Before that, we   ve been to   Greece was the first, then it was Austria, Czech Republic, what else? Moscow last year, and Spain. Next year, I think it will be   I wanted Devil   s Island, but people talked me out of it. I thought it   d be really interesting to go where they lock people up like that. You think of  Captain Alfred  Dreyfus and other prisoners there, but now they   re saying,    Oh well, I don   t think we   re going to get a lot of students to go there.    Now it might be Florence or Venice.  Finchum And they spend a good chunk of their time in an archive or doing what?  Abramson There   s always going to be some psychology component. I do this course myself with the undergraduate adviser. I don   t pawn them off on some international tour agency. Right? If I don   t know the material, I shouldn   t be doing it. I always make contact with the university in that area where we   re going. We don   t travel to different cities. We stay at one place and then 29  know that one place well. I think we   re going to go to Florence and it   ll be the psychological importance of the renaissance. Again, if you read you increase your knowledge base. I can easily pawn them off on some educational tour agency. I don   t do that. I prefer to do it myself. Then, I bring in the undergraduate adviser, which I guess, I can be the only one that does that. We have two of them, but the one I work with I   ve known for a long time. The undergraduate adviser, they should be included on these trips. They advise the undergraduates, so we   re going to do things that are a little bit different than most.  Finchum Of all the places you   ve been, is there some place, on your bucket list, that you want to go, that you haven   t been to yet?  Abramson I like them all. Then, again, I would like to go to   I   ve been to the Philippines. I   ve been to Japan, done some work there. I would like to go to Vietnam and Cambodia, places like that. I can   t do it on a spring break trip because it takes too long to get there. I can   t do it over the summer, because I   ve committed five years for this grant in Turkey.  Finchum I read somewhere you are doing experiments with cinnamon.  Abramson Yeah, that was in Venezuela. I took some kids   that was also a NSF (National Science Foundation) REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program. I took kids to Venezuela. I was working with this professor. Some people go to conferences. I don   t really do that. I don   t have an interest. If I have an interest in someone   s work, I invite them to come to OSU or I go there, or send students there. This guy was a researcher in Venezuela and he came out here to work with me. Then, I went back with him to Venezuela. We discovered that cinnamon, exposure to cinnamon, disrupts the life cycle of the insect that transmits Chagas Disease, the parasite. Now people are using cinnamon around their houses. It only effects poor people.  These guys were shocked when I come in there. I didn   t let the students go in there, because you get the parasite not through a bite like a mosquito like malaria, you get it through the feces, and then these bugs they live in the thatched huts, on the roofs. If you go in there and they go to the bathroom on you, it   s incurable. So I keep them outside while I   d go inside, and the villagers were like shocked that the students would even be around it, not to mention a professor. One of them, she has her PhD now, she got real sick. She was thin anyway. I   ll never forget this. She didn   t quit. She got real sick, she throws up. This place is filthy, this shopping area. She grabs some dirty newspaper, wipes her mouth, and continues on. It was great  Now, that   s great. Now she has her PhD and she has a great career in Public Health Service.  30  One village we went to, they spent all day trying to cook this special meal for us, and it was some sort of rat. Waylon can eat anything, but Mia, this woman named Mia, was looking at me. I knew it was a rat, and I didn   t tell them. She knew something was up, but I wouldn   t tell her. Waylon wanted seconds, you know, of this rat, as they   re chopping the tail. You get a lot of experiences like that.  I was in a riot in Venezuela. The fellow I was with was pro Ch  vez. There, they had rockets, all sorts of fights and battles right in the middle of that. I worry about that because I   m taking students to Turkey, and it might be the same thing if the government gets overthrown. There   re experiences. I tell some of the students,    I can get killed or you can get killed by some jerk on a cell phone driving, not paying attention to what they   re doing. At least you have spirit of adventure.    When I was a kid parents would encourage that.  Now everybody seems to be worried about everything. Can   t do this, can   t do that. There   s no rules that say this is what you can do to encourage people, it   s always what you can   t do. You can   t say this, you can   t write that. You can   t think this way, you can   t think that way. We can   t have free thought. I think many people will tell you that in some universities the last place you find free speech is the university campus. Safe zone this, trigger warnings. Then these people are supposed to go out in the real world and actually engage in the contingency the environment offers. These contingencies are not always positive, probably far from. It   s probably mostly negative.  Finchum If someone says    can   t    to you, you say    let   s see      Abramson Right  Let   s see. Sometimes I feel, I   m sure other professors feel the same way that    in fact I tell some people, especially the students,    Take a look at the original version of All Quiet on the Western Front,    you know. It was, I think, in the early    30s. It was a German anti-war movie, because of World War I. It starts off with some kids in a classroom. Everyone   s gone, because they   re off fighting the French. Then you see what happens to them over the time. One person they end the war with is a guy named, some sort of Sergeant. The name could have been Sergeant Schultz which is where, I guess, they got the name for the Hogan   s Heroes character. This guy realizes that he   s sending these kids out there with no training. Sometimes I feel the same way. I just send them out there with no training and they   re going to be in debt.  One case I remember, I told this student,    If you don   t take what you do seriously, you   re going to have a big problem. You   re not going to find a decent job.    About a year later I   m on that Cimarron Turnpike and there   s a McDonald   s there. I walk in there, and I hear this scream. It was her. She 31  saw me first. She couldn   t get a job. She works at McDonald   s, because she didn   t take what she did seriously.  If you ever teach a class here you   ll be lucky if half of them show up. I   m not a big technology user. I don   t use powerpoints very much. You   re paying for my experience, show up to class. If you can   t, come to my office hours or I can meet you anytime, but you   ve got to make the effort. I can only meet them 49 percent of the way. Some people say,    Well you   ve got to meet them half way.    They   ve got to do that extra 1 percent that you can build upon. That   s what I try to do, encourage them.  Finchum Have other of your students gone on to become similar to you?  Abramson I think so. Quite a few of them.  Finchum Behavior psychologists.  Abramson Yeah, they try to help students as well. I   ve got a few that are in universities. The first four I got rid of. They all have their masters with me. I just couldn   t serve on their PhDs. I think six overall have never finished with me, because I   m looking with a particular kind of   I   m not in the business of just giving out a degree.  Finchum Right.  Abramson When I got mine, I   m sure the older faculty were doing the same thing. You were never guaranteed a PhD. You were guaranteed the opportunity. It was up to you to take advantage of it. If you didn   t, you were tossed out. Bitterman, I remember him telling us,    When you have your comprehensive examinations, you view it as an athletic contest. Only the best people are going to pass.    The rest will get their masters and then off they go someplace else.  Finchum Get them a pigeon and a Kung Fu hat   Abramson Right  (Laughs) That pigeon, I still remember. His name was Four Digit.  Finchum Was what?  Abramson His name was Four Digit.  Finchum Four Digit.  Abramson Three-seven-five-nine was his number. Yeah, I worked hard, but I had a good time. I expect students to do that same. You have to care about what 32  you   re doing. Phi Beta Kappa is one of those things that, you know, is a nice recognition.  Finchum Sure.  Abramson It shows you have breadth of knowledge. I remember, as a student I had a lot of friends who were engineering majors and so on, they can talk about maybe one or two things. I had a breadth of knowledge. The idea of a liberal arts education is not very much in fashion anymore. It   s really important. You learn how to play an instrument. If I was some administrator at OSU, I would require everyone to learn how to play an musical instrument. Take an acting class. Tell them,    This is what you need to do, if you want to have a real interesting in life.     Finchum Do you play an instrument?  Abramson I used to play the banjo.  Finchum Ah   Abramson That was during the Sex Pistols    day. I did    God Save the Queen    on the banjo. The James Bond theme I was pretty good at too. That was, I enjoyed that.  Finchum Five string or three string?  Abramson Five.  Finchum Five.  Abramson You know, the (Earl) Scruggs picking method, not the claw hammer  thing. I enjoyed that. Learn how to write, creative writing. I suggested here that every psych major should take an acting class, take a music class. And they are,    Why an acting class?    Well, for me the answer is obvious. You can try to put yourself in the other person   s shoes. Especially most of them want to be clinical psychologists. What is it like to say something and no one listens to you, or to be locked up or shut in and you   re afraid to go out of the house? An acting class will give you some of that experience. Or if you   re alone, pick up an instrument, draw, go outside and draw something, or dare I say, if you   re, I don   t want to say religious, but yeah, if you believe in God, you are never alone. As silly as that may sound to some people, that   s something that should be considered too.  Finchum All these things, the art, the music, is that part of Phi Beta Kappa requirements?  33  Abramson Yeah, we want well-rounded individuals. The idea of a liberal arts education, being able to do different things and appreciate. That   s what my mother taught me, going to art museums, going to science museums. I went to the ballet, I went to Broadway during what everybody called the Golden Age of Broadway. I saw Zero Mostel in Fiddler on the Roof and just many things like that. It gave me appreciation. No matter how bad you might have it, go to the museum, look at great works of art, go to the library. Snap yourself out of it. Read a biography of someone, or autobiography of someone that faced terrible odds and was able to succeed. These things are important. I know they sound stupid today, but they   re as good today as they were back then.  If you get depressed, go outside and paint something, like Theta Pond. Pick up an instrument, even a harmonica, go out there and play with it. Learn to appreciate classical music. Learn to appreciate culture through learning the language. This is what I think we can do a better job of, and this is what again, for me, what Phi Beta Kappa represents. You   ve got to persuade people that this stuff is important.  I tried to get some departments to, even the University as a whole   you know they have all these TV monitors. One simple thing to do is put motivational quotes, maybe the library can do this. Everyone gets depressed, and then you   re walking down and at the exact psychological moment you see some uplifting quote by Martin Luther King or Will Rogers. Then, you can have the state, as a project, pick the quotes that could be used on these monitors. The idea of uplifting the spirit, this is, again, what I think Phi Beta Kappa does. It   s not just grade point average. It   s the idea that you have reached a certain level where you can make a difference.  Finchum Well, to get in Phi Beta Kappa it   s just grade point or do you do an interview?  Abramson I don   t think they interview, but it   s a well-rounded coursework.  Finchum They look at the transcript, not necessarily the grade?  Abramson Yeah.  Finchum Okay.  Abramson If you look at the people who are Phi Beta Kappa members, it   s Supreme Court justices, presidents. Paul Robeson, a very famous singer, was Phi Beta Kappa. The list goes on, Helen Keller, the list goes on and on and on. You   re a member of a really select group of people, which also is nice.  Finchum You   re more up to date on films. Is it mentioned in those currently, as much? 34  Abramson I don   t really see that many movies anymore. I don   t have a TV. I haven   t had one for twenty years. I have no cell phone. In that sense I   m pretty divorced.  Finchum I would imagine it   s not as much as back when you were younger.  Abramson Back then, yeah. Even some people on their tombstones would say Phi Beta Kappa, because it was such a big deal.  Finchum So it   ll be on yours?  Abramson I don   t know. I showed you my Abramson action figure. I thought maybe if I ever get cremated I can put myself in these various action figures and give them to students who go around to different parts of the world and take photographs with it. We   ll see. I   ve had a good time overall.  Finchum It   s been a good path?  Abramson Yeah, it   s been a good path.  Finchum Bumpy some, but     Abramson Yeah, because it could   ve been a lot different. Could   ve been a lot different.  Finchum You just wonder how it came out so positive for you with all these road blocks along the way.  Abramson I worked for it. Sometimes you lose battles, but I knew I was never going to lose the war.  Finchum Something had to make you want to do that.  Abramson Being driven.  Finchum Driven.  Abramson Yeah, I remember some guy that I met at the World Trade Center. He said,    Charles, if you   re here being a security guard for two years, you   re going to be here forever.    I was there for two years, not two consecutive years. I can understand what he was saying. At that time  2.02 an hour was minimum wage, but you had time to read, do all sorts of things. It was easy. Sometimes things in life you need to work for. I knew I would never be a failure.  35  Finchum Do you know the moment when you decided that? When you think back, at what point did you decide?  Abramson When you   re getting beaten as a child, you have two choices. Either accept it, or fight back. I remember when they had Two-Ton Tony try to hit me. I remember the day. I can tell you exactly when I changed. I must have been about ten. I   m in Florida Air Academy. I was a quiet kind of kid. They tried to have Two-Ton Tony, funny how you remember these names, try to sit on me. They had him chase me around a pillar. Then I stopped and I hit him so hard. He just ran into my fist. I knocked him out and teeth went flying. Much to my surprise, they left me alone. That   s when I learned you have to stand up for your rights. You   ve got to stand up for your rights. It   s not like I dwell on it, but I certainly remember these key events. I thought of writing a book called Six Significant Events in Your Life.  Finchum I think you should.  Abramson I remember that one. That was probably the first, then Professor Marcucella, coming to OSU because that   s where I met Italo Aquino and from there I met Zeyna. Then I did all this international stuff just from Brazil. I   m sure there   s a few others that I just don   t recall at this point. I always can appreciate Marcucella for giving me the chance, and that   s what I try to do to everybody here, but you get one chance. Take advantage of it. I   m not a babysitter. If you   ve got a problem, just tell me. I only ask four things of my students. Don   t lie, because I   ll know. Do what you say you   re going to do. Before you ask me to give you an answer, try to figure it out for yourself. Show up on time. Those are the four things, all that I ask. If you don   t know something, that   s fine, no problem. At least try and figure it out for yourself before you ask me.  Finchum Well, those four things will be good going forward with them, too, once they   re off campus.  Abramson Yep. You know, I have kids that show up late. This time I   m a little relaxed on that rule, because I teach an eight o   clock class. It   s very difficult for some kids to get up, but when I teach a normal time class, nine thirty or whatever, nobody shows up late. You   re not allowed to go in, unless you have a legitimate excuse. No cell phones either. If the cell phone goes off, you get a F. If you tell me ahead of time that,    I   m expecting a call,    babysitter or whatever, that   s fine. You   ve got to have self-respect. That seems to be the key. You know if you don   t respect yourself, why would anyone else want to respect you? The answer is I won   t. It   s not my problem, it   s your problem. You   ve got to reach my standards. I   m not going to go down to yours.  36  If you listen to what I tell you, just like Sergeant Schultz, you can have a good life. If you don   t, you still can have a good life, but I know my way works. When I teach a graduate class, and so many professors would rather have the students take it over, they will direct a class. I don   t. I want you to know certain things. I   m going to tell you what you need to know. Then, it goes on from there. It   s different. I have a different way of doing things, but I think my way works. I can demonstrate that it works.  Finchum Over twenty years     Abramson Other ways may work, but I know my way works. I   ve had two students get NSF graduate research fellowships. Very hard to do. I   ve got more than my share of grant money. Remember, you know, my foundation is weak. I   m a psychologist that studies bugs, so how can I take what I do really that seriously, right? Everything that I   ve ever gotten in my life has been on the back of an insect. That   s really   you   ve got to be pretty good to do that. (Laughs) I   m in the psychology department where I study bugs.  Finchum So at home, do you have a fly swat?  Abramson Yeah, I   ve got a fly swat. My wife doesn   t like the flies or the wasps.  Finchum You wonder if that   s your business, do you kill the ones you don   t want in your house and such.  Abramson I try to move them out, but she   ll try to kill them. She is flexible. The wasps, I have hundreds and hundreds of wasps around the property, and she lets me keep them there. Then I had the bee colonies. When the Dairy Barn building was eliminated, I had to move them to my house. OSU would let me put them on some buildings here, but I needed a flat roof. Most people don   t realize that many of the roofs at OSU are not flat. I was going to put them on the PIO  Public Information Office  building, but I   m just getting too old to climb up and down ladders. And I   m not allowed to have the students do it. I wouldn   t want them anyway to do it, in case something happens. I keep them at my house.  One day, like I   m talking to you, a honey bee flies up my wife   s nose. She like me, because of our backgrounds, you don   t panic. Luckily, she didn   t, and I was able to talk her through it. She got the bee out of her nose, because if she got stung in the nostril, even if you are not allergic, that can cause major problems.  Finchum Well, how would you get one out?  Abramson You gently blow it out, but not really strong. Make it sort of like an irritant to it. It eventually turned around and came out. Another time I had a reporter 37  there. She   s standing there in front of the bee colony and she gets stung near the eye. She got stung over here. (Gestures near the eye) Another millimeter, she would   ve got stung in the eye. So again, you   ve got to be careful.  Finchum Do you harvest the honey?  Abramson Yeah, I call it Bee-Ware Honey. I can give you a jar. I give it out to people for free.  Finchum Take the comb or leave the comb?  Abramson I like to leave the comb in there, let them do it.  Finchum Have you ever done anything with tarantulas?  Abramson Many, many years ago.  Finchum There are quite a few of those here.  Abramson Yeah, many, many years ago. It   s hard. The laboratory   s small, though I   d like to express my appreciation to the dean. And  Ronald  Van Den Bussche was able to get a small research space in the new  Henry  Bellmon  Research Center . I appreciate that. Sometimes you wonder what I could do if I had a bigger space, more people, but everybody needs space.  Finchum A bigger space means more time?  Abramson Yeah, then also you get more students.  Finchum That   s true.  Abramson I have a student coming over. In the Spain trip   I   m starting to get back into the behavior of plants. I met a student there and the professor   s going to spend time at OSU in January, for six months, working on this plant project. I have somebody now from Colombia on sabbatical here, part-time. Part-time here and part-time at the University of Tulsa. I   ve got some more people coming down Sunday for engineering meetings, and then some Brazilians coming down for the robotics competition.  I   ve always got something I   m working on, and the students enjoy it. Being able to meet people of world class quality. In New York, I always had a lot of visitors, if nothing else, because it was New York. You miss those conversations. At OSU, Oklahoma in general, nobody comes here because they   re passing through. They come here for specific reasons. At least now, I   m getting more and more of these visitors, so the students interact when they give guest lectures and so on. I think that works out well too. 38  Finchum Now, if they ask, you can say we have a Phi Beta Kappa.  Abramson That   s right. Yeah, my son was disappointed, because he   s an engineering major at OSU so he can   t do Phi Beta Kappa. He was from Brazil. Now he   s got himself as a U.S. citizen, which I feel a little bit bad about because Brazil   s a nice country and there   s a lot of good people there.  Finchum Is there something comparable to Phi Beta Kappa that he can     Abramson They have an engineering honor society. I think he   s going to be part of that. Again, it   s not like, everybody knows Phi Beta Kappa, at least in the world that I came from they did.  Finchum Well, if you took a few more classes outside of engineering?  Abramson No, because his major is engineering. It has to be liberal arts. He   ll never have enough courses, unless he gets a dual major, but it   s time to move on.  Finchum If someone had a University Studies degree and had all these well-rounded classes, they still wouldn   t qualify necessarily?  Abramson That would be something that would be brought up with us. I   d want to say why not? If they   ve taken a wide range of liberal arts classes, their grades are good, they   ve done volunteer activities and other things outside of classroom.  Finchum Some of those things are flexible.  Abramson Yeah.  Finchum Within the chapter or the national level?  Abramson Yeah, there   s certainly standards but there is some flexibility as well. There were some question that we had, when we asked a student to become a Phi Beta Kappa member and they refused, can we ask them again? I think we voted that we can. Other places they say if you don   t accept it, that   s it.  Finchum Can they change their mind and come back and say yes?  Abramson As far as we   re concerned here, the answer is yes.  Finchum They don   t have to be asked again, but if they decide     39  Abramson Again, we don   t know, but my guess is that we would say yes, but it would have to be discussed among the officers. My personal opinion, I don   t see why not.  Finchum If they met the requirements to begin with.  Abramson That   s right. It   s not a business. You want to reach that level. It   s not like we say no and you   re all of a sudden somehow dragged back. You   re reached that level and you should be recognized for it.  Finchum It becomes a negative if you say no?  Abramson I don   t know about a negative, but it   s more that we don   t understand why. Then we realize in this part of the country that kind of   there are so many honor societies now, and I guess Phi Beta Kappa never had much of a presence in this part of the country. We hope that that will change.  Finchum Well, by negative I meant if the chapter said no. If they asked if they could, after they   d said no. That would be a negative on the chapter?  Abramson On the chapter, yeah, I would think so. I remember I could never understand why OU has a chapter, Tulsa University has a chapter and we don   t. We   re as good as, if not better than, they are and I know that bugged a lot of us.  Finchum If they hadn   t have passed this time, would they have gone again, in your opinion?  Abramson I would like to think so, but there surely was discussion by some of the committee members to give it up. Because what more can you do? President Hargis had a big influence. You got all the material that they needed. We have   one of the officers with the national office was associated with OSU, he was either the father or   everything was in place. If we didn   t do it this time, what more can you do? I think there would still be some of us going for it again, but others would say they had had enough. Nobody wants to hit their head against the wall. I don   t. That   s one reason why I became a comparative psychologist. If you block me one way, I   ll go around another. I focus on the goal.  Finchum Well you accomplished this one.  Abramson Yeah, I   m really pleased with it. Also, thank you for your help with this oral history project. I think that if I do anything, being the chapter historian, it   s this. People can see this from years and years and years. Also, again, my name   s Abramson, so it begins Ab. You look at the charter that   s in the Arts and Sciences building. Who   s the first name? (Laughs) I get a lot of 40  criticism for that. Like in book chapters and stuff, Abramson usually comes first.  Finchum Whether you did the most work for it or not?  Abramson Right. That   s the way it goes.  Finchum Sure, CIA.  Abramson CIA. Yeah, the Russians really have a problem with that. Also, if I was an FBI Agent or CIA agent, and there was a Russian with the initials KGB, sure I   d check him out, or her out, because you never know.  Finchum I guess you could legally change your middle initial or something.  Abramson That   s IRA. Then I would have problems in Italy, Irish Republic Army, so they   d be wondering about that to. Being detained, most recently, in Colombia was really   they put you in a locked room with no windows. That I didn   t like. I was there for about an hour. Nobody spoke English. My Spanish is, broken Spanish, broken Portuguese. I finally complained so much they just let me out. That sort of thing happened, but that was   I think I   m on some list. That really bugs me. I   m always getting stopped. I   ve got like a seven out of ten chance of getting stopped, pulled over, bags searched, and so on. That   s why I think I   m on some list. I could be paranoid. I   m a psychologist, right? (Laughs) I don   t think so. I think it   s something real.  Finchum You have to definitely make sure you   re aware of what   s in your bags and what you   re taking from one to the other.  Abramson When I first went to Russia, it was communist. One of the people I worked with, she wanted me to bring back one of her crayfish. The only crayfish you were allowed to experiment on was communist crayfish, meaning crayfish from communist countries. She gave me a crayfish to bring back to the United States to set free. So I did. (Laughs)  And you asked me if I have a favorite country or favorite experience. I like them all, but if you were to ask me what was my favorite experiment, I would say it   s not so much the experiment as the people you meet along the way. That   s what I think is important. That   s why language skills, right, the qualities of someone who   s a Phi Beta Kappa, the broad background, being able to speak on various topics, well read, able to solve problems. I   m not saying you can   t do that with other things, but that   s certainly one recognition that you   at least at a certain time in your life these are the things that you did. You can do it.  41  You know, be able to know a culture by the language. Then again, if I was OSU, I would require everyone to learn a language. Everyone should take an art class, everyone should take a music class, to appreciate these things. To appreciate some of the best parts of life. I   m sure you do, I know I do, you go to a ballet, you go to an opera, you hear these voices. It   s just incredible. It   s human experience. Again, these are the things that I think Phi Beta Kappa tries to enhance in people and recognize you have reached a certain level, you can appreciate these things. I think that   s very important.  And these motivational quotes, everybody gets down. You   re depressed about something, and you walk by, and all of a sudden this screen pops up and it has some sort of quote. Then your spirit gets lifted up. You go back at it. You don   t get crushed by it, which a lot of people do. They use it as a crutch.  Finchum It could even be a quote from some of these oral histories.  Abramson Right. How much does it take to press a few buttons to put a motivational quote on one of these monitors? It can   t be that hard. They put other things on it. This is what I   if you   re an administrator, if you can   t persuade people, order it,    Do it. This is what you   re going to do.    If you want the reasons come over and I   ll explain it to you, if you don   t understand why motivational quotes are important. Then, you get the whole state involved in selecting the quotes. It   ll be a nice statewide project. Then they say these things,    Well you   re an idiot. You don   t understand. We can   t, we   re too busy.    What are you really too busy doing, watching a TV show?  Finchum Even the Library of Congress has those all over the place.  Abramson Oh do they?  Finchum They have quotes, over the archways.  Abramson I don   t remember that. I gave a lecture at Morehouse University and they had quotes from all sorts, Booker T. Washington, Paul Robeson, Martin Luther King. Makes a difference. How much can it be to chisel in a quote on a building? I think we seem to lose sight of that. Again, Phi Beta Kappa helps you focus on what, I think, are some of the more important business.  Finchum Do you keep a running list of some of your favorite quotes?  Abramson Yeah, I got a whole bunch, because I hope one day to try and convince somebody to put them on the screen.  Finchum I   ll have to start one of those too.  42  Abramson I have all sorts of books here with motivational quotes. I try to, I haven   t done it this semester, I try to put it   on every new section, I put up a quote on the board. So when they   re going over their notes, and they see those quotes, and they   re tired of studying or don   t understand something, they see this. Maybe it   ll give them more impetus to keep on going.  Finchum It sounds like another experiment, behavioral psychology.  Abramson Yeah, it   s not that hard to motivate people. You have to want to do it. Again, you can only meet them 49 percent, they have to give that extra 1percent. You know, I understand all the fancy teaching things they have, but teaching really hasn   t changed. You have to have a motivated student. You have to have some access to information, whether it   s from the teacher or whether it   s from a book or some other kind of media. There   s no magic to it. You have to want to teach.  I think that   s probably one of the biggest gifts that I can give people is to have them reach their potential. That   s what I try to do. As you can tell, I   m not a happy smiley kind of guy, but I can tell you what muscles move when I smile. (Laughter) I got to practice in the mirror. Give an honest effort. Especially at a place like OSU, it   s not a rich state. OSU is a land grant college. It has a special mission. We need to acknowledge that.  When I went to Boston University the president at the time was, I think it was his second year, it was John Silber. He was mentioned   he   s dead. He ran for governor of Massachusetts. He got every student, every freshman, as many as he could, I think it was even required, into this auditorium. He told them,    This is what   s expected of you at this university.    I think they should do that here. I   ve been trying to get the department head to do something like that.    As a psych major, this is what is expected of you. If you can   t do it, you   re going to have problems. Either go someplace else or stop your training and then come back when you   re ready to learn. Come to class, show up on time, and take advantage of the professors. Use the library. Take advantage of the resource courses. Be the best you can be, and do it every day.    I think everybody here needs to get that message, but they   re not getting the message. There are things that I would to, but I   ll never be an administrator here. I know that.  Finchum By choice?  Abramson Well, they think I don   t I have the temperament. I probably don   t. So what? These messages are clear. Do what you are supposed to do and you could have a good life. Be educated. Don   t waste it. You see so many of these kids just wasting their education. I   ll be sixty years old soon. How many years do I have left? Twenty? Maybe even less, probably less, to be productive and be able to travel without a cane and stuff like that. It goes by fast. You may 43  not believe that, but it does. After a certain point, where did all the time go? I   ve been here twenty-three years. It   s amazing. It   s gone by really fast.  Finchum Have you had to move during those twenty-three years?  Abramson Twice. I had an office down there, then I moved here. This is one of the bigger offices. I   ve earned it. We compete over phones, offices. It   s terrible. You know, you look at animals, and what do animals compete over? Any limited resource, whether it   s access to females for reproduction or food or whatever. Same thing here. You compete over limited resources. If we all worked together and respect each other   s views, and have diversity of opinion, and viewpoints, I think you would be better off.  Finchum The colony won   t collapse   Abramson The colony won   t collapse. That   s right, that   s right. I   ve made some very, I have some very good colleagues here, across the University. Besides being a psychology professor, one of my proudest achievements here, besides Phi Beta Kappa, is also being a professor adjunct in the zoology department and also in the entomology department. I look at myself as an old-time professor. I   m more of a generalist than something really specific. I look for universals. Differences too, but I   m always impressed by how much is similar, than the differences.  We   re all taught that the differences are more important than the similarities. I just don   t buy it. I think it   s the similarities that we should be focusing on. Like most people want to have a good future for their children. There   s at least a hundred similarities that we all have in common. These things are never celebrated. It   s just the differences, and some of these differences are phony, in my view. You wear this versus that. Okay. The basic underlying principles would be the same. You want to improve yourself, you want to be better. You want to achieve. That doesn   t change. I would love to be even an administrator for a day that had some authority, and snap my fingers and say,    This is what   s going to happen here.     Finchum You probably have three or four things right off the bat you would do.  Abramson Yeah, some of the things we mentioned here. You know, when I was a kid, maybe you had the same thing with your parents, I took piano lessons. Then I complained and they stopped me taking them. Boy, I wish I would have kept on the piano lessons. The same thing here. You got to show you could play an instrument. It could be a harmonica, it doesn   t matter. You   ve got to have some musical appreciation. You   ve got to be able to have some drawing, some artistic skills. It   s not that hard to draw something. I mean, there are plenty of books on how to do it. At least some appreciation of it.  44  I remember I was in France with some students and going to the Louvre you see the Mona Lisa and these amazing statues. The kids that went over to Spain with me they saw just the architecture and how the stuff was done in the mosques and the churches. They go,    Wow     I   ve had some students here that have never even heard of Vienna. We   re not doing something. Part of it us as professors, or me in particular, and part of it is them. We   re not getting the message across.  Boston University had some relationship with the high schools in Boston. Could do the same thing here. Again there are many things that could be done to help the community as a whole. I tell you this from being a loner, and I can see it just being someone that   s not a big people person. But I know what to do. Just try, no matter if I get it done. You and I   ve talked about this many times, one of my favorite places is going to an old bookstore. Never even see that. Just going to the library and looking at all the knowledge. You   re sort of surrounded by it. You say,    Wow  That   s really impressive.    Just the titles of the books. Just the idea of being in a place that has so much knowledge around. That   s what a university is, but we   ve got to take advantage of it. Not just professors, but also the students.  Finchum A big part of it now is they don   t seem to have as much time.  Abramson What do they do with the other time?  Finchum Exactly.  Abramson Just think about the decrease in observation skills. It   s frightening. They spend so much time with the buttons on the phones and not enough looking around.  Finchum Or with things in their ears.  Abramson Oh that drives me nuts. What does that mean? It means you   re shutting yourself off from the world around you. That   s really unfortunate. I can see some sort of instructional tape or something at a particular time but there   s some people around here, even faculty, they have these things in their ears the whole time. Also, I laugh sometimes because they   re going deaf. You know they are, because the ear   s not made to function that way. If you don   t believe me, go into your car and turn on the radio. Many people turn it up. The next morning when   you park your car and go out, come back in to start your car, and the radio comes on and it   s so loud that you   ve got to turn it down. You   re going deaf, as sure as I   m standing here. Then you say,    Wow  Don   t you even recognize that?    I try to teach these kids life skills.  Finchum Sounds like it.  45  Abramson I teach    History of Psychology.    They took me off that for a while, because they were going, I guess, to an online course. Which is, again, this piece of shit. Just terrible. I guess in the fall they   re going back to teaching it in the classroom. I teach    History of Psychology,    but not so much the history of psychology as opposed to the love of history. That   s what I really want, a love of learning, a love of Phi Beta Kappa, which is what that represents. In many ways it goes back to the same theme, a liberal arts education, being broad-based. It   s good to be focused also, but not at the expense, in my view, of broad-based education. I would also have ever student take a philosophy class. There   s nothing better than a philosophy class. Many of the problems they think are unique have been discussed for thousands of years.  Finchum Maybe as a pass/fail.  Abramson Yeah, whatever, or let the kids sit in on it. Something. I think they should be taking an introduction to philosophy class, the great philosophers. Again, cross-cultural kinds of courses too. Like today in our comparative class we   re talking about cross-cultural attraction in humans. For the first time they were able to see different cultures and how they view attraction. Some people thin, some people bigger, some people with pasty faces, other people with piercings, and they   ve never been exposed to that before. But you   re at a university, you should be exposed to that. You know, again, it does get depressing after a while. That   s why I thought that I should retire. Then, I accepted another graduate student. I would never accept a grad student and then just bail on them, which happens also. If you were going to go someplace else, then why did you accept this student? They   re like your children, in some sense.  Finchum That   s a four or five-year commitment.  Abramson Right. Then this grant is five years. If we get another one, that would be another ten years, or ten or fifteen. I would like to   maybe you could make me an administrator for a day   Finchum With the power.  Abramson Then I might be able to do what I wanted to do, with the power to do it, do things. (Laughs) Yeah. Having the staff take classes would be nice. The idea that the University is supposed to be an educator, it doesn   t need to be restricted just to students. I know they do have some courses, but if a secretary wants to take a course in philosophy, let them take the course. Not everything has to be for the money.  Finchum Especially at a land grant.  46  Abramson Right, especially at a land grant school. At the Phi Beta Kappa, we pay for all the kids    fees. We don   t let them pay. If they want special things, that   s up to them. The initiation fee, we pay for it. I   d be glad to write a check for several hundred dollars. I   ve paid kids    tuitions in the past and so on. If you see someone is really trying hard, it makes all the difference in the world. You want to support that. I don   t think all of us do that. I think sometimes, not so much here, but in other places, they lose sight of the fact what is a university. What   s the goal of the university? It   s not to indoctrinate people. It   s to allow them to explore their potential and give them the knowledge base to be able to do that. It   s not to turn them into this or that.  I had a Russian colleague come here. I   ve worked with him for years, since the    90s. He was shocked when he came here at how many kids that he met wanted to be little communists or socialists. He got so angry. He told us,    You don   t know what it   s like to live in a system like that.    It   s okay to spout out these terms but when you   re victimized by it, it   s a different story. Again, I know I   m not teaching these kids how to think for themselves. It   s like Sergeant Shultz, you send them out there and they   ll have lives but it   s not as good as it could be, again in my view. When was the last time that someone took an art appreciation class? How about learning how to dance? You know, I mean that   s what I would do. Some of these courses, this is what you do, because we want you to have a better life. We want you to be able to think. This just gets me frustrated.  Finchum You also want them to enjoy, which comes into play with the music and the dance...  Abramson Right.  Finchum    and the art.  Abramson And the art. Learn how to appreciate a book, instead of selling them all the time, which drives me nuts, you know. Like with my son, he wanted to sell back some of his engineering books. I said,    I   ll buy it from you. Then, you keep these books.    You don   t sell a book. You keep it. When I went through the Pavlov Institute of Experimental Medicine in Saint Petersburg, they gave me an original Pavlov. I   m looking right at it. You see in the margins all the notes that this person wrote down. You don   t see that much anymore. When I taught   I teach a lot in third world countries, developing countries. These kids will die for an education, literally. Here, in some cases, they waste it. Not all, but even if it   s one, it   s one too many. I can tell you from my experiences that it   s a lot more than just one.  Again, I think overall Phi Beta Kappa, if we could make it more known around the University it would help. They   ve got to know it even when they are in high school or a freshman. When they have their, I don   t know if they 47  do this, when they have the application packets, they should have something about Phi Beta Kappa in there. All the undergraduate advisers should know, because of the language requirement. I know there   s a move in some departments to reduce the language requirement. How can you do that and say    Gee, we want our kids to have international experiences. We want our kids to appreciate reading Cervantes in original Spanish as opposed to some English version.    We don   t, some of us don   t go and push and recognize that I guess. Or they feel that anything that they say is just going to be like water off a duck   s back to some administrator.  Finchum Some of those issues, will Phi Beta Kappa take on?  Abramson I hope. Again, it   s what I hope. But some people don   t make waves,    Don   t do this, don   t do that.    It   s never,    Take a chance.    I for one have taken chances all my life. You know, you have to do that. I remember when I left BU, people thought I was crazy to go to Hawaii, because that may add more time to my degree, but I didn   t care. If you want to be the best, you should work with the best. Even though this guy was very difficult, in the end it all worked out. It worked out better than anyone could have thought.  Then, I   ve never had a day of unemployment. I   ve never had the endless round of postdocs that some people have, especially these days. In the biological sciences, it   s hard to get a job at a place like OSU as opposed to a smaller school. Even that now is becoming more difficult. They expect you to have one or two postdocs, so by the time you   re ready for your first university job, you could be thirty-five, forty years old. That   s not good either. Look at all the unemployed PhDs and college kids that are going home to live with their parents. I don   t think their parents want them there. They   ve struggled for so long, they want a break.  My wife is Brazilian and she thought, like many of them do,    Oh yeah. The children will live at home until they   re fifty.    She now realizes as soon as he graduates, he   s going to start his life. If you   re going to go to grad school, that   s fine. If you   re going to get a job as an engineer, that   s fine too, but you   ve got to start your life. You can   t be babied until you fifty. I   m glad that she said that. I was hoping that she would say that. It   s a mother   s son, you cannot get in between that. Not everybody had my experiences where I just got tossed out of there.  Finchum I keep picturing you laying on the ground at ten and looking at the sky.  Abramson Oh yeah   Finchum Thinking,    I   m in trouble now.     48  Abramson Just like yesterday.    I   m in trouble now.    I remember in the other military school Mr. Shultz, the biology teacher, he would say,    You   ve got a test in two weeks, start studying and you should get an A.    You would not leave that classroom until you got an A. He   d be right with you until you got that A on that test. Then you   d be in trouble because you   re wasting his time, but he would be right there with you. You wonder what happened   another guy, I can   t remember his name, in Croydon Hall Academy. I always had problems spelling enough, E-N-U-F. He did the same thing. He kept working with you.  (Phone Rings)  Finchum Enough?  Abramson Yeah, it was E-N-U-F. Then he would be right with me,    Try again. Try again.    Stern, but he   d give me the opportunity to figure it out on my own, which is what I do with my students. But then don   t waste time, give an honest effort. Again, these little things at the precise psychological moment make all the difference in the world. That   s what I try to do, and I focus more on the D and F Students than I probably do on the A students, because they know. It   s the D and F Students that need the help, but they have to want the help. You   re just wasting your time if you   re offering help and they aren   t ready to accept it. It   s better to say,    The door   s open to you. When you   re ready, here I am.    Don   t waste the time.  Finchum Any of those D and F students become star pupils?  Abramson Yeah, I   ve got people that cry when they end up with a C in my class, because they   re so proud that they got that C. Yeah. I   ll meet them anytime anywhere but you know,    I   m not going to beg you to help you. You   re going to have to want to do it.     Finchum Some take you up on your offer?  Abramson Right.  Finchum Some do?  Abramson Yeah. There are others who don   t. Then you think,    You all should do it.    You probably do the same thing I do. You drive around Oklahoma and see all these people with cows, and so many people look at the group of cows. I focus on the one that is off in the field by itself. I say,    Why is that cow by itself and not with the others?    Why is that student not performing as much as the others will? Is there something going on in their life that maybe I can help them with? Sometimes it   s just they can   t pay for a course. They got 49  this, it   s only money. I can write a check. It   s not like I   m poor. If it   s money, it   s the simplest thing in the world to solve. Just write a check.  Finchum You   ve done that for some?  Abramson Quite a few. Less so now, because I   m married. Before, I actually paid people   s tuitions. I   m glad to do it. Glad to do it. One person I bought a wheelchair. There are other things like that. He always   just Marcuella did for me, you always want to help someone that   s trying to better themselves. You don   t want to crush them. It   s easy to do that.    Bug off. Get lost. I   m too busy now. Leave me alone. I   ve got my own problems.    It   s easy to say those things. But it   s just as easy to say    Yeah, come on down and I   ll give you a hand. What do you need? You want to use the laboratory? Put on a science show for kids?    It   s easy. What does that mean? One less news show you   re watching, one less comic book you   re reading or whatever. You can   t spare an hour in your busy day? No one is that busy.  If you   ve got graduate students or even undergraduate students working in your laboratory, train them to do it, which is what I try to do. Then they can go out there and then maybe they   ll train somebody else. Soon it snowballs. It   s not that hard to do, but everybody has to be working on the same page, and you can   t have little kingdoms and fiefdoms and everything else that people like to do. Nobody knows everything. Again, depends on the team members. If you   re surrounded by losers, you become a loser. Surrounded by people that achieve, you become a person that achieves. You know, in my view anyway, the rules for life are pretty simple.  Finchum Sounds like you do what you preach.  Abramson I try to. In college I was an oriental religion minor. I always appreciated religion. They   re guides on behavior. Is it so wrong to say,    Thou shalt not kill?    Or I don   t want to covet somebody else   s wife? What   s so wrong about that? Or some of the other things.    Do unto others as you would do unto yourself.    These are just rules to live by. I see nothing wrong with that. Some people are alone, they feel they   re alone. They   re not really alone if you believe, you know, certain kinds of religions or maybe all of them. Whether it   s oriental religions or non-oriental, you   re part of the big picture.  I can   t get too  religious  or I get in trouble, because the last place on Earth you get free speech is the college campus. Right? I think most people would agree with that. All I   ve got to do is say a couple of sentences, and the next thing I know they   ll be down in my office complaining about something. That needs to change too. You   ve got to be able to express your views if you   re a professor. I see that   s becoming less and less and less. It can be being educated is a good thing.  50  You say you   re depressed, take out your kazoo, your harmonica, your guitar, your violin, you   re pounding on the desk or something. Pick up a book. Read about somebody else   s triumphs or failures. Read autobiographies and biographies of what people have done. You feel better. I know, because I   ve done it. It works. Many people   s stories, everybody   s got a story. Many, if not most, if not all, are inspiring. Be inspired.  Finchum Uh-huh.  Abramson In the history class I ask people,    Ever been inspired by a book?    Most of them say no, because they don   t read. If you   re going to be a good writer, you   ve got to be a good reader. They go hand in hand. I never thought I would live to see the day of when now we have to use plagiarism software to detect cheating in student papers. Yeah, I don   t do that. I   m not going to waste my time. You   re going to cheat, feel free. In the end you   re going to get it. You   re not going to have the knowledge that you need and your life   s going to be crummy. You won   t be able to appreciate this or that. In the end, cheaters get caught. You don   t fool anybody. I   ve noticed some pretty wide ranging.  Finchum You   re also the one that didn   t do two grades in high school, and managed to get     Abramson Yeah, I went to five high schools. I knew that I would never be a failure. How can you complain when you   re reading a biography or autobiography of Helen Keller? All the problems that she had and I   m complaining about being smacked around and having my fingers broken? Or you think of some of the veterans of the Vietnam War, Hanoi Hilton and other things these people went through. I   m complaining I didn   t get a paper accepted? You know, it   s all a matter of perspective. If you don   t have a wide knowledge base, you don   t appreciate, you get cut off. That   s what I hope that at least with Phi Beta Kappa, you   re joining a community of people that feel the same way that you do, that have reached   essentially reach your goals. I hope they   ll continue to stay that way, but at least for a certain time in their life they   re able to say,    Hey I accomplished something that no one could ever take away,    because they can   t take this away.  Finchum The committee can say that.  Abramson Yeah.  Finchum The multiple committees, I guess.  Abramson Once you   re elected Phi Beta Kappa, there   s no way to take it away. Unless you cheated your whole life, through the grade process.  51  Finchum Sure.  Abramson But if that ever happens, it   s probably rare. So, I hope I didn   t bore you.  Finchum No, it   s been great.  Abramson I   ve been imparting you with the history. I know this story is a little bit different, or what we talk about is somewhat different than the others. My role in the Phi Beta Kappa application process wasn   t that great. You know it all fits together, but I enjoyed it, and I   m glad that Perry Gethner overlooked   I   d do the same thing. What difference does it make if you don   t agree with somebody? As long as they can do the job, that   s all that matters, getting the job done. He appreciated that. I couldn   t believe it.    Man, I can   t believe that was Perry Gethner.    (Laughs) We were very friendly over the emails, right? I had no idea it was him.  Finchum Did he know it was you? Did he make that connection too?  Abramson Maybe later.  Finchum Maybe later?  Abramson Yeah, but I   m right.    You   re delaying me getting to my class. I   m starting my class late.    I need that ten-minute interval between classes to set up my stuff. I do a lot of demonstrations. I need that time. He was wrong. It turns out other people said the same thing. I   m the only one, once again, that was able to say something. People don   t want to say something. Then, again, I felt bad because he ended up moving the class to another place. When you have a class that seats fifty and you only have four or five people in there, there   s another space you can use. I did feel a little bit awkward. We did become, I don   t know, we aren   t bosom buddies, but we   re friendly. I appreciate what he does. I think he appreciates what I do. More importantly we respect each other, which I think mutual respect is important.  Finchum Good lesson learned too.  Abramson Right.  Finchum Right.  Abramson I learned that I   ve got to be careful. I   ve got to look up these people first, but I gave every opportunity. I even knocked on the door when it was five of, then after. I didn   t just do it right away. I even offered to get him an alarm clock. He said,    There   s no clock in the class.    I said,    I   ll buy you a clock.    I did all that. In the end, it still didn   t happen. Then I   ve got to do something, because I   m not going to be disrespected by anybody. 52  Finchum And your students might not hang around long enough for the classroom to clear.  Abramson Also, they see me. They say,    Here   s Dr. Abramson. He   s being pushed around.    That does not work. I will not be pushed around by anybody, an administrator or anybody. That   s not going to happen. Those days are, it was fifty years ago, those days are long over. Long over. It will never happen again. When I hit that Two-Ton Tony in the face and knocked his teeth out, I was shocked he left me alone. I   ll never forget that day. I still remember the column they chased me around, everybody   s laughing, and then I stop and I hit him and he goes right into my fist. Then everybody was like    Wow     I never was, for the most part, I was never hassled again.  Then I moved to the other place, and I started having problems. There I learned reinforcement or rewards are relative. I started getting into fights all the time, all the time. I was getting punished all the time. I was running away all the time. They agreed with my father, they would only talk to me and interact with me in class. That meant I marched by myself, ate by myself. Imagine a corps of cadets and then you had horses. I was actually after the horse group, and one little kid marching. We had parades every Saturday. They thought that was like the biggest punishment. For me it was great. (Laughs) They left me alone, I could do whatever I want. Again, you learn that you can   t treat everybody the same way. You   ve got to know their reinforcement history. What   s a reward for somebody may not be a reward for somebody else. The reward now may not be the same reward ten years ago or ten years since. You always have to be careful about that. That   s what you learn as a behaviorist. Behavior counts.  This cognitive stuff, I   m not a big fan of cognitive psychology. I think it   s nonsense. I   m not sure they even know what it even means.    What is cognitive?    They say,    Well I investigate learning.    Well, then you   re a learning psychologist. I did a survey of intro books and cognitive books on the definition of cognition. If I looked at twelve books there were twelve different definitions. I   m sure you notice the same thing. People just don   t define terms anymore. When they do define it, it means one thing here and means something else over there. There are things that are universals. There is good and bad. There are areas that are not gray. It   s either this or that. That   s what I try to instill in the students. There are absolutes. You need to try to find what these things are. Either you tell the truth or you   re lying. You don   t tell the truth part of the time.  Now, in response to that, I   m working with a student to create an app. Let   s say a student says,    I want to see you in office hours.    They don   t show up. I can plot that and then the next time I see them, over the semester,    Why would I believe anything you say when you only have a 50 percent chance 53  of doing what you say you   re going to do?    Then I   m going to show them,    This is what your data looks like.    That   s almost finished. I   ve got a beta version I   m starting to work on, an alpha version. Similar to the requirement of teaching little kids about behavior. If I can do that, other people can do it, but you have to want to work at it together and you want to have to do it. Right? You want to embody the principles of what is a person of Phi Beta Kappa. That   s what I think is important.  Finchum Well, I think you do that very well from where I   m sitting.  Abramson It   s just really   you get depressed.  Finchum That   s when you have chocolate.  Abramson Yeah, I drink like four or six cups of coffee a day with the espresso, coffee that I make. Sometimes you look at those students and you say    Boy, they   re going to go out there and they   re going to get killed,    because they   re just so unprepared.  Finchum But then there are some that will surprise you.  Abramson Yeah, some do, but you remember   this is actually a comparative question that I want to try and answer. Do you focus more on the positives or the negatives? Is that behavior throughout the phylogenetic scale? Does an ant remember the places where there   s danger as opposed to the places where they find food? Does a human remember the better things, or the angels of your nature, as opposed to the bad things that happen to them? Like for me, I used to play ice hockey and football and other things. I remember every loss, I didn   t have that many. I don   t remember the wins as much as I remember the losses. I remember the failures more than I remember the successes. I   m not sure   that   s not the best way of doing things. I wonder if other people feel the same way and whether animals do this, the same kind of criteria. Do they remember the dangerous places rather than the places that were not so dangerous? These are empirical questions.  Finchum Self-preservation makes you think they   d remember the negative.  Abramson Right, but self-preservation is also a good thing. Again, these are questions that I hope to answer someday. I   ve got to find the time. I need a bigger laboratory space.  Finchum More students to help you find those answers.  Abramson (Laughs) And more students to help. I have a laboratory in Brazil and other places around the world, but I can   t be everywhere all the time. If I can get out of teaching and just do research full-time, I   d rather do that. I   m not sure 54  I   m making a difference. That   s what I wonder about all the time. Then with these phony course evaluations, and they are phony. You know they say,    Well we don   t use it for tenure promotion.    That   s BS. I never read them. I refuse to read them. If you   ve got something to tell 
