 Ahrberg and I   m interviewing Art Bieri today. Mr.  Bieri is participating in the Oklahoma State University Oral History  Project called O-STATE Stories. He is of the graduating class of 1958?  Yes.  We   d like to welcome you.  Thank you.  Can you tell me a little bit about yourself   where you are from  originally and where you grew up?  I was born in New York City, and after birth my dad and mother took  me to New Jersey. We lived in New Jersey just about all my life. My  dad worked for a milk corporation, Sheffield Farms, and my mother was  a homemaker. I have two sisters and a brother. I finished high school in  1950 and then I got drafted and enlisted in the Air Force. I was in the  Air Force for four years. I was stationed in various parts of the  country   in Ohio and Alabama. Then I went over to Korea in early 1953  and I was there for a year and then rotated back to the United States.  At that time I felt I really enjoyed the military, but I felt that I needed to  go ahead and continue on and try to get my education. I met my former  wife, Alvena N. Brillhart, who was an English teacher at the university  and she taught 13 years. That was in the summer of 1955. I was in Korea  from 1953 to 1954 and I was discharged in 1955 at Altus Air Force Base  here in Oklahoma. That   s what got me to stay in Oklahoma and I met  my former wife. I had gone back to New Jersey, worked at a swimming  pool in the summer, then came back here and we got married in  November 1955, so I stayed out here. Went to school here at  A M/OSU   at that time it was Oklahoma A M   and then after I  5  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  graduated, I taught in Cushing. I was there for two years and then we  came to Stillwater. The superintendent in Cushing had the  superintendent   s job over in Stillwater and so he took that job and he  called me up and he said,    Art, are you ready to move?    I said,    Yes,  sir,    and so we came to Stillwater, my wife and I. Then I taught in the  Stillwater schools 28 years   excellent career   excellent university  career and excellent career in the public schools of Oklahoma. I had a  wonderful college career and teachers at OSU.  That   s wonderful. So you   ve lived in Stillwater since then?  Yes.  And you don   t miss New Jersey anymore?  I do miss it quite a bit because when I was growing up we lived a block  and a half from the Atlantic Ocean. That was our playground. Every so  often I can still smell the salt air even being out here so long. But it was  a good growing up life, just shortly after the Depression time, too.  Let me ask you to state what years you attended Oklahoma A M.  1955 to 1958   I put four years in three years.  Okay, and can you tell us again why you decided to attend OAMC?  When I met my former wife, Alvena N. Brillhart, she was teaching here  at the English Department. Rather than she move with me   I had been  accepted to Bridgeport University in Connecticut, a scholarship to go to  school. Well I didn   t take it   I came here to Oklahoma and stayed with  her and our relationship developed. Then we got married and that was it.  So I stayed here all that time.  You weren   t on the GI Bill?  Yes, I was.  You were. Which that helped a lot, I would think.  Yes, it did. So from what she was making at the time and the GI Bill,  that got me through school.  What was your major while you were here in school?  It was physical education.  6  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Okay.  I got my bachelor   s in physical education and then I had my bachelor   s  in elementary ed. Then I got my master   s in physical education.  And all your degrees are from OAMC?  They   re from Oklahoma State University because that changed, I think it  was in 1957. I started when it was OAMC and when I graduated it was  Oklahoma State.  What did your family think about you going to school out here in  Oklahoma?  Well, they didn   t object to it at all. As time went on, from teaching I  went into administration   the superintendent after several years wanted  me to take over a principalship and I did. My dad, I remember him  saying,    Well, Art, why don   t you come to New Jersey? You could  make more money.    But I didn   t do that. I was comfortable here. I was  making progress. Everything was working out nicely, and so I stayed. I  didn   t feel the need to go ahead and uproot anything from here     although it was tough going back to New Jersey a lot of times because of  distance and time. My mother and dad and our family were very close.  Are you the only member in your family to go to college? Did your  parents attend college? Did you have siblings that attended college here  or elsewhere?  My mother and dad didn   t. Mother went to high school. My dad finished  in seventh grade, and that   s because of the times. My brother went to  Monmouth College which is now Monmouth University. He was there  for two years. My younger sister didn   t go to college, although she felt  that the job that she was offered at the time from the U.S. Government     because you can get the experience there, and she did   she was with the  Government for a long time. And then I have a twin sister, and she lives  in Flower Mound, Texas, and she had academic work but she didn   t  finish. Then my daughter, Donna Jean Bieri, graduated from Oklahoma  State, but prior to that she went to Oklahoma City University and  majored in sociology and then graduated in FRCD here. My son, John  Arthur Bieri, graduated from OCU in marketing. Both children are  highly accomplished and wonderful.  So your daughter graduated from OSU?  Yes.  7  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Awesome. And you said your major was elementary ed and      Elementary and secondary      Secondary education   but you went into the administrative part of it?  Can you tell me some of the classes you remember taking?  I took a number of classes in physical education since it was the major. I  took Oklahoma history. I took some sociology, psychology, education  classes. Gosh      Well, is there any particular class that stands out from all the others that  you remember as one of the most interesting or challenging?  I enjoyed all my professors. I didn   t have problems in getting along. I  really valued every one of them that I was associated with for what they  taught me, and it rubbed off. Also the classes that really had a lot of  strong impact was my physical education classes. Dr. A. B. Harrison  was very influential, and I see him regularly today because he works out  at the Wellness Center. He was a big influence on me.  You took a class under him or      All my classes in physical education pretty much were with him, Gordon  Gilbert and Valerie Colvin, who the P.E. Center is named after.  That   s awesome. Can you remember some of the names of the buildings  your classes were held in, and what was the condition of these  buildings? Did you have air conditioning, elevators?  Well, the Classroom Building was one. Gallagher-Iba was another one  that was primary because most of the athletics and intramurals were  right there. Gardner Hall, I had classes there. The Armory, which is now  the Architecture Building, across from the Business office building.  There used to be a swimming pool in the Armory and I taught swimming  there. That   s where I took my classes from Dr. Harrison and then I  finally taught classes there for him when he went on sabbatical. He  wanted me to teach his classes so I did that. And of course the Business  Building is the same. The Student Union is the same. The Music  Department   Cordell Hall. That was across from where the tennis  courts were and here again, they   re gone. Lewis Field was there at the  time and a great running track.  Did you have any classes in those wonderful Quonset huts they used to  have?  8  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  No. I didn   t have any classes, and the only Quonset hut that was there at  that time was the sculpture quonset.  Were your classes pretty much spread out across campus? Did you have  to walk a long way?  No, it was basically from Gallagher-Iba to the Classroom Building.  Did a lot of people bicycle or did they walk to classes? Were there a lot  of bicycles in use back then?  Not as much as they are today, but there were bicycles and a lot of  walking, of course.  What about cars? Parking probably wasn   t a problem as it is today.  I didn   t think there was because I walked all the time. I had a car, but I  walked. From what I observed, there was plenty of parking at the time  but where I walked from, I don   t know about the ones that had to go  from a distance, I   m not sure.  So you were married when you attended school?  Yes.  Where did you all live?  We lived on West Street, which was just a half block from the OSU fire  department, and we lived in an apartment house there. It   s still there.  Really?  Yes.  Wow. How much was rent? Do you remember?  Oh, gosh.  That   s a long time ago, I know.  Yes. I really don   t remember; it was still high but the only reason it was  high because, here again, the times were different, and my check was  about  136 from the government, so from what I made and what my  wife had made, we pulled that together. Yes...  That was a tough question.  9  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  That   s a good question too, but I don   t remember the rent cost.  So you never got to experience dorm life?  No.  Nothing like that?  No. I had opportunities to be in fraternities and I didn   t take them, and  the reason I didn   t was because I just came back from Korea and I  wasn   t prepared to have somebody tell me what to do. (Laughter)  Pledgeships are a little hard.  I   d just been through a lot.  Yeah. I could understand that.  I don   t mind taking orders, but the atmosphere of what was going on and  everything like that   it was just hard to take.  I can imagine. So with a spouse, did you have places that you all liked to  eat out together? Were there places on campus that you as a student ate  at?  Yes. We went to the Student Union quite often, and in town we went to  restaurants in town.  Well there was Swim Campus Shop      Yes. We went to it.      and there was a drugstore downtown, Central Drug.  The Union was more popular, and when you   re on campus you   re in a  different community entirely. You don   t usually keep up with what   s  going on around town. You   re pretty much confined with studying and  with friends that you had at school. We went to ballgames all the time.  When you say ballgames, are you talking about baseball, football?  Football, basketball, baseball   we liked them. Track and field, but we  didn   t go as often as we did with football and basketball.  So Mr. Iba was on the campus at that time?  10  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  He was my teacher.  Oh, okay.  Mr. Iba was my teacher in basketball when I was taking classes.  Tell us a little bit about that.  Oh, he was a great guy and deserving to be called Mr. Iba. When he  walked in the room, as often as you would see him in there, you just  stared. I have all his notes from when I was in school. I have them in a  black book at my house. Sam Albey was his assistant at the time and  then Coach Albey was also my teacher. Eddie Sutton   he and I were  together in class.  That   s neat.  Yes, it really was. I can recall back with Eddie. I was sitting in the  bleachers on the front row by myself, nobody else was in Gallagher at  the time, either meditating or worrying about a test or something. I can   t  recall what it was and Eddie came across the court. He had just finished  a class. There was no one else present. He came across the court and he  said,    My name is Eddie Sutton, and I   m from Stillwater,    and so I told  him who I was and where I was from. I   ll never forget that.  That   s really neat.  Yes.  So you ate mostly at the Student Union. Was the Sugar Shack here?  Yes. It was on the corner, I think it was called the Sugar Shack, but it  was on the corner up from the Classroom Building.  Okay. I think you could get coffee there      Yes, doughnuts and candy.  What about your laundry, did you have laundry facilities in your  apartment building or did you have to find places in Stillwater to do  your laundry?  Yes.  Did you pay people to do your laundry?  11  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  No. We did it ourselves.  Was it expensive enough to do that?  Yes. We did it ourselves, there were some laundry shops in the area of  Washington Street and on Boomer Road. As a matter of fact, the  Cowboy was there at the time and Ikey Sanders is the one that has that     and then Ikey ran the campus laundry for many, many years. We didn   t  go there, but we went to the one on   the Cowboy      Did you own a car while you were here in Stillwater?  Yes.  Did you go into town? Did you visit town often as far as      Yes, we did.      or did you stay strictly on the campus?  No. We went to town. Of course the theaters were there at the time, and  then the campus theater was right on the corner where the Hideaway is  now. There was a movie theater, and we attended that quite often and it  was just a half a block from where we lived anyway. They had good  movies. Then we did go into town to the Leachman at that time, and  then there was another theater on Main Street   I can   t recall what the  name was. Then we went shopping to the stores that were available at  the time   the grocery stores and      So the whole time that you lived here in Stillwater, or attended school  here, you lived in the same apartment building? You didn   t live  anywhere in a house or anything?  We did. We lived at the apartment building on West Street, and then we  moved to a duplex on McElroy. They   re gone now, too   gosh   but we  lived in this duplex for about a year, maybe a year and a half. And then  after that, we did buy a house on South McFarland and we lived there  for quite a long time and Donna was born during that time, 1962.  You came here on the GI Bill. Did you associate with many of the other  military personnel that were attending the school at that time? Was  there kind of a camaraderie with you all, knowing that you were all      We really didn   t know that at the time, but in class you would find out  that they were in the military and we didn   t talk anything about money.  Being on the GI Bill   and the association   just by chance, you know,  12  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  you were sitting next to someone and they   d say,    Well, yes, I just got  out of the service.    Then you start going back and talk about it and after  that you either associated together or you went your ways. But we had  good relationships with campus people and the college people. I   ll never  forget how good it was.  Let   s talk a little bit about the student body as far as the make-up. You  said there were a lot of military people here on campus during those  years because of the war   mostly here for the GI Bill. Were there any  Native Americans that you saw or African Americans?  Very few Native Americans, very few African Americans.  Where did you like to study at? Did you go to the library any?  I went to the library quite a bit. I studied a lot at the apartment that we  had. Also, we studied at each other   s apartments or house that they  might be living in. The Student Union was pretty popular, but the  library, I think, was one of the best because of the accessibility of what  you had to have and the quietness.  So did you use it a lot? You did some research there      Yes.      for your classes and stuff? That   s neat. Tell us a little bit about your  social life then. You said you went to some dances?  We went to the dances on campus and they used to have them at the  Starlight Ballroom.  Did they charge you? How much did they charge you?  It was maybe a dollar, dollar and a half, but then they had a lot of  conventions there. They also had a lot of entertainment during that time  put on by some of the fraternities and sororities. Some of it was free and  some of it was nominal cost.  Was the music live? It was all played by the bands?  Yes, and there   s a lot of good Allied Arts programs   wonderful Allied  Arts programs. The Seretean wasn   t built at that time. The college  auditorium was where the Seretean is today. The theater program and  many tests were taken in the auditorium, lectures.  We   re here for Homecoming, so can you give us a little bit of the  13  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  memories about your Homecomings that you spent here back then?  The parades were always good. They were always really nice and  colorful all the time, a lot of variety. A lot of effort put into every float.  It was amazing how quickly they did that, even though it took weeks to  get it done. A lot of horses. When the parades were coming down Main  Street, they would turn and come down Sixth, and the horses had to stop  at Sixth Street because of the grates by IGA. You know what I   m  speaking of? There are still grates there, but the horses would stop all the  time and the riders had to go ahead and take the horses on the ground  and not cross the grates because it   s an instinct for the horses and any  other animals to go across a grate and maybe get their hoof stuck into it.  Were the horses being used to pull the floats? Or were they just being  part of the parade?  Part of the parade, yes, and then they had a wagon and one or two  shovelers (Laughter) behind the horses.  What about the house and dorm decorations? Were they as elaborate as  they are now? Were they scaled down or were they      Well, they were elaborate at the time, and as time went on you saw  different changes that improved things. They always looked for  improvement in class, color, noise.  Did they have a Walk-A-Round like they do now?  Oh, yes     Even back then?      yes, big time      Big time.      but they didn   t have any concession stands that I can remember   and  I think that   s a nice addition, to put the hot dogs and refreshments   but  it   s still very colorful, and it was back then.  Just to throw out something else   the housing was completely different  than what it is today. At the time we even had our house, my wife and I,  everything was residential. People kept their homes real nice     everything throughout the community basically   but today, the  neighborhoods are ruined because, it just took one person to rent their  house in Stillwater where the family of someone else would come and  14  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  buy that when it was rented   they offered it for sale, bought the house  and now there   s their children plus others from one of the families that  lived in the same house. That   s going on in Stillwater today.  Neighborhoods are destroyed; lawns that were well kept are destroyed.  So there wasn   t a lot of rental property around campus at that time?  There was, but the people who would retire or die, or for some reason  leave   those houses were sold to another family and still kept up. But  today they   re rented and by being rented, it goes downhill because no  one is taking care of it. The lawns are abused badly with the vehicles and  that   s all over town. It   s caused a lot of disturbance for the residents  today who still live there as a family.  You mentioned earlier about Valerie Colvin. Can you tell us a little bit  about her and did you have interactions or classes with her?  Yes, I had a lot of classes with her. I did my Master   s field problem with  her.  Okay. Tell us a little bit about her.  Miss Colvin. She didn   t have her doctorate, but everybody called her  Miss Colvin. She was about four feet three   maybe four six. She was  small, petite and very, very active   very aggressive   determined to  make you a good person in physical education   in elementary. We had  classes at the Armory at the time and we had classes outdoors. We had  to teach classes in front of her as part of the student acquaintance of PE.  We just learned so much from her in skills. I did my master   s work with  her, and that was very interesting. I took my master   s as a field problem.  It was called a field problem. She wanted me to write on three areas; on  rhythms, games and tumbling. I did, and it came out in 1962. I used my  own students because I was still teaching at the time, so I had access to  what you need live and it worked out real well. But I didn   t take  advantage of my classes anytime by using school time for this kind of  work. But she had a lot of vitality. There was a time when the physical  education people wanted to go ahead and name a building for her, and  the people against that said,    Well, she   s not dead yet.    So we kept after  it, and finally we got it while she was alive      That   s great.      because they had one for Mr. Iba, but he was already deceased, and  we always felt it wasn   t proper at that time. But the reason then, too, was  because they didn   t want controversy. Some people would like it and  some people wouldn   t. She was alive and that was such a great tribute  15  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  when that building was called the Colvin Center.  Yeah. I used to go over there for some of my classes. It was a beautiful  building. I still think it   s a beautiful building. What were the sizes of  your classes? Did they vary in size or did you have some big   like  today, some are huge classes and then some that are more specific to  your major are smaller.  The biology classes were large. They had anywhere from 200 to 250 and  we were in the auditorium, which was a building before the Seretean  was built. It was a college auditorium. We had a lecture by the  professors in biology and the humanities. In my activity classes, we had  about oh, 26, 27 students, and they were pretty standard. We went from  football to basketball, the whole group went, and so the class stayed  pretty stable.  As far as your social life, you said you attended the games. Did you  attend the football games here on campus or at that time, were they   I  know back in the    40   s they said that a lot of times they played them  down in Oklahoma City, but at the time that you were in school were  they being played here on campus?  Yes they were, and it was OU and A M at the time. They were played  here and at Norman, and likewise with some of the other ballgames     Missouri, Kansas. We didn   t travel.  What was Washington Street like when you were here? Was it a campus  place that it   s grown to be?  It changed so often. Before they did all the paving, it was dirty. The  people that owned shops and everything did the best they could to keep  it clean but it has so much use, and the city kept it clean as best that   s  possible. There was always a change of stores. You get one group  coming in that would have a hot dog store, clothing   used to be at the  time   and then when they graduated, the store closed. The barber shop  (Bud   s) has been there for many, many years and that   s been a standard.  There used to be a photo shop, Osborne   s, which was very productive.  Dupree   s was still there at the time.  Really? That long?  Yes, long time. Colonial Florist wasn   t there at that particular time that I  can remember, there on the corner. They relocated and Terry is the one  that owns that. He   s a good man. I had him as a student. That was a good  move for them. There   s a lot more bars. There were a few bars      16  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  At the time you were in school it was frequented quite a bit by this  campus      Oh yes, a lot of it.      by the students and so forth? Okay. Have you kept up with a lot of the  people you attended school with or do you have some people that you  know that you keep in touch with that you went to school with?  Just one and that   s the sad thing about it because I think when you   re  going to school you need friends in college that are good and  compatible, and to keep a relationship and know what they   re doing in  their life after college is important. I do keep in touch with one person,  although all my classmates that I can remember were good people.  Myron Pease; he lives in Broken Arrow. He had a good career, and I just  visited with him the other day on the phone. He and his wife and my  wife, socialized   went to dances. So to me that   s real important to keep  in touch with your college people.  Oklahoma State seems to have a real bond with its students and  personnel. Can you explain that feeling   can you put into words what  you think   as you talked about this one friend that you have kept in  touch with a long time   what do you think it is about OSU that allows or  puts that feeling to be extended to people after they leave the university?  Is it the traditions that we have, that we carry on, that bonds you? Is it  just the camaraderie that we have? Maybe it   s because we   re the  underdogs, (Laughs) that a lot of times OSU is known as the underdogs  and so we stick together because you have to. Can you explain that  feeling? Because OSU really does have quite a tradition for its  Homecoming and alumni, and I   m wondering what your take would be  on that.  I think the publicity has helped a whole lot. The O   Collegian being out  every single day, with good information, expanded information as it is  today. The O   Collegian at that time was free on campus and free in  town. Now there is a cost off campus, and probably some people can   t  handle that unless they know where to get The O   Collegian. But The  O   Collegian was at that time, and still is to me, one of the highlight  communicators and they have good writers. They keep in tune with  what   s going on not only on campus but around the state and the world.  The O   Stater magazine is very, very good. It keeps a lot of people  informed. They have their yearly information that comes out in the  1950s, the 1960s and so on   a little brief in there. I think the people that  have graduated have really done well and had a lot of impact in their  17  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  areas, in their communities. However, they haven   t received much  recognition and yet they   re graduates and part of OSU. They   re good  people. They worked hard in school and yet they don   t receive the  recognition as    What did you do in your life since you left?    You hear  more about donations which overwhelms so much, but the ones like  myself and others   and I   ve got to say that   need to have some  recognition that the college has done the job, because the graduates went  out and did the job. We had good teachers, good surroundings.  Do you remember any particular campus traditions besides  Homecoming? Maybe something they did before football games or  maybe before the fraternities and sororities got together and they had  their Rush Week or something?  It was there, Rush Week, fraternities    gatherings.  Speaking of some of the social things that you did, did they have a lot of  bands coming to the Starlight Terrace and were they local bands? Did  they bring any outside people from the city or big names? Did Frank  Sinatra ever visit our campus or      No, he didn   t. (Laughter) No, the bands came to the campus before and  when the Seretean Center was built. Bert Bacharack lt; bob Hope, Lilly  Tomlin   many good programs  Allied Arts was great, Varsity  Reviews     Did your family ever come to visit you while you were here?  Yes, they did. That was very nice.  What was their impression of Oklahoma A M when they came? Or did  they come while you were here in school?  Yes, they did twice. They were impressed. They were impressed that I  was the only one of the family that had graduated from school, and it  was because of the times and situations that didn   t allow my brothers  and sisters, and even some relatives didn   t have some opportunites. I had  the chance because I had the GI Bill and that made a difference. What  was your other question?  If your family ever came to see you and what was their impression of the  campus when they came?  Oh, yes. They liked the campus very much. I can remember that  because of the beauty of it, the care of it. My dad always was very  meticulous in neatness, and both he and my mother enjoyed the campus  18  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  a lot. We ate on campus. They went to my graduation, and it was just  impressive for them to take the time to travel from New Jersey, come to  Oklahoma, spend a few days with us then go back home. It was really a  valued time.  Can you tell us anything about what you remember about Theta Pond  and Old Central? You touched on the library and the Student Union     but what about Theta Pond and Old Central?  Theta Pond was always kept up well, too, and it was always a drawing  card at any time of the year. Homecoming was impressive. There were  always a lot of ducks, a lot of squirrels, a lot of birds. The beauty of the  pond and the upkeep that they   ve always done here on campus has been  impressive.  You talked a little bit about the name change from OAMC to OSU. You  were here when they did that?  Yes.  Can you tell us a little bit about that? Were you for it? Were you against  it? What did most of the campus feel like when they decided?  I don   t think they had much of a choice of a change. It was coming  around, but only those I think that had something to do with it politically  or however it was motivated to make that change, I really can   t be sure.  It happened, I think, in 1957. All of a sudden   even though it wasn   t all  of a sudden, but when it came about, it was OAMC and then now  Oklahoma State. So much had to be changed on paper, and the color.  Orange was just not an orange at the time. They had to do so many  samples to identify what orange is. I can remember that. (Laughter)  There   s orange and then there   s orange.  I had more priorities sometimes than I wondered about the name change,  but when it came about it was impressive. But sometimes you go too  much overboard. (Laughs)  Old Central has been here and they   re currently renovating it. Did they  hold classes in Old Central at the time you were here?  Yes, they did, but I didn   t go to those. I did more attending of classes  after I graduated.  Did a lot of the students go home back in that era?  19  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Yes.  Did they not stay on campus during the weekends?  Yes, they did. We didn   t have as many international students at the time  either, but they went home. We would talk about it ourselves      What  are you gonna do for the holidays?       Well I   m going home, going to  Tulsa       or the City or wherever they lived. Internationals usually  stayed on campus.  You and your spouse, were you able to leave Stillwater and travel quite  a bit? You said you had a car. When the weekends came, did you try and  get out of town or did you stay home and study or      I stayed home and studied, and my wife helped me a lot. She was in the  English Department and she really helped me to get through school.  There was a saying all the time,    To know my wife was like getting a  BS degree,    and that   s true. She lived in Hobart, Oklahoma. We went to  Hobart on weekends to see her folks. They had a farm in Hobart, and we  also would go to the state lodges later on in our college time, that was  very relaxing.  What advice would you give to students today that were thinking about  coming to a university? What would you say about why you would come  to Oklahoma State University?  The friendliness of the campus, the people on campus. I don   t know how  it would be today in classes. The people have changed so much in their  wearing apparel. We used to wear a shirt and tie more. I think that the  attitude has always been high as far as the academics and not just sports.  I always looked at everybody that had gone to school at the time I did     you know, we really looked at trying to do the best we could at school. If  you were an athlete, you still did the best you could. But the overall  friendliness to me was real important.  Did you have a job while you were   I know you attended on the GI Bill,  but did you have a job?  No.  What were some of the popular places off-campus? You may have  touched upon that. I think I did ask you that question.  The Hideaway, Couch Park, movie theaters in town.  Where was the Hideaway located?  20  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  It was across the street from St. Andrews Episcopal Church  on Third  Street .  So it was there back when you were in school?  Yes. Richard Dermer is the owner, and he graduated in culinary arts I  believe. That   s where it started, and then as time went on they moved to  their present location  on Knoblock , and the Campus Theater used to be  on the corner. When that closed, then they had a bar that was downstairs  to Campus Theater and then that faded out.  Is there anything that you would like to add today that we haven   t  covered? Can you tell us about the materials that we scanned that you     I haven   t seen them, but you brought some materials that we scanned.  Can you tell us a little bit about that?  The materials I presented to David have to do with the accomplishments  that I have done, with the help of a lot of people through the years after I  graduated. I started a library program here in Stillwater years ago when I  was principal of Lincoln School. I started that in the foyer of the  auditorium, and that was the only library at that time in the public  schools. The classroom teachers had libraries in their rooms, but as time  went on I put the library   s program together and that   s all written out in  this packet. Then the Board of Education saw what was going on, talk  was going around, a bond issue was set up, a bond issue passed and  every elementary school has a library.  That   s awesome.  Terrific, yes. That   s just one thing.  Anything else?  I   m working on the history of elementary physical education in  Stillwater   I started the program     Is there a funny story or a memorable event that you would like to tell  us?  When I was principal of Lincoln School, we had fire drills periodically,  purposely set up. I ran a fire drill and I told a custodian,    You check this  part of the building and I   ll check the other part.    I came to the boys     restroom and there was a little second grader sitting on a stool, and I said  to him,    Son, we   re running a fire drill.    He said,    Mr. Bieri, I   ve got to  go so bad. Let it burn. Let it burn.    (Laughter)  21  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  Ahrberg  Bieri  That   s a great story  (Laughs)  That   s good.  That is good. I want to thank you again for coming and sharing your  stories with us. It   s been wonderful to meet you.  Oh, you   ve done a good job, thanks.  I   ve just really thoroughly enjoyed it.  Thank you very much.  -------  -------   
