 Gill. Today is September 16, 2009. I   m visiting with  Dr. Bob Spurrier in the newly renovated Old Central building, which is  home of the Honors College now. Bob, I know you   re excited about  moving in   on the Oklahoma State University campus in Stillwater,  Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project, which is  part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Bob, I know  you   ve got a lot of duties going on in your day, I appreciate you taking  time.  Jerry, I   m happy to do it. As you indicated, we   re just thrilled to be over  here in Old Central and very grateful to the OSU Regents for putting the  kind of money they did in to preserve this historic building.  How appropriate.  Long, long time to come, right?  It has been. Bob, first of all, there   s a lot of things we want to talk about  today. But could we go back to the beginning and ask a little about your  early life, about where you grew up, and a little bit about your family?  Sure. I grew up in rural Missouri, a little town of Butler, Missouri, south  of Kansas City. I lived there almost all my life till I went to college, then  moved. I went to the University of Missouri in Colombia, got a  bachelor   s and master   s degree there. Then went to the University of  California-Santa Barbara for the doctorate. Then came back to OSU, as a  brand new assistant professor in 1972, in the fall.  Bob, your family, you grew up on a farm you said in rural     No, just a rural town.  5  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Small town in Missouri.  Small town in Missouri, right.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  One brother. He   s younger than I and just retired as a professor of  statistics at the University of South Carolina. So he got all the  quantitative skills in the family, I think.  What did your dad do for a living?  He was an attorney.  So, is there a story about how you got to Oklahoma State University?  How did you find out about OSU?  There was a job opening here when I was getting ready to finish my PhD  and I applied here and they seemed willing to take me and I   ve been  happy here ever since.  Who did you interview with?  Cliff Rich was the department head over in Political Science then.  Okay. I was thinking it was Harold Sayre.  Harold came along after Cliff, yes. I worked closely with Harold for  many years over there.  Did you have a particular area of emphasis in political science?  I had pretty much the courts and the judicial system, constitutional law,  that sort of thing. I taught freshmen American Government for many  years, as well.  Everybody gets a shot at that particular subject, right?  Oh yeah, that was kind of a fun class to teach actually.  What were your first impressions of Oklahoma State and Stillwater?  Oh, very positive. I mean it   s a beautiful campus, everybody knows that.  But the people were quite friendly, the department was very welcoming.  So it seemed to go very smoothly from the very first.  6  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  What year was that, Bob?  1972, the fall of    72.  Can you share some information about the positions you had,  responsibilities that you   ve held during your career?  I started off as an assistant professor, then an associate professor, then a  full professor in Political Science. Moved over to Arts and Sciences  Extension, as it was called then, because they were doing some satellite  teleconferencing sort of things in those days. I was Assistant and then  Associate Director there and continued to teach political science courses.  Then became Arts and Sciences Honors Director eventually, eventually  University Honors Director. I started doing the Honors thing in 1988 so  it   s been 21 years now doing Honors in one way or another.  As you   ve said Bob, you   ve been interested in Honors positions,  responsibilities for Honors courses and Honors programs as well...  Right.  Why have you been so passionate about Honors programs?  Well one, I was an undergraduate Honors student at the University of  Missouri, in their Honors College. So I got the small classes and the  team taught interdisciplinary courses and got to do a senior thesis and all  that sort of thing. So I saw the value of it from the student side. When I  came here, Political Science was very much into encouraging their  majors to do Honors theses and do the Honors program. I think Geoff  Pill was the Honors Director, primarily. At the time I was over in Arts  and Sciences in Political Science. And so I worked with Geoff there as  well and then got the opportunity to do it in Arts and Sciences, then  University wide. OSU   s been very good about supporting my work with  the National Honors Organization, so I served as our National President  back in 1998-99 and have been on the Board of Directors for awhile and  chaired some committees and been able to write some things for their  publications. So it   s been both local and national.  So in 1988, you started with what was called the Honors Program at the  time, then it evolved to where it   s now, the Honors College?  Correct.  What year did that happen?  It went for the Arts and Sciences Honors Program in    88 is when I came  7  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  in there but it had been going since the mid-   60s. Then in 1989 we went  university-wide, which was called University Honors Program. Then in  2000 the Regents changed the name to the Honors College.  What are some components about the program that you might want to  note?  I think several different things, Jerry. One, we have usually 60-70  Honors course sections each semester. Those are small sections taught  by regular faculty that get to be a lot more interactive among the  students and the faculty. We have special Honors advising. We have five  of us who do that now. An assistant director and myself, we each have  about a hundred students. Then we have three full-time Honors  academic counselors, they have about 250 students each. So we have,  sort of, a parallel advising system. They still have the regular advisor in  their academic college or department, but also an Honors advisor over  here. Our job in that capacity is to help them stay on track for Honors  College requirements, because our requirements are some of the stiffest  in the country in terms of  one  has to have a 3.5 grade point average, 39  Honors credit hours, complete both the general Honors part of the thing,  plus honors in your major, including a thesis. So that   s among the  highest total of Honors credit hours anywhere in the country, and  likewise the highest grade point average requirements. There may be one  or two schools in the country that require a little bit more. But of the  800-plus schools in the National Collegiate Honors Council, we   re the  very top of what we require of the students. And they just excel. They do  wonderfully well with it.  Is that adding hours to the curriculum?  Normally not. Normally they can be fit in with the regular degree  requirements.  Were there any early frustrations setting up the Honors College? Were  there some, I won   t say skeptics, but people who said,    Why do we need  a separate college when we have a separate program?     Sure.  Can you speak candidly to that?  Oh, not too much. I think early on, the question was, was the university  going to fund it adequately. President Campbell was the first one to start  putting resources in and then when Ray Bowen came as Provost, that   s  when we started putting more resources university-wide in Honors and  when we started to grow significantly in terms of the number of students  8  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  we served. As you know, budget is always an issue at a state school and  OSU has been very generous over the years. In fact, I have the privilege  every year to go out to three or four other places to conduct external  reviews as part of a team and almost always come back rather happy that  I   m at OSU after I see what is going on other places. So all things  considered, I think they   ve done a great job supporting us.  Bob, did I hear you say earlier there are around 800 students?  800 colleges and universities in our national organization. Around 900  students active right now in terms of Honors at OSU this fall.  Getting back again to your genesis about your engagement with the  Scholar Development Recognition Program, were you in on the  groundwork on some of the development and implementation?  Not too much. Bob Graalman took it on and he and I both used to work  over in Arts and Sciences so we knew each other and kind of worked  hand and glove from the outset. And it   s been kind of fun because when  the National Association of Fellowships Advisors got started, Bob was  the Founding President of that. And with my work as President and then  later on continuing on the Board of Directors of NCHC, our National  Honors Organization, we actually had those two groups working  together at our national conference for a couple of years. And still the  number of people in the National Honors Organization and also the  Fellowship Advisors back on their home campus so we were able to  work hand and glove here at OSU, but also nationally, which was quite  rewarding. And a lot of the students who have won major national  fellowships have been Honors College students, but by no means all. My  role typically is helping identify maybe a prospective student to send  over to Bob   s office. Bob teaches some Honors courses for us, so that   s  a way he can interact with the students. Both an English Literature  section he usually teaches and then he does this Windows to the World  Honors seminar to help students prepare for interviews, that kind of  thing.  And then one of the things I really enjoy is I get to be part of the mock  interview teams they do before they send the people off to their real  interviews. My role on that is to be the junkyard dog, just be as rough as  I can on them so when they   and I   ve got a couple colleagues who can  do it just as well as I can. And that way when they get to the real  interview, they   ll come back and tell us,    Well you guys may have been  harder on us than the real interviewers were,    which is exactly what  we   re trying to do. Help them get over the rough spots and be able to run  with it when they get to the national interview. And, of course, OSU  students working though Bob   s office have just done a fantastic job over  9  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  the last decade or so in terms of being successful in those very, very  competitive scholarship programs, the Rhodes, the Marshall. Truman, in  particular, we   ve done extremely well. Udall and now some Fulbrights  and other things like that.  You mentioned Bob Graalman, how important has Bob been to the  success of the scholar program?  Oh, I think tremendously so. And again, it   s a matter of institutional  commitment. By putting a full-time position in to do that along with  Gillian going over there and now with Tim O   Neil as a graduate  assistant helping out with that and with the Freshman Research Scholars  Program. That   s what it takes is to have that kind of commitment so you  have somebody who   s not just doing it sort of out of their hip pocket  while they   re a professor or something. And that   s one reason Bob is so  well-known nationally is how successful he   s been and the fact he   s  more than willing to share his knowledge and expertise with other  people at other institutions who do the sort of thing he does.  Well Bob, let me step back. Earlier you were talking about some of the  activities you   re professionally engaging for the national and regional  organizations. Can you share some recognitions that the program has  received?  There really aren   t that many program recognitions out there in Honors.  There was a professor at University of North Carolina-Greensborough  who a few years ago put out on an electronic bulletin board asking  colleagues around the country to give him the name of two or three  exemplary Honors programs or Honors colleges out there. And that was  okay, but then he published his list, which upset a lot of folks. I think he  had 14 names of schools that came up on the list. And in this region, I  think only Oklahoma State and Texas Tech showed up on his list. So we  were flattered and, of course, shamefully gleeful at the same time that  we were the only school in Oklahoma that made his list. Nothing  official, but we   ll take it.  Absolutely. And your professional recognition yourself? I know that  you   re probably pretty modest about it, but I   m asking you if you   d share  with me some recognitions you   ve received, which has been partially  due to the success of the program here on campus.  I think it   s just really a privilege to be president of the national  organization. I   m what   s called an NCHC recommended site visitor,  which means there are about 40 of us in the country the national  organization certifies as knowing what we   re doing to go out and  conduct external reviews at other places. Beyond that I think just the  10  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  opportunity to interact with colleagues is recognition in its own way.  Back to, again, the question I asked earlier about perhaps some skeptics  in the Honors College, but what about the Scholars Program? I   ve  heard some concern over the years about if we are engaging too many  resources in a small number of people. How would you respond to that?  I   d respond to that a couple different ways, the same way I do on  program reviews. The first question   and there was a little bit of this  early on from some faculty,    This is too elitist for OSU, a land-grant  school.    And I remember asking a guy named Grey Austin, who was the  guru of Honors nationally when I got started, who was at Ohio State.  You know, I caught him at my first Honors conference and he was very  gracious, gave a few minutes of his time to this brand new guy on the  block. And I said,    Grey, how do you deal with this question of elitism  at Ohio State?    He kind of looked at me, a twinkle in his eye, and said,     Bob, at Ohio State that question would not be asked.    And so from then  on I just pleaded guilty if somebody said that we are trying to work with  the very best kids. The same way we try to have the best athletes, we try  to have the best graduate students and so on, so we just plead guilty and  go on. And I think over the years when we have shown that these  students come from all majors, all colleges, it   s a very open elite if you  want to call it an elite because it doesn   t make any difference who your  family is or where you grew up or anything. If you do well  academically, then we welcome you with open arms, either as an  entering freshman or if you get here and do well once you got here  regardless of your high school record or test scores. We   ll pick up  another 80 or so students in the spring who may not have been eligible  the first semester. And so that criticism has sort of gone away.  I suspect success hasn   t hurt any with that in terms of the number of  degrees that   the last couple years we   ve had, I think, 79 Honors  degrees each year. When I took over we had two, which is not to say  much about what I   ve done, but to say how much more the faculty has  gotten behind it over the years, and the students. I think the same thing  with the Scholar Development Program. Probably at first there were  some skeptics, but I haven   t seen anybody trying to say OSU should  never mention we have Truman scholars, or Rhodes scholars, or Gates  scholars anymore. So I think, again, that   s sort of gone by the boards.  There were times at OSU we were almost apologetic for our success and  almost had like an inferiority complex. I think Bob   s program in  particular has really helped get us past that in a lot of ways.  Can you describe your participation, personally, in the Scholars  Program?  11  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Pretty much it   s limited, as I say, in identifying students and then  making sure we schedule classes that Bob can teach in Honors and then  the mock interview participation, that role. And occasionally I   ll read  over an essay if it   s something in an area I know something about and  certainly writing reference letters for the students. If I know them well in  the Honors College I   m happy to do that any time.  Do a lot of them come to you when they need to answer a question?  Right, sometimes I can give a little bit of help on that. Bob does the  heavy lifting on that sort of stuff but sometimes I can help out, nibble  around the edges just a bit if they need a little bit more help.  What is the synergy that you see between the Honors College, the  Honors programs, and the Scholar Program?  Well, I think identifying the students sometimes early on and maybe  meeting with say an entering freshman and you just talk to them and  they have that kind of spark that I know he   s looking for. And I say,     Well before you head home today, why don   t you go over to the  Student Union and meet Dr. Graalman and introduce yourself and tell  him you might be interested down the line in some sort of a competition  like that.    If it   s a student in my class who just really seems to show that  spark I may send them over to talk to him. I think beyond that, his being  able to teach for us, that helps both of us. He can get to know the  students quite well as well as encourage them to participate. In that  extent it   s sort of like the study abroad program when Steve Hallgren  who does the Fulbright, now he teaches a one-hour Honors seminar for  us about study abroad and what it   s really like. And you know when  Gerry Auel is going to have a program we try to publicize that. So again,  just feed back and forth. And then beyond the other things I mentioned,  the mock interviews, working on the various essays, that kind of thing is  my biggest role, I suspect, in that. And then Bob and I sometimes are  asked when we go on the road, I know he may have told you this  already,    Well isn   t there competition between the two offices?    There  must be at some places because this question comes up. And we both  just kind of chuckle, say,    No, we couldn   t have a better working  relationship. We   re not in competition at all. We just try to help each  other and reinforce each other.     What percentage of students who are participating in the Scholars  Program also participate in the Honors Program?  I would say more than 50  but I can   t give you an exact number. Bob  might have a better feel for that than I do.  12  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  I just guessed that it   d probably be a large number. Would you assume  or would you feel that probably the Honors Program attracts and  identifies more scholars to the program from any other program?  I would assume so in the sense that because we   re drawing from all the  colleges, that would probably make some sense.  You were talking about helping identify students. What is the process for  identifying prospective participants in the Scholars Program, both at the  high school level and at OSU?  It   s sort of half intuition and half looking at records. I know Bob has his  English Lit class in the fall. It   s technically by permission only, you  have to have his permission to get in, but he will tell us, if you spot  somebody who really looks sharp, and over the years we kind of know  what he   s looking for, he says,    Go ahead and put them in it.    Same  thing for his Windows to the World seminar in the spring. Sometimes  we   ll have some people he says,    We want to be sure they get in, that   s  great. But likewise, put in a few more.    And it   s something the more you  have a feel for than any formula you can put on it. When you see an  Ashley Hildebrand or somebody come through, it doesn   t take very long  to figure out, there   s a young lady who   s really going to do things. You  know, just come right along in both engineering but also in study  overseas.  I know for many years, you   ve gone out to some of the key college night  programs, Oklahoma State programs, and particularly those schools  that we   ve had a lot of scholars from and identify students for the  Honors Program. Do you share some of that information with Bob as  well, when you do that?  We usually go out together when they have the events. And they have  not had as many of those in recent years as they have in the past. But he  and I both try to go to those, if we can. And we   ve worked together so  long if one of us can   t be there, we can do both sides of it. We could  probably trade over and do each other   s side and nobody would know  the difference except the two of us. That   s one of the good things of  working together for an extended period of time, you get to know quite a  bit about each other   s programs and how they work.  Well Bob, maybe step back just a minute. I want to ask you this question.  What are the components of the program? We talked a little bit about  mock interviews, we talked about classes. Can you describe when we  talk about the Scholar Development Recognition program, what does  that encompass?  13  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Really you   re asking the wrong person, Jerry. I know the pieces of it I  see. I know Bob works extensively with the students on refining their  essays and they   ll have faculty mentors in their major fields, usually,  who also work with them at great length. I know it takes a tremendous  amount of time to do that correctly, beyond that, I don   t get involved in  that that much. I   m the wrong person to ask, I suspect.  I   ve visited with Gail Gates and I visited with some other individuals. I  mentioned the Wentz Program, the Scholars Research Program, how  important has that been? First of all can you describe what that is? I  guess there are two parts of it, there   s the Wentz Freshman Research  Project and then there   s the Wentz     There   s the projects and then the scholarships, really three parts, I guess.  Freshman Research Scholars try to identify entering freshmen who think  they would like to do some research, pair them with a faculty mentor in  their college, and then Tim O   Neil has been doing a lot of the  coordinating of that the last year or two for Bob   s office. That   s a great  experience for students to get a first taste of what research would be like.  Out of that, some of them may well apply for the Wentz project grants,  which are, I want to say,  4,500 now, which is a tremendous deal for  these students to be able to identify a research project they would like to  do. They come up with it, find a faculty mentor who   s willing to work  with them, and then the student submits the proposal. And then the  Wentz scholarships, which are a lesser amount but are just a straight  scholarship each year, Honors students win more than half of those.  We   re about 5  of the student body, which is fairly typical nationwide.  I   m just working on the annual report and we   re always over 50  of  those, it seems like. Our students really take advantage of that and they  want to dive in and do the research and that sort of thing.  It seems like Ed Miller was talking about that research they did kind of  gave them a step up, a lot of them, on their competition for national  scholarships and programs.  Sure. And a lot of the students will take that Wentz project and turn it  into their senior Honors thesis. So that   s, again, if they can have a  double benefit both for Scholar Development and as far as Honors  college requirements go.  Bob, this has been several years ago I guess, you may remember the day  it changed, but they used to be more of a work-study kind of scholarship.  Many years ago when I first got here, and I don   t know exactly why the  Wentz board made the change. Again, Bob probably knows far more  than I do. But I can remember back when I was in Political Science we  14  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  had some Wentz scholar students. It was sort of like a work-study  program in those days.  What are different steps, from past engagements, that students might  take in the program? Is it different for different students in the Scholars  Program? What are the gateways into the program and are there  different ways they get engaged and involved?  I think everything from faculty recommendations, somebody will call  and say,    I   ve got this really sharp student in my class,    or maybe Ed  Miller in Ag would notice somebody. You have students   Bob will hold  sort of receptions for people to talk about their program and we   ll  promote those using email and so on to Honors College students, really  encourage them to go find out more about this program. That   s another  way it happens. Another way is when Bob is teaching these Honors  seminars, he   ll meet some students that may not know as much about his  program as they just hear he   s a good teacher and they want to take that  class. That would be another way that you can get at it. So all sorts of  different ways.  It seems like when I visit with people there   s kind of a conception, maybe  misconception, that there   s a Scholars Recognition Development  Program. Seems like there are different components, different ways  students get engaged once they get identified and take those courses.  Sure.  Some of them move towards competition for Truman Scholarships, some  gravitate toward Rhodes, or Gates.  Right. Part of it depends on what they want to do in graduate or  professional school. The Truman is public service while the Rhodes  seems to be more the liberal arts and sciences sort of thing. Each one,  the Udall for example, for Native Americans ,or for those in certain  areas about health and so forth. And so the various scholarships set up  their parameters of the type of student they will accept or at least would  likely be successful in the competition. And then Bob is the office where  to the student goes,    Okay, this is what you   d like to do. Here are the  ones that line up pretty well with what you   re going to do. This one  might be a long shot and this one you don   t have a chance in the world.     Like a Goldwater, which is Science and Mathematics and Engineering  and you   re an English major, not likely to work very well. And so his  office is very important to the students early on if they   re thinking about  this kind of competition, pointing them in the direction of the correct  scholarships.  15  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Is there a profile of a typical student who participates in the Scholar  Program? What kind of characteristics?  I   m not sure there is such an animal. They   re bright, they   re motivated,  but beyond that, they   re such different types of students that I   ve seen  over the years in the mock interviews and stuff. Shannon Ferrell, for  example, who   s now on the faculty here, another Honors student, and  you talk to Shannon the first day he came in, it   s pretty obvious he   s  going to go somewhere. And so the whole thing is a pattern in terms, I  suppose, of motivation and academic skills and ability to communicate  in an interview and in writing. But beyond that, they   re as different as  their various personalities and majors.  So you   re saying they   re bright, articulate, writing and speaking skills,  passionate about what they do, they   re sort of self-starters.  Not always self-starters. Sometimes you have to drag them along  kicking and screaming the first year or two.  (Laughs) Well by any measure that you can think of, Oklahoma State  University has been very, very successful in the last few years and in  competition.  Oh, absolutely.  So I   m wondering, have you gotten any feedback on what qualities they  like about OSU students?  I really have not. And that   s more Bob   s communication, you said  you   re going to have a chance to visit with Louis Blair, he could  probably from his experiences with the Truman Fellowship, the Truman  Scholarship Foundation, could probably give you a lot more information  on that sort of thing. And Bob himself, no doubt, knows a lot about that.  Can you share some favorite success stories of students that you know  personally have been scholarship recipients?  Those big scholarships?  How it   s impacted their lives?  Yeah, Blaine Greteman   s a classic example, our Rhodes Scholar who  came from a small town in rural Oklahoma. So small they didn   t even  have their own high school, he had to go over to the next town over. He  came and was extremely successful, obviously, at OSU. Editor of the  literary magazine, if I remember correctly, and then went on to the  16  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Rhodes scholarship and taught over there, was on the faculty here as a  visiting assistant professor and then was hired away by the University of  Iowa this year. And his wife, Mandy, came close to getting a Rhodes. So  that would   ve been quite the thing to have a husband and wife  combination. In fact, it was just about that time that Rhodes changed the  rules so you could be married and compete for it. So he was obviously a  superstar. Ashley Hildebrand I mentioned, the Gates Cambridge  Scholarship, another one. Shannon Ferrell, and I   m sure some others are  going to slip my mind but just some of the ones I   ve had some contact  with lately so I know a little bit about them. They   re all great, but  they   re individual folks. They   re not the same mold in all things. Ashley  is an engineer with a philosophy minor.  In what ways has the Scholars Program enriched and influenced the  lives of the students involved in it, scholarship winners and non-winners?  I think the winners are sort of obvious, you know. The non-winners  though, and Bob tells them this going into it, that,    A lot of the value of  this for you is going to be the work you put into competing. How you  work on your writing, how you do all the sorts of things, and win or  lose, this is the growth you   re going to get from the process.    Also  because of some generous donors, Bob   s office has been able to provide  scholarship money for students who didn   t win one of the big ones, to  study overseas. And that   s been, again, some OSU alums who   ve come  up with money, and he can give you names. They   ve surprised some  students with a check, a very sizeable check, saying,    We want to make  this possible for you to study even though you didn   t get this major  international scholarship.     Are scholar program participants encouraged to broaden their  academic interests maybe just outside their one     I think it depends on the scholarship. You know, the Goldwater, which is  purely Math, Science, and Engineering, that may not be as important as  the Rhodes or the Marshall, the more liberal arts sorts of things. But I  think scholars who have won these things have sometimes told Bob and  told me that because we forced them to spread out, in Honors anyway,  they found that to be very, very helpful. When they got to the interviews  and they did have more breadth than a student who had had tunnel  vision, whether the tunnel vision was in English or in engineering or in  mathematics or chemistry or philosophy. The breadth seems to help  them out in both the essay stage and the interview stage.  It seemed like a couple individuals that I visited with about the program  talked about trying to encourage students sometimes to even take a  17  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  semester abroad and do some internships. It might cause them to take  four years and an extra semester to graduate, but how do you feel about  those kinds of experiences?  I think any time a student has a chance to study abroad it   s very much to  their advantage. They   re going to get a different view of the world than  they   re going to get from even studying at another university in the  United States. It   s just a different environment and something that I  think is a very valuable part of their education. The same thing with  internships and so on. We encourage students   in fact, in Honors, we  have some ways you can count internship credit toward the Honors  requirements, study abroad you can count towards Honors requirements.  As part of those 39 hours we have some ways we can encourage and sort  of reward, in a sense, students who take on those extra types of activities  while they   re an undergraduate.  Back to a previous question, what do you say to those students who tried  and competed unsuccessfully for scholarships? What do you share with  those students?  Well in one sense, you tell them that no matter how good you are,  getting one of these is a little bit like lightning striking. Because there  are going to be a lot of really good people competing and sometimes it   s  just almost what the committee had for breakfast that morning. You  can   t predict sometimes. People you thought would be sure winners  aren   t and the people you thought had a really good chance but you  weren   t so confident, they win.  What do you say to them?  I think the same thing Bob does,    It   s a great opportunity to compete for  it but understand going in the odds are against you. And if you win that   s  wonderful, we   re incredibly proud of you, but if you   re not selected at  that level, we   re still incredibly proud of you. If you make it to the  interview stage, you   ve really done something.     How does the Scholars Program measure with other academic programs  and units on campus? You described particularly your office, the Honors  College, with it. How does it mesh with other academic units and other  academic recognition programs across campus?  That one I really don   t have that much information on, Jerry. I know  some departments like Agricultural Economics seem to have a pipeline  of producing these great students and some of the Engineering programs  do, but others are less a pattern that you see. In fact some of the students  on the Udall started recruiting their own successors in recent years just  18  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  on their own and sending students over to talk to Bob. So he   s a far  better source, or maybe Ed Miller or somebody like that, than I am on  how they interact outside of what we do between Honors and Scholar  Development.  Is it just more of an informal, some professors particularly that may bind  with the program to identify     I don   t know. Possibly, but I just can   t give you an answer based on  first-hand knowledge on that one.  Generally, how has the Scholar Recognition Program benefited  Oklahoma State University?  Oh I think the recognition   you can   t buy the kind of publicity you get  when you get a Rhodes or a Marshall scholarship or a Gates scholarship  or being the Truman Honor Institution, that sort of thing. The publicity  you get, the fact that people see OSU at that level competing with places  like the Harvards and the Stanfords and the Yales and that kind of thing  is fantastic. Because we   ve always known here that we have some truly  outstanding students, almost any university is going to have. But then to  have them recognized that way certainly helps in recruiting and it helps  those students talk to other students back home and I think indirectly  you get good publicity, in a sense, that way, from student to student.  You were talking earlier about Blaine Greteman, our first and I guess at  this point, our only Rhodes Scholar. How important to the Scholar  Development Program and to Oklahoma State University was Blaine   s  recognition?  I think it really was special as far as I can see. It kind of put us on the  map at that level. Truman, even though it   s a very important scholarship,  is not as well known, hasn   t been going nearly as long as the Rhodes.  And in one sense, the Rhodes and the Marshall are sort of the gold  standard a lot of people think of when they talk about some of these very  prestigious scholarships, and those two, of course, are both in Great  Britain.  Picking up from your conversation about the Truman, we received the  Truman Scholar Institution recognition from the Truman Foundation a  few years ago.  Yes.  How has that enhanced OSU   s academic reputation nationally, or has  it?  19  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  That I don   t know. Again, I   m delighted that that recognition came along  and I know some colleagues in Honors around the country who similarly  have that designation and we   re all rather proud of it. To think that our  students have done that well consistently enough that OSU is put in that  league of top flight schools.  Are you surprised by our success in that competition and our  recognition?  No, not really.  You   ve known this a long time, huh?  Yeah. I think, again, the big part would be the fact, as I said earlier, that  the University was going to put the commitment in to fund that office  with a full-time director and a support staff to start. It   s sort of like  refining gold. There   s some polishing and refining that has to be done  along the line and you can   t do that by accident. And the schools that do  it well and consistently tend to have people like Bob in their institutions,  as well.  Speaking of Bob, and of course in addition to yourself, are there other  champions for the Scholar Recognition Program across the campus that  you can mention?  Oh sure, I think Ed Miller you mentioned, in Agricultural Sciences and  Natural Resources, would be one. There are faculty like Edward Jones  over in English, Russ Rhinehart over in Engineering who comes in and  does the mock interviews and has been a mentor for some. And as soon  as I start naming people I   m going to leave some out. Elizabeth Williams  in History has taken part in a number of the interviews. Michael Dix has  done some. So there are a bunch of different people, and Bob tries to  stack those mock interview panels with some people the student knows  and some that they don   t know, because they   re not going to know  everybody when it comes to the actual interview.  Are there, generally, I know Bob would have the exact answer, but we   re  talking about 20, 50, 100 faculty members involved?  That I just don   t know. Because except for the mock interview part, I   m  not seeing what   s going on behind the scenes with the drafting of essays  and the writing letters and that kind of thing.  Well in your opinion, how has the Scholar Program evolved and  changed over the years from its inception, what in the late    90s?  20  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  I   m not sure exactly when it started. I think one thing, there have been  more of these scholarships that pop up. Like Tim O   Neil has the Javits,  he   s our first one to have that. He could   ve gone anywhere in the  country and chose to stay here for graduate school. In English there   s the  Jack Kent Cooke, which we won one a couple years ago for the first  time. And so Bob   s task is sort of never-ending because you have these  different scholarships popping up. Plus they change their rules from time  to time, so he has to be on top of that as to what they   re looking for now  as opposed to what they looked for two or three years ago. So he   s got  quite the juggling act that has to go on over there to keep track of  everything.  What have been the strengths of the program through the years?  I think being able to identify students early enough in their academic  careers that they have time to get ready for this sort of competition.  Because you can   t walk in there as a second semester junior and pull it  off. The fact that there is a place on campus to which students can go     there   s a location. And once they get there, people who care a great deal  about them are willing to go way above and beyond the call of duty to  help them be successful. And then I think just also the attitude that   s  been built up around campus, of course we can win those sorts of things.  And certainly, that attitude was not there before this program got started.  Going back to a question I asked earlier, in the genesis of the program,  do you recall what the thinking/ thought process was at first? As you  indicated there had to be a commitment to resources to     And I really don   t know the answer to that one, Jerry, as to why the     Why all of a sudden we decided to do it?  I don   t know. We had a faculty committee or some faculty members  back when we were trying to get a Rhodes and it never happened. I think  eventually somebody figured out, and I   m sure Bob can tell you, I don   t  know who it was who said,    Okay, if we   re going to do this, let   s do it  right.    Sort of like with Honors when Ray Bowen came, that was his  philosophy that,    If we   re going to do it, let   s do it right. And that means  putting a lot of resources into it.     You weren   t a part of those earlier discussions then?  Not on the Scholar Development side, no, not at all.  Competition for these national scholarships and international  scholarships that we   ve talked about has become tougher as other  21  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  institutions have created and developed strong programs similar to  OSU.  Sure.  Are there components of the program that may need to be changed or  strengthened, in your opinion, to continue?  Again, I   m not as familiar on that side of what   s going on at the other  schools. And so you   re above my pay grade I think on what other folks  do that we might be able to compete with.  What do you think will be the key to our continued success in this  competition?  I think you   re going to have to continue to have Bob over there or  someone very like Bob, permanently. And you may even actually have  to beef that office up some with additional staff as more students get  interested. Again, it   s a matter of dollars and cents in terms of staffing  that office. And also just the commitment from the highest levels of the  university, which we clearly have now and have had for some time, that  this is important to the university.  Bob, can you see where this has helped with our recruitment of  academically gifted students?  I would say it definitely has. We go out and talk about this on the road,  you see students perk up who might be interested. I think the fact even if  we don   t get to talk to them the word is out there that we have such a  program. We have a combined brochure that features both Scholar  Development and the Honors College. Students we talk to get to hear  about Bob   s program and he   s quite good about handing the same sort of  brochure out to let them know about Honors and recruiting themselves.  Even in the publications we sort of work together on some of our  publications.  There   s kind of a buzz out there for students, those     Some of them, at least, are aware and others don   t know till they get  here. And they   re fun to find and point over in Bob   s direction.  That   s great. You   ve been involved for many years in the program, what  would you say to faculty about their participation in the program? What  would you say to them about getting involved?  In the Scholar Development Program?  22  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Yes, in the Scholar Development Program.  Oh I think by all means, go for it. The couple of times I worked closely  with students in terms of their essays and so on, it   s been really exciting  to watch them develop and grow in their thinking and their writing and  so on over time as they work on those essays.  Bob, the university-wide institutional commitment to Honors, to the  Scholars Program, these kinds of things, is that something you see being  enhanced and increased in recent years at Oklahoma State University?  In recent years, at least as far as Honors goes, it   s been sort of an  incremental increase. The University has been quite good as we need  more Honors sections and so forth, they   ve put up some additional  funding. The new funding we   ve gotten over the last several years, that   s  where it   s gone is we have to have more money in our budget that we  can then transfer out to the departments to add another section of Honors  Calculus or another section of Honors History or something like that. So  it   s pass-through money. The ultimate recipient is going to be the  department head who can use that money to release that faculty member  from a regular class to allow them to teach an Honors class. But as I said  early on, the big commitment that really made the difference and put us  on the map was when Ray Bowen was Provost. And his commitment to  let   s do it right, you know, off we go. And as they say, the rest is history  in terms of the number of courses we can offer and the fact that we can  go to national conferences and talk a lot about what we do with our head  held very high because we   ve been quite successful in putting a program  together that really benefits the students and the faculty seem to enjoy it.  We had a pretty broad-faced discussion about the Scholars Program,  what it   s been to Oklahoma State University, but picking back up from  the last question, we asked about the direction Oklahoma State  University is going, recognition of scholars. Do you see this trend  continuing to be emphasis on     I certainly hope so. And we   ve got some of the best and brightest  students here that you   re going to find anywhere in the country. As I  said earlier, almost any university has some potential superstar students.  Our job, I think, as a land-grant school is not only to be accessible to a  wide range of students from Oklahoma, but also to really help those who  have that potential to succeed. If you don   t, it   s like saying,    We have  this natural resource, but we   ll set the forest on fire.    You know, they   re  some real gems that we have here and our job is to help them be  everything they can be academically and in terms of competition for  scholarships and preparing themselves for the future.  23  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  On a personal note, you   ve been here since 1988?     72 is when I came here,    88 in Honors.  A long time. You   ve had a lot of passion for this program over the years.  Sure.  What keeps you going? What gives you the passion?  It   s a lot of fun. You work with some of the students, two or three  things. One, they   re a delight to teach. And the advising side, sometimes  you can spot a student who is obviously very, very bright but sometimes  they don   t know it. Particularly students from rural areas and so forth.  You can talk to them a few minutes and realize if we can just let that  student catch on to how bright they are, after a year or so my job   s going  to be get out of their way because they   re going to be on their way. And  that   s happened many times. And when I talk to colleagues around the  country, that   s one of the things that all of us find to be extremely  rewarding. If you can just help build that spark into a small flame and  then help those students succeed. So that   s fun.  And also just the ability to go from   my predecessor in Honors back  when I took over in    88 had his own faculty office and a quarter-time  release. And like I said, there were only two Honors graduates that year  and it was just in Arts and Sciences and there weren   t much in the way  of resources putting in. Over time we   ve gone to a full five people in the  office, all full-time, student assistants, and thanks to our Board of  Regents, we now have Old Central as the home for the Honors College,  which is a great place with classrooms and a computer lab down in the  basement, the advising offices. I know our undergraduate admissions  people are already bringing tours through and showing prospective  Honors students this is the building that OSU has committed to Honors.  So that   s a thrill for us as well and I think it will be very helpful in  recruiting. So we   ve gone from quarter-time release in the faculty office  to having our own building now. People I   ve talked to around the  country since we   ve been over here have been in their emails saying  they   re kind of green with envy that we   ve got such a fantastic building  for the Honors College here.  I was interested in your comment about students who don   t realize how  good they are. Is part of that probably just Oklahoma a little bit, I don   t  want to say inferiority complex, but we think about the Ivy League  schools and others and here     It   s funny because     24  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  Gill  Spurrier  And I   ve heard you mention a couple different times that point that  perhaps some of our students in the University don   t really know how  good it is.  I think that   s true. I think sometimes we don   t. And I think that   s one  place Bob has been incredibly good in the Scholar Development  Program. It   s kind of hard to say we   re not as good when we   re winning  these national, international scholarship competitions regularly.  Do you see this as kind of an affirmation of that?  Yeah, I think so. It   s external validation of what we   re doing.  Well, Bob, thanks. I know we   ve taken your time today but what have we  not covered? Are there some other things you   d like to share with us?  I don   t think all that much, Jerry. Other than just may that office  continue to produce the kind of students they have and help equip them  to compete at that level. And I hope Honors can do the same thing for  Honors students, whether or not they choose to compete. Help them to  take every advantage possible of their undergraduate educational  opportunities.  I appreciate it, Bob. Thank you.  Oh, you   re more than welcome, Jerry.  -------  -------   
