 Paustenbaugh  It is Saturday, April 18, 2009 and I am here in the office of  Oklahoma  State University  Athletic Director, Mike Holder, with Tim Green, who  is a member of the 1959 National Championship baseball team. This is  Jennifer Paustenbaugh with the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program. Mr. Green, thank you so much for joining us today for this  interview, we really appreciate your participation. I want to ask you a  series of questions. You and your teammates are here today for a special  50 year reunion celebrating that championship season. How special is  this reunion for you?  Extremely special. I spent my professional career as an athletic director  at East Central University in Ada. I was their athletic director 25 years,  was at the University for 35  years  as a professor and administrator. I  learned down there how hard it was to win a national championship.  Fortunately, while I was athletic director we did win one national  championship in football in 1993. We went to the finals one year at  Kemper  Arena in  Kansas City in basketball. Got beat  by  three points,  so I know how hard it is to win. At the time, I didn   t probably appreciate  it as much as I have learned to appreciate it now. Of course, with the  kind of reputation that the Cowboys have in baseball and to have only  won it once at that time, you can see how fortunate we were. Two things  that you   ll hear from me and the other players as well, you gotta be good  and you gotta be lucky and we were both.  Well and a little bit later on, I want to talk to you about that 1958 season  where you were good but not lucky.  Yeah.  But you make a really good point there, you have to be both. Were there  some guys on the team that you were especially close to? And have you  been able to meet up with them here today?  5  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Oh, yes. Well, Ben Bancroft   I played right field and Ben played center  field, so we have quite a rapport   as players we did. We   ve maintained  a friendship through the years. Then, of course, some of the other guys  but I just have not had as much contact with them as I   ve had with Ben.  Now is this the first time that you all have had a reunion?  No, we had one about maybe 25 years ago over at the Wes Watkins  facility, which was very, very nice. It was a sit-down dinner occasion  and that   s when they inducted us into the Hall of Fame, put our pictures  down there. That was a delightful evening.  I bet it was. Can you tell me about where you grew up and your family  and your early life?  I went to high school at Asher. And Asher, I don   t know if you know  much about high school baseball, but for several years Asher had quite a  reputation as a powerhouse high school program. Actually, all of that  happened a year or two after I got out of high school. In fact, the coach  at Asher High School, a guy named Merle Bowen, was one year ahead  of me in high school and he came back to his alma mater and coached  and has had a tremendously successful career there. I made All-State my  senior year in baseball as a third baseman, which I thought was my best  position and I was recruited by several universities out of high school,  but I wanted to come to Stillwater. Could   ve gone to OU but I chose to  come up here and am just delighted that I did.  What helped make that decision that Stillwater was where you wanted to  be?  Oh, I   d played several summers over at Cushing. At that time, Cushing  had two oil refineries and they were good summer jobs and they  recruited a lot of our ball players to play on their summer sandlot team  and give us good summer jobs so a lot of it had to do with the guys that  I   d made acquaintances with during the summer. My first year to play  over at Cushing was between my junior and senior year in high school  and I played over there for actually about five summers in a row.  Okay, so even while you were in college then you were able to play  there?  Yes, and play with a lot of the guys that I continued to play with over  here. There were probably seven or eight of us that played over there in  the summer time.  That sounds like something the NCAA wouldn   t allow to happen  6  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  anymore, doesn   t it?  Well, they might not (laughter),  but we were in compliance: the  compensation was for working at various jobs. I worked in an oil  refinery for four summers.   What year did you enroll and what was your major here?  I majored in Business Administration and worked in industry for about  four years and then I went back to school and got another Baccalaureate  degree and a Master   s degree in Education and got a Doctorate from the  University of Oklahoma and got into higher ed and professed and really  enjoyed that part of my life. I was here as an athlete from    57 to    59. Of  course, freshmen couldn   t play. I didn   t play my sophomore year.  Actually, I went a year and a half to East Central because even though  Coach Greene had recruited me, he had some guys coming back from  the Korean War and Mr. Iba told him,    You gotta take these guys back.     But Coach Greene told me,    Some of these guys don   t know how to be  students when they come back and they   re not going to stay very long.     And that   s exactly what happened,    As soon as that happens, then I   ll be  able to pick you up to a full scholarship.    When I first came I was  actually not eligible because I had lettered that freshman year down at  East Central in baseball. I was just on a partial  scholarship  and then the  last two years I was on full scholarship.  So do you remember your first visit to the OSU campus?  Yeah, I really do.  What was your impression?  Oh, actually I caught a ride up here and I was a little late coming into  Coach Greene   s office. I had made an appointment and when I came in  he said,    Tim, you   re a little late.    I said,    Well, I know I am, Coach.       I  had a little trouble catching a ride.    I never heard another word about it  because he recognized that if that   s the way I got there that I really  wanted to be there. He knew when to get on to you at the right time and  when to get off at the right time.  I   ve heard that before.  I had a lot of respect for Coach Greene.  Did you have some favorite hangouts on campus?  Well, the Alpha Delta Pi house.  7  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  (Laughter) Where you met your wife?  Where I met that lady, yeah. She   s from Ponca City and I   m from Asher,  which is different parts of the state and we met here. Yeah, that got to be  my favorite hangout.  Well, at this point in our recording I should probably note since they   re  not on camera that Mr. Green   s wife, Paula Kay Green, is here and also  your daughter Kelly is listening in on the interview and we   re glad to  have both of them here. So before we talk about the    59 season, tell me a  little bit about the    58 season. That was kind of a heartbreaker, wasn   t  it?  Well, it was. And we had a lot of unfortunate things happen. There were  some critical rainouts, probably some ballgames we could   ve won. The  ones that didn   t rain out were the teams that were hard to beat. So it was  just   that   s part of being lucky, like I told you awhile ago. Of course,  baseball is about as good as your pitching. And the ball club that we won  the national championship with, Joel Horlen and Roy Peterson and Dick  Soergel, were three good pitchers and they could stop anybody. They  started about every ballgame. So we never did have to   we could play  good defense and we had a pretty good offensive ball club, but we never  did have to score very many runs to beat anybody because they weren   t  going to get very many runs off of us. I attribute a lot of our success to  those three guys.  Tell me what you remember about Coach Toby Greene. And I   m  assuming that there   s no relationship between the two     No relationship. Coach Greene didn   t know how to spell Green. He put  an E on the end of his name. (Laughter)  Oh okay, that   s right. I notice that now.  Well, Coach Greene, he was a task master. This is rather unique, when I  was a player and, of course, I think the other players will document this,  there was not a lot of chit chat exchange between Coach Greene and  players. It was just,    This is what you do.    And you do it. You speak to  him when he speaks to you, that sort of thing. There was no question  about the pecking order. After I graduated, I was in Stillwater for  business and I thought,    Well, I   ll just go by Coach Greene   s office and  tell him hi.    I didn   t expect any more conversation out of him then than I  would   ve gotten back when I was playing. Totally different situation; he  acted like I was his son. We just talked and Mrs. Greene came in and  gave me a hug, I just couldn   t believe it. But our relationship had  changed. I   m no longer a player. No, I   m an adult and he just talked to  8  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  me altogether differently and about how much he appreciated me as a  player and being the right kind of guy.  Did you continue to maintain contact with him?  Somewhat, yes. I had kind of a unique situation happen one time. We  went down early on and saw how they fixed up downstairs where the  weight facility is. When I was here that was dirt. Dirt floor, terrible. We  were down there and, of course, the track guys were there, the pole  vaulters, and we were in there hitting. We had a hitting net. A lot of  activity and that dirt, when you come out of there and cough and spit it  looked like you had something wrong with your pulmonary system  because it was red from sucking in all that dust. It was my turn in the  batting cage and this guy throwing batting practice hit me three times.  When I came out of the batting cage, I said some tacky words and I   ve  heard Coach Greene say some tacky words and I   ve heard some of my  fellow players say tacky words and nobody said anything. Profanity is  what it was. He had not said anything to any of them. But he jumped  right in my face. I mean I hadn   t hardly cleared the batting cage and he  got right in my face and he said,    Green, I don   t ever want to hear that  kind of language out of you again.       If I do, you   re through.    And, of  course, I didn   t say a word. I just went on with the day   s activities.  Well, we all left and went up to shower and I turned around, went back  down. He was there by himself going around picking up balls that he  found that had failed to be picked up by the helper. So it was just the two  of us down there. I went up to him and I said,    Coach, I want to      I was  really feeling sorry about what I   d said, and I was disappointed. I said,     Coach, I   m sorry about saying those nasty words.    He said,    I   m sorry  too, Timmy.       I thought you were a good Christian boy.    That   s been 50  years ago, and I   ve never forgotten that. Even though he wasn   t  particularly inclined in that direction or didn   t seem to be, he did  appreciate it in other people. So he taught me a good lesson.  You   ve talked a little bit about what it was like to work out under  Gallagher Hall and how primitive those conditions were. What do you  recall about the baseball facilities themselves in the pre-Allie Reynolds  Stadium era?  Well, it was a pretty nice place to play back then, the same place. It   s  nicer now, of course, larger. But I didn   t have any complaints about  where we played. Most of the places where we played, our facility back  then was as nice as anybody   s.  And you told me that you were a right-fielder. Is that the only position  that you played on the baseball field?  9  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Played some of my junior year, I played some third base. But he moved  me to the outfield.  So what was your batting average?  Oh, I hit around .300.  Well, I   ve heard lots of funny comments about people that were ball  players, they can   t remember lots of other numbers but they always  remember what their batting average was.  (Laughter) Batting averages are like wine, they improve with age.  Like fish stories, right?  That   s right.  So what was travel to away games like at that time?  We travelled in cars. He let the more responsible (in his estimation)  players that had pretty nice cars do the driving. So we divided up into  different cars. There   s an interesting thing. Of course, Dick Soergel, you  know Dick lettered in three sports; he lettered three years in baseball,  and football, and basketball   and was a real asset. We   d been to, I  believe, Peoria, played Bradley. We spent the night in St. Louis coming  home and we did some car switching and I   m not sure why, it probably  had to do with somebody that was riding with one bunch didn   t want to  do some night activity and someone else did so they said,    Well, I   ll go  with them because they   re going to get up late and       But anyway,  through all the switches, Dick got left. We got back to Stillwater and I  think we   re maybe the last car and he   s out there waiting. He says,    Is  Soergel with you all?    We said,    No, he   s not in this car.    He said,     Well, we   ve left him in St. Louis.    (Laughs) We did and they had to fly  Dick in from St. Louis   So did you ever fly for any of your games?  No, we didn   t fly anywhere.  So at the start of the    59 season, what were the expectations for the  team?  Well, I   d say win it. We thought we had a good ball club. We knew we  had good pitching and we knew we had been good for a couple of years  prior to that. Circumstances were such that the advantages had just not  fallen our way and we knew that if they did we could be in the hunt. And  10  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  we were.  So you knew you were good, you just needed to be lucky too.  Yeah. That   s right.  Well, you had already mentioned that pitching was really one of the  strengths of the team and that you could turn the hitting on when you  needed to. Is there anything else that was particularly noteworthy about  this team?  Well, we had a number of good players. I don   t know of anybody, I  don   t know of any position that I didn   t have confidence in. Everybody  played really, really well. There   s a guy who I found out today is  deceased, a guy named Grayson Mersch, played first base. The best  glove I   ve ever seen at any level and I   m talking about the major  leagues. Grayson didn   t hit well enough, but I   m telling you, he was a  vacuum cleaner over there on first base. The Andrew boys were  Stillwater boys, Bruce and Bob. One of them was second baseman and  the other one was a shortstop. They were different. Bruce was about  10  talent and 90  hustle, and Bob was about 90  talent and 10   hustle. (Laughter) They were just the opposite. Bob was older, he had  been to the service and come back. Great player, could have been an  outstanding player had he had the same zeal for the game that his little  brother did. But his little brother was a gamer because he played so hard.  Jim Dobson, our third baseman, who really was recruited as a football  player, was the MVP of the National Tournament and he just played  lights out at Omaha.  So Bruce was the younger?  Yeah. Bruce was the second baseman.  Okay, because I   m looking at an article from June of 1959 that was in  the Oklahoman about this win and they called him Little Bruce Andrew.  So he was also shorter in stature?  He   s shorter in stature, yeah. In fact, Bob was the   they have a standard  size for an honor guard that presents the colors in Washington and he  just fit the mold for that. He   s about six feet tall, well-built, nice looking  and he just had a lot of stuff going his way. His desire had waned  somewhere along the way. We had a really good catcher, a young man  named Ray Bond. Tim Smalley, who is a local MD, was a catcher also.  We played Arizona twice, that   s who we beat in the finals and they beat  us the first game, if I   m not mistaken, 5 to 3 and then we turned around  and beat them 5 to 3. We had a relief pitcher, a young man named Toby  11  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Bensinger that started the finals game and pitched about five innings of  really good baseball; first game he started all year. Then, Dick came  back in and finished the ballgame for about the last three innings. Dick   s  the guy that Arizona had beaten the first game. Now Dick had a  refutation.  And that was his only loss that season, wasn   t it?  Yeah, I think so. But Dick had such a resolve and such competitive  nature, he kept telling Toby you give me   get one inning out of yourself  and I   ll guarantee you I   ll shut the door on them. And he did.  So was there any game that was really a turning point in that season?  Well, having to come back through the loser   s bracket, three of us had  lost one game. I think it was Fresno State and Arizona and us. We did a  coin flip because somebody got a bye. Well we lost, Arizona won it. So  we had to beat Fresno State in order to get to play Arizona. So we had to  play one more ballgame than they did and they had a day to rest and  save their pitching. They were ready with everybody for us for the finals  and had somewhat of an advantage but I would say laboring under a  handicap environment we did alright.  I would say so. What about the regular season? I mean that was pretty  good except for I think was it Iowa State that swept you in a series? That  season that you pretty much took care of everybody else?  Well, not sure. I   m not sure if it was Iowa State or not. Back then,  actually the team that was in the Big Eight, the one that challenged on a  fairly regular basis was Missouri. But several of them were pretty good.  I thought one thing that was really interesting is that I didn   t realize the  number of games you played at that particular point in time. I don   t  know when it changed, but now it seems like they play 60, 65 games.  Our entire season, Coach Anderson and his guys would play that many  ballgames in a month, you   re right. But we had rainouts and things and  you didn   t have field covers and so forth like you have now.  So when you were rained out you were really stuck, weren   t you?  Yeah. And a lot of it is mandated by conference offices. Now, you have  to cover your field and so forth. Back then, if there   s somebody you  didn   t want to play, you might not cover your field and if there   s  somebody you wanted to play, you would cover it. So they   ve tightened  some things up.  12  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  I imagine in that    58 season when you had those three rainouts, that it  was maybe a case of a team that really didn   t want to play Oklahoma  State.  Could be, could be, yeah.  Was there a game during the regular season of that    59 season that was  really memorable for you?  Well, we beat the Sooners down at Norman. I liked that.  That   s always good   Yeah.  Some things never change with time. So was the College World Series  the same kind of big deal then as it is now?  Oh yeah, it really was. Back then it was the Big Eight and Nebraska, of  course, was in the Big Eight. We were the people   s choice at Omaha  because Nebraska didn   t go and the Omaha crowd was for us because  we were the Big Eight representative. They were exceptionally nice to  us. I don   t know, Jerry will probably hear about this, but we were  playing Nebraska up there and they had a pitcher, a guy that was older,  had been in the service and had come back, and was pitching for them  and doing one heck of a job. It was about the fifth inning and they had us  down about 5-3. We were batting and he threw the ball to one of our  players and he nubbed it over into our dugout and Ray Bond, our  catcher, was sitting on the edge of the dugout and he just caught the little  nubber and I   m telling you, this was an honest mistake, but it just  happened simultaneously. This pitcher from Nebraska comes walking  off the mound right towards Ray, towards our dugout, with his hand out  to get the ball that Ray   s going to throw to him. Ray picks the ball up  and throws it and almost at the same moment, the home plate umpire  hollered,    Ball in      That pitcher turned to field the ball from the catcher and the ball Ray  threw hit that Nebraska pitcher   it   s funny but it wasn   t funny at the  time   in the side of the head, knocked him colder than a wedge. I mean  he was on us, so we saw the Nebraska coach coming over there, coming  to our dugout, and Coach Greene said,    Don   t you guys say a word,  keep your mouths shut.    He came over there and just walked up and  down in front of our dugout. You talk about reading us the riot act,    You  bunch of bush league       because we had finished his pitcher for the day.  Well he has to come in with a relief pitcher and we get all over him and  won the ballgame. But it was absolutely an honest mistake. We didn   t  13  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  intend that at all and it was that pitcher   s fault as much as anybody   s  because he was holding out his glove to receive the ball from Ray.  Something else in the championship game that I saw and I think some of  the other guys did. After we won, we were hopping around out on the  field. We didn   t do any of that piling on like they do now, but we were  high fiving and all of this stuff. Byron Bird, who was the trainer, went  over and grabbed Coach Greene. Coach Greene is about my size and in  dugouts, you know they   re concrete and the ceilings are not very tall.  Coach Bird, the trainer, grabbed Coach Greene by the waist and hoisted  him up into the top of that concrete dugout. (Laughs) I guess when he  came out of the dugout he was 2 inches shorter. I mean you talk about  pile driving somebody upside down. I saw him put Coach Greene down  and he was weaving around. Oh, it was funny. But they were trying to  celebrate and Bird just didn   t realize he had given him that much of a  boost.  So besides the championship game, are there any other games in the  World Series that really stick out in your mind?  Well, the ones we won. (Laughter) Oh, yeah. And you know the  interesting thing about that championship game, after we won it, that  Nebraska coach who had been so hard on us that ballgame when we  played up there, he was right down there in the dugout whooping and  hollering just like the rest of us, congratulating everybody. When we  came up out of the dugout headed back to the bus, the Nebraska fans had  kind of created an alley for us and were really complimenting us. So we  had the crowd on our side.  They didn   t hold a grudge, huh?  Not one bit. Another thing that happened to me, this happened to me  downtown. I think maybe we played that afternoon and weren   t going to  play    til the next day. I was in downtown Omaha, had on street clothes,  and I looked down and the zipper on my slacks had broken. Everybody  in here knows when you break a zipper how hard it is to get it back in  the right slot. Well, I couldn   t. I kind of got off in a little alcove there  and tried to do the best I could but I couldn   t get it to do anything. There  was a tailor shop right there handy, cleaners. So I walked in there and I  showed the tailor, I said,    I got a problem here, can you help me out?     He said,    Well get your britches off.    So I did, gave them to him, and he  went in there and worked on them about 30 minutes, came back out and  fixed it, no charge. You know he just asked me what I was doing up  there and I said,    Well, I   m here from Oklahoma. I   m playing in the  College World Series.    Just the whole city was so nice. It was just a  delightful experience.  14  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  That   s really good to hear. So how do you think that the    59 era club  ranks in comparison to some of the really good teams like Gary Ward  and Frank Anderson have had?  Oh, I think there   s parity for sure. I think for sure Gary   s had ball clubs  as good as ours and probably Coach Anderson has, it just hasn   t  happened for him. But it will one of these days. As long as you recruit  good athletes and the right kind.  How do you think that other than the sheer number of games that are  played in college baseball now, do you think that there   s a lot of  differences between college baseball in 2009 and college baseball in  1959?  Well, they play a lot more as you   ve already alluded to. So that probably  has something to do with their ability to play the game. I   m not sure it   s  necessarily positive in regard to academics, because you do have to miss  a lot of school. Pretty much in the fall we were students, we played in  the spring. Now they have year-long programs and even sometimes play  a limited fall schedule. So I think you   ve got to be concerned about that  part of it, because being a student, it takes a lot of time being a college  athlete. A lot of things that people don   t understand about the demands  of playing in college, you go to class in the morning, you practice nearly  all afternoon, you go eat, and then there   s the fatigue factor. When  you   re tired and trying to study, they don   t necessarily complement one  another. So unless you can really discipline yourself, you can have a  hard time making decent grades.  Well, I think it   s interesting now and I think it   s good all of the academic  support that they have for student athletes.  Absolutely, yes.  What kinds of services similar to that were available to student athletes  in 1959?  We didn   t have what they call today graduation coaches, per say, on  staff. But if you were having trouble in a particular class, you could go  see the coach and he would arrange for a student that either had the class  or maybe was in the class you were in to do some private mentoring. It  wasn   t necessarily one on one, it   d be maybe three of us in the same  class that needed a little special mentoring. So you had that kind of  assistance because they were interested in you passing. Of course, now if  you just weren   t going to class, they   d handle that.  Well, I mean especially since you were an athletics administrator all  15  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  these years, do you have any sense that student athletes in the day when  you played were more interested in being students than say they are  today? Or you don   t think that that part of it has changed?  I don   t think so. I think maybe we were a little more interested in the  academic part of it, but I don   t think there   s a marked difference.  It just seems like all little boys want to be a professional football or  baseball or basketball player. I didn   t know how prevalent that idea was  then that I   m coming to be a college baseball player and my goal is to be  a professional baseball player. Whether that mindset was as prevalent  then as it is now or whether people just saw this as something they could  do while going to school but not their life   s work.  Yeah.  How has the OSU campus changed since you were a student here?  (Laughs) A great deal. I was laughing with my wife because we  graduated the same year, and it   s just changed so much. In fact, this is  the first time I   ve seen the new renovation. I do buy a couple of O Club  season tickets every year but my daughter and her husband take care of  that because they have a son that   s a student over here. But I   m just  overwhelmed. There   s absolutely no comparison, it   s just gorgeous.  So I understand that your daughter   s here with us and did she attend  school here at OSU?  She did one year.  And do you have other children or grandchildren that went to school  here?  We have two grandchildren that are students here, yeah. Her kids.  That   s great. So OSU ended up becoming a really big part of your life?  Oh yeah. I didn   t have a lot of choices. (Laughter)  Well, I   ve asked you quite a few questions but I   m just wondering if  there   s anything that you wish that I would   ve asked you that I didn   t  that you want to talk about.  No, I don   t think so. I think it   s been fairly comprehensive.  So what   s on tap for the rest of the day for you as far as this reunion  16  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  Green  Paustenbaugh  goes?  Well, we   re planning on coming back at six to watch a little of the spring  football game. We   re going to spend the night then we   ll go back to Ada  tomorrow.  Well, it sounds like it   s been a nice reunion.  It   s been nice. It   s been a delight. Some of these guys I haven   t seen in  50 years and they look a little different.  (Laughter) I bet they do. Good you have name tags, right?  I needed it for some people. I went to my 50th year high school reunion  about three years ago and I sat down at this table and the lady that I did  not recognize is about as far as from me as you are. I sat by a lady who I  see fairly frequently, she lives in Tecumseh and of course we live in Ada  and those two cities are about 50 miles apart and I would see her  occasionally so I sat by her and we were visiting. I spoke to this lady  sitting across the table from me. That   s all I did was just say,    How are  you?    So the lady next to me, she says,    Well, you know who that is?    I  said,    Well, no not really.    She told me her name and it was a young  lady that I had had several dates with in high school and I did not  recognize her. (Laughter)  That   s pretty funny.  Some of these guys look different, just like I do.  Well, thank you so much for spending this time with me today.  Oh it   s been my pleasure. You all have done a great job today.  Well thank you, it   s been fun.  -------  -------   
